PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FOURTH REPORT
ON
The Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region
and Adjoining Areas (Imposition, Collection and Utilization of
Environmental Compensation for Stubble Burning) Rules, 2023
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11 th February, 2025)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2025/Magha, 1946 (Saka)
REPORT NO.
254


CONTENTS
PAGES
1 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)
2 INTRODUCTION (ii)
3 ABBREVIATIONS (iii)
4 REPORT ON THE COMMISSION FOR AIR QUALITY
MANAGEMENT IN NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION AND
ADJOINING AREAS (IMPOSITION, COLLECTION AND
UTILIZATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL COMPENSATION
FOR SUTBBLE BURNING) RULES, 2023
1-17
5 EXAMINATION OF RULES, OBSERVATIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
18-23
6 SUMMARY OF THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE
24-26
7 MINUTES 27-37
8 ANNEXURES 38-60

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(CONSTITUTED ON THE 22ND OCTOBER, 2024)
1. Shri Milind Murli DeoraChairman
2. Shri Golla Baburao
3. Ms. Sushmita Dev
4. Shri KesridevsinhJhala
5. Shri Jose K. Mani
6. Shri Manan Kumar Mishra
7. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
8. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam
9. Dr. Dinesh Sharma
10. Shri Kartikeya Sharma
11. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
12. Shri Tiruchi Siva
13. Shri SadanandMhaluShet Tanavade
14. Shri G. K. Vasan
15. Smt. Sangeeta Yadav
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Khursija, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Director
3. Shri ThangzalunKhuptong, Deputy Secretary
4. Shri P.P. Raumon, Under Secretary
(i)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been authorized by
the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf, this Two Hundred and Fifty Fourth Report of the
Committee.
2. The Committee examined the matters that came up while scrutinizingthe Commission for
Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Imposition,
Collection and Utilization of Environmental Compensation for Stubble Burning) Rules, 2023
and issues relating to them along with the comments received from the various Ministries and
subject experts.
3. The observations and recommendations, which in the opinion of the Committee should be
brought to the notice of the House, are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report in its meeting held on the 4 th
February, 2025.
New Delhi Milind Murli Deora
4thFebruary, 2025 Chairman,
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha
(ii)

ABBREVIATIONS
AQI: Air Quality Index
BAM: Biomass Aggregation Machinery
CBG: Compressed Bio Gas
CAQM: Commission for Air Quality Management
CHC: Custom Hiring Centre
CPPRI: Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute
CRM: Crop Residue Management
DPIIT: Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade
EC: Environmental Compensation
FCI: Food Corporation of India
GNCTD: Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
IEC: Information, Education and Communication
IIT: Indian Institute of Technology
IMC: Inter-Ministerial Committee
KNHPI: Kumarappa National Handmade Paper Institute
ISRO: Indian Space Research Organisation
NCCBM: National Council for Cement and Building Materials
NCR: National Capital Region
NCT: National Capital Territory
NFSM: National Food Security Mission
PUSA: Indian Agricultural Research Institute (Pusa Institute)
SDM: Sub-Divisional Magistrate
SMS: Super Straw Management System
TPH: Tonnes Per Hour
(iii)

REPORT
I. Introduction and Background
1.1 The Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas
Bill, 2021 was introduced in Lok Sabha on July 30, 2021. This Bill provided for the constitution of a
Commission for better co-ordination, research, identification, and resolution of problems related to air
quality in the National Capital Region (NCR) and adjoining areas. Adjoining areas were defined as areas
in Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh, adjoining the National Capital Territory of Delhi and
NCR, where any source of pollution may cause adverse impact on air quality in the NCR. This Bill also
sought to dissolve the Environment Pollution Prevention and Control Authority established in the NCR in
1998. An Ordinance establishing a similar Commission was promulgated in October 2020 which lapsed
in March 2021 and was repromulgated in April 2021. This Bill repealed the 2021 Ordinance.
1.2 The Statement of Object and Reasons, with the Bill, succinctly stated that the Bill aimed to
establish a Commission for Air Quality Management in the National Capital Region (NCR) and its
adjoining areas to address the ongoing air pollution crisis while noting that despite efforts by Committees,
Courts, and ad hoc measures, air quality remains a significant concern in the region. Through the Bill, a
permanent, statutory authority with broad powers to tackle pollution, including controlling stubble
burning, vehicular emissions, industrial pollution, and other sources, through coordination between states
and various stakeholders was sought to be created. It was stated that the Bill will replace previous
temporary Committees and Ordinances, focusing on comprehensive, collaborative actions, and enforce
penalties for violations. The Bill also included sub-committees to support monitoring, enforcement, and
research efforts, ensuring long-term, effective solutions to air pollution.
1.3 The said Bill was passed by Houses of Parliament and notified on 13 thAugust, 2021 as“The
Commission for Air Quality Management in NCR and Adjoining Areas Act, 2021”(CAQM Act
henceforth) (Annexure I) .
1.4 The Commission for Air Quality Management in NCR and Adjoining Areas (Imposition,
Collection and Utilization of Environmental Compensation for Stubble Burning) Rules, 2023 and
subsequent amendments.
1.4.1 India is committed to create a clean environment and pollution free air as mandated in the
Constitution of India. The Committee appointed under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 has taken
measures to deal with the menace of air pollution, particularly in the National Capital Region. By orders
1

passed from time to time, the courts have also set upad hoccommittees to aid and assist them on it
oringand implementation of its orders and generally to take steps to deal with air pollution. Even then,
quality of air in the air shed of the National Capital Region and in the adjoining areas remains a major
cause of concern. There is a need to evolve and implement a consolidated approach for monitoring,
tackling and eliminating the causes for air pollution and identifying, specifying and rigorously enforcing
measures for elimination and mitigation of air pollution, including but not limited to, controlling or
eliminating the activities of stubble burning, vehicular pollution, industrial emissions, road dust, biomass
burning and urban construction. To deal with the problem of Stubble Burning and fulfil the provision of
Section 15 of the Commission for Air Quality Management in NCR and Adjoining Areas Act,2021,The
Commission for Air Quality Management in NCR and Adjoining Areas (Imposition, Collection and
Utilization of Environmental Compensation for Stubble Burning) Rules, 2023were framed and notified.
1.4.2 The Commission for Air Quality Management in NCR and Adjoining Areas(Imposition,
Collection and Utilization of Environmental Compensation for Stubble Burning) Rules, 2023 have been
framed in accordance with the provision in Section 15 of the Commission for Air Quality Management in
National CapitalRegion and Adjoining Areas Act, 2021 which provides that “the Commission may
impose and collect environmental compensation from farmers causing air pollution by stubble burning, at
such rate and in such manner,as maybe prescribed”.
1.4.3Background of imposition of Environmental Compensation:Prior to the enactment of the
CAQM Act, the Hon’ble National Green Tribunal (Principal Bench),
New Delhi through its judgment dated 10.12.2015 in Application No. 118 of 2013 titled as 2.
Vikrant Kumar Tongad Vs. Environment Pollution (Prevention & Control) Authority & Ors.,inter alia,
directed as under:
“In view of the above discussion and the stand taken before us by the different State
Governments and the Ministry, we dispose of this application with the following directions:
XXX
All the States which have issued Notification prohibiting agriculture crop residue burning
shall ensure that the Notifications are enforced rigorously and proper action is taken against the
defaulters. Any person or body that is found offending this direction would be liable to pay
Environmental Compensation as follows:
a.Small land holders having an area less than 2 Acres shall pay Environmental Compensation
of Rs. 2500/- per incidence.
b.Land holders having land area more than 2 Acres but Less than 5 Acres shall pay
Environmental Compensation of Rs. 5000/- per incidence.
2

c.Land holders having land area more than 5 Acres shall pay Environmental Compensation of
Rs. 15000/-per incidence.”
State Governments had been imposing Environmental Compensation on the defaulters by following the
directions of Hon’ble Tribunal in the above-mentioned order.
1.4.4 Statutory Framework for imposition of Environmental Compensation:The Commission for
Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Ordinance, 2020 (No. 13 of
2020) was promulgated on 28.10.2020, for co-ordination, research, identification and resolution of
problems surrounding the air quality in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas. Upon it’s lapse, the
Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Ordinance,
2021 (No. 4 of 2021) was promulgated on 13.4.2021, for co-ordination, research, identification and
resolution of problems surrounding the air quality in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas.
Subsequently, The Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining
Areas Act, 2021 (No. 29 of 2021) was enacted in the Parliament on 13.8.2021.
1.4.5 The Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas
Act, 2021 inter-alia has the following key provisions:
(a) Constitution of the Commission for Air Quality Management in NCR and Adjoining Areas to
perform the functions;
(b) Appointment of Chairperson, Members and Member-Secretary of the Commission
(c) Constitution of the Sub-committees on Monitoring and Identification, Safeguarding and
Enforcement, Research and Development;
(d) Powers and functions of the Commission to take all such measures and issue directions for the
purpose of protection and improvement of air quality in NCR and Adjoining Areas;
(e) Authorisation of any person by the Commission to perform the functions of the Commission;
(f) Commission to provide an effective framework, action plan and appropriate steps for tackling
the problem of stubble burning and monitor the measures taken by the States to prevent stubble
burning, in the NCR and Adjoining Areas;
(g) Penalty for contravention of provisions, rules, orders or directions issued by the Commission;
(h) Imposition and collection of Environmental Compensation from farmers causing air pollution
by stubble burning;
(i) Payment of grants by the Central Government to the Commission for its functioning;
(j) Maintaining accounts by the Commission and conducting audits;
3

(k) Powers of Central Government to make rules to carry out the provisions.
1.4.6 The Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas
(hereinafter referred to as the “Commission”) was constituted on 23.04.2021 in accordance with the
provisions of the Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining
Areas Act, 2021 (hereinafter referred to as the “Act”). Section 14 of the Act provides for penalty for
contravention of provisions of the Act, rules, orders and directions issued by the Commission. Section 14
of the Act,inter alia,stipulates as under:
“(1) Any non-compliance or contravention of any provisions of this Act, rules made there under or any
order or direction issued by the Commission, shall be an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend up to five years or with fine which may extend up to one crore rupees or with both:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any farmer for causing air pollution
by stubble burning or mismanagement of agricultural residue.”
1.4.7 While Section 14(1) of the Act provides for punishment with imprisonment which may extend
upto five years or with fine which may extend upto one crore or with both for any non-compliance or
contraventions of the Act or rules or directions, the said provision is not applicable to any farmer for
causing air pollution by stubble burning or mismanagement of agricultural residue.
1.4.8 Accordingly, Section 15 of the Act, provides for imposition of Environmental Compensation on
farmers for causing air pollution by stubble burning. Section 15 of the Act,inter alia,stipulates as under:
“The Commission may impose and collect environmental compensation from farmers causing air
pollution by stubble burning, at such rate and in such manner, as may be prescribed.”
1.4.9 Section 25 provides for making rules by the Central Government to carry out the provisions of the
Act. Section 25 of the Act,inter-aliastipulates as under:
“(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this
Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
xxxxx
(h) the rate at which, and the manner in which, the environmental compensation shall be
imposed and collected under section 15;”
1.4.10 In view of the provisions of the Act, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Changevideits Notification No. G.S.R. 322(E) dated 28.04.2023 notified the Commission for Air Quality
4

Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Imposition, Collection and Utilization of
Environmental Compensation for Stubble Burning) Rules, 2023,(Annexure II) which,inter alia,
stipulates as under:
“Imposition of environmental compensation for stubble burning.—The Commission may
impose and collect environmental compensation on farmers liable for burning stubble, at the
following rates, namely: -
(a) The Farmer having an area of land less than two acres shall pay an environmental
compensation of rupees two thousand five hundred;
(b) The Farmer having an area of land of two acres or more but less than five acres shall
pay an environmental compensation of rupees five thousand;
(c) The Farmers having an area of more than five acres shall pay an environmental
compensation of rupees fifteen thousand.”
1.4.11Amendment in the Extant Provision for implementation of Environmental Compensation:
The Hon’ble Supreme Court vide its Order dated 23.10.2024 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 13029 of 1985
in the matter of M.C. Mehta Vs. Union of India & Ors.,inter alia, observed and directed as under:
“…The environmental compensation that is stated to be recovered is minimal.
The learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the Commission states that the
Government of India has exercised power under Section 15 of the Commission for Air
Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Act, 2021 (for short, "the Act") and
has adopted the formula laid down by the National Green Tribunal for fixing rates of compensation while
framing Rules. Nothing is placed on record to show that the rulemaking power has been exercised in
terms of Section 15 of the Act prescribing the rates of compensation. The importance of Section 15 of the
Act has to be understood in the context of the proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 14 of the Act, which
excludes the farmers from the applicability of penal provisions. When such a concession is given to the
farmers, power has to be exercised by the Government of India under Section 15 of the Act
by framing rules and by providing appropriate Environmental Compensation. The Government cannot
blindly rely upon the formula fixed by the National Green Tribunal.
We direct the Government of India to reconsider the issue and take action under Section
15 of the Act for prescribing proper rates of compensation. Section 15 of the Act talks about the
manner of collecting compensation. Unless proper exercise of power under Section 15 of the Act
is made, there cannot be any effective action against the wrongdoers. We expect the Government
to take actionwithin two weeks from today.”
1.4.12 The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, accordinglyvideNotification No.
G.S.R. 690(E) dated 06.11.2024, notified the Commission for Air Quality Management in
National
5

Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Imposition, Collection and Utilization of Environmental
Compensation for Stubble Burning) Amendment Rules, 2024, (AnnexureIII)inter alia, substituting the
rule 3 as under:
“The Commission may impose environmental compensation as per the provisions of the Act
for stubble burning, at the following rates:-
(a) the Farmer having an area of land of less than two acres shall pay an environmental
compensation of five thousand rupees, per incidence;
(b) the Farmer having an area of land of two acres or more but less than five acres shall
pay an environmental compensation of ten thousand rupees, per incidence;
(c) the Farmer having an area of land of more than five acres shall pay an environmental
compensation of thirty thousand rupees, per incidence.”
Applicability of the CAQM Rules, 2023 is to the States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan
and NCT of Delhi.
1.5 Keeping in view its significance, the CAQM Rules 2023 was taken up for detailed examination
by the Committee. The Committee had sought information through Background notes and
Questionnaire from the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for
their comments/clarifications. The subject was deliberated upon by the Committee in its two meetings
held on 3 rd and 18 th December, 2024. During the course of its examination, the Committee had long
ranging discussion with the representatives of the (i) Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate
Change, Commission for Air Quality Management and Central Pollution Control Board on 3 rd
December, 2024 and (ii) On 18 th December, 2024 with the representatives of the Ministries of
Agriculture & Farmers' Welfare, New and Renewable Energy, Petroleum and Natural Gas, Power,
Commerce and Industry (Department of Promotion of Industry and Internal trade) besides the nodal
Ministry ( Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change). The Committee also heard experts on
the subject of stubble burning namely Dr. Suresh Jain, Professor of Air Pollution and Health,
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Tirupati (Andhra
Pradesh) and Dr. Abhishek Kar, Senior Programme Lead, Council on Energy, Environment and Water,
Vasant Kunj Institutional area, New Delhi. .
1.6 In their submissions before the Committee the invited Ministries and the subject experts stated as
under:
1.6.1 Submissions by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry:Representatives from the Ministry of
Commerce and Industry presented their approach towards utilizing agricultural residues, particularly
parali, as an alternative fuel and raw material for various industries, including cement, paper, and
6

furniture manufacturing. The Ministry outlined a three-pronged strategy to explore these possibilities
through stakeholder consultations, research, and collaboration with national-level institutes. In their
submissions they highlighted that stubble, particularly rice straw, has significant potential in industries
such as construction, paper, and furniture manufacturing with key uses being identified as particle boards
for furniture and construction, pulp for paper production, including eco-friendly tableware and packaging-
grade paper and alternative fuel for cement kilns, although challenges related to its high chloride content,
storage, and logistics need to be addressed. The Ministry emphasized the economic and environmental
benefits of utilizing agricultural waste, especially rice straw, as a feedstock. It supports the transition from
timber-based products, helping reduce deforestation, air pollution, and waste management issues.
1.6.2 The Ministry outlined the following steps to advance stubble utilization:
(i) Regular stakeholder consultations with Paper mills producing agro-pulp, pulp man ufactures, institutes
such as Central Paper and Pulp Research Institute (CPPRI),Saharanpur, IIT Delhi and Kumarrappa
National Hand made Paper Institute(KNHPI), Jaipur in order to study and evaluate techno-
commercial viability for the paper industry.
(ii) Undertake research studies by National Council for Cement and Building Material
(NCCBM),an autonomous organization under DPIIT on the utilization of stubble as an alternative
fuel in cement kilns and its impact assessment on productivity, process, quality and environment.
1.6.3 In conclusion, the Ministry submitted that it is committed to exploring innovative and sustainable
ways to utilize agricultural waste, particularly rice stubble, across multiple industries, while addressing
the associated challenges through research and stakeholder collaboration.
1.8 Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas:Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas submitted that the Ministry has a Scheme called SATAT in which compressed bio gas (CBG)
is manufactured, and as of now, in the NCR region, two plants are commissioned with a capacity of 21
tonnes per day, and one plant is under construction with a capacity of 15 tonnes per day. It was further
submitted that for effective collection of the biomass, the Ministry have a scheme called BAM, that is,
Biomass Aggregation Machinery, which has been started this year. Under this scheme, the Ministry
provides 50 per cent incentive to the Compressed Bio Gas (CBG) producers for purchase of the biomass
set and that set consists of 12 machines. Thus, the Ministry is giving 50 per cent subsidy. As of now, six
sets have been sanctioned and two of them are in the NCR region. Apart from that, it was submitted that
for effective evacuation of the gas that is produced, there is a scheme for pipeline infrastructure, in which
the Ministry provides Rs.50 lakhs per kilometre for laying down the pipeline, whereby they connect a
Compressed Bio Gas (CBG) producer to a CBG entity.
7

As sometimes, it is very difficult and uneconomical to lay down a pipeline, so, the Ministry has started a
pilot project whereby GAIL has been asked to install a small-scale Liquified Natural Gas project, which
will liquify natural gas, put it in the cascade and then take it to the gas line.
1.8.1 The Ministry also made certain suggestions to discourage the stubble burning.
Even after using combine harvester and cutter in field, stubble of 10-15 cm is left in the field
which cannot be manually harvested due to scarcity of labours in agriculture field. The
technology should be developed so that combine harvester and cutter can clear the stubbles
from the field.
b. More plantation of early maturing rice varieties can yield in maturation and harvest of Rice crop
in the first week of September every year and so will provide sufficient time to farmers to sow
wheat crop by the end of October.
The aggregated penalty amount can be effectively utilised for conducting awareness drives
among farmers and also providing them training on alternative use of stubble.
d. The incentive on transportation of stubbles to CBG/power /other industries can be provided to
farmers for discouraging them from burning stubble in the fields.
1.9Ministry of Power:Representatives of the Ministry of Power submitted that, in order to address
the issue of air pollution due to farm stubble burning and to reduce carbon footprints of thermal power
generation, steps have been taken. For utilization of surplus agro residue in eco-friendly and cost effective
manner while mitigating problem of air quality deterioration due to stubble burning by farmers in the
fields, and alsoto generate additional income to farmers, Ministry of Power in November’2017, issued a
policy on “Biomass Utilization for Power Generation through co-firing in Coal-basedpower plants”.
Through this policy, all fluidized bed and pulverized coal units (coal based thermal power plants) located
in India were advised to endeavour to use 5-10% blend of biomass pellets made primarily of agro residue
along-with coal, after assessing the technical feasibility, safety aspects etc. It has further been submitted
that the Ministry in July 2021 established Sustainable Agrarian Mission on use of Agro-Residue in
Thermal Power Plants (SAMARTH Mission) to implement and Monitoring Biomass policy. Also, in
order to further promote use of biomass pellets in coal based thermal power plants and to convert the
problem of crop-residue burning into a solution for power production, the Ministry revised the above
policy in October’2021 tomandatorily co-fire the suitable biomass pellets made, primarily, of agro
residue in the range of 5% to 7% on annual basis in all coal-based power plants depending upon their type
of milling system. It was informed that the Ministry issued modification on 16.06.2023 to revise the
biomass policy issued in Oct’2021, which mandates 5%biomass co-firing in Thermal Power Plants
(TPPs) on annual basis from FY 2024-25 and the obligation shall increase to 7%from FY 2025-26.
8


Till November 2024, 10.3 lakh metric ton biomass co-firing was done in 11 nos. of thermal power plants
in NCR region. It was submitted that the Ministry is focusing that the thermal power plants should co-fire,
along with coal, biomass-based pellets also. For this purpose, the Ministry is promoting creation of
biomass chain, that is, creation of pellet-manufacturing chain through this Mission and also helping our
thermal power plants to actually migrate, at least, up to 5 to 10 per cent. Initially they have targeted that
there should be 5 per cent co-firing, that is, blending, in the current financial year; and, in subsequent
years, raising it up to 7 per cent. It was also submitted that the focus is primarily across the country and
also in the National Capital Region. In the National Capital Region, there are around 11 thermal power
plants where the Ministry is focusing. It was clarified that the pellets are the biomass-based stubble
pellets. The Committee was informed that the Ministry has also introduced benchmark price for biomass
pellet. These benchmark prices are an indication. Basically, it gives encouragement for development of
supply chain and it also encourages creation of more and more pellet manufacturing units. These pellet
manufacturing units, actually, use this biomass pellet.
1.9.1 In respect of the views of the Ministry on the Commission for Air Quality Management in National
Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Imposition, Collection and Utilization of Environmental
Compensation for Stubble Burning) Rules, 2023, it has been submitted that Central Electricity Authority
(CEA) has signed a MoU with M/S ASCI (Administrative Staff College of India) for the Study of Biomass
availability in NCR area as well as in India. During discussions with ASCI some of the following points
have been emerged related to the stubble burning by farmers:
(i) Generally, the farmers use the harvester for cutting the crops, but by cutting the crops through
harvester alone, the husk is left on the ground. If the harvester-cum-baler is used, the husk is also
collected in the form of bales. These bales can be easily disposed to vacate the fields.
(ii) Also, the farmers have small tractors, which are not capable of pulling large balers. If bigger
size tractors are provided to farmers, it will be easy to handle the large bales.
(iii) Balers may be provided to the farmers to handle the crop residue and form bales.
1.10 Ministry of New and Renewable Energy:Representatives of the Ministry informed that they
have notified National Bio Energy Programme on 02.11.2022 for a period from 01.04.2021 to 31.03.2026
with an out lay of Rs.858 crore under Phase-I. This National Bio Energy Programme has a provision of
Central Financial Assistance (CFA) for setting up of Bio energy projects in the country under the
components: Waste to Energy Programme, Biomass Programme and Biogas programme. It was mentioned
that biomass comes from various resources including stubble, which is being used for various purposes,
that is, for briquette and pellet manufacturing. It was further informed that the Ministry provides subsidy
9

for briquette and pellet manufacturing and in addition to that, the biomass is also going for co-generation
and compressed biogas production. The biomass is converted into biogas. Then, it is compressed.
1.10.1 In their submissions, the Ministry observed that collection and safe storage of paddy Straw is
challenging due the small window available for collection. Large land parcels for storage is needed
specifically at hot spot places. Also, there are technical difficulties inusing100% paddy straws feedstock
for pelletization, briquetting and CBG projects due to high wear and tear of machineries because of high
silica content of Paddy Straw. Besides that Paddy straw pre-treatment is challenging due to its
composition. The Ministry suggests that there is a need to focus on surplus paddy straw storage
procurement plan by creating decentralized biomass banks specially in the Stubble burning hotspot
districts. Also, 25% higher CFA for projects using paddy straw as feedstock (more than80%) in
briquetting/pelleting/CBG/Cogen projects in comparison to the CFA provided under existing MNRE
Schemes. Based on IMC ex-situ management recommendation revision is under consideration by the
Ministry. It has also been suggested that policy for“Biomass to Power” isproposed to be developed for
promoting100% Paddy Straw based power generation projects. As the tariff rates are higher compared to
other renewable energy sources, the option of providing VGF (viability gap funding) and other incentives
is being explored.
1.11Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare:Representatives of the Ministry informed that
Paddy stubble burning is mainly practiced in Indo-Gangetic plains of the States of Punjab, Haryana and
Uttar Pradesh due to short window between the harvesting of paddy crop and sowing of next Rabi crop.
To support the efforts of the Governments of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and NCT of Delhi to
address air pollution caused due to paddy stubble burning and to subsidize machinery required for
management of crop residue, a Central Sector Scheme called ‘Crop Residue Management Scheme’has
been implemented. Under the Scheme, interventions are three-fold. One is that the Ministry provides
machines for managing the paddy straw that is generated in the fields, and, for that, subsidy at the rate of
50 per cent is given to the farmers, and for establishing Custom Hiring Centres, 80 per cent subsidy is
being given, through which the farmers can rent-out machines and use it for managing the paddy straw.
Second intervention is for providing project-based support for ex-situ management of the paddy straw
under which 65 per cent of the cost of the machine to the farmers for purchasing machines is provided;
and 25 per cent, the industry pitches in; and 10 per cent, the aggregators give as a beneficiary. So under
this, the paddy straw is collected, and, as a supply chain, it is provided to the industry which is using it.
Third component is that very aggressive campaigning and promotion is done to carry out the Information
Education and Communication (IEC ) campaign through Indian Council for Agricultural Research
(ICAR) institutes, and through the State Governments, to make an informed suggestion to the farmers not
to burn the paddy straw and how it is having an ill-effect and how, by not burning the paddy straw, they
10

could benefit and have the nutrients back in the soil. At the same time, they could have a remunerative
income also.
1.11.1 It was further submitted that as regardingincentivizing farmers, a special component under
the scheme which is called Paddy Supply Value Chain Project has been worked out which is a project-
based initiative where the aggregators, which can be farmers or rural entrepreneurs or co-operatives, and
the industry and the beneficiaries, all of them come together. Under this initiative the Ministry is
providing 65 per cent of the cost of the machinery and under this special project, all machines are catered
to. Everything is worked out in the form of an agreement and the project is implemented when the straw
becomes available. Also, for selling the straw, the farmers have the option that they can sell the straw,
they can use it within the field itself by incorporating it in the soil by using the machines. They could sell
it for fodder.
1.11.2 It was also mentioned that Agriculture being a State subject--the States have been given
the flexibility to work out these incentives and mechanisms as to how the paddy could be managed. Broad
Guidelines have been set by the Ministry. Regarding uniform price, it was stated that the States have the
flexibility to do that. Representatives of the Ministry also informed that an Inter-Ministerial Committee
(IMC) has been constituted for time bound implementation of the various schemes for management of
paddy straw in a convergent and synergistic manner. The Committee was formed with an objective to
look into all the schemes for extensive management of paddy straw, how best they could be converged or
duplication could be avoided and in what way the Ministry could encourage, through regular follow-up,
utilization of paddy straw. It was also submitted that when the IMC was constituted, one of its main
objectives of the Committee was to take stock of how much paddy straw is being, particularly, in the
States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and, to some extent, in Madhya Pradesh and also to analyze how
much has been managed through the machines within the soil itself like in situ method without burning,
and, how much has been burnt, or, how much has been managed as the raw material for the industries.
This analysis has already been done.
1.11.3 As regards the silica content in the crops then, it was submitted that the paddy variety,
which is of basmati category, does not have much silica in it and it is being used in Northern States also
as fodder. In the Southern States, all kinds of varieties of straw are used as fodder. The paddy straw
which was being generated was by the seed variety called Pusa-44. That has already been banned. It is
not being circulated. At present, it is PR-126 variety of seed which generates less silica. It is a short-
duration variety. That is being encouraged by providing seed mini-kits to the farmers through their
National Food Security Mission ( NFSM ) scheme besides Seed Village Scheme.
11

1.12 Representative of Council on Energy, Environment, and Water (CEEW):Dr. Abhishek Kar,
representing the Council on Energy, Environment, and Water (CEEW), in his submissions focused on
crop residue burning, which he described as a pan-India problem exacerbated by economic constraints in
biomass processing. He stated that despite strong policy efforts, challenges persist due to partial burning
practices by farmers, stemming from perceptions and advice about machinery usage. He emphasized that
while farmers adopt crop residue management (CRM) machines, they often neglect the accompanying
agricultural practices, leading to inefficiencies and complaints. He highlighted that one of the
recommendations is that combine harvesters should be fitted with Super Straw Management System and
then they should use the machine; however, unfortunately, farmers are not doing that. They are directly
using the super seeder which sometimes is raising complaints around pesticides, etc. He highlighted
issues in both in-situ and ex-situ approaches. In ex-situ methods, contract enforcement and storage
problems degrade biomass quality before industrial use. He also noted the growing popularity of short-
duration seed varieties, which sometimes result in lower yields and procurement confusion due to
misalignment between promoting and procuring entities. He suggested utilizing environmental
compensation funds, for awareness campaigns to address these challenges. He recommended continuous
messaging, using wall paintings and brochures, and promoting successful model practices through peer
farmer advocacy. Additionally, he stressed the need for guidelines on biomass storage and equitable
access to custom hiring centers for small and marginal farmers, alongside behaviour change campaigns to
combat negative perceptions about CRM practices.
1.13Submissions by Dr. Suresh Jain: Dr. Jain on the issue of stubble burning, emphasized the gap
between field realities and policy implementation in Punjab, Haryana, and Uttar Pradesh. He highlighted
the challenges farmers face due to shortened crop cycles, limited availability of resources like custom
hiring centres, and inadequate supply chain support from companies collecting stubble. He stressed the
need for a real-time forecasting system to predict crop maturity, weather conditions, and hotspots of
burning, allowing better resource optimization and planning.
1.13.1 He pointed out that transportation costs and the lack of interim storage facilities hinder
efficient stubble collection, suggesting that small farmers could become entrepreneurs to manage local
storage, facilitating smoother operations for larger companies. He also mentioned about the integration of
policies across various Ministries, especially concerning biomass conversion to bio-energy, stressing the
importance of aligning power plant requirements with the quality of stubble-based products.
1.13.2 He recommended a more integrated approach to managing crop residue, combining both
in-situ and ex-situ methods, and ensuring that rules clearly specify how funds collected from
environmental compensation should be utilized. He emphasized that understanding the ecosystem
12

holistically is crucial for sustainable solutions and suggested fostering collaborations among small-scale
briquette manufacturers to meet large-scale power plant demands.
1.14Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate change:The Committee heard the
Representatives of the nodal Ministry in both its meetings held on the subject i.e on 3 rd December and 18 th
December, 2024. Besides that, the Ministry also submitted its responses/ clarifications to the
Questionnaires sent and to the queries raised by the Members. Based on these inputs, the submissions of
the Ministry are as under.
1.14.1 Representatives of the Ministry, in the meeting of the Committee on 3 rd December, 2024,
highlighted the environmental and logistical challenges of managing paddy stubble burning in Punjab and
Haryana, which significantly impacts air quality in the National Capital Region (NCR). It was submitted
that Punjab and Haryana have substantial areas under paddy cultivation, generating millions of tonnes of
straw annually, with non-basmati varieties posing particular management challenges due to their high
silica content, making them unfit for cattle fodder. It was further informed that the Commission for Air
Quality Management (CAQM) focuses on the NCR and adjacent areas, primarily Punjab and Haryana,
where stubble burning significantly contributes to air pollution. Although other states like Uttar Pradesh
and Rajasthan also practice stubble burning, their impact on NCR air quality is relatively minimal. Also,
various measures, including in-situ and ex-situ management practices, have been implemented to control
stubble burning like promoting less straw-generating paddy varieties, using machinery for in-situ
management, and utilizing paddy straw for industrial purposes. It was also informed that Satellite
monitoring by ISRO and ground-level enforcement through nodal officers in Punjab and Haryana have
been critical in tracking and reducing stubble burning incidents. Despite these efforts, challenges like
limited machinery and the financial burden on farmers persist. It was mentioned that the EC rates for
stubble burning have been revised upwards to disincentivize the practice.
1.14.2 During the meeting of the Committee on 18 th December, 2024, the representatives outlined
the various measures taken by the Ministry, the Commission for Air Quality Management (CAQM) in
NCR and adjoining areas, and the Central Pollution Control Board to manage air quality in Delhi NCR
and other regions. It was stated that the Ministry implements the National Clean Air Programme (NCAP)
and uses the 'PRANA' portal (Portal for Regulation of Air Pollution in Non-Attainment Cities) to monitor
air quality in 130 cities, with a baseline set in 2017. The CAQM, established under the 2021 Act,
coordinates with state governments and pollution control boards to issue directives and monitor air
quality in NCR. Major contributors to air pollution in NCR include dust, vehicular emissions, industrial
pollution, biomass and waste burning, and seasonal events like stubble burning and firecrackers.
13

It was also stated that Rules have been enacted to utilize crop residue, such as biomass pellets in thermal
power plants, and to impose fines for stubble burning and the CAQM monitors air quality and enforces
regulations with the support of scientists and a task force. The Committee was also informed that there is
an inter-ministerial Committee to ensure convergence and avoid duplication in air quality improvement
schemes. Also, regular meetings are held with CAQM, state pollution control boards, and other
Ministries. Representatives of the Ministry also mentioned about the approaches of controlled burning of
biomass in thermal power plants to reduce pollution compared to disperse burning and exploring
alternative solutions like bio-decomposition and promoting less polluting crop varieties. It was also stated
that the geographical and climatic conditions of the NCR region, such as low wind speeds and
temperature inversions, exacerbate pollution levels, making dispersal difficult.
1.14.3 In respect of certain queries raised by Members, the Ministry has clarified, as regards co-
relation between the paddy stubble burning counts in Punjab and Haryana and AQI of Delhi that Paddy
stubble burning anywhere in the areas adjoining the National Capital Region can impact the AQI levels
in Delhi-NCR. However, this contribution much depends upon the nature of wind, speed and direction.
Typically, in the months of October–November, the predominant wind direction is North-Westerly into
Delhi-NCR and thus the paddy stubble burning incidents in Punjab, Haryana and even from trans-
boundary areas impact the air quality of Delhi-NCR, depending upon the distance / location of farm
fires, intensity of the farm fires (quantum of stubble burnt), wind speed and direction on a particular day
etc. Air quality in Delhi-NCR is a resultant of multiple contributing factors/sources and weather/
meteorological conditions and the impact/ contribution of paddy stubble burning to the overall air
quality can be roughly estimated through modelling exercises by the Indian Meteorological Department /
Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology. Also, thatHaryana’sannual generation of non-Basmati paddy
straw is only about 4.04 million tones and accordingly the concern is much lower as compared to Punjab
where about 16.1 million tonnes of non-Basmati paddy straw is generated. This also is reflected in the
paddy residue burning events recorded in the two States through the ISRO protocol during the paddy
harvesting season in 2024,with Punjab recording10,909 incidents as against only 1,406 incidents in
Haryana. It has further been informed that besides the schemes of the Central Government for
facilitating in-situ / ex-situ management of paddy straw, the State Government of Haryana has further
provided the following incentives / facilitators to the farmers:
 Rs.7,000/acre for crop diversification.
 Rs.4,000/acre for Direct Seeding of Rice
 Rs.1,000/acre for in-situ/ex-situ mgmt.
 Transportation charges to Gaushalas-Rs.500/acre.
 Common determined rate for procurement of paddy straw.
14

The Punjab Government has provided for the following:
 Rs.1500/acre for Direct Seeding of Rice.
 Reimbursement of SGST( States Goods and Service Tax) on cost of paddy straw based industrial
boilers(>25 TPH).
1.14.4 On the point of better varieties of paddy seeds and ex-situ utilization of paddy straw as fuel in
industrial boilers, brick kilns etc. shifts air pollution from one place to another, the Ministry has
submitted that Ministry of Agriculture and IARI Pusa in collaboration with the State Agriculture
Universities have been working to develop low straw generating paddy varieties. PUSA 44 variety
which generated maximum straw has been discontinued. In Punjab, now PR 126 variety is being
promoted the most which is low straw generating and would reduce the burden of open burning of straw.
However, the problem of Silica content in non- Basmati paddy straw still remains a concern for it to be
used as cattle fodder. Also, open burning of paddy straw in the fields is carried out in totally
uncontrolled conditions which lead to large volumes of air pollutants as well as Green House Gases,
besides causing loss of nutrients in the soil and affecting its fertility. On the other hand, paddy straw
duly processed in bales / briquettes / pellets etc. is utilized as fuel with much efficient and effective
combustion in such boilers, furnaces etc. and with appropriate pollution control devices to trap the
pollutants and regulating the exhaust through appropriate chimney / stack systems. Such industries /
applications are required to achieve and adhere to the much stringent emission standards prescribed by
the Commission for bio-mass based fuels. Ex-situ utilization of paddy straw in various applications as
presented is on the lines of international best practices. The Ministry has also mentioned that Levying of
Environmental Compensation on farmers resorting to stubble burning is the last resort. Efforts are being
made through various facilitators / schemes by the Central Government and the State Governments to
encourage farmers to manage the paddy straw through such schemes either in-situ or through ex-situ
applications. Such measures, on one hand, would benefit environment and air quality and on the other,
could also fetch some economic value to the farmers through sale of paddy straw for ex-situ
applications. Revision of EC charges is primarily to act as a deterrent against open paddy stubble
burning.
1.14.5 The Ministry in its written submissions has stated that the concerned Ministries in the Central
Government and the Commission for Air Quality Management have been continually working towards
scientific and technological interventions for prevention and control of agricultural stubble burning, both
through in- situ and ex-situ management measures. The in-situ crop residue management envisages in-situ
mulching/incorporation of the paddy residue in the field itself through efficient and affordable
mechanized means / crop residue management machinery. Aided by the Crop Residue Management
(CRM) Scheme of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, the Commission has from time to
15

time highlighted timely procurement and allocation of adequate CRM machinery, ensuring optimal
utilization of the available machinery with Custom hiring centers, cooperatives and individual farmers,
staggering harvesting schedule in Village / Block to improve machine utilization, mandating upper SMS
with combine harvester and extensive use of Bio-decomposer in conjunction with CRM Machines etc. for
effective in-situ management.
1.14.6 It has also been submitted that the ex-situ utilization of paddy straw, while obviating open
burning in the fields, also fetches economic value for the farmers and the straw is utilized as a resource
in various send-use applications. Over the last few years, the practice of ex-situ utilization of paddy
straw has been gaining traction across industrial / commercial applications by developing an ecosystem
and robust supply chain mechanism and technology to boost ex-situ utilization of straw. Such major
sectors for ex situ utilization of paddy straw include use of paddy straw as a fuel in Industrial Boilers,
Furnaces, Waste to Energy Plants, Thermal Power Plants, Captive Power Plants (Co-firing of Biomass
pellets with Coal), Brick Kilns, Biomass Pellets/briquettes in Tandoors/Stoves/Chullahs Crematoria. The
other applications include bio-mass power generation, production of Compressed Bio-Gas (CBG), Bio-
ethanol, Cattle Fodder, Compost/Manure, furniture panels, Packaging materials and other miscellaneous
commercial applications. Over the years, the ex-situ utilization has seen a major boost and thereby a
control on the incidents of paddy stubble burning.
1.14.7 As regards raising awareness the Ministry submits that consistent efforts have been made by
various stakeholders under the direction of the Commission to raise awareness about the environmental
impacts of stubble burning by undertaking extensive IEC activities /Awareness programs. These IEC
activities are regularly conducted by the Central Government and concerned State Governments /
GNCTD machinery to spread awareness towards best practices and environmental impacts. IEC
activities include painting of walls in the villages with slogans, print media advertisements, hoardings
and panels at prominent places, publicity/ awareness message in the villages, awareness/ educative
programs in schools, distribution of pamphlets and leaflets to farmers, awareness jingles on Radio
Channels, display boards, etc., demonstration camps for various in situ / ex situ management practices.
Progressive farmers are also felicitated and asked to sensitize other farmers to ensure ‘no burning’of
paddy straw. Also, under various schemes, economic benefits, subsidies and incentives towards control
of stubble burning are disbursed.
1.14.8 As regards the environmental compensation, it has been submitted that the Commission has
delegated the function of imposition and collection of the said environmental compensation charges
against stubble burning to all the Nodal / Supervisory Officers nominated by the respective State
Government towards control and effective enforcement of the direction and guidelines related to
16

prevention and control of paddy stubble burning. The quantum of the environmental compensation is
based on the total events of stubble burning recorded as also on the area of the land holding by the
farmers involved and a rate has been prescribed for the same under the subject Rules.
1.14.9 The Ministry has informed that there are scientific tools and models which estimate the impact
of stubble burning on the overall air quality scenario in Delhi-NCR and the CAQM has engaged with
Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) towards better and effective means for recording the stubble
burning events and the area of impact of such burning. Also, with a view to ensure effective
implementation of the action plans at the field level, the CAQM has also authorized the Deputy
Commissioners/District Collectors/ District Magistrates in the States of Punjab, Haryana, NCR areas of
Rajasthan and U.P. and in the NCT of Delhi to file a complaint/ prosecution before jurisdictional judicial
magistrate, in case of inactioninrespectofofficials,includingnodalofficersandsupervisoryofficersatvarious
levels and Station House Officers, responsible for effective enforcement towards ensuring elimination of
paddy stubble burning in their respective jurisdiction.
1.14.10 On the point of enhancing coordination amongst the Ministry of Environment, Forests
and Climate Change and other relevant ministries to ensure a unified approach to stubble management, it
has been informed that a n Inter-Ministerial Committee(IMC) has been constituted on 18.12.2023 to
regularly monitor the effective time bound implementation of the various schemes for management of
paddy straw in a convergent and synergistic manner and the Committee has convened 9 meetings so far
since December, 2023 till November, 2024 with the State Government of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar
Pradesh and their Stakeholder Ministries. Also, b ased on the deliberations with State Governments and
various stakeholders, The Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and
Adjoining Areas (CAQM) has provided a Framework to the states concerned for control / elimination of
crop residue burning and directed the State Governments to draw up detailed state- specific action plans
based on the major contours of the framework.
1.14.11 On the aspect of modes of utilization of fines collected under CAQM Rules the Mini stry has
submi tted that th e environmental compensation charges against paddy stubble burning are to be deposited
in the accounts of their respective pollution control boards, as for environmental compensation charges
collected by them against violations of other environmental norms and are utilized accordingly.
1.14.12In respect of some recent observations by the Hon’bleCourts, the Ministry has submitted
that the Commission, since its inception, has been making efforts to comprehensively address the issue
of air pollution in NCR and adjoining areas in a collective, collaborative and participative mode,
involving all the major stakeholders mentioning that the Commission has formulated a Policy of Curb
17

Air Pollution in the National Capital Region. While the comprehensive policy document provide a
broader prospective and indicative road map towards reduction of the air pollution load in NCR, to
specifically guide and direct various actions as also envisaged in the policy noted above, the
Commission since its inception has issued 85 Statutory Directions, 16 Advisories, besides various
orders, guidelines and official communications from time to time, targeting each of the identified
sectors. Such Statutory Directions,inter alia,detail the polluting potential in respective sectors,
measures and mechanism for abatement of air pollution in the sector and targeted milestones. In the
process, wherever felt necessary, the Commission has also come up with much stringent emission
standards / norms for various polluting activities in NCR, as compared to the national standards. These
directions are vigorously followed up through periodic progress reviews and issuing records of such
deliberations, supplementary orders, clarifications etc. and numerous official correspondences from time
to time.
5. II EXAMINATION OF RULES, OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
1. After detailed deliberations amongst the Committee based on inputs from the respective Ministries
namely the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Agriculture & Farmers' Welfare, New
and Renewable Energy, Petroleum and Natural Gas, Power and Commerce and Industry (Department of
Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade along with experts on the subject of stubble burning, the
observations/recommendations of the Committee are put forth in the succeeding paragraphs: -
1.1 The Committee, after a bare reading of the rules, is of the view that comprehensive and precise
definitions can be included for terms such as "stubble burning," "environmental compensation," and
"affected areas." As this will help ensure clarity and uniform interpretation across all stakeholders and
legal authorities. Specific definitions will reduce ambiguity and allow for more effective implementation
and enforcement of the rules. It further is of the view that the inclusion of proviso with a clear definition
for "small and marginal farmers" to identify those who are financially vulnerable would help in ensuring
that special provisions and exemptions, if applicable, are tailored to their needs. Provisions could include
financial aid, technology support for stubble management, or reduced penalties for stubble burning in
case of non-compliance, based on the farmer's economic capacity.The Committee observes that by
addressing these key definitions, the rules could be more effective in achieving both environmental
objectives and providing fair treatment to all farmers, especially the economically disadvantaged.
1.2 The Committee observes that to safeguard the rights and interests of farmers and ensure the
prevention of unjust penalization for stubble burning, it is essential to establish a robust redressal
mechanism. This mechanism shall provide a clearly defined process for addressing grievances related to
erroneous or disputed challans. It must include the designation of the competent appellate authority,
18

stipulate a prescribed timeline for resolution, and outline the procedural framework for adjudication.
Such a system will enable farmers to challenge wrongful actions effectively and uphold principles of
fairness and accountability. In this context, t he Committee notes that Rule 4 which concerns
“Collection of Environmental Compensation for stubble burning” and outlines theprocedures for
the Collection of Environmental Compensation for Stubble Burning, exhibits certain ambiguities
regarding the delineation of roles, responsibilities, and accountability mechanisms. Sub-clause (3) of
Rule 4 states that if the Farmer fails to pay the challan amount within the period specified under sub-
rule(2),the Commission shall prepare a certificate specifying the amount due from the Farmer and
forward the certificate along with the form of challan to the officer authorised by the respective State
Government or, Union territory, as the case may be, in this regard. The Committee observes that the
term "officer" is vague and this lack of specificity might cause delays or confusion in implementation as
responsibilities could be unclear. The rule should specify the officer's designation, e.g., "Tehsildar,"
"Sub-Divisional Magistrate (SDM)," or "Revenue Officer" responsible for land revenue collection in the
respective region or the state pollution control board or the authority managing the penalties collected
from stubble burning.The Committee, in this regard, recommends that suitable and appropriate
modifications may be carried out in (i) designating an authority who will be able to address the
grievances of farmers in a time bound manner, (ii) clarityon the term “officer” for issuing
challans.
1.3 The Committee notes that i n Sub Rule (4) of Rule 4 it has been stated that“the
officer referred to in sub rule (4) shall on receipt of the certificate and the form of challan,
shall proceed to recover the amount specified there under from the farmer as if it were an
arrear of the landrevenue. “TheCommittee notes that the error in the wording, which was
typographical, has been rectified and substituted by “sub rule (3)”. The Committee further
notes that Sub-clause (3) of Rule 4 specifies that a Certificate will be prepared, but there is no
prescribed format annexed, leading to variability in implementation. The Committee is of the view
that absence of a standardized Certificate Form could lead to inconsistencies and legal ambiguities.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that a standardised Certificate Form be prepared on the
lines of Challan and put in Annexure of the Rules.
1.4 The Committee notes that Sub-clause (5) of Rule 4 states that“The officer of the respective State
Government or, Union territory who maintains the land revenue record as prevalent in the respective
State Government or, Union territory shall ensure that such record is marked with red entry against the
Farmer where from the incident of stubble burning is found or reported to burn stubble or there is a
proof to the effect that stubble burning has happened in the land;”The Committee deduces that, as per
provision of the Rule, t he “RED ENTRY” shall be maintained by the designated authority in the
respective State Government or Union Territory and this entry shall serve as a record of non-
19

compliance with the regulations prohibiting stubble burning and may be considered for future
regulatory actions or incentives. Noting this, the Committee observes that the rules does not specify
with clarity that whether “RED ENTRY” is to be marked for thefarmers who had paid the fine, or
not paid the fine or for all the cases where stubble is burned or reported for maintaining the records.
Also, it is not made clear,which authority will maintain these records of “RED ENTRY”.
Therefore, it is necessary to enhance the clarity of the provisions. The Committee feels that the
officer of the respective State Government or Union Territory who maintains the land revenue
record, as prevalent in the respective State Government or Union Territory, should ensure that such
record is marked with a red entry against the farmer’s land parcel where stubble burning hasbeen
detected or reported; or a fine has been imposed for stubble burning, regardless of whether it has
been paid or not; or any other evidence of stubble burning exists. The Committee, therefore
recommends that, the Ministry may examine the suitable provisions in this regard and make
necessary amendments or issue necessary clarifications/ instructions for bringing clarity.
1.4.1 The Committee further observes that incorporating an exit provision or removal mechanism for
the Red Entry under the Rule would significantly help farmers affected by such entries. A structured
approach could include a time-bound removal mechanism, where the Red Entry is automatically erased
after a specified period if no repeat offense occurs. Additionally, farmers could be provided an
opportunity to remove the entry by adopting eco-friendly practices, providing proof of compliance, and
attending awareness programs on stubble management. Also, to ensure fairness, an appeal and review
process can be established, allowing farmers to contest a Red Entry by submitting counter-evidence
before a designated authority and if an entry is found to be erroneous or based on incorrect reports, it
could be removed immediately upon verification.Based on these observations, the Committee
recommends introducing an incentive-based Red entry removal system, enabling early removal for
farmers actively participating in sustainable farming practices or government-supported stubble
management programs.The Committee is of the firm view that these measures would help promote
justice and fairness, prevent undue harassment, encourage positive behavioral change over punitive
measures, and strike a balance between environmental concerns and the socio-economic realities of
farmers.
1.5 The Committee notes that the Sub-clause (6)of Rule 4 states that “The environmental
compensation collected under this rule shall be deposited in the account of respective State
Pollution Control Board or Pollution Control Committee.”This, the Committee understands means
that the environmental compensation collected under this rule shall be deposited to a Stubble
Management Fund managed by a particular authority to use this fund for better management of
20

crop residue in the respective states or regions. However, the Committee observes that this sub-
clause (6), lack explicit provisions governing the utilization of environmental compensation
funds and thus it is imperative to specify the purposes for fund allocation, designate the
authorities authorized to approve disbursements, and establish mechanisms for monitoring
and ensuring effective utilization as incorporating such provisions will enhance transparency
and accountability in fund management.
1.6 Drawing on its observations in above para, the Committee is of the view that while the
current Rules outline the framework for imposing and collecting environmental compensation,
they lack specific provisions regarding its utilization. Thus, the Committee feels that an
appropriate addition of a new Rule will help in aligning the same with their stated purpose of
Imposition, Collection, and Utilization of Environmental Compensation for Stubble Burning.
I n v i e w o f t h e f o r e g o i n g t h e C o m m i t t e e r e c o m m e n d s t h a t a n e w
s u b - r u l e r e l a t i n g t o u tilization of Environmental Compensation Fund for stubble
burning be incorporated in the Rules so that the Environmental Compensation Funds get
utilized to promote sustainable agriculture practices by subsidizing residue management
technologies, incentivizing crop diversification, supporting biomass utilization
infrastructure, research in the area of crop residue management and educating farmers one
co-friendly practices, etc. to reduce stubble burning for sustainable farming. Further the
respective State Governments, in consultation with the Commission, may be authorized to
formulate and issue appropriate guidelines and notifications for the implementation of
incentivization measures as deemed necessary.
1.7 The Committee consciously notes that its mandate is to explicitly examine the Commission for
Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Imposition, Collection and
Utilization of Environmental Compensation for Stubble Burning) Rules, 2023. However, based on
ground insights, comments from representatives of various Ministries and other experts including
concerns raised by the Hon’ble Members of the Committee,the Committee outlines the following further
recommendations/ observations/ suggestions for consideration of the Ministry/ relevant stakeholders:
(i) The Committee recommends towards establishing a mechanism by State Governments, in
consultation with the Commission to determine and benchmark a minimum price for paddy crop
residue. This price should function similarly to a Minimum Support Price (MSP) to provide
farmers with guaranteed returns upon selling their stubble. These benchmark price can be
reviewed and notified annually before the Kharif harvest season, ensuring they reflect farmers'
costs for residue collection, including labour and machinery.
21

(ii)The Committee is of the view that establishing a Real-time Mapping of Crop Acreage and
Forecasting of Crop Maturity and Weather System to estimate the land under cultivation for different
crops and their yields to assess the total district-wise crop yield and Real-time forecasting of crop
maturity and weather for better planning and efficacy of technological and human resources to manage
harvesting and crop residue management timely and efficiently will go a long way in addressing the issue
of stubble burning.The Committee therefore recommends the establishment of Real-time Mapping
of Crop Acreage and Forecasting of Crop Maturity and Weather system.
(iii) Based on the inputs received and noting the initiatives being taken and noting that transport
costs are one of the main constraints in the transportation of residues,the Committee is of the view that
establishing interim storage facilities in different districts for collecting crop residue in areas where
industries or end users are unavailable within 20-50 km., would facilitate t he local
aggregators/agribusiness to enable the collection of crop residue/bail efficiently and timely besides
motivating local entrepreneurs and aggregators to facilitate CRM.
(iv) The Committee notes that a primary concern is the limited window of about 25 days available to
farmers between the harvesting of paddy and the sowing of the next crop. The Committee believes that
this short window between the Rabi and Kharif crops is one of the main reasons why farmers resort to
stubble burning.Therefore, the Committee recommends that the respective State Governments
incentivize the adoption of short-duration paddy varieties as an alternative to long-duration
varieties such as PUSA 44. This can include measures such as standardizing procurement
processes, enforcing seed certification bans, and providing financial support to farmers who opt
for crop diversification under government schemes.The procurement guidelines of the Food
Corporation of India (FCI) for rice should align with the quality standards of short-duration paddy
varieties.The Committee further recommends that the Union Government assess and implement
an impact evaluation framework for ongoing crop diversification incentives under schemes like
the Crop Diversification Plan, ensuring the scalability of these incentives to other states.
(v) The Committee is of the considered opinion, after hearing representatives of various Ministries
there is a need to integrate agriculture residue into bio energy generation effectively.Towards this the
Committee recommends the formulation of a Unified National Policy for the integration of
agriculture residue into bio energy generation. This policy should ensure inter-ministerial
coordination across Agriculture, New and Renewable Energy, Petroleum and Natural Gas,
Industry, Health, and Environment Ministries, and prioritize the adoption of technologies like bio
ethanol, compressed biogas, and biomass pellets. It should address ex-situ costs for crop residue
management, provide financial incentives, develop supply chain infrastructure, and implement
awareness programs for farmers, ensuring both economic viability and environmental
sustainability.
22

(vi) During the deliberations on the issue, the Committee noted that Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare is neither a part of the Inter Ministerial Committee constituted on the issue of stubble burning
and also not represented in the Commission for Air Quality Management (CAQM). The Committee
noted that the Air Pollution and worsening air quality poses serious health risks for millions of residents
of Delhi and NCR.Therefore, the Committee recommends that representatives of Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare at various forums in connection with Air Pollution and stubble burning
related issues may be ensured.
(vii)The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate
Change, should undertake periodic reviews, based on stakeholder feedback and evolving
environmental conditions, to ensure continuous improvement and adaptability of the notified Rules.
23

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE–AT A GLANCE
The Committee observes that by addressing these key definitions, the rules could be more effective
in achieving both environmental objectives and providing fair treatment to all farmers, especially
the economically disadvantaged.
Para II (1.1)
The Committee, in this regard, recommends that suitable and appropriate modifications may be
carried out in (i) designating an authority who will be able to address the grievances of farmers in
a time bound manner, (ii) clarity on the term “officer” for issuing challans.
Para II (1.2)
The Committee recommends that a standardised Certificate Form be prepared on the lines of
Challan and put in Annexure of the Rules.
Para II (1.3)
The Committee recommends that, the Ministry may examine the suitable provisions in this
regard and make necessary amendments or issue necessary clarifications/ instructions for
bringing clarity.
Para II (1.4)
The Committee recommends introducing an incentive-based Red entry removal system, enabling
early removal for farmers actively participating in sustainable farming practices or government-
supported stubble management programs.
Para II (1.4.1)
The Committee observes that this sub-clause (6), lack explicit provisions governing the
utilization of environmental compensation funds and thus it is imperative to specify the
purposes for fund allocation, designate the authorities authorized to approve disbursements,
and establish mechanisms for monitoring and ensuring effective utilization as incorporating
such provisions will enhance transparency and accountability in fund management.
Para II (1.5)
24

T h e C o m m i t t e e r e c o m m e n d s t h a t a n e w s u b - r u l e r e l a t i n g t o u tilization
of Environmental Compensation Fund for stubble burning be incorporated in the Rules so
that the Environmental Compensation funds get utilized to promote sustainable agriculture
practices by subsidizing residue management technologies, incentivizing crop diversification,
supporting biomass utilization infrastructure, research in the area of crop residue
management and educating farmers one co-friendly practices, etc. to reduce stubble burning
for sustainable farming. Further the respective State Governments, in consultation with the
Commission, may be authorized to formulate and issue appropriate guidelines and
notifications for the implementation of incentivization measures as deemed necessary.
Para II (1.6)
The Committee recommends towards establishing a mechanism by State Governments, in
consultation with the Commission to determine and benchmark a minimum price for paddy crop
residue. This price should function similarly to a Minimum Support Price (MSP) to provide
farmers with guaranteed returns upon selling their stubble. These benchmark price can be
reviewed and notified annually before the Kharif harvest season, ensuring they reflect farmers'
costs for residue collection, including labour and machinery.
Para II (1.7)(i)
The Committee therefore recommends the establishment of Real-time Mapping of Crop Acreage
and Forecasting of Crop Maturity and Weather system.
Para II (1.7)(ii)
The Committee is of the view that establishing interim storage facilities in different districts for
collecting crop residue in areas where industries or end users are unavailable within 20-50 km.,
would facilitate the local aggregators/agribusiness to enable the collection of crop residue/bail
efficiently and timely besides motivating local entrepreneurs and aggregators to facilitate CRM.
Para II (1.7)(iii)
The Committee recommends that the respective State Governments incentivize the adoption of
short-duration paddy varieties as an alternative to long-duration varieties such as PUSA 44. This
can include measures such as standardizing procurement processes, enforcing seed certification
bans, and providing financial support to farmers who opt for crop diversification under
government schemes. The Committee further recommends that the Union Government assess and
25

implement an impact evaluation framework for ongoing crop diversification incentives under
schemes like the Crop Diversification Plan, ensuring the scalability of these incentives to other
states.
Para II (1.7)(iv)
The Committee recommends the formulation of a Unified National Policy for the integration of
agriculture residue into bioenergy generation. This policy should ensure inter-ministerial
coordination across Agriculture, New and Renewable Energy, Petroleum and Natural Gas,
Industry, Health, and Environment Ministries, and prioritize the adoption of technologies like
bioethanol, compressed biogas, and biomass pellets. It should address ex-situ costs for crop residue
management, provide financial incentives, develop supply chain infrastructure, and implement
awareness programs for farmers, ensuring both economic viability and environmental
sustainability. Para II (1.7)(v)
The Committee recommends that representatives of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare at
various forums in connection with Air Pollution and stubble burning related issues may be
ensured.
Para II (1.7)(vi)
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change,
should undertake periodic reviews, based on stakeholder feedback and evolving environmental
conditions, to ensure continuous improvement and adaptability of the notified Rules.
Para II (1.7)(vii)
26

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
RAJYA SABHA
I
First Meeting
The Committee met at 03.30 PM on Tuesday, the 3rd December, 2024in Committee Room No.-4,
A-Block, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi.
Present
1. Shri Milind Murli Deora Chairman
Members
2.Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala
3. Shri Jose K. Mani
4. Dr. Dinesh Sharma
5. Shri Kartikeya Sharma
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva
8. Shri G.K. Vasan
9. Smt. Sangeeta Yadav
Secretariat
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Khursija, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Director
3. Shri Thangzalun Khuptong, Deputy Secretary
4. Shri P. P. Raumon, Under Secretary
5. Shri Pardeep Kumar, Committee Officer
27

WITNESSES
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
1. Smt. Leena Nandan, Secretary
2. Shri Tanmay Kumar, Special Secretary
3. Shri Naresh Pal Gangwar, Addl. Secretary
4. Shri Ved Prakash Mishra, Joint Secretary
5. Shri N Subrahmanyam, Scientist 'E'
6. Shri Prasoon Tripathi, Under Secretary
Commission For Air Quality Management (CAQM)
1. Shri Rajesh Verma, Chairman,
2. Shri Arvind Kumar Nautiyal, Member Secretary
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)
1. Shri Bharat Kumar Sharma, Member Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members present to the first meeting of the Committee and
apprised them the Agenda of the day i.e.:-
(i) Selection of Subjects for detailed study and discussion on future course of action.
(ii) To hear the Secretary, M/o Environment, Forest and Climate Change on the Commission for Air
Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Imposition, Collection and
Utilization of Environmental Compensation for Stubble Burning) Rules, 2023 and subsequent
amendment.
2.1. On the request of the Chairman, all the Members present and the officers of the Secretariat introduced
themselves. The Chairman, thereafter, underscored the role of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation
focusing on examination of Rules, Regulations, Bye-Laws, Schemes and presenting reports thereon in
Rajya Sabha.
28

2.2. The Chairman mentioned that he has identified certain rules, playing pivotal in the manufacturing
sector, where upon, the Members may give valuable inputs and suggestions in identification of the
subjects for detailed examination by the Committee as well as during the course of the examination and
finalization of Reports thereon.
2.3. After that the Chairman, drew the attention of the Members of the Committee to the provision
regarding declaration of interest as mentioned in Rule–294(I) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) which read as under:-
“Whenever a member has a personal or specific pecuniary interest(direct or indirect) in a matter being
considered by the Council or a Committee thereof, he shall declare the nature of such interest
notwithstanding any registration of his interests in the Register, and shall not participate in any debate
taking place in the Council or its Committees before making suchdeclaration.”
3. The Director (COSL) made a brief power point presentation on the Working of the Committee on
Subordinate Legislation and also the following Rules that had been identified for detailed examination:-
(i) The Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Imposition, Collection
and Utilization of Environmental Compensation for Stubble Burning) Rules, 2023 under the Commission
for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Act, 2021.
(ii) Telecommunication (Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure) Rules-2024 under the
Telecommunication Act 2023.
(iii) Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber Security), Rules-2024 under the Telecommunication Act 2023.
(iv) The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021
under the Information Technology Act-2000.
(v) Drone Rules, 2021 under Aircraft Act, 1934.
(vi) Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016 and subsequent amendments under the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986
(vii) Battery Waste Management Rules, 2022 Rules under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
(viii) Securities and Exchange Board of India (Real Estate Investment Trusts) Regulations, 2014 under
the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992.
29

(ix) The Electricity (Rights of Consumers) Amendment Rules, 2021 under the Electricity Act, 2003
(Rooftop Solar matter is mentioned in these Rules).
(x) Competition Commission of India (Commitment) Regulations, 2024framed under the Competition
Act, 2002.
3.1. Thereafter, the Chairman asked the Members to suggest the rules and regulations on which the
Committee need to focus on apart from above mentioned rules. After a brief discussion, the Committee
decided to take up first the abovementioned Rules and the later on the Committee may take up certain
other Rules as would be suggested by Members of the Committee. Thereupon, some of the Members
suggested that the Secretariat may identify the rules and a list of it may be circulated to the Members to
take a view on identification of the Rules for detailed study by the Committee. Some of the Members also
suggested that printed copies of the background materials and other documents may be circulated
amongst the Members enabling them to participate in the discussion more conveniently. Some of the
members also suggested for conduct of more number of meetings of the Committee in order to deliver
maximum output by the Committee. Members also desired to have study visit on selected subjects to
various parts of the Country to take stock of the ground realities.
4. The Chairman, thereafter, invited the Secretary and other senior officers from the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change to deliver on the Commission for Air Quality Management in
National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Imposition, Collection and Utilization of Environmental
Compensation for Stubble Burning) Rules, 2023. The Member Secretary, Commission for Air Quality
Management (CAQM), with the aid of power point presentation, explained to the Committee, the various
provisions of the Rules. He explained to the Committee, with the aid of satellite pictures, about the impact
of the pollution, and how the smog travels to the NCR area. He explained that there is a standard ISRO
protocol through which the satellite captures and relays the counts, pin-pointed the areas where the
incidence of stubble burning incurred. He mentioned that cases of stubble burning came down to about
11,000 counts in the year 2024 as compared to71,000 in Punjab in2021. While in Haryana, the incidence
of stubble burning came down to 1400 from7,000 cases during the same period.
5. Responding to the Member’s query, as to why the stubble burning in Punjab andHaryana States are
causing the air pollution, while stubble burning in other adjoining States viz. Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh
does not cause that much air pollution, the Ministry replied that post monsoon wind direction causes
lesser air pollution as the smog is carried by the winds from the northern direction. The Ministry also
explained that due to silica content in straw the stubble burning could not be used for fodder but causes
air pollution on burning. The Ministry also mentioned about various industrial uses of stubble that could
30

generate handsome income to farmers. It was mentioned that promotion industrial use of stubble by
various Ministries should form part of the management plan for prevention and control of stubble
burning.
5.1. The Ministry apprised the Committee about the supply chain mechanism as part of the crop residue
management. Various campaigns with other related ministries and agencies, monitoring mechanism,
deployment of nodal officers etc were also explained to the Committee. The rates of environmental
compensation to the farmers, the penalty on the violators were also explained. Members suggested that in
order to curb the stubble burning, distribution of the seeds need to be controlled in these states so that
only straw which are having use for other purposes be produced rather than the types to which the farmers
are compelling to burn.
6. Some of the Members also pointed out that farmers interest must be taken into account while resolving
the problem of stubble burning. Therefore, the Members were of the view that the Ministry should collect
and analyse statistics of all the pollutants and their contribution to the air pollution in the NCR, and
formulate policy and plan to curb the polluting agents at the original source rather than just blaming the
farmers for the entire problem. The Crop Residue Management Plan should incentivizes the farmers, and
ensure fair price/remunerative price of stubble by promoting its industrial use. Some Members asked for
state-wise statistics of the pollution caused by stubble burning. The Chairman pointed out that if the
incidents of stubble burning is reduced considerably, what are the reasons that the AQI rate is going up.
7. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised several other queries relating to the Rules and the
representatives from the Ministry responded to some of them. The Chairman, thereafter, directed the
Ministries to furnish the written replies to the queries raised by the Members in the meeting for
consideration of the Committee.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.17 pm
9. A verbatim of the proceedings of the Meeting of the Committee was kept.
Bhupendra Bhaskar
03-12-2024 Director
New Delhi
31

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATELEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA .
II SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 18 thDecember, 2024 in
Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor,Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
The following Members of the Committee were present in the meeting:-
PRESENT:
1. Shri Milind Murli Deora - Chairman Members
1. Shri Golla Baburao
2. Ms. Sushmita Dev
3. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala
4. Shri Manan Kumar Mishra
5. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
6. Shri C.Ve Shanmugam
7. Dr. Dinesh Sharma
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva
10. Shri G.K. Vasan
11. Smt. Sangeeta Yadav
Secretariat
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Khursija, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Director
3. Shri Thangzalun Khuptong, Deputy Secretary
4. Ms. Aditi Choudhary, OSD to Hon’ble Chairman, RajyaSabha
5. Shri P.P.Raumon,Under Secretary
6. Shri Pardeep Kumar,Committee Officer
WITNESSES:
Ministryof Agriculture and FarmersWelfare
1. Mrs. S. Rukmani, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arvind Meshram, Deputy Commissioner
3. Shri C.V.Chimote, Assistant Commissioner
4. Shri Rajiv Thakur, Agriculture Engineer
32

Ministry of Power
1. Shri Piyush Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Praveen Gupta, Member(Thermal)CEA
3. Shri Venkateswarlu Talluri, Chief Engineer, CEA
4. Shri Satish Upadhyay, Mission Director & ED,NTPC
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
1. Dr. Sangita M.Kasturi, Scientist-G
2. Shri Sanjay Kumar Shahi, Scientist-E
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas
1. Shri Asheesh Joshi, JointSecretary
2. Shri Ajit Thakur, IOCL
3. Shri Sachidanand Yadav, GAIL
4. Shri Anurag Saraogi, BPCL
Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department for Promotion of
Industry and Internal Trade)
1. Shri Sanjiv, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mohammad Isharar Ali, Director
3. Shri Naresh Kumar Wadhwa, Director
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
1. Shri Tanmay Kumar, Special Secretary & Chairman, CPCB
2. Shri Naresh Pal Gangwar, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Ved Prakash Mishra, Joint Secretary
EXPERTS
1. Dr. Suresh Jain, Professor of Air Pollution and Health
Head, Deptt. of Civil & Environmental Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology, Tirupati (Andhra Pradesh)
2. Dr. Abhishek Kar, Senior Programme
Lead Council on Energy, Environment and Water Vasant Kunj
Institutional Area
New Delhi.
33

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the
officials present. He stated that the Committee had a meeting on 3 rdDecember, 2024 on
the subject“The Commission for Air Quality Managementin National Capital Region and
Adjoining Areas (Imposition, Collection and Utilization of Environmental compensation
for Stubble Burning) Rules, 2023 and Subsequent amendments. Based on the feedback
from Members, as a follow up, the Committee has decided to hear the views of a multi-
agency on what the issues are and how it pertains to other Ministries and Departments.
2.1 Th e Chairman stated that two exp erts in this area have been called to present their
views namely Dr. Su resh Jain, Professor of Air Pollution and He alth, the Hea d of
Department Civil &Environmental Engineering in the Indian Ins titute of Technology ,
IIT, Tirupati an d Dr .Abhishek Ka r, Senior Programme Lead from the Co uncil of En ergy ,
Environment an d Water, Vasant Ku nj Institutional Area. Besides them, officers from the
Ministry and Farmers’Welfare, Ministry of Power, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy ,
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Ga s, Ministry of Commerce and Industry and the nodal
Ministry i.e Ministry of Enviro nment, For est and Clim ate Change have also been invited
to make su bmissions on the subje ct. Thereafter , the Chairman of the Co mmittee requested
there p resentatives of th e Ministry and both the exp erts to make their su bmissions, in
brief, one by one on this issue.
3. The Joint Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’Welfare in her
submissions informed the Committee that she was dealing with farm mechanization in
Ministry of Agriculture under which they are providing all kinds of machinery to the
farmers on subsidized basis. On the issue of Air pollution, the Ministry has started a
scheme called ‘Crop Residue Management Schemer 2018 with their three folds of
interventions. One is providing machines for managing the paddy straw that is generated
in the fields, and, for that they are giving subsidy at the rate of 50% to the farmers, and for
establishing Custom Hiring Centres, provided 80% subsidy, through which the farmers
can rent- out machines and use it form an aging the paddy straw.
3.1 The Ministry has further stated that the second intervention is for providing project-
based support for ex-situ management of the paddy straw under which they have provided
65% of the cost of the machine to the farmers for purchasing of machines; 25% the
industry pitches in; and10%, the aggregators gives as a beneficiary. So under this, the
paddy straw is collect and as a supply chain, it is provided to the industry which is using
it. The third component of the Scheme is that they are doing aggressive campaigning and
promotion and carry out the Information, Education& Communication (IEC) campaign
through Indian Council for Agricultural Research (ICAR) Institutes, and through the State
governments, to make an informed suggestion to the farmers not to burn the paddy straw
and how it is having an ill-effect and how, by not burning the paddy straw, they could be
net and have the nutrients back in the soil and also have a remunerative income.
4. The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Power stated that they have introduced a policy in
the year 2017 for co-firing of biomass pellets in their thermal power plants. The Ministry
has already created a dedicated Mission called ‘SAMARTH Mission’ under which they
are focusing that the thermal power plants should co-fire biomass-based pellets along with
coal. The Ministry is promoting creation of biomass chain and creation of pellet-
manufacturing chain through the above Mission. The Ministry has further stated that they
34

are helping their thermal power plants to actually migrate, at least, up to 5 to 10 per cent
and they have targeted that there should be 5 per cent on co-firing and the same will be
raised to 7 per cent in subsequent years. The Ministry has further informed the Committee
that they are focusing primarily across the country and also in the National Capital Region
(NCR).
5. The representative of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy informed that
they are running a Scheme, namely, the Bio Energy Programme, under which there are
three components - Waste to Energy, Biomass Programme and Biogas Programme.
Biomass comes from various resources including stubble, that is being used for
manufacturing of briquette and pellet manufacturing and they are providing subsidy for
the purpose. In addition to that, the biomass is also going for co-generation and
compressed biogas production and converted into biogas. The Committee was also
apprised that so far, they have 15.31 lakh tones per year consumption of biomass in three
States from these commissioned projects.
6. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas apprised the Committee that they have a
policy called SATAT in which they manufacture Compressed Biogas(CBG) and as of
now, in the NCR Region, two plants are commissioned with capacity of 21 tonnes per day
and one plant is under construction with a capacity of 15 tonnes per day. For effective
collection of the biomass, they have started a Scheme this year called BAM, i.e., Biomass
Aggregation Machinery The Ministry is providing 50 per cent incentive to the CBG
producers for purchase of the biomass set under this Scheme. For effective evacuation of
the gas that i s produced, they have a scheme for pipeline infrastructure under which they
have provided Rs50lakhs per kilometer for laying down the pipeline, which connect a
CBG producer to a CBG entity.
7. The Ministry of Commerce and Industry in their presentation stated that they should
find ways in which parali or stubble can be used as an alternative fuel for cement kilns and
how it can be used by paper industry and the particle boards made by them can be used
for furniture industry. The Ministry has further stated that they will soon have stakeholder
consultation with furniture industry and particle board manufacturers to understand what
the requirement of furniture industry is because they have been told that parali has lot of
silica content which makes it little difficult for equipments to manufacture furniture as
well as make good paper out of it.
7.1 The Ministry has further stated that they have requested their two National level
Institutes, the Central Paper and Pulp Research Institute (CPPRI) and National Council for
Cement and Building Material to do research as to how this stubble can be used as an
alternative fuel or feed stock for paper manufacturing.
8. The Special Secretary& Chairman, CPCB in his presentation, inter alia, informed
the Committee that in the earlier meeting with the Commission for Air Quality
Management in NCR and Adjoining areas on Dec 3, 2024 a detailed presentation was
made by the Chairperson of CAQM on their role. Under the regulatory framework, thereis
an Act in place known as the Commission for Air Quality management in NCR and
Adjoining Areas Act which came into force in 2021.
35

8.1 The Ministry apprised the Committee that under the Act the powers have been
vested with the Commission for issuing directions and it does monitoring exercise and
reform exercise in consultation with all the State Governments; the State Governments of
Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, Rajasthan and some parts of Uttar Pradesh and respective State
Pollution Control Boards. Under that umbrella, the CAQM holds meetings and issues
directions from time to time for improvement of air quality. They categorized the sources
of air pollution in Delhi and NCR as below - (i) dust, that is, dust from consistent
demolition waste as also the road dust, (ii) vehicular pollution, (iii) industrial
pollution,(iv)the pollution from burning of biomass and waste, and (v) the episodic events,
which happen in the months of October and November, when stubble burning and fire
crackers etc. contribute to the air pollution. To control that the Commission has issued a
number of directions and the Ministry has also come out with Rules.
8.2 Further, the Ministry apprised the Committee that imposition of fines, etc., is also a
component of the overall stubble burning management framework and
monitoring exercise is done by the CAQM with support of the scientists from CPCB and
also deputed core scientists by the Ministry and CAQM. The AirQuality Index is measured
by the continuous ambient air quality monitoring stations which have been put up in Delhi
and other parts of the Country.
9. Dr. Abhishek Kar in his brief presentation on the subject apprised the Committee
regarding CAQM Rules, the insights from the field, those are all based out of their
research, which is peer reviewed. Firstly, it is the problem of crop residue burning and
they did a survey of about 1,500 farmers to understand the problem on the ground. One of
the issues is partial burning which farmers often resorted to. He has further informed the
Committee about the CRM Machines. Farmers are just adopting the machines not the
package of farming practices.
9.1 He has submitted before the Committee that combine harvesters should be fitted
with Super Straw Management System and then farmers should use the machine.
Unfortunately, farmers are not doing that. They are directly using the super seeder. This
sometimes is raising complaints around pesticides, etc. so that this is in-situ approach. Next
is ex situ approach. One challenge that they have seen is in terms of contract enforcement.
Often farmers are told that their harvest is going to be picked up, but often it is not getting
picked up. On the other hand, sometimes it so happens that after the baling machines are
used, the material is kept there and there is a delay in picking that up. In winters, the
quality of straw is getting damaged. There is a delay between harvesting and bringing it to
the industry. He highlighted that the short duration seed variety is getting more popular
yet evidence on the ground suggest that it is coming as broken. He suggest that while there
is a complete ban on burning of stubble, one has to differentiate between partial burning
and complete burning.
10. Dr. Suresh Jain in his submission before the Committee stated that there is a
mismatch between what we see in the field and how policies or strategies are implemented
in the case of stubble burning. He has further mentioned about the number of subsidies
given to equipments and supply chain. The Companies, which can support the amount of
36

stubble which is getting generated in those areas, are less in number and other aspects
comes like, weather, crop maturity, depending upon the variety of growing paddy and
infrastructural resources required.
10.1 He has further suggested for a real-time forecasting system with integrated
parameters of size of crop acreage, hot-spot in terms of where more burning occurs and
how the weather is going to be there can help in making accurate forecasts about location,
type of meteorology, rainfall patterns, allowing for collection of resources in a better way
with the minimum available time.
11. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised some queries and then inquired
from the representatives of the Ministries presented in the meeting on the following issues:
(i) whether there is any plan of the Ministry of Agriculture to set a uniform price
to improve the supply chain and to incentivize the farmers to ultimately sell rather
than burn;
(ii) the status for setting up biomass bank for storage of stubble;
(iii) Involvement of Ministry of Health& Family Welfare in the Inter-Ministerial
Committee on Crop Residue management and representation of Health and family
Welfare in CAQM etc.
12. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised several other queries and the
representatives from the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Environment and
Forests and experts responded to some of them. The Chairman, thereafter, directed the
witnesses to furnish the written replies to the queries raised by the Members for
consideration of the Committee.
13. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
14. The Committee adjourned at 04.01 P.M.
Sanjay Kumar Khursija
Joint Secretary
New Delhi
18thDecember, 2024
37

2783 GI/2023 (1)
स ं. .ए.- 33004/99 REGD. No. D. L.-33004/99
xxxGIDHxxx
xxxGIDExxx
अ
EXTRAORDINARY
भ II— ण 3—उ -ण (i)
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i)
  
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
ाव, व औ वु वा ं
अूच
ई दल,28अ, 2023
... 322(अ).—  े  ,ष  औ टव ो े वु वट ं आ अ,
2021 (202129)ी 25ी उ(2)  ं() त ो    हए,म   ,
अा्:--
1. ंप , ू औ ंभ .— (1)इ ो  ंप  ष  औ टव ो े वु
वट ं आ(   ाव   अ,ंग औ उ), 2023।
(2) ष  ज  दल,ं ज, ज औ ष  ज  स औ उत 
े ू ो ।
(3)  े उ   ी   वृत ो।
2. भएं.— (1)इ ो े,  ंभा  अन अ  ,  व,-
."अ’’ ष  औ टव ो े वु वट ं आ अ, 2021 (202129)
अभ ;
."आ" 3  अ  ष  औ टव ो े वु वट ं आ अभ ;
.“ ृ ”    ृ  उ भू  सव  अभ   अभ ;
ं. 260] ई दल, ुकव, अ 28,2023/ व 8,1945
No. 260] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, APRIL 28, 2023/VAISAKHA 8, 1945
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-28042023-245503
CG-DL-E-28042023-245503

2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [P ART II—S EC. 3(i)]
घ.“” अ ी  अभ ।
(2)उ बो औ ो  , इे ु ै औ भ  ै,दनु अ े भ ै,व अा ो  उ
अ े ै ।
3.    ए ाव   अ.— आ म ो    व  ृ ो 
ाव  अ औ ंृ   ,अा्:--
() ए   भू व  ृ ,  ंच ौ    ाव   ं े;
() ए  उ अ दनु ंच ए   भू व  ृ  ंच     ाव   ं
े;
()ंच ए  अ  व  ृ  न     ाव   ं े ।
4.    ए ाव   ंग.— (1)ाव ,इ ो  उ  े वरा
च    े  ृ   ंृ द ए ।
(2) ृ  च   ी    दो  अ ी अव   भ इ ो   अ च   अु 
 भु  ।
(3)द  ृ  उ(2)  अ वरा अव   भ च   भु  े व  ,आ, ृ  
 ्  े    वरा  हए     औ स,इ ंं े ंं ज   ंघ
ज   ृ  अ  च    े      अग  ।
(4)उ(4)े रा अ,  ी औ च    े प  , ृ   उे रा  ी वू  
ए दक अए, द  भू-सव   ;
(5)ंं ज   ंघ ज  अ ंं ज   ंघ ज े च भू-सव ॉा 
व  , ुि  द ऐ ॉा  ृ    व  व    चन द  ,ं 
 ी घट    ी ूच प हई   इ     द भू े   ी घट घट हई  ।
(6)इ    अ ंृ ए ाव  ंं ज ू ं ा  ू ं    
े  द ए ।
[.ं.ू-15014/10/2021-ए]
 ंव,अ चव

(3औ 4े)
च ंख... ...../../….
च
 े     ष  ज औ टव ो े वु वट ं आ(    ए
ाव ुआव  अ,ंग औ उ), 2023  अु े,ष  औ टव ो े वु
वट ं आ, …………भू (,व औ ौ  भू  )… औ    ृ 
अा् श/ुश...........ी भू  ौ द ।  ृ    हए  /टा ी ई ी ूच    इ 
 ू  द उ उल भू े   ी घट हई ।
ृ   :
 ं:
:

[भII—ण3(i)] भ  :अ 3
ग:
घ:
:
:
ज:
ं ा ंख:
 ृ  ी भू  ,   ई ई : (उु ॉ   एँ)
(i) 2ए  ...............
(ii) 25ए   च................
(iii) 5ए  अ
चूंद  ृ   उ ो    द ,अ: ृ   च ी    द   भ
‘‘………………………’’   े   ं डफट   ध ......................(  व बो े)ए   ाव
      ए अ औ  द   ।
 अ   स


अ ी ु
ं ा ं
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 28th April, 2023
G.S.R. 322(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 25 of the
Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Act, 2021 (29 of 2021),
the Central Government hereby makes the following rules, namely:-
1. Short title and commencement.—(1) These rules may be called the Commission for Air Quality Management in
National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Imposition, Collection and Utilization of Environmental
Compensation for Stubble Burning) Rules, 2023.
(2) They shall apply to the National Capital territory of Delhi, State of Punjab, State of Haryana and National
Capital Region of Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.
(3) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. Definitions.—(1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, -
(a)“Act” means the Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas
Act, 2021 (29 of 2021);
(b)“Commission” means the Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and
adjoining areas constituted under section 3;
(c)“Farmer” means the owner or occupier or cultivator of the farming or agricultural land;
(d)“Section” means a section of the Act.
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Act shall have the same meanings as
assigned to them in the Act.

4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [P ART II—S EC. 3(i)]
3. Imposition of environmental compensation for stubble burning.—The Commission may impose and collect
environmental compensation on farmers liable for burning stubble, at the following rates, namely:-
(a) The Farmer having an area of land less than two acres shall pay an environmental compensation of rupees
two thousand five hundred;
(b) The Farmer having an area of land of two acres or more but less than five acres shall pay an environmental
compensation of rupees five thousand;
(c) The Farmers having an area of more than five acres shall pay an environmental compensation of rupees
fifteen thousand.
4. Collection of Environmental Compensation for stubble burning.—(1) The environmental compensation
shall be collected from the Farmer in the form of challan as specified in Form annexed to these rules;
(2) The Farmer shall pay the amount in pursuance of challan under these rules within a period not exceeding thirty
days from the date of issuance of form of challan;
(3) If the Farmer fails to pay the challan amount within the period specified under sub-rule (2), the Commission
shall prepare a certificate specifying the amount due from the Farmer and forward the certificate along with
the form of challan to the officer authorised by the respective State Government or, Union territory, as the
case may be, in this regard;
(4) The officer referred to in sub-rule (4) shall, on receipt of the certificate and the form of challan, shall proceed
to recover the amount specified thereunder from the Farmer as if it were an arrear of the land revenue;
(5) The officer of the respective State Government or, Union territory who maintains the land revenue record as
prevalent in the respective State Government or, Union territory shall ensure that such record is marked with
red entry against the Farmer where from the incident of stubble burning is found or reported to burn stubble
or there is a proof to the effect that stubble burning has happened in the land;
(6) The environmental compensation collected under this rule shall be deposited in the account of respective State
Pollution Control Board or Pollution Control Committee.
[F. No. Q-15014/10/2021-CPA]
NARESH PAL GANGWAR, Addl. Secy.
FORM
(See rule 3 and rule 4)
Challan No……………… Dated: ../../….
Challan
In compliance of the Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining
Areas (Imposition, Collection and Utilization of Environmental Compensation for Stubble Burning) Rules, 2023
issued by the Central Government, the Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and
adjoining areas, visited the land of the Farmer namely Mr./Ms.__________________________________on (Date and
Time) ________ at (Address of Land including khasra, Khewat and Khatoni number of the land___________. The
Farmer was found /has been reported to burn stubble or there is an evidence to the effect that stubble burning has
happened in the above noted land.
Address of the Farmer:
House No.:
Street:
Village:
Post Office:
Tehsil:
District:
State:
Contact No.:

[भII—ण3(i)] भ  :अ 5
The area of land of the farmer who has resorted to stubble burning: (tick the appropriate box)
(i) Less than 2 acres (ii) Between 2 to 5 acres
(iii) More than 5 acres
As the Farmer has not complied with the said rules, the Farmer is hereby imposed and directed to deposit the
environmental compensation of Rupees _________________ (in words ____________________________ only),
through Cash or Demand Draft in favour of “__________________________” within thirty days from the date of
Challan.
Signature of inspecting officer :
Name :
Designation :
Seal of the Officer :
Contact No. :
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. SARVESH KUMAR 
SRIVASTAVA
Digitally signed by SARVESH 
KUMAR SRIVASTAVA 
Date: 2023.04.28 17:57:35 
+05'30'

7200 GI/2024 (1)
स ं. .ए.- 33004/99 REGD. No. D. L.-33004/99
xxxGIDHxxx
xxxGIDExxx
अध
EXTRAORDINARY
भ II— ण 3—उ -ण (i)
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i)
ध  
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
ाव, व औ वु वा ं
अधिसूचना
ई दल, 6व,4 202
... 690(अ).—   , ध औ टव ो  वु ुवत ंध आ
अध, 2021 (202129)ी ध25ी उ-ध(2)  ं() त िो    हए,
 ध औ टव ो  वु ुवत ंध आ(   ाव  
अध,ंग औ उ), 2023 ंध    ए म   ै,अा्:-
1. ंप , ू औ ंभ  - (1)इ ो  ंप   ध औ टव ो  वु
ुवत ंध आ(   ाव   अध,ंग औ उ)ंध ,
2024ै।
(2)   उ   ी   वृत ो।
2.  ध औ टव ो  वु ुवत ंध आ(   ाव  
अध,ंग औ उ), 2023( इ इ  श उि ो   ै),3  स ,
म    ए,अा्:-
ं. 632] ई दल, ुधव, व 6,2024/ ा 15,1946
No. 632] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 2024/ KARTIKA 15, 1946
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-06112024-258498
CG-DL-E-06112024-258498

2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [P ART II—S EC. 3(i)]
“3. आ अध   उंधो   अु म ो    व  ृ ो  ाव
 अध औ ंृ   ै,अा्:-
() ए   भू व  ृ , घट   ए ंच     ाव   ं
;
() ए  उ अध दनु ंच ए   भू व  ृ , घट   ए     
ाव   ं ;
()ंच ए  अध भू व  ृ , घट   ए      ाव   ं
”।
3.उि ो ,4  उ-(4), "उ-(4) रा अध"ष,बो औ आंो  
ए,ष,ब औ आं"उ-(3) रा अध"स दए एं।"
4. उि ो      ए,म   ए,अा्:-
“
( 3 औ 4 )
च ंख………………
:../../….
च
 ध औ टव ो  वु ुवत ंध आ अध, 2021(202129)ी ध15
औ  ध औ टव ो  वु ुवत ंध आ(   ाव  
अध,ंग औ उ), 2023  अु ,च दए ए वा   अु  ृ      ी
ूच  /ी ई ै  इ आ  ई क ै द उी भू   ई ई ै औ सव
अध औ उल ो   अु ाव   अध द  ै,औ उ म
वव   अु ऐ ाव      े द  ै,अा्:-
1. ृ   :
2. ं:
3.:
4.ग:
5.घ:
6.:
7.:
8.ज:
9.ं ा ंख:
10.भू  ं ,व औ ौ  भू  वव:

[भII—ण3(i)] भ  :अध 3
11. ृ  ी भू  ,   ई ई ै: (उुि ॉ   एं)
(i) 2ए 

(ii) 25
ए  
च
(iii) 5ए 
अध
12.ऊ   ृ  च ी    दो   भ ाव  ंनध ज ू ं
ा  ू ं ,ै भ ,   ,  ं डफट  इ    
_________________(बो ____________________________  व)   ै।
स:
:
:
:
अध ी ु:
ं ा ं:
[.ं.ू-15014/10/2021-ए/इ-160523]
व  ,ंु चव
ट-ू  भ   ,अध,भII,ं3,उं(i) ... 322 (अ),28अै,
2023  दए ए ।
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 6th November, 2024
G.S.R. 690(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 25 of the
Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Act, 2021 (29 of 2021), the
Central Government hereby makes the following rules to amend the Commission for Air Quality Management in
National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Imposition, Collection and Utilization of Environmental Compensation
for Stubble Burning) Rules, 2023, namely:-
1. Short title and commencement.- (1) These rules may be called the Commission for Air Quality Management in
National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Imposition, Collection and Utilization of Environmental Compensation
for Stubble Burning) Amendment Rules, 2024.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2.In the Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Imposition,
Collection and Utilization of Environmental Compensation for Stubble Burning) Rules, 2023 (hereinafter referred to as
the said rules), for rule 3, the following rule shall be substituted, namely:-
“3.The Commission may impose environmental compensation as per the provisions of the Act for stubble
burning, at the following rates:-
(a) the Farmer having an area of land of less than two acres shall pay an environmental compensation of five
thousand rupees, per incidence;

4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [P ART II—S EC. 3(i)]
(b) the Farmer having an area of land of two acres or more but less than five acres shall pay an environmental
compensation of ten thousand rupees, per incidence;
(c) the Farmer having an area of land of more than five acres shall pay an environmental compensation of
thirty thousand rupees, per incidence.”.
3.In the said rules, in sub-rule (4) of rule 4, for the bracket, words and figures “The officer referred to in sub-rule
(4)”, the bracket, words and figures “The officer referred to in sub-rule (3)” shall be substituted.
4.For the Form to the said rules, the following Form shall be substituted, namely:-
“FORM
(See rule 3 and rule 4)
Challan No……………… Dated: ../../….
CHALLAN
In pursuance of the section 15 of the Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining
Areas Act, 2021 (29 of 2021) and the Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and
Adjoining Areas (Imposition, Collection and Utilization of Environmental Compensation for Stubble Burning) Rules,
2023, the Farmer described below was found/ has been reported to burn stubble or there is an evidence to the effect that
Stubble Burning has happened in his land, and consequently Environmental Compensation has been imposed as per the
Act and the rules mentioned above, and is directed to deposit such Environmental Compensation as per the following
details, namely:-
1. Name of the Farmer:
2. House No. :
3. Street :
4. Village :
5. Post Office :
6. Tehsil :
7. District :
8. State :
9. Contact No. :
10. Details of land including Khasra, Khewat and Khatoni number of the land:
11. The area of land of the farmer who has resorted to stubble burning: (tick the appropriate box)
i Less than 2 acres ii Between 2 to 5 acres iii More than 5 acres
The Farmer named above may deposit the Environmental Compensation of Rupees _________________
(in words ____________________________ only), through Cash or Demand Draft or through electronic mode in the
account of respective State Pollution Control Board or the Pollution Control Committee, as the case may be within thirty
days from the date of Challan.
Signature :
Name :
Designation :
Address :
Seal of the Officer:
Contact No :
[F. No. Q-15014/10/2021-CPA/(e-160523)]
VED PRAKASH MISHRA, Jt. Secy.
Note.-The principal rules were published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (i), vide
notification number G.S.R. 322(E), dated the 28th April, 2023.
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.SARVESH KUMAR 
SRIVASTAVA
Digitally signed by SARVESH 
KUMAR SRIVASTAVA 
Date: 2024.11.06 21:35:45 
+05'30'

2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 13th April, 2021.
2.(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,––
(a) “adjoining areas” means the areas in the States of Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan
and Uttar Pradesh, adjoining the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the National
Capital Region, where any source of pollution is located, causing adverse impact on air
quality in the National Capital Region;
(b) “Associate Member” means a member who is co-opted under
sub-section (3) of section 3;
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Commission for Air Quality
Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas referred to in section 3;
(d) “Commission” means the Commission for Air Quality Management in National
Capital Region and Adjoining Areas constituted under section 3;
(e) “Member” means a Member of the Commission and includes the Chairperson
thereof;
(f) “National Capital Region” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (f) of section 2 of the National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985;
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(2) The words used herein and not defined, but defined in the Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986, shall have the meaning as assigned to them in that Act.
CHAPTER II
COMMISSION FOR AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT IN NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION AND
ADJOINING AREAS
3.(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a body to be known as the Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital
Region and Adjoining Areas to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform the
functions assigned to, that Commission under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of the following Members, namely:––
(a) a full-time Chairperson having experience of not less than fifteen years in the
field of environment protection and pollution control or having administrative
experience of not less than twenty-five years;
(b) a representative of the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, who shall be an officer not below the rank
of Joint Secretary,ex officio;
(c) fiveex officioMembers who are either Chief Secretaries, or Secretaries
in-charge of the department dealing with environment protection in the National Capital
Territory of Delhi and the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh;
(d) one full-time Member who is or has been a Joint Secretary to the Government
of India;
(e) three full-time independent technical Members to be appointed from amongst
persons having specific knowledge and experience in matters relating to air pollution;
(f) one technical Member from the Central Pollution Control Board,ex officio;
(g) one technical Member to be nominated by the Indian Space Research
Organisation,ex officio;
2 of 1985.
Definitions.
26 of 1986.
Constitution of
Commission.

SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3
(h) three Members from non-Governmental organisations having experience in
matters concerning combating of air pollution;
(i) one representative of the National Institution for Transforming India, not
below the rank of Joint Secretary or Adviser,ex officio;
(j) one officer in the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India to be
appointed by the Central Government as a full-time Member-Secretary of the
Commission;
(k) three members, being stakeholders from such sectors as agriculture, industry,
transport or construction.
(3) The Commission may co-opt the following persons as Associate Members,
namely:—
(a) a representative of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, not below
the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India;
(b) a representative of the Ministry of Power, not below the rank of Joint Secretary
to the Government of India;
(c) a representative of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, not below the
rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India;
(d) a representative of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, not below the
rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India;
(e) a representative of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ W elfare, not
below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India;
(f) a representative of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, not below the
rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India;
(g) a representative of any association of commerce or industry;
(h) such other Associate Members, as may be prescribed.
(4) The Member-Secretary shall be the Chief Co-ordinating Officer of the Commission
and shall assist the Commission in the discharge of its functions under this Act.
(5) The headquarters of the Commission shall be at Delhi and the Commission may,
with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other places in the
National Capital Region or adjoining areas.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
and notwithstanding any judgment or order of any court, the Commission shall have exclusive
jurisdiction in the National Capital Region and adjoining areas in respect of matters covered
by this Act and no other body, authority, individual or committee shall have any power or
jurisdiction in such matters:
Provided that in case of any conflict in the orders or directions of the Commission and
the Governments of the National Capital Territory of Delhi and of the States of Punjab,
Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh or the Central Pollution Control Board or the State
Pollution Control Boards of the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh or
the Pollution Control Committee of the National Capital Territory of Delhi or any other
statutory authority set up or established under a State Act, the order as well as the direction
of the Commission shall prevail.
4.(1) The full-time Chairperson and full-time Members, other thanex officioMembers,
of the Commission shall be appointed by the Central Government:
Provided that every appointment under this sub-section shall, subject to the
provisions of second proviso, be made on the recommendations of a Selection Committee
consisting of—
Appointment
o f
Chairperson,
Members and
Member-
Secretary.

4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(a) Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
in the Government of India––Chairperson;
(b) Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry in the
Government of India––member;
(c) Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in the
Government of India—member;
(d) Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Science and Technology in the
Government of India––member;
(e) Cabinet Secretary–– member:
Provided further that in case where the Central Government appoints a serving officer
as the Chairperson under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 3, or the full-time Member
under clause (d) thereof, then, no recommendation of the Selection Committee shall be
required.
(2) No appointment of the Chairperson or a Member shall be invalid merely by reason
of any vacancy of any member in the Selection Committee referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) The appointment of the Member-Secretary of the Commission shall be made by the
Central Government in such manner, subject to such terms and conditions, as may be
prescribed.
5.(1) The Chairperson or a Member, other than anex officioMember, may, by notice in
writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office.
(2) The Central Government may remove the Chairperson or any Member, other than
anex officioMember, from his office, in such manner as may be prescribed, if such person—
(a) is adjudged an insolvent;
(b) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties
of his office;
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest;
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions; or
(f) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in the
opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpitude:
Provided that no such Member shall be so removed, unless he has been given an
opportunity of being heard.
6.The Chairperson or a Member, other than anex officioMember, shall hold office for
a term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the
age of seventy years, whichever is earlier, and shall be eligible for re-appointment.
7.(1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson by
reason of death, resignation or otherwise, the Central Government may, by notification,
authorise one of the Members to act as the Chairperson until the appointment of a new
Chairperson to fill such vacancy.
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence on
leave or otherwise, such one of the Members as the Central Government may, by notification,
authorise in this behalf, shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on
which the Chairperson resumes his duties.
Resignation
and removal
o f
Chairperson
and Members.
Term of office
of Chairperson
and Members.
Member to act
as Chairperson
or to discharge
his functions
in certain
circumstances.

SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5
8.The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and Members, other thanex officioMembers, shall be such as
may be prescribed:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson or a Member shall be varied to his disadvantage after his
appointment.
9.No act or proceedings of the Commission shall be invalidated merely on the ground
of existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Commission.
10.(1) The Commission shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may
think fit.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Commission
shall have the power to lay down by regulations its own procedure.
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the
Member-Secretary or any other officer of the Commission duly authorised by the Chairperson
in this behalf.
(4) The Commission may, by general or special order, subject to such conditions and
limitations, if any, as may be specified therein, delegate to the Chairperson, full-time Member,
Member-Secretary or any Sub-Committee constituted under section 11, such of its powers
under this Act (except the power to make regulations under section 25), as it may deem
necessary or expedient for the purpose of protecting and improving the quality of the air in
the National Capital Region and adjoining areas.
11.(1) The Commission shall have at least the following three Sub-Committees—
(a) Sub-Committee on Monitoring and Identification;
(b) Sub-Committee on Safeguarding and Enforcement;
(c) Sub-Committee on Research and Development.
(2) The Sub-Committee on Monitoring and Identification shall be headed by a Member
of the Commission chosen by it and shall have the following additional members, namely:—
(a) one representative from the Central Pollution Control Board;
(b) one representative each from the State Pollution Control Board or Committee,
as the case may be, of the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the States of Punjab,
Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh;
(c) one representative from the National Environmental Engineering Research
Institute;
(d) such other members as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The Sub-Committee on Safeguarding and Enforcement shall be headed by the
full-time Chairperson of the Commission and shall have the following additional members,
namely:—
(a) one representative each, not below the rank of Secretary from the department
tackling air pollution from the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the States of
Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh;
(b) one representative each from the State Pollution Control Board or Committee,
as the case may be, from the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the States of
Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh;
(c) one officer not below the rank of Inspector General of Police or equivalent
from the National Capital T erritory of Delhi and the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan
and Uttar Pradesh;
(d) such other members as may be specified by regulations.
Terms and
conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and Members.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings of
Commission.
Procedure to
be regulated by
Commission.
Sub-
Committees
and other staff
o f
Commission.

6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(4) The Sub-Committee on Research and Development shall be headed by a full-time
technical Member of the Commission and shall have the following additional Members,
namely:—
(a) two technical representatives from the National Environmental Engineering
Research Institute;
(b) one technical representative each from research institutions or Universities
or colleges or organisations in the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the States of
Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh;
(c) two technical representatives from the field of medicine and research working
or studying on the impact of air pollution on living beings;
(d) such other members as may be specified by regulations.
(5) The Commission may also constitute such other Sub-Committees as it thinks fit.
(6) The members of the Sub-Committees, other thanex officiomembers, shall be paid
such allowances as may be prescribed.
(7) The Central Government, in consultation with the Commission, shall determine the
nature and the categories of officers and other staff required to assist the Commission in the
discharge of its function and provide the Commission with such officers and employees as
it may deem fit.
(8) The officers and other staff of the Commission shall discharge their duties and
functions under the general superintendence of the Chairperson.
(9) The salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other staff
appointed under sub-section (7) shall be such as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION
12.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the Commission shall have the power to take all such measures, issue directions and
entertain complaints, as it deems necessary or expedient, for the purpose of protecting and
improving the quality of the air in the National Capital Region and adjoining areas and shall
also have the duty to take all such measures as may become necessary for protecting and
improving the quality of air in the National Capital Region and adjoining areas.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), the
Commission shall, for the purposes of sub-section (1), have the following powers to perform
its duties, including taking measures to abate air pollution and to regulate or prohibit activities
that are likely to cause or increase air pollution in the National Capital Region and adjoining
areas, namely:—
(i) co-ordination of actions by the Governments of the National Capital Territory
of Delhi and the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, officers and
other authorities under this Act or the rules made thereunder or under any other law
for the time being in force, which is relatable to the objects of this Act;
(ii) planning and execution of a programme for the region for prevention, control
and abatement of air pollution;
(iii) laying down parameters for the quality of air in its various aspects;
(iv) laying down parameters for emission or discharge of environmental pollutants
from various sources whatsoever that have implications on air quality in the region:
Provided that different parameters for emission or discharge may be laid down
under this clause from different sources having regard to the quality or composition
Powers and
functions of
Commission.

SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7
of the emission or discharge of environmental pollutants from such sources that have
implications on air quality in the region;
(v) restriction of areas in which any industries, operations or processes or class
of industries, operations or processes, that have implications on air quality in the
region, shall not be carried out or shall be carried out subject to certain safeguards;
(vi) carrying out and requiring investigations and research relating to problems
of environmental pollution that have implications on air quality in the region;
(vii) inspection of any premises, plant, equipment, machinery, manufacturing or
other processes, materials or substances and giving, by order, of such directions to
such authorities, officers or persons as it may consider necessary to take steps for
the prevention, control and abatement of air pollution in the region;
(viii) collection and dissemination of information in respect of matters relating
to air pollution in the region;
(ix) preparation of manuals or codes or guidelines relating to the prevention,
control and abatement of air pollution in the region;
(x) appoint officers, with prior approval of the Central Government, with such
designations, as it thinks fit, for the purposes of this Act and may entrust to them
such of the powers and functions under this Act or for the purposes of achieving the
objects of this Act, as it may deem fit;
(xi) issue directions in writing to any person, officer or any authority and such
person, officer or authority shall be bound to comply with such directions.
Explanation.—For avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power to issue
directions under this section includes the power to direct—
(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry, operation or
process; or
(b) stoppage or regulation of the supply of electricity or water or any other
service.
(3) (a) Subject to the provisions of this section, any person authorised by the
Commission in this behalf shall have a right to enter, at all reasonable times, and with such
assistance as he considers necessary, any place, for the purpose of—
(i) performing any of the functions of the Commission entrusted to him;
(ii) determining whether and if so, in what manner any such functions are to be
performed or whether any provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any
notice, order, direction or authorisation served, made, given or granted under this Act
is being or has been complied with;
(iii) examining and testing any equipment, industrial plant, record, register,
document or any other material object or for conducting a search of any building in
which he has reasons to believe that an offence under this Act or the rules made
thereunder has been or is being or is about to be committed and for seizing any such
equipment, industrial plant, record, register, document or other material object if he
has reasons to believe that it may furnish evidence to the Commission of an offence
punishable under this Act or the rules made thereunder or that such seizure is necessary
to prevent or mitigate environmental pollution;
(b) every person carrying on any industry, operation or process or handling any
hazardous substance shall be bound to render all assistance to the person empowered by
the Commission under clause (a) for carrying out the functions under that clause and if he
fails to do so without any reasonable cause or excuse, he shall be guilty of an offence under
this Act;

8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(c) if any person wilfully delays or obstructs any person authorised by the
Commission under clause (a) in the performance of his functions, he shall be guilty of
an offence under this Act;
(d) the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply to any
search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search or seizure made under
the authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code or, as the case may
be, under the corresponding provisions of the said law.
(4) (a) The Commission or any officer authorised by it in this behalf, shall, for the
purpose of analysis, have power to take samples of air from any factory, premises or other
place in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) the result of any analysis of a sample taken under clause (a) shall not be admissible
in evidence in any legal proceeding unless the provisions of clauses (c) and (d) are complied
with;
(c) subject to the provisions of clause (d), the person taking the sample under
clause (a) shall,—
(i) serve on the occupier or his agent or person in-charge of the place, a notice,
then and there, in such form as may be prescribed, of his intention to have it so
analysed;
(ii) in the presence of the occupier or his agent or person, collect a sample for
analysis;
(iii) cause the sample to be placed in a container or containers which shall be
marked and sealed and shall also be signed both by the person taking the sample and
the occupier or his agent or person;
(iv) send without delay, the container or the containers to the laboratory
established or recognised by the Central Government;
(d) when a sample is taken for analysis under clause (a) and the person taking the
sample serves on the occupier or his agent or person, a notice under sub-clause (i) of
clause (c), then,—
(i) in a case where the occupier, his agent or person wilfully absents himself, the
person taking the sample shall collect the sample for analysis to be placed in a container
or containers which shall be marked and sealed and shall also be signed by the person
taking the sample; and
(ii) in a case where the occupier or his agent or person present at the time of
taking the sample refuses to sign the marked and sealed container or containers of the
sample as required under sub-clause (iii) of clause (c), the marked and sealed container
or containers shall be signed by the person taking the samples,
and the container or containers shall be sent without delay by the person taking the sample
for analysis to the laboratory established or recognised by the Central Government and
such person shall inform the Government Analyst appointed or recognised, about the wilful
absence of the occupier or his agent or person, or, as the case may be, his refusal to sign the
container or containers.
(5) In discharge of its functions and exercising of its authority, the Commission and
the Sub-Committees mentioned in section 11 shall be bound by such general or specific
directions of the Central Government, as may be issued from time to time.
2 of 1974.

SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9
(6) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions,
the Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely:—
(a) take up matterssuo motu, or on the basis of complaints made by any
individual, representative body or organisation functioning in the field of environment,
against any individual, association, company, public undertaking or local body
carrying on any industry, operation or process;
(b) provide the mechanism and the means to implement in the National Capital
Region and adjoining areas—
(i) the National Clean Air Programme;
(ii) the National Air Quality Monitoring Programme;
(iii) the National Ambient Air Quality Standards;
(c) provide an effective framework and platform in the National Capital Region
and adjoining areas for—
(i) source identification of air pollutants on a periodic basis;
(ii) taking on-ground steps for curbing air pollution;
(iii) specific research and development in the field of air pollution;
(iv) synergising the energies and efforts of all stakeholders in developing
innovative ways to monitor, enforce and research on the issues concerning air
pollution;
(v) building a network between technical institutions working or
researching in the field of air pollution;
(vi) international co-operation including sharing of international best
practices in the field of air pollution;
(vii) training and creating a special work-force for tackling the problem of
air pollution;
(d) provide an effective frame work, action plan and take appropriate steps
for—
(i) tackling the problem of stubble burning;
(ii) monitoring, assessing and inspecting air polluting agents;
(iii) increasing plantation;
(e) monitoring the measures taken by the States to prevent stubble burning;
(f) undertake and promote research in the field of air pollution;
(g) spread awareness regarding air pollution among various sections of society
and promote awareness of the collective steps that the public may take through
publications, the media, seminars and other available means;
(h) encourage the efforts of non-governmental organisations and institutions
working in the field of air pollution;
(i) any other functions as have been entrusted to anyad hoccommittee or
commission or task force or body formed for the purpose of dealing with issues
concerning air pollution, stubble burning or the monitoring of related factors, in
pursuance of any judicial order passed from time to time;
(j) such other functions as it may consider necessary for the prevention of air
pollution in the National Capital Region and adjoining areas.

10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
13.(1) The Commission shall furnish to the Central Government an annual report
containing such details of the steps taken, proposals made, researches awaited and other
measures undertaken by it in pursuance of its functions under section 12, in such form and
manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report furnished under
sub-section (1) to be laid before each House of Parliament.
14.(1) Any non-compliance or contravention of any provisions of this Act, rules
made thereunder or any order or direction issued by the Commission, shall be an offence
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to five years or with fine
which may extend up to one crore rupees or with both:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any farmer for causing
air pollution by stubble burning or mismanagement of agricultural residue.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the
offence under this Act shall be non-cognizable and triable by the Jurisdictional Judicial
Magistrate of the First Class, who shall not take cognizance of the offence except upon a
complaint made by the Commission or any officer authorised by the Commission in this
behalf.
(3) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time when the offence was committed, was directly in-charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-sections (3) and (4),—
(a) "company" means any body corporate, and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
(5) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by any Department of the
Government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such Head of the
Department liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without
his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a Department of Government and it is proved that the
Annual report.
Penalty for
contravention
of provisions
of Act, rules,
order or
direction.
2 of 1974.

SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any
neglect on the part of, any officer, other than the Head of the Department, such officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
(7) For the purpose of this section and the procedure to be followed thereunder, the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall apply.
15.The Commission may impose and collect environmental compensation from farmers
causing air pollution by stubble burning, at such rate and in such manner, as may be
prescribed.
CHAPTER IV
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
16.(1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money as the
Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the functions
under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants
referred to in sub-section (1).
17.(1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure
incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission under this Act shall have the
same rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India generally has in connection with the audit of Government
accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts,
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of
the Commission.
(4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with
the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the
Commission and the Central Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as
may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
18.An appeal shall lie to the National Green Tribunal constituted under the National
Green Tribunal Act, 2010 against any order, direction or action taken by or on behalf of the
Commission constituted under section 3.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Accounts and
audit.
Appeal.
19 of 2010.
Environmental
compensation.
2 of 1974.

12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
19.Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
or any judicial order by any Court, where the Commission considers it necessary so to do,
it may constitute one or more special investigation teams, consisting of such officers or
such persons, as it thinks necessary, for the purposes of carrying out its functions under
this Act.
20.Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
but subject to the provision of this Act, the Central Government may issue in writing such
direction, as it deems fit, to the Commission or any person, officer or authority authorised
by the Commission, and the Commission, person, or authority, as the case may be, shall be
bound to comply with such direction.
21.The Central Government may, from time to time, call for such information and
reports from the Commission, as it deems fit and the Commission shall be bound to provide
such information and report.
22.No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit, proceeding or dispute
pertaining to or arising out of the actions taken or directions issued by the Commission in
respect of any matter which the Commission is empowered by or under this Act.
23.No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government, the
Commission, or any Member thereof, or any person acting under the direction of either the
Central Government or the Commission in respect of anything which is in good faith done
or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or any order made thereunder.
24.Every Member of the Commission and every officer appointed or authorised by
the Commission to exercise functions under this Act shall be deemed to be a public servant
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
25.(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the other Associate Members under clause (h) of sub-section (3) of section 3;
(b) the manner of removal of Chairperson or a Member under sub-section (2) of
section 5;
(c) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions
of service of, the Chairperson and Members under sub-section (1) of section 8;
(d) the allowance payable to the members, other thanex officiomembers of the
Sub-Committees, under sub-section (6) of section 11;
(e) the appointment of officers and other staff under sub-section (7) of
section 11;
(f) the salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other
staff under sub-section (9) of section 11;
(g) the manner of taking samples under clause (a) and the form of notice under
sub-clause (i) of clause (c), of sub-section (4) of section 12;
(h) the rate at which, and the manner in which, the environmental compensation
shall be imposed and collected under section 15;
Constitution
of special
investigation
teams.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
direction.
Power of
Central
Government
to call for
information.
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Members and
officers to be
public
servants.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
45 of 1860.

SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13
(i) the form in which annual statement of accounts shall be prepared under
sub-section (1) of section 17;
(j) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
26.(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the
Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by notification,
make regulations to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the procedure to be followed by the Commission under sub-section (2) of
section 10;
(b) the conditions and limitations subject to which power may be delegated by
the Commission under sub-section (4) of section 10;
(c) the members of each Sub-Committee under sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of
section 11;
(d) the form and the manner of furnishing annual report under section 13;
(e) any other matter which has to be, or may be, specified by regulations.
(3) Every regulation made by the Commission under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the
regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that regulation.
27.(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of
two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
Power of
Commission
to make
regulations.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

28.(1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, any document,
judgment, order, bye-law, rule, regulation, notification having the force of law in the territory
of India.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
any judgment or any order of any Court and subject to the provisions of this Act, upon the
notification of the constitution of the Commission under section 3, no other individual or
body or authority constituted either under a law enacted by Parliament, or by a State, or
appointed or nominated in terms of any judicial order, shall act upon or have jurisdiction in
relation to the matters covered by this Act.
29.(1) The Order made under section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986
constituting the Environment Pollution (Prevention and Control) Authority for the National
Capital Regionvidenotification number S.O.93(E), dated the 29th January, 1998 is hereby
repealed and the Environment Pollution (Prevention and Control) Authority for the National
Capital Region is hereby dissolved.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken by the Environment
Pollution (Prevention and Control) Authority for the National Capital Region under the said
Order, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of
this Act.
30.Notwithstanding the cessation of the Commission for Air Quality Management in
National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Ordinance, 2020, anything done or any action
taken under the Ordinance so ceased, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provisions of this Act.
31.(1) The Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and
Adjoining Areas Ordinance, 2021 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the
Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas
Ordinance, 2021 shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding
provisions of this Act.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Repeal and
savings.
Repeal and
savings of
order
constituting
Environment
Pollution
(Prevention
and Control)
Authority for
National
Capital
Region.
Ord. 4 of
2021.
Ord. 4 of
2021.
29 of 1986.
Savings.
Ord. 13 of
2020.
————
ANOOP KUMAR MENDIRATTA,
Secretary to the Govt. of India.
MGIPMRND—713GI(S3)—13-08-2021.
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [P ART II— S EC. 1]
SUBIR 
NARAYAN 
GARAI
Digitally signed by 
SUBIR NARAYAN 
GARAI 
Date: 2021.08.13 
23:01:03 +05'30'