 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2015/Sravana, 1937 (Saka) 
 REPORT NO.  
22 3 
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
Reverse Mortgage Scheme, 2008  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on   13 th   August , 2015) 

C O N T E N T S 
      
        PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION 
 OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
(ii) 
3. REPORT  
 
 
 
 
4. CONCLUSION 
 
 
5. ANNEXURE 
  
6. *MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be enclosed later 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   15 th  September, 2014) 
 
 
 
 
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy   Chairman  
2. *Shri  Biswajit Daimary   
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
5. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
6. **Vacant 
7. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
8. Shri S. Muthukaruppan 
9. Shri K. Parasaran 
10. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
11. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
12. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh 
13. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
14. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
15. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
   
 
S
ECRETARIAT  
 
1.  Shri J.G. Negi , Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
3.   Shri R.S. Rawat, Joint Director 
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint  Director  
5. Shri  R.P. Shukla, Deputy Director  
6.   Smt. Monica Baa, Deputy Director  
 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 7 
th  May, 2015 
**Vacant w.e.f. 25 th  July, 2015 (Shri Kalpataru Das passing away on 25 th  July, 2015)  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been authorized by 
the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf, thi s Two Hundred and Twenty Third Report of the 
Committee.  
 
2.  The Committee examined the matters that came up  while scrutinizing the 
Reverse Mortgage 
Scheme, 2008  and issues relating to them along with the comments received from the Government. 
 
3.   The observations and recommendations of the Co mmittee are contained in the Report.  
 
4.  The Committee considered and adopted the draft Re port in its meeting held on the 12
th      
August, 2015 
 
 
 
 
Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy 
                                                                                                               
Chairman 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
                                                                                                                                         Rajya Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI  
August   13, 2015 
 
 
 
 

Report 
On  
The Reverse Mortgage Scheme, 2008  
 
The Reverse Mortgage Scheme, 2008 ( Annexure I ) has been framed by the Central Board 
of Direct Taxes with an intent to monetize the hous e of a Senior Citizen  as an asset and the 
owners equity in the house. The Scheme involves the  senior citizen as borrower mortgaging the 
house property to a lender, who then makes periodic  payments to the borrower during the latter’s 
lifetime.  The Senior citizen borrower is not requi red to service the loan during his life time and, 
therefore, does not make monthly repayments of prin cipal and interest to the lender. On the 
borrower’s death or on the borrower leaving the hou se property permanently, the loan is repaid 
along with accumulated interest, through sale of the house property.  
2. The proportion of Senior Citizens as well as the ir dependency in the old age is increasing 
in the country. While on the one hand, there is sig nificant increase in longevity, on the other hand, 
cost of good health care facilities is also spirali ng and there is little social security. Senior citi zens, 
therefore, need regular cash flow for supplementing  their pension or other income scheme to 
address their financial needs.  
3. Keeping these issues in consideration and also t he fact that for most senior citizens, the 
house is the largest component of their wealth, the Committee took up for detailed examination the 
Reverse Mortgage Scheme, 2008. A questionnaire on t he Scheme was forwarded to the Ministry 
for their comments/ clarifications which have since  been received ( Annexure II ). The Committee 
also took up for discussion the said Scheme in its meetings held at Mumbai, Udhagamandalam and 
Bangalore on 24 
th  May,  2010; 28th  May, 2010; and, 30 th  May,  2010, respectively.  Study Notes on 
the said discussions are enclosed ( Annexure III, IV and V ). The Committee also had detailed 
discussion with the State Bank of Travancore at Kum aracom on 22 nd  June, 2011 and with IDBI 
Bank at Mumbai on 27 th  September, 2011.  Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Studies) 
was also present on both the meetings.  Study Note on the said discussions are enclosed 
(Annexure VI and VII respectively).  The points raised by the Committee and the 
comments/clarifications of the Ministry are reproduced in the succeeding paragraphs. 
4. In response to the Committees query as to whethe r it was possible to amend the rules to 
specify the maximum charges that may be levied by a pproved lending institution for benefit of 
customers , it was informed that Primary lending institutions m ay levy One-time Upfront 
Processing charges which include origination, appra isal and inspection fees, property verification 
and title examination fees, legal charges, survey a nd property valuation charges and On going 
service charges. However, as per the operational gu idelines issued by National Housing Board 
(NHB) on the Reverse Mortgage Loan (RML), a detaile d schedule of all such costs should clearly 
be specified and provided to the prospective borrow ers.  The guidelines of the Bank on the new 
RML enabled Annuity have stipulated that the maximu m on-going service charges should not 
exceed 1.50 per cent per annum of the net loan outstanding. 
5. The Committee sought details as to how many Bank s were operating the scheme and what 
were the different steps taken by the Ministry and Banks to give wide publicity to this scheme. In 
response the Ministry informed that the reverse mor tgage scheme was being implemented by 23 
banks and two housing finance companies (HFCs). Til l March 31, 2010, an amount of Rs. 1413 
crore had been sanctioned to 7034 Senior Citizens, as per information furnished by the various 
Scheduled Commerical Banks and HFCs to NHB. Nationa l Housing Bank, the nodal organization 
for this scheme, has been continuing with its endea vour to promote the scheme. The Bank has 
launched programmes for counseling senior citizens in partnership with reputed non governmental 

organizations (NGOs) across the country. The main o bjective of such a programme is to generate 
greater awareness amongst senior citizen about the features, terms and conditions relating to 
reverse mortgage scheme and to enable the senior ci tizens to take informed decisions for availing 
the benefits under the scheme. So far seven reverse mortgage counseling centers have been opened 
by the Bank in partnership with NG0s. Further, NHB has also been involved in capacity building 
measures for strengthening the knowledge base about  the product and its features. NHB also 
organized a number of seminars and conferences in this regard. 
 6. On the issue of formulation of guidelines or mo del code by RBI/Ministry for 
implementation of the scheme for the Banks, the Min istry informed that pursuant to the 
announcement in the Union Budget for the year 2007- 08, National Housing Bank (NHB), being 
the nodal agency for the scheme, issued operational guidelines in May 2007 to facilitate Scheduled 
Commercial Banks (SCBs) and Housing Finance Compani es (HFCs) to extend Reverse Mortgage 
Loans (RML) to Senior Citizens in India in order to  enable them avail a periodic stream of cash 
flows against mortgage of his/her house. The guidel ines were notified by the Central Government 
vide its notification No. S.O. 2310 (E) dated 30th September, 2008 on Reverse Mortgage Scheme, 
2008.  
7. The announcement of the central Government in th e Union Budget 2008-09 enabled the 
addition of a new subsection (43) under Section 10 of the Income Tax Act to the effect that the 
stream of payments received by Senior Citizens unde r RML scheme made and notified by the 
Central Government would not be treated as "income.  Further, a new subsection (xvi) has been 
added to Section 47 of the Income Tax Act providing  that any transfer of a capital asset in a 
transaction of reverse mortgage shall not be regard ed as a transfer. A senior citizen borrower will 
be thus liable to tax on capital gains only at the point of alienation of the mortgaged property.  
8. The NHB conceptualized an extended RML scheme en suring assured life-time annuity 
payments to the senior citizens in December 2009. W ith a view to overcome limitations of the 
RML scheme launched in May 2007, the new scheme, termed as RML enabled Annuity scheme, is 
an extension over the initial RML scheme. The schem e envisages the bank / HFCs to source 
assured life time annuity for the senior citizens from a life insurance company. Further, the scheme 
provides an option for married couple-both husband and wife- to be joint borrowers for availing 
the periodic annuity payments throughout their life  time i.e. the payments shall continue to flow 
till the last surviving borrower is no more. NHB has also issued operational guidelines to the banks 
and HFCs for implementing the RML enabled Annuity scheme in December 2009.  
9. The Committee also sought details on the steps w hich have been taken to ensure that the 
borrower does not invest this money in speculative and other risk taking ventures thus putting his 
financial well being at stake as the loan amount ma y be disbursed in lump sum payment in one or 
more tranches. In response the Ministry informed th at as per the guidelines issued by NHB, the 
loan amount can be used for the purposes (i) Up gra dation, renovation, extension, improvement, 
maintenance and insurance of house; (ii) Medical pu rposes, meeting increased living expenses or 
any other consumption need; and (iii) The use of re verse mortgage loan payments for speculative, 
trading and business purposes shall not be permitted.  
10. As per the NHB guidelines issued in May 2007, t he maximum lump-sum payment shall be 
restricted to 50% of the total eligible amount of l oan subject to a cap of Rs.15 lakh or such other 
amount as may be notified by the Government of Indi a, to be used for medical treatment for self, 
spouse and dependants, if any. NHB further issued g uidelines in December 2009 (for the RML 
enabled Annuity scheme) wherein the maximum lump-su m payment has been reduced to 25% of 
eligible loan amount, in order to ensure greater pr oportion of monthly payments in the stream of 

fund inflows to senior citizens to meet increased l iving expenses and hence, their financial well 
being.  
11. In response to Committee’s query on the method devised to calculate the home loan 
eligibility of the applicants and revaluation of the property at periodic intervals to increase the loan 
eligibility of the applicants, the Ministry informe d that as per the operational guidelines of NHB, 
the amount of loan will depend on market value of r esidential property, as assessed by the primary 
lending institutions (PLIs), age of borrower(s), an d prevalent interest rate charged by the PLI. The 
PLIs will have the discretion to determine the elig ible quantum of loan. The methodology adopted 
for determining the quantum of loan including the d etailed tables of calculations, the rate of 
interest and assumptions (if any), shall be clearly  disclosed to the borrower. The Ministry further 
informed that the PLIs will need to re-value the pr operty mortgaged to them at intervals that may 
be fixed by the PLI depending upon the location of the property, its physical state etc. Such 
revaluation may be done at least once every five ye ars, the quantum of loan may undergo revision 
based on such re-valuation of property at the discretion of the lender.  
12. The PLIs shall ensure that all reverse mortgage  loan products carry a clear and transparent 
`no negative equity' or 'non-recourse' guarantee. That is, the Borrower(s) will never owe more than 
the net realizable value of their property, provide d the terms and conditions of the loan have been 
met. In the operational guidelines issued by NHB fo r RML enabled Annuity (December 2009), 
NHB has indicated stipulation of maximum Loan to Va lue (LTV) Ratio as hereunder, in addition 
to the above.  
J—Age of Borrower Maximum Loan to Value Ratio 
Between 60 and 70 60% 
Between 70 and 80 70% 
80 and above  75% 
 
13. The Committee also sought to be briefed on the major problems arising in giving effect to 
the Reverse Mortgage Scheme and the steps taken or proposed to be taken to remove these 
shortcomings. In response the Ministry informed tha t the senior citizens were mainly concerned 
about the Payment Tenure of 20 years only and Month ly payments not assured during entire 
lifetime of citizen. The Ministry to overcome these  shortcomings conceptualized an extended 
RML scheme ensuring assured life-time annuity payme nts to the senior citizens. This new scheme 
is an extension over the initial RML scheme of 2007 /2008. The new scheme will now facilitate the 
senior citizen borrowers to receive assured life-ti me payments i.e. even after completion of the 
fixed term of 20 years, in accordance with the anno uncement in Budget 2007-08. All payments 
under reverse mortgage loan are exempt from income tax under Section 10(43) of the Income tax 
Act, 1961. However, periodic annuity payments are s ubject to tax under provisions of Section 56 
of the Income Tax Act and taxable in the hands of t he annuity recipients. The Committee was 
informed that it was proposed that the RML, enabled  Annuity received by senior citizens may be 
exempted from taxation. The rationale for this prop osal is that the Annuity in this case emanates 
from the Reverse Mortgage Loan, essentially, the bo rrower finances such Annuity by way of the 
reverse mortgage loan.  
14. The Committee was further informed that the rev erse mortgage loan becomes due and 
payable to the primary lending institutions only on  death of the borrowers.  Therefore, while the 
primary lending institutions do not receive any int erest income till the loan becomes due ( which 
occurs only on the death of the borrowers), the sam e accrues in their books of accounts.  As such, 
primary lenders are taxed on the accrued income whi ch has actually not been received.   The 

Ministry proposed that the interest income on rever se mortgage loans to the primary lending 
institutions may be taxed only on actual receipt an d not on its accrual (but not received).  This will  
not only encourage the primary lending institutions  to implement the scheme widely, but also will 
facilitate in lowering the interest rates for the s cheme, thereby, resulting in better benefits to the  
senior citizens.   
15. The Committee sought the comments of the Minist ry on specific advantages that the 
reverse mortgage scheme intends to provide in compa rison with other social security schemes 
operational for elderly people. In response the Min istry informed that the reverse mortgages loan 
and reverse mortgage loan enabled annuity provide t he following advantages/benefits to senior 
citizens: 
a.  Release of the locked equity owned by senior ci tizens in their own houses, so that they can 
avail a stream of cash flows throughout their life time to meet their increased living 
expenses.  
b.  They continue to stay in their house and at the  same time can avail the cash inflows,  
c. They do not have to make any repayments to the P LIs throughout their life time as long as 
they continue to occupy the mortgaged house.  
d. In case the value of their house increases, they  may have option to increase their loan, based 
on the revaluation by the PLIs.  
e. It reduces the burden on the Government excheque r towards budgetary allocations for social 
security schemes (which the Government would have to provide otherwise).  
16. The Committee appreciates the effort of the Min istry to come up with the Reverse 
Mortgage Scheme as it provides a level of financial  support to the Senior Citizens. The 
Committee, however, observed that the Scheme did no t receive the response that was expected.  
Keeping in view the lackluster response of the Sche me, the Committee took note of the issues 
raised in its interactions with different organizat ions and the comments/ clarifications furnished by 
the Ministry. 
Observations and Recommendations  
17.  It was found out that some of the Banks had not sta rted implementing the Scheme. 
The Committee took an exception to this and was of the opinion that the Ministry should 
ensure that all the concerned financial institution s should implement the said Scheme as it is 
an important component for providing social securit y to the senior citizens of the country. 
The Committee would like to have the latest position in this regard. 
18. During the course of the discussions it was bro ught before the Committee that the 
cost of the registration charges as imposed by the State Governments tends to adversely 
affects the amount which the senior citizen receive s under the scheme. The Committee, 
keeping in view the social benefits associated with  the scheme, was of the opinion that the 
States could be urged to extend some concessions to  cases settled under this Scheme to make 
it more attractive and viable for old and needy per sons. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends to Ministry to take this up with the Sta tes to persuade them to offer the 
required concessions to older people under the scheme . 
19.  Amongst the drawbacks associated with the Sche me was regarding the valuation of 
the property concerned. The Committee voiced its co ncern over the valuation procedure of 
the property and the scope of under-valuation leadi ng to loss to the owner of the asset. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should ensure that valuation procedure 
is transparent and linked to the market rates of th e property concerned so that the owner 
gets a good price for his asset. This would help ge nerate confidence in the other potential 
clients of the Scheme. 

20.  The Committee also expresses its concern at th e indifferent attitude of the concerned 
officials in the implementation of schemes/policies  associated with elderly people. It felt that 
since this scheme was specially designed for senior  citizen, it would have been better if the 
officials with a proven track record of customer sa tisfaction were associated with its 
implementation. 
21. The Committee noticed that many of the senior c itizens or their relatives were not 
fully aware of this scheme. As a result, not many o f them were coming forward to take 
benefit of this socially useful scheme. Therefore, the Committee is of the opinion that more 
efforts were needed to give wider publicity to this  Scheme. It urges the Ministry ensure that 
the concerned institutions made suitable efforts to  generate awareness about this Scheme 
which may result in increased business for them. 
22. The Committee reiterates the Ministry’s proposa l that the Reverse Mortgage Loan 
enabled Annuity received by the senior citizen may be exempted from taxation as the 
Annuity in this case emanates from Reverse Mortgage  Loan and the borrower finances such 
Annuity by way of the reverse mortgage loan. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommends that 
necessary action may be taken in this regard on pri ority basis so as to reduce the taxation 
burden of senior citizen significantly. 
23. The Committee reiterates the Ministry’s proposa l that the interest income on reverse 
mortgage loans to the primary lending institutions may be taxed only on actual receipt and 
not on its accrual.  This will not only encourage t he primary lending institutions to 
implement the scheme widely, but also will facilita te in lowering the interest rates for the 
scheme, thereby, resulting in better benefits to th e senior citizens. Accordingly, Committee 
recommends to bring the required amendment in the r elevant law which would enable 
primary lending institutions to tax only on actual receipt thus making the scheme more 
popular by reducing the interest rate and producing greater benefits to senior citizen. 
24. The Committee is hopeful that the Ministry woul d carry out the recommendations of 
the Committee expeditiously under intimation to it.  The Committee is also of the opinion 
that proper monitoring and inspections are essentia l for the proper implementation of the 
Scheme and stresses upon the Ministry to ensure tha t the objectives of the Scheme are 
achieved.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
 
 XIII  
 
Thirteenth Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 03.00 pm on Wednesday, the 12 th  August, 2015 in Room Number 126-C, 
Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.  The following Members of the Committee were present in the 
meeting:- 
 
Members Present 
 
1. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam   in the Chair  
2. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
3. Shri S. Muthukaruppan 
4. Shri K. Parasaran 
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh 
6. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
 1.   Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary  
       2.   Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director  
       3.  Shri R.S. Rawat, Joint Director 
       4.  Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director   
       5.  Shri R.P. Shukla, Deputy Director    
 6.   Smt. Monica Baa, Deputy Director  
 
2.  The Convener welcomed the Members of the Commit tee and thereafter the Committee 
took up the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption one-by-one:- 
 
(i)  Two Hundred and Twenty First Report on the Statutory Orders laid on the Table of the Rajya 
Sabha during the 233 
rd  Session; 
 
(ii)  Two Hundred and Twenty Second Report on the Statutory Orders laid on the Table of the 
Rajya Sabha during the 234 
th  Session; and 
 
(iii)  Two Hundred and Twenty Third Report on the Reverse Mortgage Scheme, 2008.    
 
 3. The Committee, after some discussion, adopted the 221 st , 222 nd , & 223 rd  Reports. The Committee also 
authorized its Chairman and in his absence Dr. K.P. Ramalingam and in his absence Shri Arvind Kumar 
Singh to present the Reports to the House on the 13th  August, 2015.  
 

4. The Convener then, thanked the Members present a nd the meeting was concluded at 3.40 pm.    
  
 