COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
Parliament of India
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Committee on SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
126th REPORT
( Presented to the House on 23.12.1999)
CONTENTS
1 Composition of the Committee
2 Report
    i     Introduction
    ii   Jawaharlal Nehru port trust employees
        (pay and allowances) regulations
   iii  Jawaharlal Nehru port trust employees
        (welfare fund) regulations, 1980
    iv coconut development board regulations, 1982
    v tobacco board rules, 1976 
    vi environment (Protection) rules, 1986 
    vii summamry of recommendations. 
    viii minutes 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on the 13th August, 1998)
1. Miss Saroj Khaparde¾ Chairperson
2. Shri Satyanarayana Dronamraju
3. Shri Radhakishan Malaviya
4. Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt
5. Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani
6. Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat
7. Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
8. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
9. Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah
10. Prof. A. Lakshmisagar
*11. Shri Munavvar Hasan

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
12. Shri N. Thalavai Sundaram
**13. Shri Sukh Dev Singh Libra
14. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
15. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
Secretariat
  
 
1. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary
3. Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
_________________________________________________________
* Nominated on 22.11.99 against the vacancy caused on account of demise of Shri Ish dutt Yadav.
** Nominated on 27.12.99 against the vacancy on account of resignation by Shri Sukh Dev Singh Dhindsa. 
  
 
I
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do
hereby present this Hundred and Twenty Sixth Report of the Committee.
2. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on 22.12.99.
1.3 The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various Rules/Regulations and the issues, related therewith, alongwith the
Government’s comments received thereon. The observations and recommendations which, in the opinion of the Committee, should be brought to
the notice of the House, are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.
II
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU PORT TRUST EMPLOYEES (PAY AND ALLOWANCE) REGULATIONS, 1997.
The Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Employees (Pay & Allowances) Regulations, 1997 made under sub-section (1) of Section 124 read with sub-
section (1) of section 132 of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 were examined and a questionnaire seeking some comments/clarifications was referred
to the Ministry of Surface Transport on January 27, 1999. The points raised in the questionnaire and the Ministry’s comments thereon as follows:-
Question No. 1
Whether the Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Employees (Pay and Allowances) Regulations, 1997 have since been laid on the Table of both the Houses
of Parliament, if so, the details thereof.

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
Comments –
The Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Employees (Pay and Allowances) Regulations, 1997 were laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th July, 1998 and
Rajya Sabha on 28th July, 1998.
Question No. 2
Regulation 2(4) "Compensatory Allowance" means an allowance included in the Schedule or approved for inclusion in the Schedule or granted
under these or any other regulations to meet personal expenditure necessitated by the special circumstances in which duty is performed. It includes a
travelling allowance.
What is the justification for including travelling allowance within the meaning of the term "compensatory allowance" when the same has been
defined separately in regulation 2(28).
 
Comments-
The definition as contained in Regulation 2(4) of the JNP Employees (Pay & Allowances) Regulation, 1997 has been borrowed from the definition
of compensatory allowance as contained in the 9(5). This definition of compensatory allowance as contained in the Fundamental Rules specifically
states that it includes travelling allowance. In Regulation 2(28) of the JNP Regulations, travelling allowance has been separately defined as an
allowance granted to the employee to cover the expenditure which he incurs on travelling in the course of his employment and it includes allowance
granted for maintenance of any mode of conveyance. It may be seen that there is no duplication between Regulation 2(28) and Regulation 2(4)
which states that travelling allowance can also be treated as compensatory allowance.
Question No. 3
Regulation 2(19)- "Personal pay" means additional pay granted to an employee –
(i) to save him from a loss of substantive pay in respect of a permanent post due to revision of pay or to any reduction of such substantive pay
otherwise than as a disciplinary measure; or
(ii) in exceptional circumstances, on other personal consideration in accordance with the general orders issued by the Government as the case may
be.
The words "exceptional circumstances, on other personal consideration" appearing in the regulation does not appear to be specific. What are the
circumstances or personal consideration contemplated by the Ministry in this regulation. Whether there is any objection in making the regulation
specific and precise?
Comments-
Government has issued instructions for grant of a special increment in the form of personal pay in respect of employees who undergo sterilisation
operation after having 2 or 3 surviving children. Such personal pay should not be absorbed in further increases in pay either in the same post or on
promotion to a higher post. Such personal pay is also granted for passing certain specified Hindi examinations. It may not be advisable to elaborate
the words ‘exceptional circumstances on other personal consideration’ as it may not be possible to envisage all circumstances when Government
may issue instructions on granting of such personal pay in future. It is however, assured that there is not scope for misuse of this provisions, as such
personal pay can be granted only in accordance with the general orders issued by the government.
Question No. 4
Regulation 4 - Fixation of initial pay-
(I) The initial pay of an employee who is appointed to a post in the Board’s service on a time-scale of pay in regulated as follows:
(a)(i) Where an employee holding a post in a substantive, temporary or officiating capacity in the Board’s service in appointed in substantive,
temporary or officiating capacity as the case may be, subject to the fulfillment of the eligibility conditions as prescribed in the relevant Recruitment
Rules, to another post carrying duties an responsibilities of greater importance than those attaching to the post held by him, his initial pay in the
time-scale of the higher post shall be fixed at the stage next above the notional pay arrived at by increasing his pay in respect of the lower post held
by him regularly by an increment at the stage at which such pay has accrued or rupees twenty five only, whichever is more. Save incases of
appointment on deputation or foreign service to an ex-cadre post, or to a post on ad-hoc basis, the employee shall have
 
 

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
the option, to be exercised within one month from the date of appointment, to have the pay fixed under this regulation from the date of appointment
or to have the pay fixed initially at the stage of the time scale of the higher post above the regulation on the date of accrual of next increment in the
time scale of pay of the lower post. In cases where ad-hoc appointment is followed by regular appointment without break, the option is admissible
as from date of initial appointment to be exercised within one month from the date of regular appointment. Provided that where an employee is
immediately before his appointment on regular basis to higher post, drawing pay at the maximum of the time-scale of the lower post, his initial pay
in the time-scale of the higher post shall be fixed at the stage next above the pay notionally arrived at by increasing his pay in respect of the lower
post held by him on regular basis by an amount equal to the last increment in the time-scale of the lower post or rupees twenty-five, whichever is
more.
What is the justification for ensuring a minimum increase of Rs.25/- to an employee of the Port Trust while fixing his initial pay on initial
appointment? Whether this figure of Rs.25/- is common for pay fixation in all grades? When was the limit of Rs.25/- determined and whether a
revision of this amount is due or contemplated, if so, the details in this regard. What is the minimum rate of increment in the lowest grade in the Port
Trust.
Comments-
Rs.25 has been borrowed from Fundamental Rule 22 applicable to Central Govt. employees. This limit has been fixed to ensure certain minimum
increase of pay on promotion. It is applicable to all employees. The limit of Rs.25/- was introduced from 1
st January, 1986. The minimum rate of
increment applicable to port employees is Rs.35/-. It is due for revision from 1.1.97. It is felt that there is no need to stipulate minimum limit of
Rs.25/- now and hence the limit may be deleted.
Question No.5
Regulations 9 - Counting of service for increment
The following provisions prescribe the conditions on which service counts for increments in a time scale.
(1) XXX XXX XXX
All leave including extra-ordinary leave as defined in the JNPT Employees (Leave) Regulations taken on medical certificate, due to civil
commotion or for prosecuting higher technical and scientific studies and the period of deputation out of India shall count for increment in the time
scale applicable to the post which the employee was holding in regular or officiating capacity at the time he proceeded on leave or deputation out of
India and would have continued to officiate but for his proceeding on leave or deputation out of India.
Provided that where an employee takes extra-ordinary leave for any reasons beyond the control of the employee the Chairman may direct that such
extra-ordinary leave shall be counted for increments.
As per the proviso, the Chairman of the Board has been authorised to allow counting of extra ordinary leave for the purpose of increments in case
the extra ordinary leave is taken "for reasons beyond the control of the employee."
What are the situatio0ns contemplated to be covered by the above said proviso? The normal rule is that, extra-ordinary leave shall count for purpose
of increment only if the same is taken on Medical certificate. The words "for reasons beyond the control of the employee" are vague. Whether Govt.
have any objection in substituting them by some specific provision. Besides, the proviso vests wide discretionary powers in the Chairman of the
Board which are liable to he misused.
Comments-
Sub- regulation (2) specifies that extra ordinary leave taken on medical certificate, due to civil commotion and for prosecuting further studies will
count as duty for grant of annual increment. Other reasons which may justify extra-ordinary leave being counted as duty for increment are:
(i) Sudden failure of public transport system
(ii) Natural calamities like flood, etc.
It may not be advisable to delete the words "for reasons beyond the control of the employee" and substitute them by specific provisions as it may
not be possible to envisage all situations beyond the control of the employee for which counting of service for increment is justified.
Question No.6

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
Regulation 10(1). - Grant of Advance Increment
(1) The Chairman in respect of all posts and the Deputy Chairman in respect of Class III and Class IV posts may grant premature increment to an
employee on a time scale of pay in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the Govt. from time to time. 
  
 
XXX XXX XXX
(3) Premature increments shall not be granted to an employee in the following cases:-
(i) as a reward of meritorious work; 
 
(ii) in disregard of the normal rules governing fixation of pay except in cases of hardship or where the circumstances are unusual;
How many premature increments can be granted to an employee at a time? Is there any objection in amending the regulation prescribing the
maximum number of premature increments that can be granted at a time? Under the regulation, premature increment can be granted in case of
hardship or where the circumstances are unusual. What is the criteria for determining hardship or unusual circumstances? Whether there are any
guidelines in this regard? Whether Govt. have any objection in appending an explanation to the regulation defining "hard ship" and "unusual
circumstances."
Comments-
According to the guidelines issued by the Central Govt., 5 premature increments can be granted to an employee at the time of direct recruitment.
It may not be advisable to prescribe the maximum number premature increments that can be granted at a time in the regulation, as it will remove
flexibility from the Government to increase or decrease the number of such increments.
Premature increments were being granted if an employee possesses or acquires higher qualification and are being granted to an employee of
Government or Public Enterprise on his permanent transfer or absorption in JNPT to protect his existing substantive pay. As all the cases of
hardship or where the circumstances are unusual con not be anticipated before hand, it may not be advisable to append an explanation to the
regulation and define ‘ ‘hardship’ and ‘unusual circumstances’.
 
 
Question No.7
Regulation 19(1) - Fees & Honorarium:
An employee may with prior approval of the competent authority be permitted, if this can be done without detriment to his official duties and
responsibilities to perform a specified service or series of services or undertake work for a person or body and to receive a remuneration therefore if
the service be material, in the form of non-recurring or recurring fee.
(2) Unless the Board otherwise directs, one third of any non-recurring fee in excess of Rs.500/-or one third of any recurring fee in excess of
Rs.250/- per year received by an employee shall be credited to the General Account of the Port.
What are the activities/services contemplated under the regulation in which fee can be paid to an employee? What is the justification for crediting
1/3 of any non-recurring fee in excess of Rs.500 and 1/3 of any recurring fee in excess of Rs.250 per year to the General Account of the Port when
the employee is performing services and receiving fee with the prior approval of the competent authority, without effecting his official duties and
responsibilities? What is the amount collected by the JNPT under this Regulation so far? Whether Govt. have any objection in doing away with this
practice?.
Further the words "if the service be material" appearing in the Regulation is not specific and bestows wide discretion or the Port Trust. Whether this
word can not be defined through an explanation.
Comments-
Following are some of the activities/services contemplated under this regulation in which fee can be paid to an employee.
 
  

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
 
1. Where an employee is permitted to perform a clerical, administrative or technical work of an occasional or casual nature in a purely Private
Body. The words ‘Private Body’ would include all Co-operative Societies registered under the Societies Registration Act which are not
subject to the administrative control of the Government.
2. Regular remunerative occupation in the nature of part-time employment permitted by JNPT.
3. Publishing a book or contributing an article on subjects other than literary, cultural or artistic, technological and scientific Management
Sciences, etc.
4. Where an employee receives sale proceeds or royalty on a book which is a mere compilation of Government Rules, Regulations and
Procedures.
5. Fee received by an employee from any University, Statutory Bodies, National Institute of Port Management, India Institute of Port
Management etc. The recovery of 1/3rd of the fee in excess of the limits mentioned has been provided to be in line with the Government
instructions on the subject, However, it is felt that there is no justification for such recovery. It will therefore be proposed to delete this
provision. JNPT has not collected any amount under these regulations so far.
The words ‘if the service be material’ have been used to prevent any misuse of this provision. This is to ensure that the employee does not receive
the remuneration from an outside agency without any ostensible reason. The words are self- explanatory may not need a separate explanatory note.
Question No.8
Regulation 24 - Subsistence Allowance during suspension
2(ii) The subsistence allowance shall not be denied on any ground unless an employee is unable to/does not furnish a certificate that he is not
engaged in any other employment business, profession or vocation, during the period of suspension.
Regulation No.24 (2) (ii) is repetition of the conditions already prescribed under Regulation 24 (2) (i) what is the justification for adding Regulation
no24 (2) (ii) when the position already stands clarified in Regulation 24 (2) (i) whether the Ministry have any objection in avoiding this repetition?
Comments-
Regulation 24 (2) (i) says that subsistence allowance shall not be made unless the employee furnishes a certificate that he is not engaged in any
other employment, business, profession or vocation. Sub Clause (ii) of this sub regulation states that subsistence allowance shall not be denied on
any other ground other than non production of a certificate that he is not engaged in any employment etc. These provisions are slightly different
from each other. It is, however, proposed that sub-clause (ii) may be reworded to say that "the subsistence allowance shall not be denied to an
employee on any ground other than the non-production of certificate mentioned in sub-clause (i).
 
 
Question No.9-
Regulation 27(2)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Regulation 24 where an employee under suspension dies before the disciplinary or the Court proceedings
instituted against him are concluded, the period between the date of suspension and the date of death shall be treated as a period spent on duty for all
purposes and his family shall be paid the full pay, and allowances for that period to which he would have been entitled had he not been suspended,
subject to adjustment in respect of subsistence allowance already paid.
What is the justification in allowing the period between the date of suspension and the date of death of an suspended employee as period spent on
duty and allowing the benefits for all purposes?
Comments-
An employee may be suspended pending departmental enquiry or judicial proceedings. On conclusion of departmental enquiry or judicial
proceedings, suspension period is treated is duty, leave or no duty depending on the fact whether the employee was found guilty or not. If an
employee dies before conclusion of departmental enquiry or judicial proceedings such a conclusion cannot be made and therefore the suspension
period is treated as on duty as if he is not guilty. This provision is made to meet the principles of natural justice.
2. The Committee discussed the subject with the representatives of Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust & the Ministry of Surface Transport on February 5,
1999 at Mumbai. The relevant extract from study note are place at Appendix-I.
 

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
  
 
3. The Committee again considered the matter in its meeting held on May 6, 1999. The Committee expresses satisfaction that the Ministry of
Surface Transport had agreed to amend regulations 4, 19(1) and 24 as per its suggestions. As regards regulation 2 (19) the Committee
decided that the regulation may be retained in its existing form. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Surface Transport will notify
the amendments to regulation 4, 19 (1) and 24 expeditiously under intimation to it.
Appendix
 
STUDY NOTE ON THE VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION TO GOA AND MUMBAI FROM FEBRUARY 1
TO 5 1999.
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU PORT TRUST EMPLOYEES (PAY & ALLOWANCES) RULES, 1997
The Committee met with the representatives of Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust at 11.30 a.m. on Friday 5, 1999 in Conference Room of Hotel
President, in Mumbai.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Miss Saroj Khaparde, Chairperson
2. Shri M.K. Dhyani
3. Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat
4. Shri S. Patil Vahadare
5. Shri Ramachandran Pillai
6. Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah
7. Shri N. Thalavai Sundaram
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.C. Agarwal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary
 
  
  
REPRESENTATIVES OF JAWAHARLAL NEHRU PORT TRUST
1. Shri M.P. Pinto, Chairman
2. Shri Kishor G. Apte, Deputy Chairman 
 
3. Shri M.P. Shukla, Chief Manager (PP & D)
4. Shri J. Chakraborty, Chief Manager (Operation)
5. Shri Indresh Kumar, Chief Manager (Finance)
6. Shri R. Ravi Kumar, Chief Manager (Administration)

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
REPRESENTATIVES OF JAWAHARLAL NEHRU PORT TRUST
1. Shri D. Sircar, Director
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of JNPT and the Ministry of Surface Transport. Thereafter, the members of the
Committee were introduced. The representatives were informed about the functions of the Committee and the purpose of its visit. Thereafter, the
Chairman , Jawahar Lal Nehru Port Trust made a brief presentation on the various activities of Jawahar Lal Nehru Port Trust. The Committee
thereafter took up the agenda.
 
  
 
Point No.2 Regulation 2 (4)
The representatives of Jawahar Lal Nehru Port Trust clarified that the definition of compensatory allowance as contained in the Fundamental Rules
specifically include travelling allowance, and Jawahar Lal Nehru Port Trust has borrowed its definition from the Fundamental Rules. The
Committee noted the reply.
Point No. 3 Regulation 2 (19)
The representatives of Jawahar Lal Nehru Port Trust informed the Committee that it was difficult to elaborate the words ‘exceptional circumstance
on other personal consideration’. They however assured the Committee that the provisions were not likely to be misused. The Committee however
desired that the provisions would be made more specific.
 
  
 
Point No. 4. Regulation 4
Committee was informed that the minimum rate of increment applicable to port employees is due for revision from 1.1.97. The Committee desired
that the amendment be expedited.
Point No. 5 Regulation 9
The Committee considered the view point of the representatives of Jawahar Lal Nehru Port Trust and opined that the rule may be retained in its
present form.
Point No. 6 Regulation 10 (1)
The Committee considered the view of the representatives of Jawahar Lal Nehru Port Trust and decided not to pursue the matter further.
Point No. 7 Regulation 19 (1)
The Committee noted the reply furnished by the representative of Jawahar Lal Nehru Port Trust.
Point No. 8 Regulation 24
The Committee noted the reply.
Point No. 9 Regulation 27 (2)
The Committee considered the view point of the representative of Jawahar Lal Nehru Port Trust and opined that the rule may be retained in its
present form.
III
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU PORT TRUST EMPLOYEES (WELFARE FUND) REGULATIONS, 1990-IMPLEMENTATION OF
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 99
th REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE.
The Committee examined the Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Employees (Welfare Fund) Regulations, 1990 framed under clause (b) of Section 28 of
the Major Port Trust Act, 1963 and its recommendations, as reproduced below, were include in its 99th Report which was presented to the House on

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
the 22nd March, 1993.
5. The Committee observed that the term ‘any other class of employees or labour’ appearing in Regulations 1 (C) is that it should be
suitably amended so as to provide that these Regulations are applicable to all the regular employees of Port Trust.
6. The Committee after some discussion decided not to press for the delectation of Sub-regulations (B) to (D) to Regulations III and
directed that in respect thereof status-quo be maintained.
7. The Committee feels that the term ‘Bhajans’ appearing in Regulations V (C) (f) is not in consonance with the secular spirit of our
constitution, hence, recommends that the same be deleted soon, under intimation to it.
 
 
8. The Committee also recommends that the Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Employees General Conditions of Service Regulations be
framed expeditiously, as assured by the Ministry, under intimation to it.
2. Extracts from the Report referred to above were forwarded to the Ministry of Surface Transport on the 8th April, 1993 for implementation
thereof.
3. The Ministry of Surface Transport vide their O.M. dated 12th November 1993 forwarded a copy of the Gazette Notification G.S.R. 583 (E) dated
the 1st September, 1993 (Appendix) publishing the Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Employees (Welfare Fund) first Amendment Regulations, 1993
implementing the recommendations of the Committee contained in paras 4.5 and 4.7 which was laid on the Table of the House on 8.12. 1993.
4. As regards recommendation contained in para 4.8 regarding framing of regulations for regulating the conditions of some of employees of the Port
Trust. The Ministry of Surface Transport, after some correspondence informed the Committee that the following regulations, have been framed and
laid before the Parliament:-
(i) JNPT (General Conditions of Service Regulations, 1995-GSR 754 (E) dated 17.11. 1995.
(ii) JNPT (Pay and Allowance ) Regulations, 1997-GSR 561 (E) dated 19.9. 1997.
(iii) JNPT (Foreign Service) Regulations, 1994-GSR 757 (E) dated 18.10. 1994.
(iv) JNPT (Retirement) Regulations, 1995-GSR 550 (E) dated 17.7. 1995.
5. The Committee at its sitting held on the 6
th May, 1999 considered the matter. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of
Surface Transport had implemented all the recommendations of the Committee as contained its 99th Report on the subject.
 
MINISTRY OF SURFACE TRANSPORT
(Ports Wing)
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 1st September, 1993
G.S.R. 583(E):-In exercise of the powers conferred by Sub-section (i) of Section 124, read with sub-section 132 of the Major Ports Act, 1963 (38 of
1963), the Central Government hereby approves the Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Employees (Welfare Fund) First Amendment Regulations, 1993
made by the Board of Trustees for the Port of Jawaharlal Nehru and set out in the Schedule annexed to this Notification.
2. The said regulations shall come into force on the date of publication of this notification in the Official Gazette.
 

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
  
  
 
No.H-11011/6/91-PE-I)
-Sd-
SCHEDULE
In exercise of the power confirmed by Clause (b) of Section 28 of the Major Port Trust Act, 1963(38 of 1963), the Board of Trustees of the
JNTP hereby makes the following Regulations to amend the JNPT Employees Welfare Fund Regulations, 1990:-
Short title:- These Regulations may be called the JNPT Employees Welfare Fund (First Amendment) Regulations, 1993. 
  
 
4. THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY (Part II Sec.
Numbers of Regulation may be substituted as follows:-
Existing No. Substituted No.
I 1
II 2
III 3
IV 4
V 5
VI 6
VII 7
VIII 8
3. In Regulation1:-
(i) Clause (B) shall be substituted as follows:-
"(B) They shall apply to all employees"
(ii) Clause ( C) shall be deleted.
4. In Regulation 5:-
(1) The figure "4" appearing in Clause (A) may be substituted by the figure "3"
(2) Sub-clause "f" of Clause "C" may be substituted as follows:-
"Grant for conducting Sports, competition etc. Dramas, music and film shows, prayers, devotional songs etc, for employees."
FOOT NOTE:- The Principal Regulations were published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (i) vide GSR
No.945(E), dated 12
th December, 1990. 
 

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
IV
COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD REGULATIONS 1982- IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 115TH REPORT OF THE
COMMITTEE
The Committee considered the Coconut Development Board Regulations, 1982 and made the following observations/recommendations as
contained in its 115th Report which was presented to the House on the 24th November, 1997:-
2.9 The Committee expresses it dissatisfaction for not finalizing the Service Regulations (Pension, Leave and Medical Funds) of the
Officers and Staff of the Coconut Development Board and strongly recommends that these regulations be framed and notified under Section
8 (3) of the Coconut Development Board Act, expeditiously.
3. The Committee takes a serious view of the delay in notifying the Provident Fund Rules and recommends that this should be notified
immediately, if not already done.
3.1 The Committee feels that the powers of the Chairman, Coconut Development Board for grant of leave to a member to abstain
from a meeting be specified in Regulation 9 and that Regulation 9 should be amended, accordingly.
3.2 The Committee noted that the Ministry has agreed to specify time limit in regulation 10 (1) for filling up the casual vacancies of
members other than ex-officio members of the Board.
3.3 The provision of second (casting) vote by the Chairman of the Board under Regulation 15 (2) should be deleted as suggested by
the Committee. 
 
3.4 The Committee notes with dismay that the recruitment Regulations for some of the posts of the Board have not been notified
under Regulation 18 and recommends that Recruitment regulations should be notified forthwith"
2. The Committee met with the representatives of the Coconut Development Board and Ministry of Agriculture on 11th January, 1999 at
Cochin and discussed the status report (Appendix-I) on implementation of the above recommendations of the Committee as contained in its
115th Report. The Committee expressed its concern about the inordinate delay in framing the Coconut Board Service Regulations. In that
connection, the Committee was informed that all the formalities in respect of framing of Regulations had been completed and the
regulations were in the final stage of vetting by the Ministry of Law. It was further informed that the notification would be issued in this
regard within four months time. Further the Committee made a suggestion for inducting more members from the coconut Industry to the
Coconut Development Board as they might be useful and effective in the functioning of the Board. The Committee expressed its displeasure
in treating the appointment of a whole time Chairman of Coconut Development Board in casual manner. The Committee was however,
satisfied with the actions taken on rest of the recommendations of the Committee. A study note prepared on the basis of the Committee’s
discussion held at Cochin is placed at (Appendix-II).
3. The Committee considered the matter in its meeting held on April 1, 1999. The Committee notes that necessary action has been taken on all
recommendations of the Committee except one relating to Coconut Service Board Regulations. The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction
over the fact that the Ministry of Agriculture could not
keep its promise of framing the Coconut Board Service Regulations within four months as assured to the Committee during its visit to Cochin in
January, 1999. The Committee hopes that Coconut Board Service Regulations would farmed by the Ministry of Agriculture at the earliest
under intimation to it.
Appendix-I
  
 
STATUS REPORT ON IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 115TH REPORT OF THE RAJYA
SABHA COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION.
The Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation had held discussions with the representatives of Ministry of Agriculture and the Coconut
Development Board on 2.6.1992 at Trivandrum. Thereafter the Committee held meeting on 23.6.92 at Delhi with the Additional Secretary, Ministry

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
of Agriculture (Dept. of Agri. & Cooperation). A further meeting with the Coconut Development Board scheduled to take place in Kochi in
October, 1993 could not take place in the absence of Chairman, Coconut Development Board. After considering the replies containing status report
from the Ministry of Agriculture the committee had submitted its report to the Rajya Sabha., The position regarding implementation and action
taken on various recommendations is as follows:-
2. Framing and notifying various regulations under the Coconut Development Board Act, 1979.
The following Rules and Regulations have been framed and notified under the Coconut Development Board Act:
(i) The Coconut Development Board Rules, 1981
(ii) Coconut Development Board Regulations, 1982
(iii) Coconut Development Board Recruitment Regulations, 1984
(iv) Coconut Development Board (General Provident Fund) Regulations, 1992.
 
 
(v) Coconut Development Board (Hindi Officer) Recruitment Regulations, 1993.
(vi) Coconut Development Board (Amendment) Regulations, 1994.
(vii)Coconut Development Board (Asstt. Adm. Officer, Chemist, Driver Grade-I, Machine Operator, Sales Assistant, Handyman and
Helper) Recruitment Regulations, 1995.
 
  
 
3. The Framing and notification of Coconut Development Board Service Regulations had been under consideration of Coconut Development Board
and Central Government for quite some time The proposed Regulations intent to cover various service aspects like leave, pension, medical
attendance, etc. The draft of the Regulations framed by the Board were considered by the Central Government in the Ministry of Agriculture in
consultation with various Ministries and Departments who were concerned with different conformed to the Government of India Rules. This
exercise took considerable time, due to the involvement of the large number of Departments and Divisions within the Department. However, the
Regulations are now in the final stage and is being vetted by Ministry of Law and is expected to be notified shortly.
2. Amendment to Coconut Development Board Regulations, 1982.
During the discussions held with the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture and Coconut Development Board at Trivandrum in June, 1992
the Committee had considered amendments to some of the provisions contained in the Coconut Development Board regulations, 1982. 
 
In the light of these discussions and after a review of the Coconut Development Board regulations, 1982 the Coconut Development Board
Regulations were amended vide Coconut Development Board Regulations were amended vide Coconut Development Board (Amendment)
Regulations, 1994. 
  
 
The following amendments were accordingly carried out.
Regulation (3) was amended,
(i) To increase the tenure of Committees constituted under Section 9 of the Coconut Development Board Act, 1979 from 1 year to 2 years.
(ii) To include the Financial Advisor or the Deputy Secretary (Finance) in the Ministry of Agriculture in the Executive Committee of the
Board.
(iii) To replace the Chief Agricultural Expert, an office which was no more in existence with horticulture Commissioner in the Research and
Development Committee.
(iv) To reduce the quorum for transacting business in the meetings of the Board from 8 to 6 and that for a Committee from 4 to 3.

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
(v) To remove the provision for 2nd vote by Chairman or the Vice Chairman or Member presiding over the meeting of the Board or
Committee. The provision is that in the first instance Chairman or Vice-chairman or the member presiding over the meeting shall not
exercise his right of vote. He shall exercise his right of vote only when there is an equality of vote. 
 
6. As regards other recommendations relating to specifying the powers of Chairman in the matter of granting leave of absence (regulation 9 and
specifying time limit for filling up casual vacancies of members (Regulation 10(i), the following submissions are made;
7. The functional Committees are constituted from amongst the Members of the Board. The Members represent various interests such as
Parliament, Central and State Governments Coconut Growers, processors, etc. Due to various reasons they may not be able to attend a
meeting of the Committee to which they have been elected by the Board. The Members of the board being Senior Government Officials,
members request for leave of absence. If. they make a request it may not be possible for the Chairman to refuse to grant the same.
8. As regards specifying time limit of filling up of casual vacancies in Committees – Regulation 10(i), it is submitted that the reason for such
casual vacancies may be due to non-appointment of a particular category of member in the Board. If a time limit is provided in the status
and the board is unable to adhere to the time due to non appointment of a member in the board, then such non appointment of a member in
the board, then such non compliance will be violation of the statute. Instead of that the ministry is considering to issue executive instructions
to the Board that the casual vacancies in the various committees of the Board may be filled up from amongst the other available members of
the Board.
Summary of Action Taken
The position regarding implementation/action taken on the various recommendations of the Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate legislation
contained in 115
th Report which are summarised in para 2.9. and 3 to 3.4 is as under:- 
 
1. Framing of service Regulations (para 2.9 of the Report)- Notification of provident Fund Rules the position is explained in para-3
2. Coconut Development Board Provident Fund Regulations have been notified on 3.10.1992.
3. Specifying the power of chairman for grant of leave – para – 6 and 7.
4. Specifying time limit for filling up of casual vacancy – para – 8
5. Removal of provision of second vote by Chairman – para – 5(v)
6. Framing of Recruitment regulations of the remaining post viz. Hindi Officer, Assstt. Adm. Officer, Chemist Driver Grade-I, Machine
Operator, Sales Assistant, Handyman and Helper have been notified on 12.11.1993 and 19.5.1995.
Appendix-II
  
 
STUDY NOTE ON COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD REGUALTIONS 1982-IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 115TH REPORT OF
THE COMMITTEE.
The Committee met with the management of Coconut Development Board and the representative of ministry of Agriculture at Bristow hall, Hotel
Taj Malabar, Cochin at 11.30 a.m. on 11.1.99.
Members present 
  
 
1. 1. Miss Saroj Khaparde Chairperson
2. Shri Manohar kant Dhyani
3. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav
1. 4. Shri Shri Dara Singh Chauhan

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
5. Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat
6. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
7. Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah
8. Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.C. Agarwal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary
3. Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD
1. Dr. H.P. Singh, Chairman and Horticulture Commissioner in the Ministry of Agriculture.
 
 
2. Shri V.T. Markose, Chief Coconut Development Officer.
3. Dr. R.K. Singh, Director
4. Shri V.K. Sankaran Secretary
The Chairman initiated the discussion by apprising briefly about the purpose of the visit of the Committee and by introducing the Members of the
Committee. Thereafter, Chairman, Coconut Development Board gave a brief presentation about the various functions of the Board and utility of
Coconut in various areas. The Chairman, CDB informed the Committee that to encourage the use of Coconut the Board was arranging exhibitions
and seminars. The Committee was also informed that the quality of Coconut produced in India was much superior than the Coconut produced in
other countries and that is why a large quantity of Coconut oil was exported by India.
Coming to the agenda for the day the Chairman mentioned about the inordinate delay in framing the Coconut Board Service Regulations. The
Chairman, CDB informed that all the formalities in respect of framing of Regulations had been completed and the Regulations were in the final
stage of vetting by the Ministry of Law. It was further informed that within four months time a notification would be issued in this regard.
 
 
The point reflecting to appointment of Chairman CDB on the regular basis also came up for discussion and the Committee expressed its displeasure
in treating the appointment of a whole time Chairman for CDB in a casual manner. The Chairman felt that it is essential that the CDB should have a
whole time Chairman to monitor its activities closely. The Chairman CDB informed the committee that the formalities for appointing a full time
Chairman for CDB had been completed and any time orders could be issued in this regard.
 
The Committee was satisfied with the action taken on rest of the recommendations of the Committee in its 115th Report.
The Committee made a suggestion for inducting more from the Coconut Industry to the Coconut Development Board as they may be useful and
effective in the functioning of the Board.
The meeting concluded on mutual vote of thanks.
 
 
V
TOBACCO BOARD RULES, 1976.
The Tobacco Board Rules, were examined and certain points were referred to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, on the 8th September, 1994
for their comments/clarification which were received on the 19th September, 1994. 
  

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
 
2. The points referred and the Ministry’s comments are as under:-
1. Rule 3(2)
"When a member of the Board dies or resigns or is deemed to have resigned or is removed from office or becomes incapable of
acting, the Central Government may by notification in the official Gazette appoint a person to fill that vacancy"
Provided that where the vacancy is one which was held by the outgoing member by virtue of his membership of Parliament under
clause (b) of Sub-Section (4) of Section 4 the appointment of the next incumbent of that vacancy shall be on the basis of fresh
election by that House of parliament to which the outgoing member belonged"
i. What does the term "is deemed to have resigned" mean?
 
  
  
 
Please elucidate.
ii. There is no time limit fixed for filling the vacancy in the
Board. Whether the Ministry have any objection in fixing a definite time limit within which a vacancy shall be filled?
Ministry’s Comments:
As per Rule 7 of Tobacco Board Rules, a member going out of India, shall intimate the Secretary the date of his departure and the date of his
expected return to India and if he intends to be absent from India for a longer period than six months, he shall tender his resignation.
If he fails to do so, he shall be deemed to have resigned with effect from the date of his departure from India.
As such, it is presumed that the term "is deemed to have resigned" has been used in the context of provision of Rule (7).
Since, Ministry initiates action to fill the vacancy in the Board as soon as any vacancy arises, fixing of time limit in filling the vacancy in the board
may not be necessary.
2. Rule 4.
 
  
  
 
"Term of office of Members :- (1) A member appointed under clauses (a), (b), (c) and (e) of sub-section (4) of section 4 shall hold office for
a period of three years from the date of his appointment, and a member appointed under clause (d) shall hold office for a period of two years
from the date of his appointment:
Provided that a member shall be eligible for re-appointment."
Rule 4 provides that a Member shall be eligible for re-appointment, whether the Ministry have any objection in fixing the number of terms
for which a Member can be re-appointed?
Ministry’s Comments:

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
As per Rule 4, a member shall be eligible for reappointment. In order to give wider opportunity for representation a member appointed
under clause (e) of Sub-section 4 of Section 4 may not be reappointed for more than once. In regard to other Sub-Sections, there appears to
be no need in fixing the number of terms for which a member can be re-appointed since, they are mostly ex-office appointees.
3. Rule 5 (3)
 
  
  
 
"The power to accept the resignation of a member shall vest in the Chairman, who on accepting the resignation, shall report that fact to the
Board at its next meeting."
Since the Members are appointed by the Central Government, whether the Ministry have any objection in authorising the Central
Government to accept the resignations of the Members of the Board instead of Chairman?
Ministry Comments:
Chairman, Tobacco Board is well placed to verify the genuineness of the reasons for resignation as well as letter of resignation tendered by a
member. He can verify the signature of the member who submits the resignation letter. However, if need arises, there is no objection in
authorising the Central Government also, to accept the resignation of the Members of the Board. 
 
4. Rule 6(d)
 
  
  
 
"Removal from the Board:- The Central Government may remove any member from office.
XXXXXXXX XXXXXXX
(d) if without the leave of the Chairman, he fails to attend there consecutive meetings of the Board."
It is not clear from the Rule how long a Member can remain absent from the meetings of the Board with the leave of the Chairman?
Ministry’s Comments:
A member may be allowed to remain absent with the leave of Chairman for four consecutive meetings provided the number of meetings
held during his absence from India, as defined under Rule 7 (b), are not counted for the purpose.
5. Rule 7(2)
 
  
  
 
"If a member leaves India without observing the provisions of Sub-rule (1) he shall be deemed to have resigned with effect from the date of
his departure from India."

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
Due to compelling reasons, if a Member of the Board has to leave India to a neighbouring country such as Nepal or Bhutan, where no Visa
is required and fails to intimate about his departure. Whether he shall be deemed to have resigned? Please elucidate. 
  
 
Ministry’s Comments:
As per Rule 7 (1) the Member has to intimate about his departure, if he goes out of India. Since, Nepal and Bhutan are outside India as per
Rules he shall be deemed to have resigned if he does not give such intimation.
6. Rule 10-A
"Association of Persons by Board:-
1. The Board may associate with itself any person, either on its own or on the basis of recommendations from the Central Government,
the State Governments Public Sector Undertakings any other body or on the basis of representations from individuals or associations
interested in the promotion of tobacco industry in complying with any of the provisions of the Act.
2. The tenure of such associated persons shall be the persons shall be the period upto which the Board is reconstituted or the period as
decided by the Board, which-ever is earlier."
i. What is the composition of the Board? How many vacancies are there and since when?
ii. How many persons are associated with the board, since when and for what purpose?
iii. Whether any salary or allowances are paid to the associated persons? If so, the details thereof.
Ministry’s Comments:
i. The Board consists of:-
a. Chairman,
b. Three members of Parliament.
c. Eleven members representing various Ministries and State Governments.
d. Executive Director of the Tobacco Board.
e. Ten members representing growers of Tobacco dealers and exporters of Tobacco and its products and manufactures of Tobacco
products. The term of the Board has expired recently and is under reconstitution.
ii. Two persons were associated with the Board with effect from 5.3. 1992. The Board in it’s meeting held on 25.1.92 felt that the existing
Board does not consist of any representative of manufacturers whose views are essential in fixing crop size and to discuss marketing
problems and hence associated the General Manager of Godfry Philips of India Ltd., and the Director of ILTD, ITC Ltd. with the Board.
iii. The Associate Members are entitled for Travelling and daily allowance in term of Regulation 17 of Tobacco Board (General) Regulations,
1984. T. A. and D. A. are admissible
iv. in cases where an Associate member travels from his usual place of residence to the place of meeting of the Board or its Committee meeting
is held. No salary is however, payable. The above mentioned two Associate Members however never claimed any allowances from the
Board. Hence no salary or allowances have been paid to them by the Board.
2. Rule 11
"Committees of the Board:- (1) The Committees appointed by the Board under Section 7 may be of either advisory or executive
character and shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions of the Board as may be decided by the Board in conformity
with the provisions contained in the Act and these rules and also the directions, if any, that may be given to the Board by the Central
Government."
How many Committees have been appointed and for what specific purposes? What is the composition thereof?
Ministry’s Comments:
Five Committees have been appointed by the Board and their functions are given below:-

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
Name of the Committee Functions.
1. Executive Committee Regulation 4(1) of Tobacco Board General
Regulation, 1984.
2. Marketing Committee Regulation 4 (3) of Tobacco Board General
Regulation, 1984.
3. Committee for Production Regulation 4 (2) of Tobacco and
Production Control Board Regulation, 1984. 
 
4. Registration Committee for Rule 33(A) (2), 33 (D) (1) 34 (A)
Growers and others.* (*other (1), 34 (1) (1), 34 (M) (1) of
include nursery growers, Tobacco Board Rules, 1976.
Curers, commercial graders)
5. Registration Committee Rule 34 (E) (1), 36 (1)
for Traders Processors and of Tobacco Board
Manufacturers. Rules,1976.
 
The composition of Committee referred to above is as follows:-
1. EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE:
S/Shri
1. Chairman, Tobacco Board Chairman
2. Ch. Narendra Nath(Vice Chairman) Member
3. Executive Director, Tobacco Board
4. Dr. U Venkateswarlu, M.P.
5. B. Krishnaiah
6. P.Rameswar Reddy
7. A.Manju
8. N.Sreeramaiah
COMMITTEE FOR PRODUCTION AND PRODUCTION CONTROL:
S/Shri
1. Chairman, Tobacco Board Chairman
2. Ch, Narendra Nath (Vice-Chairman) Member
3. Executive Director, Tobacco Board

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
4. M. Gnanendra Raddy, M.P. 
 
5. B. Krishnaiah
6. B.S.Krishna Murthy
7. Secretary, Food & Agri. Dept. ,Govt. of A.P.
8. C.I. Putta Swamy Gowda
III MARKETING COMMITTEE
S/ Shri
1. Chairman, Tobacco Board Chairman
2. Ch. Narendra Nath (Vice-Chairman) Member
1. Executive Director, Tobacco Board
4. V.M. Patel, M.P.
5. A.Manju
6. N. Sreeramaiah
7. M.Lakshmaiah
8. S.K.John Saheb
IV. RECISTRATION COMMITTEE FOR GROWERS AND
OTHERS:
S/ Shri
1. Executive Director, Tobacco Board Chairman
2. N. Sreeramajah Member
3. B. Krishnaiah
4. C.T. Putta Swamy Gowda
5. Sk. John Saheb
V. REGISTRATION COMMITTEE FOR TRADERS
AND MANUFACTURES
:
S/Shri
1. Executive Director, Tobacco Board Chairman 
 
2. Dr. U. Venkateswarlu, M.P. Member
3. Ch. Narendra Nath

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
4. M. Lakahmaiah
1. A. Manju
 
8. Rule 12
"Meetings of Board :- There shall be not less than two ordinary meetings of the Board in a year on such dates and at
such places as the Chairman may think fit and the interval between any two ordinary meetings shall not, in any case,
be longer than eight months.
The term "such places" appearing in Rule gives arbitrary powers to the Chairman. It is felt that in case the meetings of the Board is to be held
outside the Headquarters, the reasons for the same be recorded in writing and the Rule be amended accordingly.
Ministry’s Comments:
It is felt that this provision lends certain amount of flexibility to convene Board meeting at different places once tobacco is grown in different states
of India. Government have no objection if an amendment is proposed to the Rule to the effect that the reason for holding the meeting outside the
head Quarters may be recorded in writing.
(9) Rule 13(2)
"The Chairman may require any officer of the Board, besides the Executive Director or invite any person to attend any meeting of
the Board, but such officer or person shall not be entitled to vote."
The term "any person" appearing in Rule is not clear. Whether the Ministry have any objection to specify that person(s) related to Tobacco industry
may be invited to attend the meeting of the Board and to amend the Rule accordingly.
Ministry Comments:
Sometimes the Board may require the assistance/guidance from persons other than those associated directly with Tobacco Industry for taking policy
decisions/corrective measures depending on the nature of the issue. Hence, it may be appropriate to retain this provision.
(10) Rule 17
"Voting :- (1) Every question brought before a meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majority of the members present and
voting.
1. In the case of an equality of votes, the Chairman or the Member presiding over such meeting shall have a second or casting vote."
The provisions of second/casting vote by the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman or Members presiding over the meeting of the Board is against the
democratic norms of the modern society. Whether there is any objection to delete the same?
Ministry’s Comments:
The provision need to be retained as it would be useful in cases of dead-lock when a resolution is put to vote. Similar provisions are available in
case of other local bodies.
11. Rule 18
"Transaction of business by circulation :-
1. Any business which is to be transacted by the Board may, if the Chairman so directs, be referred to members (other than members
who are not in India) by circulation of papers, and copies of papers so circulated shall also be sent to the Central Government.
2. Any proposal or resolution circulated under sub-rule (1) and approved by the majority of the members who have recorded their
views in writing shall be as effectual and binding as if such proposal or resolution was decided by the majority of the members at a
meeting of the Board.

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
 
  
  
 
Provided that at least *eight members of the Board have recorded their views on the proposal or resolution:
Provided further that when a proposal or resolution is referred to the members by circulation, any five members may require that the
proposal or resolution be referred to members at a meeting and there upon such reference shall be made to members at a meeting of
the Board. 
  
 
3. Where any business is referred to members under sub-rule (1), a period of not less than ten clear-days shall be allowed for the receipt
of replies from members and such period shall be reckoned from the date on which the notice of business is issued.
4. If a proposal or resolution is circulated under this rule, the result of the circulation shall be communicated to all the members and to
the Central Government.
 
 
5. All decisions on questions arrived at by circulation of papers shall be placed at the next meeting of the Board for record.
Whether Government have any objection in laying down some restrictions/guidelines to curb the temptation to resort to passing of resolutions by
circulation? It is felt that both in law and in practice, a body in its duly constituted meeting constitutes a collective personality distinct from the
individual constituents. Inn cases of similar provision in other rules, the committee has emphasised that this practice should be resorted to in special
cases only and for reasons to be recorded in writing.
Ministry’s Comments:
On some occasions it may be required to refer to the Board a Report or some additional information sought for during a recently concluded meeting
or routine matter for which convening a regular
 
 
 
meeting may be cumbersome or may not be required or may not be convenient for members to attend.
Moreover, the second proviso to Rule 18(2) provides that when any business is circulated for approval of Board Members, any five members can
require/insist that the matter be placed before the members in a meeting of the Board. This itself is a built-in restrictive provision against
indiscriminate use of this provision. Even otherwise, a resolution passed by circulation shall have to be placed at the next meeting of the Board.
In view of the position explained above, it would be appropriate to retain the provision.
1. There is no time limit fixed for filling the vacancy in the Board. Whether the Ministry have any objection in fixing a definite time
limit within which a vacancy shall be filled?
3 The Committee had discussion on the subject at Hyderabad on 21st September 1994 with the representatives of the Tobacco Board and the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry. The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry in respect of rules 3(2), 6(d), 7(2), 10-A, 11, 13(2) and 17.
Regarding Rules 5(3) 12 and 18 the Committee agreed with the reply of the Ministry and decided not to insist for the amendment. The Committee
however did not agree with the reply of the Ministry on rule 4 regarding term of the Member for which he can be re-appointed. The Committee
therefore, desired that the Ministry should amend the rule by fixing the number of terms for which he can be re-appointed. Relevant extracts from
the study note are placed at Appendix-I.
 
 

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
 
3. After a couple of reminders, the Ministry vide their O.M. dated 25 August, 1995 stated as follows with regard to the
suggestions/recommendations of the Committee made during the course of the study visit.
Rule 4
The Committee was of the view that in regard to sub-sections other than section 4(4) (e), two terms should be fixed
for which a member can be reappointed. On re-examination it is felt that as most of the members are official
members and as far as nomination of non-official members under section 4(4) (e) is concerned; to maintain a balance,
representing different geographical areas/regions & categories of growers and to ensure continuity in the functioning
of the Tobacco Board, the Ministry may be allowed to retain the right to re-nominate a person from any category
keeping his suitability in view. By amending the Rule 4 as recommended by the Committee discretion for
reappointment beyond second term would be lost. It is therefore felt that status quo with respect to section 4(4) of the
Tobacco Board Act be maintained.
Rule 6
"The Committee had noted the Ministry’s observation that a member may be allowed to remain absent with the leave
of the Chairman for 4 consecutive meeting provided the number of meetings held during his absence from India, as
defined under Rule 7(b) are not counted for the purpose".
  
  
 
5. Committee at its meeting held on February 9, 1996 consider the matter and reiterated its earlier position with regard to Rule 4 that the
number of term for which a member can be reappointed should be restricted to not more than two terms The views of the Committee in
this regard were sent to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry for implementation thereof. 
  
 
6. The Ministry vide their O.M. dated July 19, 1999 had informed that the recommendation of the Committee with regard to Rule 4 had been
accepted by the Ministry and a notification GSR 26(E) dated January 13, 1998 had been published in the Gazette of India. (Appendix-II).
7. The Committee considered the subject matter at its meeting held on September 14, 1999. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry had already implemented its outstanding recommendation on Rule 4 regarding restriction of the
number of terms of office of the member of the Board to two. The Committee further notes that the Ministry had also implemented its
suggestion by inserting clause (e) in Rule 6 regarding removal of member from the 
Board.
 
Appendix-I
(see para 3 at page 45)
STUDY NOTE ON VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION TO HYDERABAD ON 21ST SEPTEMBER, 1994
TOBACCO BOARD RULES, 1976
The Committee assembled at 3.00 P.M. on the 21st September, 1994, in Qutub Shah Room of Hotel Krishna Oberoi, Hyderabad and held
discussion with the representatives of Tobacco Board and the Ministry of Commerce.
MEMBERS PRESENT
Shri H. Hanumanthappa - Chairman
Shri Misa B. Ganesan
Shri Chimanbhai Mehta

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao
Shri K.N. Singh
Shri Gopalsinh G. Solanki
Shri Som Pal
Shri Nyodek Yonggam
SECRETARIAT
Shri Om Prakash, Under Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF TOBACCO BOARD
Shri P. Ramakanth Reddy, Chairman
Shri Asutosh Mishra, Executive Director
Shri P. Gangadhar Prasad, Secretary
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE
Shri Kashmir Singh, Under Secretary
1. At the outset, Shri P. Ramakanth Reddy, Chairman of the Tobacco Board welcomed the Committee and introduced his team of
executives. The Chairman of the Committee also introduced the Members and Officers of the Committee. Thereafter, Shri Reddy
gave a brief account of the working activities of the Tobacco Board and replied to the queries raised by the Chairman and Members
of the Committee.
Thereafter, the Committee initiated discussion in the light of the questionnaire and the reply furnished by the Ministry of Commerce.
6.2 Rule 3(2)
"When a member of the Board dies or resigns or is deemed to have resigned or is removed from office or becomes incapable of acting, the Central
Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a person to fill that vacancy;
Provided that where the vacancy is one which was held by the outgoing member by virtue of his membership of Parliament under Clause (B) of
Sub-Section (4) of Section 4, the appointment of the next incumbent of that vacancy shall be on the basis of fresh election by that House of
Parliament to which the outgoing member belonged."
The Committee sought to know what does the term "is deemed to have resigned" mean ?
 
  
  
 
The Ministry replied that as per Rule 7 of Tobacco Board Rules, a member going out of India; shall intimate the Secretary the date of his departure
and the date of his expected return to India and if he intends to be absent from India for a longer period than six months, he shall tender his
resignation. If he fails to do so, he shall be deemed to have resigned with effect from the date of his departure from India. As such, it is presumed
that the term "is deemed to have resigned" has been used in the context provision of Rule 7.
The Committee noted the reply.

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
3. The Committee sought to know whether the Ministry have any objection in fixing a definite time limit within which a vacancy shall
be filled?
 
  
  
 
The Ministry replied that they initiate action to fill the vacancy in the Board as soon as any vacancy arises, fixing of time limit in
filling the vacancy in the Board may not be necessary.
The Committee noted the reply.
4. Rule 4
 
  
  
 
"Term of Office of Members:- (1) A member appointed under clauses (a), (b), (c) and (e) of Sub-Section (4) of Section 4 shall hold
office for a period of three years from the date of his appointment, and a member appointed under clause (d) shall hold office for a
period of two years from the date of his appointment: Provided that a member shall be eligible for re-appointment."
The Committee sought to know whether the Ministry have any objection in fixing the number of terms for which a Member can be
re-appointed ?
The Ministry replied that as per Rule 4, a member shall be eligible for re-appointment. In order to give wider opportunity for
representation a member appointed under Clause (e) of Sub-Section 4 of Section 4 may not be re-appointed for more than once. In
regard to other Sub-Sections, there appears to be no need of fixing the number of terms for which a member can be re-appointed
since, they are mostly ex-office appointees.
The Committee while not agreeing with the reply of the Ministry was of the view that in regard to other Sub-Sections two terms
should be fixed for which a member can be reappointed. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry should amend
the rule accordingly under intimation to it.
5. Rule 5(3)
 
  
  
 
"The power to accept the resignation of a member shall vest in the Chairman, who on accepting the resignation, shall report that fact
to the Board at its next meeting."
The Committee sought to know whether the Ministry have say objection in authorising the Central Government to accept the
resignations of the Members of the Board instead of Chairman ?
The Ministry replied that Chairman, Tobacco Board is well placed to verify the genuineness of the reasons for resignation as well as
letter of resignation tendered by a member. He can verify the signature of the member who submits the resignation letter. However,
if need arises, there is no objection in authorising the Central Government also, to accept the resignation of the Members of the
Board.

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
The Committee felt that the present provision is reasonable and decided not insist for amendment, therefore, status quo should be
maintained. 
  
 
6. Rule 6(d)
"Removal from the Board:- The Central Government may remove any member from Office:-
XXXX XXXX XXXX
i. if without the leave of the Chairman, he fails to attend three consecutive meetings of the Board."
The Committee sought to know how long a Member can remain absent from the meetings of the Board with the leave of the Chairman ?
The Ministry replied that a member may be allowed to remain absent with the leave of the Chairman for four consecutive meeting provided the
number of meetings held during his absence from India, as defined under Rule 7 (b), are not counted for the purpose.
The Committee noted the reply.
3. Rule 7(2)
 
  
  
 
"If a member leave India without observing the provisions of sub-rule (1) he shall be deemed to have resigned with effect from the
date of his departure from India."
The Committee sought to know that if due to compelling reasons, a Member of the Board has to leave India to a neighbouring
country such as Nepal or Bhutan where no visa is required and fails to intimate about his departure, whether he shall be deemed to
have resigned? 
 
The Ministry replied that as per Rule 7(1) the Member has to intimate about his departure, if he goes out of India. Since, Nepal and
Bhutan are outside India as per Rules he shall be deemed to have resigned if he does not give such intimation.
The Committee noted the reply.
4. Rule 10-A
"Association of persons by Board:-
1. The Board may associate with itself any person, either on its own or on the basis of recommendations from the Central Government,
the State Governments, Public Sector Undertakings, any other body or on the basis of representations from individuals or
associations interested in the promotion of Tobacco Industry complying with any of the provisions of the Act.
(2) The tenure of such associated persons shall be the period up to which the Board is reconstituted or the period as decided
by the Board, whichever is earlier."
The Committee sought to know what is the composition of the Board? How many vacancies are there and since when?
The Ministry replied that the Board consists of :-

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
a. Chairman,
b. Three Members of Parliament
c. Eleven members representing various Ministries and States Govts.
d. Executive Director of the Tobacco Board
e. Ten members representing growers of Tobacco dealers and exporters of Tobacco and its products and manufacturers of Tobacco
products.
The term of the Board has expired recently and is under reconstitution.
The Committee noted the reply.
3. The Committee sought to know how many persons are associated with the Board, since when and for what purpose?
The Ministry replied that two persons were associated with the Board with effect from 5.3.1992. The Board in its meeting held on
25-1-92 felt that the existing Board does not consist of any representative of manufacturers whose views are essential in fixing crop
since and to discuss Marketing problems and hence associated the General Manager of Godfry Philips India Ltd. and the Director
ILTD. ITC. Ltd., with the Board.
The Committee noted the reply.
6.10 The Committee sought to know whether any salary or allowances are paid to the associated persons ? If so, the details thereof.
The Ministry replied that Associated Member are entitled for traveling and daily allowances in terms of Regulation 17 of Tobacco Board (General)
Regulations, 1984. T.A. and D.A. are admissible in cases where an Associate Member travels from his usual place of residence to the place of
meeting of the Board or/its Committee meeting is held. No salary is however, payable. The above mentioned two Associate Members however
never claimed any allowances from the Board. Hence no salary or allowances have been paid to them by he Board.
The Committee noted the reply.
 
 
11. Rule 11
"Committees of the Board:-(i) The Committee appointed by the Board under Section 7 may be either of advisory or
executive character and shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions of the Board as may be decided by
the 
Board in conformity with the provisions contained in the Act and these rules and also the directions if any, that may
be given to the Board by the Central Government."
The Committee sought to know how many Committee have been appointed and for what specific purposes ? What is the composition thereof ?
The Ministry replied that five Committee have been appointed by the Board and their functions are given below:-
Name of the Committee Functions
1.ExecutiveCommittee Regulation 4(1) of Tobacco Board General Regulations,
1984.
2.Marketing Committee Regulation 4(3) of Tobacco Board General Regulation, 1984.
3.Committee for production Regulation 4(2) of Tobacco
and production Control Board General Regulations,
1984.
4.Registration Committee Rule 33(A) (2), 33(D) (1),
for Growers and Others.* 34(A) (1), 34(1) (i) 34(M)

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
(1) of Tobacco Board Rules, 1976. 
 
(* other include nursery growers curers, commercial grades)
5.Registration Committee Rules 34(E) (1), 36(1)
for Traders, Processors of Tobacco Board Rules, And Manufacturers. 1976. 
  
  
  
 
The composition of Committees referred to above is as under:- 
  
 
I. 
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
S./ Shri
1.Chairman,TobaccoBoard Chairman
2.Ch. NarendraNath (Vice Chairman) Member
3.Executive Director, Tobacco Board ,,
4.Dr. U. Venkateswarlu, M.P. ,,
5.B. Krishnaiah ,,
6.P.Rameswar Reddy ,,
7.A. Manju ,,
8.N. Sreeramaiah ,,
II COMMITTEE FOR PRODUCTION AND PRODUCTION CONTROL.
S/Shri
1. Chairman,TobaccoBoard Chairman
2. Ch. Narendra Nath (Vice Chairman) Member
3. Executive Director, Tobacco Board ,,
4. M. Gnanendra Reddy, M.P. ,,
5. B. Krishnaiah ,,
6. B.S. Krishna Murthy ,,
7. Secretary, Food and Agri. Dept. Govt. of A.P. ,,
8. C.T. Putta Swamy Gowda ,,
III. MARKETING COMMITTEE:

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
 
  
  
 
S/Shri
1. Chairman,TobaccoBoard, Chairman
2. Ch.Narendra Nath (ViceChairman) ,,
3. ExecutivDirector,TobaccoBoard ,,
4. V.M.Patel,M.P. ,,
5. A.Manju ,,
6. N.Sreeramaiah ,,
7. M.Lakshmaiah ,,
8. S.K. Jonh Saheb,,
IV. REGISTRAION COMMITTEE FOR GROWERS AND OTHERS.
 
  
  
 
S/Shri
1. Executive Director, Tobacco Board Chairman
2. N. Sreeramaih Member
3. B.Krishnaiah ,,
4. C.T.Putta Sawmy Gowda ,,
5. S.K. Jonh Saheb ,,
V. REGISTRATION COMMITTEE FOR TRADERS AND MANUFACTURERS
S/Shri
1. Executive Director, Tobacco Board Chairman
2. Dr. U.Venkateswarlu, M.P. Member
3. Ch. Narendra Nath ,,
4. M.Lakshmaiah ,,
5. A.Manju ,,
The Committee noted the reply. 

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
  
 
6.12 Rule 12
"Meetings of Board:- There shall be not less than two ordinary meetings of the Board in a year on such dates and at such places as
the Chairman may think fit and the interval between any two ordinary meetings shall not, in any case, be longer than eight months".
The term "such places" appearing in Rule gives arbitrary powers to the Chairman. The Committee felt that in case the meeting of the Board is to be
held outside the Headquarters, the reasons for the same be recorded in writing and the Rule be amended accordingly.
The Committee was informed that this provision lends certain amount of flexibility to convince Board meeting at different places since tobacco is
grown in different States of India. Government have no objection if an amendment is proposed to the Rule to the effect that the reason for holding
the meeting outside the Head Quarters may be recorded in writing.
The Committee dropped its recommendations and decided not to insist for amendment.
13. Rule 13(2)
 
  
  
 
"The Chairman may require any officer of the Board, besides the Executive Director or invite any person to attend any meeting of
the Board, but such officer or person shall not be entitled to vote."
The term "any person" appearing in rule is not clear. The Committee sought to know whether the Ministry have any objection to
specify that persons(s) related to Tobacco Industry may be invited to attend the meeting of the Board and to amend the Rule
accordingly.
The Ministry replied that sometimes the Board may require the assistance/guidance from persons other than those associated directly
with Tobacco Industry for taking policy decisions/corrective measures depending on the nature of the issue. Hence, it may be
appropriate to retain this provision.
The Committee noted the reply.
14. Rule 17
"Voting: (1) Every question brought before a meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majority of the members present and voting.
(2) In the case of an equality of votes, the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman or Members presiding over the meeting of the Board is against
the democratic norms of the modern society. The Committee sought to know whether there is any objection to delete the same?
The Ministry replied that the provision needs to be retained as it would be useful in cases of dead-lock when a resolution is put to vote. Similar
provisions are available in case of other local bodies.
The Committee noted the reply.
 
 
6.15 Rule 18
"Transaction of business by circulation:- (1) Any business which is to be transacted by the Board may, if the Chairman so directs, be
referred to Members (Other than Members who are not in India) by circulation of papers, and copies of papers so circulated shall
also be sent to the Central Government.
(2) Any proposal or resolution circulated under sub rule(1) and approved by the majority of the members who have recorded their

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
views in writing shall be as effectual and binding as if such proposal or resolution was decided by the majority of the members at a
meeting of the Board.
Provided that at least eight members of the Board have recorded their views on the proposal or resolution. Provided further that
when a proposal or resolution is referred to the members by circulation, any five members may require that the proposal or
resolution be referred to members at a meeting and there upon such reference shall be made to members at a meeting of the Board. 
  
 
(3) Where any business is referred to members under sub-rule (1), a period of not less than ten clear days shall be allowed for the
receipt of replies from members and such period shall be reckoned from the date on which the notice of business is issued.
(4) If a proposal or resolution is circulated under this rule, the result of the circulation shall be communicated to all the members and
to the Central Government.
(5) All decisions on questions arrived at by circulation of papers shall be placed at the next meeting of the Board for record.
The Committee sought to know whether Government have any objection in laying down some restrictions/guidelines to curb the temptation to
resort to passing of resolutions by circulation? It is felt that both in law and in practice, a body in its duty constitute meeting constitutes a collective
personality distinct from the individual constituents. In cases of similar provision in other rules, the Committee emphasised that this practice should
be resorted to in special cases only and for reasons to be recorded in writing.
The Ministry replied that on some occasions it may be required to refer to the Board a Report or some additional information sought for during a
recently concluded meeting or a routine matter for which convening a regular meeting may be cumbersome or may not be required or may not be
convenient for a member to attend.
Moreover, the second proviso to Rule18(2) provides that when any business in circulated for approval of Board Members, any five members can
require/insist that the matter be placed before the members in a meeting of the Board. This itself is built-in restrictive provision against
indiscriminate use of this provision. Even otherwise, a resolution passed by circulation shall have to be placed at the next meeting of the Board.
In view of the position explained above, it would be appropriate to retain the provision.
The Committee accepted the reply of the Ministry.
The discussion ended with the mutual vote of thanks.
 
  
 
Appendix-II
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE NOTIFCATION NO8/10/97-EP(AGRI.VI) DATED 13th JANUARY 1998
G.S.R. 26(E) In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 32 read with clause (b) of sub-section (2) of that Section of the Tobacco Board Act,
1975 (4 of 1975), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules further to amend the Tobacco Board Rules, 1976, namely:-
1. (1) These rules may be called the Tobacco Board (Amendment) Rules, 1997.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. In the Tobacco Board rules, 1976 (herein after referred to as the said rules), in rule 4.
In sub-rule (1), for the words "Provided that a member shall be eligible for re-appointment" the following words shall be substituted,
namely:-
"Provided that a member appointed under clauses(a), (b), (c) and (d) of sub-section (4) of section 4 shall not be eligible for reappointment
for more than two terms and a member appointed under clause (e) shall not be eligible for reappointment for more than one term" 
 

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
3. In rule 6 of the said rules:-
 
  
  
 
After clause(d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(e) With the leave of the Chairman, he fails to attend four consecutive meetings of the Board; provided that the number of meetings held
during his/her absence from India, as intimated under sub-rule (1)(a) of rule 7, are not counted for the purpose" 
 
VII 
  
 
THE ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) RULE, 1986-IMPLEMENTATION OF 102ND REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE.
The Committee examined the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 framed in exercise of powers under sections 6 and 25 of the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and its recommendation, as re-produced below, were included in its 102nd Report which was presented
to the house on May, 1994:-
"6.12. However, the Committee recommends that powers under section 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 should be delegated to
the State Government of Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh without further delay".
2. Extracts from the Report were forwarded to the Ministry of Environment & Forests on May 16, 1994 for implementation of the
recommendations of the Committee.
3. The matter of implementation of the above recommendation of the Committee was perused with the Ministry of Environment & Forests
and the Ministry ultimately published a Notification. SO 609(E) dated July 20, 1998 delegating power under section 5 of the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986 to the State Government of Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland (Appendix).
4. The Committee at its meeting held on May 20, 1999 considered the matter. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of
Environment & Forests has implemented the recommendation as contained in its 102nd Report regarding delegation of powers to
the State Government of Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh under Section 5 of the Act.
Appendix
(see para 3 at page 64)
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS NOTIFICATION DATED THE 15TH JULY, 1998
PUBLISHING THE GAZETTE OF INIDA (EXTRAORDRONARY) DATED MONDAY JULY 20,
1998/ASADHA 29, 1920.
S.O. 609(E):- In exercise of the powers conferred by section 23 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986), the Central Government
hereby delegates the powers vested in it under section 5 of the Act, to the State Governments of Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland subject to the
condition that the Central Government may revoke such delegation of powers in respect of both or any one of the State Government or may itself
invoke the provision of section 5 of the Act,
if in the opinion of the Central Government such a course of action is necessary in public interest.
 
 

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
Jawaharlal Nehru port Trust Employees (Pay and Allowances) Regulations, 1997.
The Committee expresses satisfaction that the Ministry of Surface Transport had agreed to amend regulations 4, 19(1) and 24 as per its suggestions.
As regards regulation 2 (19) the Committee decided that the same may be retained in its existing form. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of
Surface Transport will notify the amendments to regulation 4, 19(1) and 24 expeditiously under intimation to it.
Jawaharlal Nehru port Trust Employees (Welfare Fund) Regulations, 1990-Implementation of the recommendations contained in 99
th
Report of the Committee.
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Surface Transport had implemented all the recommendations of the Committee as
contained its 99th Report on the subject. 
  
  
Coconut Development Board Regulation, 1982-Implementation of the recommendations contained in 115the Report of the Committee
The Committee notes that necessary action has been taken on all recommendations of the Committee except one relating to Coconut Service Board
Regulations. The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the fact that the Ministry of Agriculture could not keep its promise of framing the
Coconut Service Board Regulations 
 
within four months as assured to the Committee during its visit to Cochin in January, 1999. The Committee hopes that Coconut Board Service
Regulations would be framed by the Ministry of Agriculture at the earliest under intimation to it.
Tobacco Board Rules, 1976
The Committee notes with satisfaction that Ministry of Commerce and Industry had already implemented its suggestion on Rule 4 regarding
restriction of the number of terms of office of a member of the Board to two. The Committee further notes that the Ministry had also implemented
its suggestion by inserting clause (e) in Rule 6 regarding removal of member from the Board.
The Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986- Implementation of the recommendations contained in 102
nd Report of the Committee
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Environment & Forests has implemented the recommendation as contained in its 102nd
Report regarding delegation of powers to the State Governments of Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh under Section 5 of the Act. 
MINUTES
XII
Twelveth Meeting

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
  
 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, May 06,1999 in Room No.63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Miss Saroj Khaparde Chairperson
2. Shri Radhakishan Malaviya
3. Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt
4. Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani
5. Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat
6. Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
7. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
8. Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah
9. Prof. A. Lakshmisagar
10. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav
11. Shri Sukh Dev Singh Dhindsa
12. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
13. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri M.N. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
3. Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered the following memoranda:-
 
 
Memoranda No.16/99 Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Employees ( Pay and Allowances) Regulations, 1997.
The Committee considered the comments furnished by the Ministry of Surface Transport on the various points referred to them. The
Committee noted the Ministry’s comments relating to regulations 2(4), 9, 10(1) and 27(2). As regards regulation 2(19), the Committee
reviewed its earlier stand and decided that the regulation may continue to exit in its existing form. The Committee expressed satisfaction that
the Ministry of Surface Transport has agreed to carry out necessary changes in regulations 4, 19(1) and 24. The Committee further decided
that the matter may be reported to the House.
Memorandum No.17/99 Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Employees (Welfare Fund) Regulations,1990- Implementation of
recommendations contained in the 99
th Report of the Committee.
The Committee considered the above memorandum and noted that the Ministry of Surface Transport has since taken action on the
Committee’s recommendations as contained in its 99th Report. The Committee decided that the matter may be reported to the House.
3. The Committee adjourned at 4.10 p.m.
Eleventh Meeting
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, April 1, 1999 in Room No. 67, First Floor, Parliament House New Delhi. 
  
 

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Miss Saroj Khaparde, Chairperson 2. Shri Satyanarayana Dronamraju
3. Shri Radhakishan Malaviya
4. Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt
5. Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani
6. Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
7. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
8. Shri A. Lakshmisagar
9. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav
10. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri M.N. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
3. Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, CommitteOfficer
Memorandum No. 11/99 regarding Coconut Development Board Regulations, 1982 Implementation of 115
th Report of the Committee.
The Committee considered the above Memoranda and noted with satisfaction that Ministry of Agriculture have accepted all the recommendations
made by the Committee in its 115th Report and have 
 
also implemented them, with regard to framing of Coconut Development Board Service Regulations the Committee noted that the Ministry have
assured that a notification in this regard would be issued within four months.
The Committee further noted that the matter regarding appointment of a full time Chairman of the Coconut Development Board has also been
finalised. The Committee decided that the matter may be reported to the House.
The Committee also directed the Secretariat to examine separately whether all the Rules/Regulations required to be framed under the Coconut
Development Board Act, 1979 have since been framed.
X X X
X X X
The Committee then adjourned at 12.15 noon.
xxx Relates to matters not included in this Report.
XIV
 
  
 
FOURTHTEENTH MEETING

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, May 20, 1999, in Room No. 126-C (Chairman’s Room) Third
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Miss Saroj Khaparde Chairperson
2. Shri Satyanarayana Dronamraju
3. Shri Radhakishan Malaviya
4. Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani
5. Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat
6. Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
7. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
8. Shri Ramandla Ramachandraiah
9. Prof. A. Lakshmisagar
10. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav
11. Shri N.Thalavai Sundaram
12. Shri Sukh Dev Singh Dhindsa
13. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan 
  
 
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri M. N. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
3. Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
Memorandum No.22/99 regarding Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986-Implementation of 102
nd Report of the
Committee.
The Committee considered the above mentioned memorandum in the light of reply furnished by the Ministry of

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/126rep.htm[25-10-2016 16:35:12]
Environment and Forests. The Committee noted that the Ministry have implemented the recommendations made
by the Committee through notification No.S.O.609(E) dated July 20, 1998. The Committee decided that the
matter may be reported to the House. 
  
 
X X X 
  
 
xxx Relates to matter not included in this Report.
XXIII
Twenty Third Meeting
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday the 22nd December, 1999 in Room No. 126 C (Chairman’s Room) Third Floor, Parliament House,
New Delhi. 
  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
 
1. Miss Saroj Khaparde Chairperson
2. Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
3. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
4. Prof. A. Lakshmisagar
5. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri R.B. Gupta, Under Secretary
3. Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered its 126th Report and after some discussion adopted the same the Committee decided to present the same to the House
on Thursday the 23rd December 1999 and authorised its Chairperson and in her absence Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai and Shri N. Thalavai
Sundaram for the said purpose.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 p.m.