PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

RAJYA SABHA

COMMITTEE ON SUBORDIN:
LEGISLATION

HUNDRED AND THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT

(Prese fan March 14, 2002)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT

(December, 2001/Agrahayana, 1922 )



INTRODUCTION
|
REPORT
0) Madras Port Trust (General Provident Fund)
Regulations, 1997- Implementation of 125”
Report of the Committee.
(ly Coal Mines Pension Scheme 1998.
ता) Central Silk Board Rules, 1955
(५). Border Security Force (Tenure of Posting
and Deputation) Rules 2000.
(५) Statutory Investigation into Railway
Accidents Rules 1998.
(५). The Ozone Depleting Substances
(Regulations and Control) Rules, 2000,
(शा). Summary of Recommendations,
(VIL) Minutes.
a eo

"४४

CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

PAGES
)
(ii)

6-17
18-35
36-45

46-52

60-61


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on the 31" August, 2001)

Shri Dipankar Mukherjee — Chairman
2. Sho Brahmakumar Bhatt

3, Shri Kapil Sibal

4. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

5. Dr. A, ९. Kidwai

6. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

7. Shri Suryabhan Pati] Vahadane

8. Shri Lajpat Rai

9. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
10, Shri S. Sivasubramanian

||. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan

12. Shri 1. K. Javare Gowda

13. Shri Drupad Borgohain

14, Shri P.G. Narayanan

15. Shri Suresh A. Keswani

SECRETARIAT

1, Shri S. Vijay Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary



=

1, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having
been authorized by the’ Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do
hereby present this Hundred and Thirty Eighth Report of the Committee.

12 The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting
held on 20th December. 2001.

43 ‘The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of
various Rules/Regulations and the issues, related therewith, alongwith
Government's comments received thereon, ‘The observations and
recommendations which. in the opinion of the Committee, should be brought
to the notice of the House. are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the
Report.

NEW DELHI DIPANKAR MUKHERJEE
20" December, 200) Chairman
Committee on Subordinate Legistation,

Rajya Sabha

a



Report
I

Madras Port Trust (General Provident Fund) regulations, 1997-
Implementation of 125" Report of the Committee

The Committee in its 125" Report which was presented to the House on
22™ December 1999 examined the Madras Port Trust (General Provident
Fund) Regulations, 1997 and made the following recommendations:

“2. The Committee considered the matter in its meeting held on
April 1, 1999. it hopes that the Ministry of Surface Transport would
make necessary modifications/amendments in Regulation 3(1)(g)
Explanation, 6(7),9 16(2)(ii) and 200)(8) of the Madras Port Trust,
(General Provident Fund) Regulations, 1997 on the lines suggested
by the Committee and agreed to by the representatives of the Madras
Port Trust, expeditiously, under intimation to it”.

2, Relevant Extracts from the Report were forwarded to the Ministry of
Shipping on 2" February, 2000 for compliance.

3 The Ministry of Shipping vide their O.M. dated 25.5 2001 have since
furnished a copy of the Notification G.S-R_No. $1(E) dated January 17, 2000



publishing the Madras Port Trust (General Provident Fund) Amendment
Regulations, 2000 (Annexure-) making necessary modifications/arnendments
in Regulations 3(1)(8) Explanation, 6(7), 9 162)(6) and 200)(8) of the
Madras Port Trust (General Provident Fund) Regulations, 1997 as per the
Committee's recommendations.

4 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Shipping
have carried out amendments in regulation 3(1)(g) Explanation by
deleting the words “who lives with an employee” which was 8 condition
for giving the adopted child the same status as 8 natural born child for
the purpose of these Regulations; regulation 6(7) by prescribing a time
limit of one month within which the acceptance by Accounts Officer is to
be conveyed to the subscriber/employee; regulation 9 by providing for
enhancing/reducing of GPF subscription on two occasions in a year as is
the position in the case of Central Government Employees; regulation
16(2)(ii) removing the condition of 12 months for grant of advance after
final payment of previous advance and regulation 20(i)(B) reducing the

period from 20 years to 15 years for the purpose of final withdrawal from

Ye

the fund.



ANNEXURE |
| (Vide para 3, page 2)

MINISTRY OF SURFACE TRANSPORT
(Ports Wing)
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 17" January, 2000
G.S,R.51(E).- In exercise of the powers conferred by Sub-section (i) of
Section 124 read with Sub-section (i) of Section 132 of the Major Ports Acts,
1963 (38 of 1963), the Central Government hereby approves the Madras Port
Trust (General Provident Fund) Amendment Regulation, 2000 made by the

Board of Trustees for the Port of Madras-and set out in the Schedule annexed
to this notification,

2. The said regulations shall come into force on the date of publication of
this notification in the official Gazette.

SCHEDULE
In exercise of the powers conferred under Section 28 of the Major Port
Trust Act, 1963 (38 of 1963) the Madras Port Trust Board hereby makes the
following amendment Regulations:-

1... Short Title:

These “Regulations shail be called the Madras Port Trust (General
Provident Fund (Amendment) Regulations 2000.

2, These Regulations shall come into force from the date of publication of
the Regulation in the Official Gazette.

3, In the Madras Port Trust (General Provident Fund) Regulations, 1997, the
following Amendments shall be made:-

(i) The Regulations 3(g) of the said Regulations shall be substituted as
under:-

3



(i)

=a

“Family means (i) 7 the case of a male subscriber, the wife or wives,
parent, children, minor brothers, unmarried sisters, deceased sons,
widow and children and where no parents of the subscriber is alive. a
paternal grandparent.

in the case of a female subscriber, the husband, parents, children,
minor brother, unmarried sisters deceased sons, widow and children.
and where no parents of the ‘subscriber is alive, a paternal
grandparent:

Provident that if a subscriber proves that डाल wife/husband has
been judicially separated from him/her or has ceased under the
customary law of the community to which she/he belongs to be
entitled to maintenance as per the Law in force she/he shall
henceforth deemed to be no longer a member of the subscriber's
family in matters 10 which these regulations relate unless the
subscriber subsequently intimates by express notification in writing
to the Accaunts Officer she!he shall continue to be so regarded.

Explanation’ “Child” means Jegitimate child and include an adopted
child where adoption is recognized by the personnel law governing
the subscriber and treated as a member of the family and to whom the
employee has through & special will given the same status as of a
natural birth

The regulation 6(7) of the said Regulation shall be substituted as
under

Every nomination made. and every notice of cancellation given by a
subscriber shall, to the extent that it is valid, becomes operative on its
acceptance which shail be conveyed to the subscriber with one month
from the date of its receipt by the Accounts Officer.

(iin) The Clause (९) (1) of Regulation 9 shall be substituted as under:-

“Enhanced twice during the course of the year.”
“An advance shall not except for special reasons be granted until the
final repayment of all previous advanced”.

{iv) The note (1) under Regulation 16(2)(1) shall be substituted as under

4



5

(५) In the opening sentence of Regulation 20(1)(B) the words ‘twenty
years’ appearing after the words ‘twenty years’ appearing after the
words “After completion of” shall be substituted by the words
“fifteen years”

(vi)The first para of clause (aii) under Regulation 20(1)(B) shall be
substituted as under:-

“For any medical engineering or other technical or special lead
course in India beyond the High School stage; provided that the courses
are undertaken from the recognized institutions.”

[F.No.PR-12016/39/98-PET]
K.V.RAO, Jt. Secy.

Foot Note:
Principle Regulations:-

The Madras Port Trust (General Provident Fund Regulations, 1997
approved by Central Government and notified in the Gazette of India vide
Ministry of Surface Transport’s Notification No.G.S.R.282(E) dated
25.7.1997



=f MINES PENSIONS SCHEME 1998

The Committee examined the Coal Mines Pensions Scheme 1998 framed
under the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act.
948. A questionnaire on the subject was sent to the Ministry of Coal on
12.5.99 for their comments The points referred and the comments of the
Ministry of Coal thereon are placed at ‘Annexure-I. The Committee discussed
the subject matter with the representatives of the Coal India Ltd, And the
Ministry of Coal at Caleutta on June 9, 1999,

2.0 Relevant extracts of the study note (Annexure-Hl) on the above
discussion were forwarded to the Ministry of Coal on the August 10, 1999
with the request to furnish their comments thereon, During the course of
discussion the Committee was satisfied with the replies given by the Ministry:
on all the points except point 5 regarding proviso to clause 4(2) of the Scheme
regarding the rate of interest to be paid and the criteria/basis therefore The
Committee was of the opinion that the Ministry of Coal may consider
incorporating in the scheme rate of that the interest to be paid by an employee
on exercising option for becoming eligible for pension shall be equivalent to
the Interest being earned by the family pension fund deposits in the public
account,

3.0 The Committee expresses its satisfaction that the Ministry of Coal
have accepted its suggestion ‘and substituted the proviso to clause 4(2) of
the scheme through their notification G.S.R. No. 256(E) dated 12.4.2001
(Annexure-Ili) prescribing the rate of interest to be paid by the
employees on exercising option for becoming eligible for pension.


ANNEXURE-1
(Vide para |, page 6 }

VISIT OF RAJYA SABHA ( OMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE
LEGISLATION TO CALCUTTA ON 26.5,1999-REPLY TO
QUESTIONNAIRE ON [HF COAL MINES PENSION SCHMEM, 1998

0-1 Whether the Coal Mines Pension Scheme, 1998 has since been laid on the
table of both the houses of Parliament, if so, the details in this regard?

Ans. The Coal Mines Pension Scheme, 1998 was laid onthe Table of Lok
Sabha on 4,7,1998 and that the Rajya Sabha on 6.7.1998

Q.2 Whether it is @ fact that Section 3E under which the Coal Mines Pension
Scheme 1998 has been framed, was incorporated in the Coal Mines Provident
Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948 through an Amendment Act of
1996 and both the Amendment Act, 1996 as well as the Pension Scheme 1998
have been brought into force w.e.f 31.3.1998. What is the justification for
bringing out this new Coal Mines Pension Scheme 1998 in suppression of the
earlier Schemes of 1948. 1956 and 1958 as stated in Clause 1(3) of the
Scheme? है

Ans. Yes, The schemes of 1948, 1956 and [958 as mentioned in the question
above pertain to Coal Mines Provident Fund and have not been superceded
The Coal Mines Pension Scheme. 1998, supercedes the earlier Coal Mines
Family Pension Scheme, 1971. The justification for bringing out the new
pension scheme is to provide more comprehensive social security benefits
such as monthly pension to the retired workers in the coal sector,
widow/ widower pension. pension for children/orphans/disabled etc.

(0.3 Clause 2(h)
“Family” in relation to an employee means:

(i) wife in the case of a male employee or husband in the case of a
female employees

{ii) A judicially separated wife or husband, such separation not being



granted = the ground of adultery and the person surviving was not held
guilty of committing adultery, and

(ili) Son who has not attained the age of twenty five years and unmarried
daughter who has not attained the age of twenty five years including
such son, or daughter adopted legally before superannuating;

There are other equally serious offence which can be committed by 2
“spouse” and which can be a ground for judicial separation, What is the
justification for making ‘adultery’ only as the ground for excluding a spouse
from within the definition of family?

Ans, The provision, as made in the Coal Mines Pension Scheme, 1998, and
as pointed out in the questionnaire, is in accordance with the definition of the
family members as prescribed under the Central Civil Services (Pension).
Rules, 1972. This was also approved by the Ministry of Law & Justice.

Q.4 Clause 4(2) and (4)

4(2) An employee who had not opted for the Coal Mines Family Pension
Scheme, 1971 but is covered by the Provident Fund Scheme, may opt
pension under the provisions of this Scheme within a period of sixty
days from the appointed day and he shall be deemed to have become
the member of the Scheme from the date of his excising in Form P.S.
1.

(4) An employee who was a member of the Coal Mines Family Pension
Scheme, 1971 on the date of his superannuation on or after the first
day of April, 1994 may also opt for the pension under the provisions.
of this Scheme form the date of his superannuation within a period of
‘one hundred and eighty days from the appointed day and he shall be
deemed to have become the member of the Scheme from the date of
his option in Form-P $.-2

Under the above provisions, a fixed time period of 60 days and 180 days,
respectively has been prescribed for the purpose of exercising the option for
becoming a member of the Scheme. The provisions do not cover contingencies



9

where an employee is unable to exercise an option within the specified
period. Whether the Government have any objection in incorporating suitable
Provision in the Scheme to cover such contingencies?

Ans. The above provisions stipulate the time period for the submission of
the option preferred by the members for becoming a member of the Coal
Mines Pension Scheme. Initially, ॥ time period of 60 days and 180 days were
provided for the purpose of excising the option for becoming a member of the
pension scheme. These have been revised to 360 days for the both categories
of the employees as enumerated above in the Questionnaire to take care of the
contingencies pointed out in the questionnaire

The Government considers only such amendments that are duly discussed
and approved by the Board of Trustees, CMPF, a tripartite body having
representation of employees, employers and Government's representatives.
The Government could not act in this matter unless there is a recommendation
of the BOT to do so.

O.5 Clause 4(2) proviso

Provided that an employee exercising the option under the provisions
of this sub-paragraph shall have to deposit in the Pension Fund either
in-cash or by way of deduction in installments from his monthly
salary or by transfer from his provident fund account to the pension
Fund, the arrears equivalent to the amounts specified in clauses
(b).(c). (d) and (९) of paragraph 3, alongwith interest from the first
day of March, 1971 till the date of exercising the option.

॥ has been stated in the above noted clause that the employee
exercising the option shall have to deposit the pension fund alongwith interest
from the 1" of March, 1971 til] the date of exercise of the option, What is the
fate of interest the employee is required to pay, whether Government have any
objection in either specifying the rate of interest in the Scheme itself ot
Spelling our the criteria’basis therefore?

Ans, The sub-puragraph 2 of paragraph 4 of the Coal Mines Pension
Scheme relate to those employees who were not the member of Coal Mines
Family Pension Scheme 1971 but now intends to become the member of Coal



=i

Mines Pension Scheme. In order 10 cover these categories of employees 10
become the member of the CMPS, the modalities for the payment of arrears
and interest ete. have been stated in sub-paragraph (b),(c),(d) & (०) of
paragraph 3 of CMPS. The rate of interest as applicable on this account is not
specified in the scheme: However, the interest to be paid by an employee on
this count will be tne equivalent to the interest rate being earned by the Family
Pension Fund deposits in the Public Account, These are 7"

Feam 1971 10 1984 5.5.% per annum
From 1983 to 1988 7.5% per annum
From 1989 to 1998 $.5.%eper annum

‘The amouint specified in para 3 (०) attracts the interest @ 12% per annum
(0.6 Clause 12(3)

The amount of monthly widow or widower pension payable on the
death of an employee after date of superannuation, shall be equal to
sixty per cent of the monthly pension of the employee as. on the date
‘of hissher death or not less than rupees two hundred and fifty.

As per clause 12(3), the widow or widower pension payable on the death
of an employee after the date of super-annuation shall not be less than Rs.250

The minimum family pension of Rs.250- seems to be on the lower side if
we compare the position ay it exists in the Central Government. What is the
basis for arriving at the figure of 250 snd whether Government have any
_proposal for its revision” Does Government not take inte consideration the
pension obtaining in the Central Government in this regard?

Ans. The benefits under the Coal Mines Pension Scheme have been
provided on the basis of the actuarial evaluation of the corpus of the fund after
taking into account the liabilities and assets of the fund. lt-may be pertinent
to mention that the benefits available under the Coal Mines Pension Scheme is
‘over and above the contributory Provident Fund benefits.

07 Clause 13(1)

Children Pension (1) Afier the death of an employee from the date

$ ७४०



W

following the date of histher death, along with surviving
wife/husband, (wo of the eldest sons or unmarried daughters, as the
case may, be till they attain the age of twenty five years or in the case
of unmarried daughter till the date of her marriage. whichever is
earlier, shall be entitled to children pension.

As per Clause 13(1), children pension is admissible to two of the eldest
sons or daughters until the age of 25 years or in the case of daughters untul
they are married. whichever 1s earlier.

What 15 the justification for restricting the children pension to two of the
eldest sons or daughters? Whether Government have any objection in
introducing some sort of flexibility in the provisions so that the complexities
like eldest son/daughter being not available or being not in good terms with
the other members of the family are avoided. Further, restricting of the
children pension to only two children, does not appear to be justified
Whether Government have nay objection in providing for grant of children
pension to all the surveying children subject to fulfillment of other conditions
as specified in the Scheme?

Ans The above quoted provisions in the Coal Mines Pension Scheme
regarding eldest child are in accordance with the CCS (Pension) Rules which
prescribes that family pension to the children shall be payable in order of their
birth an the younger of them will not be eligible for family pension. Any.
flexibility in this matter would be contrary to the provisions as laid down in
the retewant rules, As regards restricting children pension to two, this. is
keeping in view the sustainability of the Corpus. In fact this provision is
liberal when compared to CCS(Pension) Rules under which only one child is
entitled

(0.8 Clause 132)

The amount of monthly children pension payable after the death of an
employee shall be equal to twenty five percent of the amount of
widow of widower pension for each son or daughter, as the case may
be, or not less than rupees one hundred for each child.

As per clause 13(2), the amount of minimum children pension payable |s
15 100/- to-¢ach child



—— ७०-००" "हु अाााशणशणशशशाशनओ
12

The amount of children pension appears to be on the lower side: What is
the basis for arriving at figure of Rs.100/~ and whether Government have any
proposal for its suitable revision?

Ans, The amount children pension is in addition to the widow/widower

pension. The outflow from Pension Fund should be less than the inflow and
hence each benefit is calculated only after actuarial valuation of the Corpus for

ensuring its sustainability.
0.9 Clause 14(2)

‘The amount of monthly orphan pension payable after the death of the
employee or the widow!widower shall be equivalent to fifty per cent
of the amount of widow/widower pension of not less than rupees one
hundred and ten each for each orphan.

Clause 14 of the Scheme which relates to orphan pension prescribes a
minimum pension of Rs.110/- for each orphan which would be admissible in

Jieu of children pension.

‘The Scheme does not seem to specify the period upto which each child
would be entitled for orphan pension. Whether the restriction of 25 years q
age or marriage in the case ‘of females is applicable in the case of orphan
pension also?

Ans. ‘The para 14(1) of the Scheme specifies the period upto which the
children would be entitled for orphan pension which reads as under:

“In case there is no surviving widow or widower at the time of the
death.,,..... til] they attain the age of 25 years and in the case of
unmarried daughter till the date of her marriage, whichever is earlier,
shall be entitled for orphan pension”.



ANNEXURE-H
(Vide para 2. page 6 )

Relevant extracts from the study note on the visit of the Committee to
Calcutta on 9" June, 1999.

Coul Mines Pension Scheme 1998

The Committee had discussions with the representatives of the Coal India
Limited along with the representatives of Ministry of Coal at 1245 p.m. on
Wednesday the 90 June 1999 at Calcutta on the Coal Mines Peasion Scheme
1998. The following were present

MIMBERS

Miss Saroy Khaparde

Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani

Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat
Shri Rumandia Ramachandranih
Shri N. Thalavai Sundaram
Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai

Chairperson

कब “4 मे ७ # ee

SECRETARIAL

1. Shri Depak Goyal, Deputy Secretary,
2 Shri Surendra K. Tripathi, Committee Officer

Representatives of the Coal India Lad

Shin CH, Bhisty. Director ae iR)

Shri NK. Sharma. Diccctor (footy

Shri A. Chatterjee. Derecror (Frnunces

Shri Ambasta, COM (Partramentary Affairss
Shri G_D, Gulab; GAL (MPA IR)

के हम पट

0 5 ६. Saha, Gat



14

Representatives of the Ministry of Coal

1... Shri S.K, Sinha, Coal Mines Provident Fi ‘und Commissioner
2. Shri P-K.G, Nair, Under Secretary

The Director (Personnel & IR), Coal India Lid, welcomed. the
Chairperson and Members of the Committee. This was followed by
introduction of Members of the Committee by the Chairperson. Before taking
up the discussion on the agenda, the Director (P&IR) gave in brief the
background of the introduction of the Coal Mines Pension Scheme, 1998 The
Committee was informed that the Coal Mines Pension Scheme, 1998 has come
by way of supersession of Coal Mines. Pension Scheme, 197). The
justification for bringing out-the new pension scheme is. to provide more
comprehensive social security benefits such as monthly pension to the retired
workers in the coal sector, widow/widower pension, pension for
children/orphans/disabled etc.

The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the comments of the
Ministry of Coal on the various points referred to them. A brief of the
discussion on each point is enumerated hereunder:

Question 1, 2&3 - Clause 2 (h)
The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry.
Question 4 - Clause 4(2) and (4)

The Committee noted with satisfaction that the Government have already
increased the time period to 360 days in respect of both the categories of
employees for the purpose of exercising option for becoming a member ‘of the
Scheme.

Question § - Clause 4(2) proviso

The Committee had discussion on the above noted proviso and it was of
the opinion that the Ministry of Coal may consider incorporating in the
Scheme itself that the interest payable by an employee on this account shall be
equivalent to the interest being earned by the family pensions fund deposits in
the public account,

‘te



15
Question 6,7,8 and 9 - Clauses 12(3), 13(1), 13(2) and 14(2)
The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry,

The meeting concluded with a mutual vote of thanks. श्र



ANNEXURE-IIE
(Vide para 3, page 6)

MINISTRY OF COAL
NOTIFICATION
New Dethi, the 12" April. 2001
G.S.R. 256(E).- In exercise of the powers conferred by section 3E of the
Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948 146 of

1948), the Central Government hereby makes the following Scheme further to
amend the Coal Mines Pension Scheme, 1998, namely:

J. (1) This Scheme may be called the Coal Mines Pension (Amendment)
Scheme. 2001.

(2) It-shall come into force from the date of its publication in the Offical
Gazene

2. tn the Coal Mines Pension Scheme. 1998. in paragraph 4. in. sub-
paragraph (2), for the proviso. the following proviso shall be substituted,
namely:~

“pypvided that an employee exercising the option under the
provisions of this sub-paragraph shall have to deposit in the Pension
Fund either in cash or by way of deduction in installments from his
monthly salary or by teansfer_from his provident fund account to the
Pension Fund, the arrears equivalent to the amounts specified in
clauses (b),(c),(d) and (८) of paragraph 3. alongwith interest from the
first day of March, 1971 till the date of exercising the option in
respect of arrears,-

a) specified in clause (b), at the rate admissible from time |
time to the monies in Coal Mines Provident Fund:

qi) specified in clauses (९) and 0) at the rate of twelve per cent
per annum, and

Ye


17

(tii) specified in clause (९). at such rate as the Central
Government, from time to time, credited interest in respect
of its contributions to the Coal Mines Family Pension
Scheme, 1971

[F No.20/15/99-ASO/PRIW]
D.P. SINGH, Joint Secretary
Footote:- The Coal Mines Pension Scheme, 1998 was published vide GS.R.

number 123(E), dated the 50 March, 1998 and subsequently
amended vide number

1) G.S.R. 268(E), dated the 25" May, 1998
2) GSR. 218(E), dated the 22™ March 1999
3) G.S.R. 689(E) dated the 29" August, 2000



um
Central Silk Board Rules, 1955

The Central Silk Board Rules, 1955 framed under the Central Silk Board
Act, 1948 were examined and certain points were referred to the Ministry |
Textiles on the 21" June, 1999 for their comments/clarifications = The
comments received from the Ministry are placed at Annexure-I. The
Committee discussed the subject matter with the representatives of the Central

Silk Board alongwith the representatives of the Ministry of Textiles at
Bangalore on June 26, 1999. The relevant extracts (Annexure-If) from the
note on the above discussion were forwarded to the Ministry of Textiles

‘on September 22, 1999 for necessary action thereon.
vide their O.M. dated January 18, 2000

furnished the action taken by them on the suggestions made by the
Committee. The Ministry accepted the under mentioned amendments
in the Central Silk Board Rules 1955 on the lines suggested by the

Committee:
(i) 808 3 fixing 3

for nomination ०|

2.0 The Ministry of Textiles

time limit of one month for writing to Government
| 3 member on a vacaney arising in the Board.

(ii) Rule 4 correcting the designation from “Secretary” 10 “Secretary
General’ in the case of ok Sabha and Rajya Sabha,

(iii) Rule 92) prescribing that intimation regarding change of address be
given by 8 member to the Secretary “forthwith”. Earlier there was 00
indication of any urgency or time limit for such an intimation.

‘ordinarily’ in the rule regarding issuance

(iv) Rulel7 deleting the word
der to make the provision

of notice of the meeting of the Board in ०

specific.

(५) Rule 21 by substituting the words “Iwo weeks time” in place of the
words “as soon as possible” for circulation of the minutes of the
meeting of the Board to each member and to the Central Government
in order to make the provision specific.

18


19

(vi) Rule 22(2) Omission of the rule authorising Board to incur
expenditure upto Rs $000 on each individual item in view of
the fact that approval of the Ministry is otherwise obtained
‘on each and every item

{vii) Rule 28(1)(1] Revision in the upper limit of the pay scale
from “Rs. 1500 per mensem™ suitably consequent upon Pay
Commission recommendation on pay revision for Central
Government employees.

3.0 The Ministry of Textiles. while accepting the suggestions made by the
Committee further informed that a Committee to work out the comprehensive
amendments in the Central Silk Board Act and Rules had been constituted that
would alse incorporate the amendments suggested by the Committee.

4.0 On further persuasion the Committee was informed vide Ministry's O.M,
dated 4" May. 2001 as under:

“the Central Silk Board had constituted a Committee for examining
the comprehensive amendments required in the Central Silk Board
Act and Rules and the Committee has not yet finalized its suggestions
for amendments. Government are also considering restructuring the
Central Silk Board so that some of the existing functions which can
be discharged by the State Gevernments can be delegated to them.
The question of making appropriate amendments to the Central Silk
Board Act and the Rules is under active consideration of the
Government and this process is likely to take considerable time”

5.0 The Committee is satisfied to note that the Ministry have accepted
the suggestions made by it for amendment in rule 3 regarding fixing a time
limit of one month for writing to Government for nomination of a member on
a vacancy arising in the Board, rule 4 correcting the designation from
“Secretary” to “Secretary General” in the case of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha,
rule 9(2) prescribing that intimation regarding change of address be given by a
member to the Secretary “forthwith”, Earlier there was no indication of any
urgency or time limit for such an intimation, 10617 deleting the word
‘ordinarily’ therein regarding issuance of notice of the meeting of the Board



a

20

in order to make the provision specific; rule 21 by substituting “two weeks
time” in place of “as soon as possible’ for circulation of the minutes of the
meeting of the Board to each member and to the Central Government in order
to make the provision specific, rule 22(2) Omission of the rule authorising
Board to incur expenditure upto Rs.5000 on each individual item in view of
the fact that approval of the Ministry is otherwise obtained on each and every
item: rule 28(1)(i) Revision in the upper limit of the pay scale from “Rs. 1300
per mensem” suitably consequent upon Pay Commission recommendations
on pay revision for Central Government Employees.

The Committee hopes that Ministey of Textiles would notify the
amendments in the Central Silk Board Rules expeditiously as per the
suggestion of the Committee under intimation to it.


ANNEXURE-I
(Vide para 1, page 18)

REPLIES TO QUESTIONNAIRE ISSUED BY RAJYA SABHA
SECRETARIAT, PARLIAMENT OF INDIA PERTAINING TO
CENTRAL SILK BOARD RULES, 1955 INCONNECTION WITH THE
VISIT OF PARLIAMENTARY COMITTEE ON SUB-ORDINATE
LEGISLATIN (RAJYA SABHA) FOR DISCUSSING CENTRAL SILK
BOARD RULES, 1955

Question (1)
Whether, फल (लाए Silk Board Rules, 1955, have been laid, on the
lable of hoth the House’of Parliament, if sa. the details in this regard?

Reply

The Central Silk Board Act No:LXI of 1948, received, the assent of
the Governor General, on 20” September, 1948, As per Section 13 of the
Act . the Government of India, to carry-out the purpose of this Act, made
Central Silk Board Rules, 1955 vide Ministry of Commerce and Hdustry
Notification No.23(60)'CTB’S3 dated 23.3 $955, published in the Cuzette
vide 98 0.62 dated 23" March. 1955

Question (2)

Rule 3 Filling in Casual vacancy ofa nominated member:~

(1) When a sacancy arises in the Board in any of the modes
described in Section 5(2) of the Act in respect of a member
nominated by the Central Government or a State Government.
the Secretary shall write to the Government entitled ७७ noite
the member inviting a fresh nominetion to |< made. within क
period of (७० months from the date of posting of such mvitator
by registered post

(2) Where any Government, other than the Central Government,
fails to make 9 nomination, which it is-entitled to make under
sub-section (31 of Section 4 of the Act within Iwo months from
the date of pasting of the letter inviting such a nomination, the
Central Government may itself ntake the nommation an exercise

of the powers cunterred under section 5 (1) of the Act



ay words “within a period of 2 months from the date of posting of
such invitation by registered
sswithin 2 months from the
nomination” appearing in Sub Rule (2) are vague in as much 35 there is
nothing in the Sub Rule to ensure that the time period runs from the point
of time the communication
nomination. Whether Government have any objection in
modification of the provisions of Rule 3 suitable?

make the

Reply:

the Board's Secretariat, the

post” appearing in ub Rule (1) and the words
date of posting of the letter inviting such 8

js received by the Government entitled to

Since the invitation to nominate the member is being issued from
date of reference should normally be from the

date on which it is posted. 10 ensure the safe transit of letter, the provision

for dispatch by reg)
when the letter has

istered post has been incorporated. {It is difficult to know
been received by the Government ‘entitled to make the

nomination, The present provision can therefore continue.

Question (3):
Ruled

Filling in Casual vacancy of anvelected member -

When a membe'

+ of the Board elected by Parliament dies,

resigns, is removed, ceases to reside in India or becomes:
incapable of acting, the Secretary shail notify the vacancy to the:
Secretary of the Rajya Sabha or the Secretary of the Lok Sabha.

according as tie

inember was elected by the: former or the latter

House of Parliament, with 3 request that-a fresh election may be

heldeas early as

may be possible and the name of the elected

member communicated to the Secretariat of the Board

As per the above Rule. vacancies of Members of Board elected
by Parliament are 10 be notified to the “Secretary” of the Rajya
Sabha or the. “Secretary of the Lok Sabha. The designation

“Secretary” has
both the Rajya

since been changed to “Secretary General” in
Sabha and Lok Sabha Secretariat, What are the

reasons that the provisions of Rule 4 have not been amended

suitably?



Reply:
We ure grateful to the Committee for pointing out the changes that
is necessary and suggestions will be adopted by a suitable amendment to the
rule,

Question (4)

Rule 9(2) -Register of Members - If a member of the Board changes. ts
address. he shall notify his new address to the Secretary and the
Seeretary shall amend the relevant entry in the Register
accordingly

Sub Rule (2) of Rule) makes it obligatory on the part of the member
to notify his new address to the Secretary Whether the Ministry have any
objection in suitable modification of this provision so as to prescribe either
Some time limit say 15 days छा 30 days within which such as “immediately” or
“forthwith” be added for the Sub Rule so as to ensure that there is no delay in
the intimation of change of address by the member.

Reply
Suyyestions to incorporate the word “forthwith” can be accepted

Question (3):

Rule 10. Member going out of India. (1) Before a member of the Board
leaves India he shall inform the Chairman of the Board and
intimate 16 him the daté of his departure and the date of his
expected return to India

(2) If he imends to be of is actually absent from India for a
period longer than sly months, he shal! tender his resignation

(i) As per Sub-Rule (2), a member is obliged to tender his resignation if he
intends to be or, is actually absent from India for a period longer than six
months Further, in case the member who is absent for more than six months



iS

has not tendered his resignation, the Central Government has been given the
power. to remove him, from the membership of the Board

These provisions of Rute 10. appear to be harsh, Whether.
Government have any objection. 10 introducing same saving clause, so that,
genuine cases of absence, can be taken care of: ५ what is the number af times.
the provisions of Sub Rule 2 & # of Rule 10, have been invoked in the past.

(ii), Rule 16 contemplates at least one meeting of the Board and at least wo
meeting of the Standing Commuttee in a Financial year | this 18 the
frequency of the meetings cyptemplated an the Rules. the provisions of Sub
Rules 2 & 3 of Rules 2 & 3 of Rule 10 appear to be harsh What Is he reaction
of Government in this regard

Reply

10] ‘Arno time, the provision of Sub Rule 2 and 3 of Rule 10, have been
invoked, in the past,

tii) Rule 16 contemplates, the minimum. number of the meetings of the

Buard-and, its Standing Committee in. a Financial year But. in actual
practice. 310 4 meetings of the Board, and, a minimum 4 to 5 iigetings of the
Standing Committee are held था each financial year

No amendments of the Rules, appear necessary, since the Central
Government by operation of thie word “may” have discretion, 10 remove. the
member or not

Question (6)

Rule 13 (5) & Rule 20 (2):
Election of members of the Standing Committee.
(3) In the case of an equal division of votes. the Chairman or. in
his absence the Vice-Chairman or in the absence of hoth the
member presiding over the meeting shall have 3 second oF
casting vote



3
a

Disposal of business:-

(2) In the case ofan equal division of votes the chairman or in
his absence the Vice-Chairman or in the absence of both. the
Member presiding shall have a second or casting vote

As per Sub Rule 5 of Rule 13, and Sub Rule (2), of Rule 20, the
presiding officer in a Board meeting or, in the meeting of the Standing
Committee has been allowed a “Second or casting vote”

What 15 the justification for allowing double vote. to the presiding
officer would not be fairs if. ihe presiding officer abstains, trom voting, in
the: normal course. and. he votes only once. in the case of a tie: Whether
Government have any objection, ur suitable modificanon of, these provisions

Reply 5

The proposed modification, may not be necessary, since. in case
there is no tie, the Presiding Officer, will not have a opportunity to wore
Exercising of the Presiding Officer's casting vote will arise only’when there Is
atic:

The convention in the Board is that the Standing Commitee members
are unanimously and amicable selected in the course of a full board meeting

Question (7)

Rule 13(8): Election of members of the Standing Committee:-
In the event of a vacancy arising in the Standing Committee डा
after the Annual General Meeting of the Central Silk Board in
any year the Chairman may, at his discretion, request the
members of the Board by post to propose candidates from among
the members of the Board to fill up the vacancy



5

The words “soon after” appearing in sub Rule (8) of Rule 13 appear
to be Vague and not specific. Whether Government have any objection in

prescribing some specific time period instead,

Reply :

‘As of now the membership of the Standing Committee is for 8 period
of one year and the constitution of the Standing Committee is usually done in
February/March every year. Since the strength of the Standing Committee 15
‘only seven, the non filling up of vacancy in the course of the year, unless it is
very proximate to the Board Meeting when the Committee is reconstituted,
would not be desirable. It is better to prescribe no time limit for the Chairman
to initiate steps for filling up vacancy in the Standing Committee.

Question (8) :
Rule 17; Notice of meetings and list of business :- (1) The Secretary shall
decide, in consultation with the Chairman or the Vice Chairman,
the date, time and place of every meeting of the Board or of the
Standing Committee. A notice of not less than 21 days from the
date of posting, shall ordinarily be given to every member for 3
meeting of the Board, A notice of not less than 10 days from the
date of the posting shall ordinarily be given Yo every member for
a meeting of the Standing Committee, ‘Such notice shall be sent (0
every member by registered post. A ligt of business propased 10
be transacted shall accompany the notice. If it is necessary 19
convene an emergency meeting of the Board or of the Standing
Committee, at least one week's notice shal] be given to cach
member of the Board or the Standing Committee , as the case may
be.

The word “ordinarily” used 10 Sub Rule (1) of Rule 17 in connection with
the fotice period for holding 8 meeting of the Board 0 of its Standing
Committee appears to give wide powers in the matter of curtailmem of the
notice period. ‘Vesting of such discretion in the Rules is not understandable
when there is specific provision in the Rule for convening ४ emergency

meeting of the Board or of the Standing Committee with & week's notice.

Whether Government have any objection in modification of the Rule so
as to have a definite period of 21 or 10 days as the case may be in the normal

course.



27

Reply:

The word ordinarily allow some flexibility in relation to a notice
period of 21 days for the Board Meeting or 10 days for the Standing
Committee from the date of posting. This was perhaps incorporated to ensure
that the convening of the meeting would not be questioned on ground of
minor shortfall of notice period.

There is however no objection to deletion of the word “ordinarily”

Question (9) :

Rule 21. :Proceedings of the meetings:- The minutes of the meetings of the
Board or the Standing Committee shall be kept in separate books
(hereinafter referred to as Minutes Book), and shall be signed by
the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman or the member who presided
at the meeting. Copies of such minutes showing, inter-alia, the
names of the members present at the meeting shal! be forwarded to
each member of the Board and to the Central Goverument as soon
as possible after every meeting.

The words “as-soon as possible” appearing in Rule 21 are not specific
Whether Government have any objection in substituting these words by some
specific time period.

Reply

‘The word “as soon as possible” may be substituted with a clause which
prescribes that such minutes shall be forwarded ordinarily within two weeks of
the date of the meeting.

Question (10):

Rule 22 (2) :Powers of the Board:- The Board may incur expenditure outside
India upto a maximum of Rs:5,000/- on each individual item;

The Jumt of Rs.5000/- by way of expenditure outside India on an
individual item seems to be on the lower side. Further, the
words “individual item” are also not specific.



S

When was the limit of Rs. 5000/- determined and whether the Ministry are
facing any problem on account of this limit: What is the purport of the words
“individual iteny’” as appearing in the Sub Rule (2) of Rule 22.

Reply

The necessity for this rule will be examined by the Committee
constituted for the comprehensive amendments to the Board's Act and Rules.
As of now sanction of the Ministry is being obtained for all items of
expenditure incurred outside India

A possible interpretation of “each individual item" could be a
“distinctly different class of expenditure”,

Question (11) हे

Rule 281 1(॥)): Salaries altowances and conditions of service of officers and
establishments of the Board:- (1) Save-as provided in Section
7 of the Act, all appointments to posts of officers and

establishments in the service of the Board shall be made by the
Board:- provided that -

(1. No post of which the maximum salary exceeds Rs. | ,300/-
per mensem shall be created or filled without the previous
sanchion of the Centra) Government.

The provisions of Rule 28 |101)) still carry a mention of the post which
carries a maximum salary of Rs.1300- per month: Perhaps the reference is to
class | post. In that case. the salary of Rs.1300 per month as indicated
therein calls for a suitable revision as two Pay Commission have been there in
the meantime, What is the justification for non-revision of these provisions”

Reply

Since the framing of CSB Rules 1955, the Rule 28 |1(1)] has been
amended twice in October, 1974 and Janvary. 1985. Further amendments in
this rule is proposed to be covered i the comprehensive amendments to C SB
Act, 1948 and Rules, 1955 ॥ would perhaps be advisable to make a provision
which says that the above limit would automatically get pegged to equivalent
level of Central Government employees when the pay-scales are revised



29

Question (12)

General

(0 The Central Sik Board Act. 1948 contemplates framing of Rules under its
various provisions like Section 4(3) proviso. S(1) 5(3), 6(1) 7, 9(2), 10(48),
1015). 106), 121) and 124, Besides Section 13 which is exclusively on
powers of the Central Government to make Rules,

The compilation of the Central Silk Board which contains the
Centr! Silk Board Act 1948 along with the (a) Study Leave Rules, (b) CPF
Rules, (¢} Pension Rules & (d) DPF Rules

Besides, the Central Silk board Rules do not seem to cover all reas where
framing of Rules in contemplated What are the comments of the Ministry in
this regard

“ny The Central Silk Board contemplated under the Act as & large
Meihersiip representing varied interest groups from different States. What
has been the constitution of the Board during the preceding S years and
whether the regular Chairman ot the Board has always been in position all
alpng

Reply

Framing of Rules under various provisions of the Act:
4) Section 4(3) proviso; 50196 Rule for this will be incorporates
in the proposed comprehensive amendments.

0). Section 3(1) The Rule has been made under this section vide
Rule no.3(2)

©) Section §(3); Sub Section 3 of Section $ does not require
framing of any rules

d) Section 6(1); Rule 24 of CSB Rules, 1955 covers this. tt is
proposed to further amend this Rule (No.24),



30

€]. Section 7 : Rule No.26 of CSB Rules, 1955 covers this In
addition Rule 22 (3) has also been amended to enable the Board
to delegates powers (0 the Member Secretary

f) Section 9(2): Rue 35 under CSB Rules, 1955 covers this
provision. Th CSB is depositing the funds received under
Section 9(1) of the Act in a scheduled Bank prescribed by
Mimstry of Textiles, Government af India. More over Rule 16 15
also related to the above point

2) Section 1048) Rule No22. 1(B) covets this provision It 1
proposed 10 further amend this rule

as

h) Section 105): No rule has heen framed and this will be
examined inthe proposed comprehensive amendment m (58
Rules, 1955

|) Sestion 10(6): No tule has been framed and this will be
examined in the proposed comprehensive amendment in CSB
Rules, 1955

i) Section 1201) Rule No 33 to 34 covers this provision.

$) Section 121A): No. Rule has been made. However, a report on
the activities and achievements of tie Board 1s submitted as per
the instructions and dates prescribed by Administrative Ministry
(Ministry of Yextiles) and laid before each house of Parliament.

|) Section |3 The Government of India have made
suitable Rules us per the provisions of Section 13 of CSB Act
except Clause Nu NVIL and X1X under Sub Section 2 of Section
3

Rules have been framed covering most of the provisions of the Act as also
in the areas required. Ministry of Textiles; Government of India have further
advised the Central Silk Bourd 1 constitute a Commitee for framing
comprehensive amendments: ॥ the CSB Act, 1948 and Rules, 955
Accordingly: the CSB has constituted a Committee for the purpose 01 working
aut amendments te Act und Rules


— =

3]

The composition of CSB is

36 members including the Chairman: The
constitution of the Board during

preceding 5 years is given in Annex- 1-4 to F
f Lok Sabha there now exisis: a Vacancy of 4
members nominated from Lok Sabha

The post of Chairman. has remained vacant intermittently, as may be sven
been appointed

i Annex- Il, The present Chairman Shri H. Ekanthaiah has
with effect trom 29.08.1997



ANNEXURE - ॥
(Vide para |. page 18)

STUDY NOTE ON THE VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBRODINATE LEGISLATION TO BANGALORE, OOTY AND
COIMBATORE FROM 27™ JUNE TO 3®° JULY, 1999.

The Central Silk Board Rules, 1955

The Committee held discussion with the representatives of the Central
Silk Board and the Ministry of textiles on the Central Silk Board Rules. 1955
at 10.00 a.m. on 287" June, 1999 at Bangalore

MEMHLRS PRESENT

Miss Saroj Khaparde. — Charperson
‘Shri Manohar Kant Dhyan}

Shri Sukhdey Singh Diindss

Shri $. Ramachandran Pillai

Shei Rumandia Ramachandraiah

Prot, A. Lakshmisagar

rE ५४३७४ -

1... Shri Deepak Goyal, Dupury Secretary,
She) Surendra K, Tripathi, Consnitere (770७

ASTATNESOF CENTRAL SILA BOARD

Shri Arun Ranganathan, Afemher Secretary
Shri T Pavan Kumar, Director

Dr. Somashekar, Director

Sts Mohemad Munceer Porsh, den Secretary:

eas

TATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES
vss ©.T.M, Suguna, Diputy Secretary
32


ESE SCS“ ~~~ oe घर ||
es लक...

33

The Chairperson initiated the discussion by giving a brief account of the
functions. of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation and the purpose of its
visit 10 Bangalore, Chairperson also introduced Members of the Committee.

On the objectives. and functions of the Central Silk Board. The Member-
Secretary. Central Silk: Board informed that Central Silk Board came into.
existence in the year 1950 to revive the Silk industry and is completing its 50
years in existence. He fusther informed that the Production of raw silk which
was 950 (०15 in the year 1950. has now reached १ 14000 tons in the year 1999
and India ranks second among the silk producing countries in the world
accounting for 17% of the total world raw Silk production, The Committee
also came ta know that with a plunge in the demand of silk in the
international arena the growth of silk in India afier 1990 has shown some
decline This was a world over phenomenon and countries like China, Japan
and Korea had also last production. The Committee was informed about the
overlapping of jurisdiction in the silk industry as some of the States also had
come tip with their own Acts on the subject, ॥ was further informed that for
the quality up-gradation of sith Various activities are being undertaken and <a
Committee has also been constituted 10 amend) review the existing Act and
sules relating to silk industry.

The Committee thereafter discussed the agenda as Indicated below
Question |

As rewards the date of laying of rules on the Table of both the Houses of
Parliament the Ministry assured to supply the same

Question 2 (Rule 3)

The Committee noted the reply but desired that-a time limit of one month
may be fixed in the rule within which the Secretary shall write to the
Central State Government,

Question 3 (Rule 4)

The Committee expressed its satisfaction that the Central Silk Board has
agreed 10 amend the rule as Suggested by the Committee.



34

Question 4 (Rule 9 (2))

The Committee expressed its satisfaction that the Central Silk Board has
agreed to amend the rule as suggested by the Committee.

Question 5 (Rule 10)

The Committee noted the reply.
Question 6 (Rute 15 (5) and 20 (2))
‘The Committee noted the reply
Question 7 (Rule 13 (8))

The Committee noted the reply.

Question 8 (Rule 17)

‘The Committee expressed its satisfaction that the Central Silk Board has
agreed to amend the rule as suggested by the Committee.

Question 9 (Rule 21)

The Committee expressed its satisfaction that the Central Silk Board has
agreed to amend the rule as suggested by the Committee.

Question 10 (Rule 22 (2)

In view of the fact that approval of the Ministry was being obtained on
each and every item the Committee observed that the rule may be omitted.
Question 11 (Rule 281K)
al Silk Board has

The Committee expressed its satisfaction that the Centr

agreed to amend the rule as suggested by the Committee.



35

Question 12

The Committee noted the reply

The meeting concluded with ॥ mutual vote of thanks.



E
The Border Security Force (Tenure of Posting and Deputation) Rules.
2000

The Border Security lorce (Tenure of Posting and Depututian) Rules.

2000 framed under the Burder Security Force Act, 1068 were examined and
certain points were feferred to the Ministry of Home Affairs on July 24. 2000
for their comments’clarifications, The Ministry vide their OM. dated
September 11, 2000 furnished their comments received and Committee's
obsetvition thereon are placed at Annexure,
2 The Committee considered the subject matter at its siting held on the 9”
April 2001. The Committee accepted comments of the ministry on most of the
pojnts, The Committee, however, did not agree to their comments on paint
fos | and 3 and made the followiny observation:-

| Point referred

The Rules have been framed under Section 141(2) (a) of the Border
Security Force Act, 1968 A perusal of the Rules does not give any indication
that some other set of Rules were in force before that enactment of the said
Rules. What are the reasons that Government did not have any set of Rules on
the Subject’ for over three decades and in what manner Government have
been regulating this area of activity? Further, what are the factors which
necessitated Government to frame the said Rules. now?

Ministry's reply

Posting’ Transfer of Border Security Force personnel was regulated as per
instructions issued by Border Security Force in 1991 & 1992, and by Ministry
of Home Affairs in 1995, However. it was experienced that a tendency was
creeping, amongst the Force personne! to manage soft postings. Personne! who
got soft postings in static locations’ were managing to continue in such
postings for long period of time. sometimes by applying political and
bureaucratic pressure. The Border Security Force Tenure & Deputation Rules.
2000 have therefore, been notified 10 achieve the following objectives -

(a) Afford fair treatment to all Border Security Force personnel, with
respect 10 posting 16 static locations’soft postings.

36



7

(9) inculcate regimental spirit by declaring parent Battalion (Bn) ofeach
member of the Paree upto the rank of) Commandant.

(0 Equitable opportunities for difficult and hard tenures,
(d) Transparency while deciding postings
Committee's observation

The Committee observed that the Ministry's initiative for framing the
mules was quite delayed

NH. Point referred
Rule (J)

“Family means the spouse and dependant children of the inember of
the Force

What is the justification for including only spouse only and dependent
children within the defininon of the term “Family” If medical ground of
spouse and dependant children ts relevant for deciding posting under Rule |,
the medical grounds in respect f dependant parents should also be relevant.
What are Ministry’s comments on this

Ministry's reply

The spouse and dependent children are purely dependent upon
Government servant whereas Parents can be looked after by other children. In
many cases parents also choose their dependency depending upon the place of
Posting of a particular son.or daughter Whereas, the wife and children of the
BSF personnel have no'such choice In view of the above, dependent parents

are not included in the definition of the famtily in rule 20)



38
Committce’s observation/recommendation

The Committee did not agree with the Ministry's comments and opined
that dependent parents should also be included within the definition of
“family”

3. The Committee is unhappy (0० note that the Ministry of Home Affairs
did not frame statutory rules as contemplated under section 141(2) of the
Border Security Force Act, 1968 all this time upto the year 2000 and the
executive instructions on posting/transfer of Border Security Force
personnel also appear to have been issued as late as in 1991-92 wherein it
became difficult to manage the posting/transfers in the absence statutory
rules, The Ministry of Home Affairs should have gone in for in the
beginning itself. The Committee hopes that such situations will not
reoccur, Further the Committee is not satisfied with the comments of
Ministry of Home Affairs on Rule 2 (J) regarding definition of “family”
and it recommends that dependent parents be made a part of “family”
after ascertaining the position with respect to other similarly situated
organisations and the definition be amended suitably.



ANNEXURE
(Vide para | page 36)

Points referred to the Ministry of Home Affairs and the comments received
therefrom

|. Point referred

The Rules have been framed under Section 141 (2) (4) of the Border
Security Force Act, 1968. A perusal of the Rules does not give any indication
that some other set of Rules were in force before the enactment of the said
Rules. What are the reasons the Government did not have any set of Rules on
the subject for over three decades and in what manner Government have been
regulating this area of activity? Further, what are the factors which
necessitated Government to frame the said Rules. now?

Ministry's reply

Posting/Transfer of BSF personnel was regulated 85 per instructions
issued by BSF in 199] & 1992 and by Ministry of Home Affairs in 1995
However, it was experienced that a tendency was creeping amongst the Force
personnel to manage soft postings Personnel who got soft postings in static
locations were managing 10 continue in such postings for long periods of time.
sometimes by applying political and bureaucratic pressure. The BSF Tenure
& Deputation rules, 2000 have therefore, been notified to achieve the
following objectives:-

a) Afford fair treatment to all BSF personnel with respect to posting to static
locations. soft postings.

bj Inculcate regimental spirit by declaring parent Battalion (Bn) of cach
member of the Force upto the rank of commandant,

c} Equitable opportunities for difficult and hard tenures.
d) Transparency while deciding postings.

Il Points referred
As per Rule 1(2), the Rules have been made inapplicable to five specified

39



iS

categories of members of Force like. Sports persons, members of the Band
Team, etc and the rules authorize the Director-General to issue Departmental
guidelines 10 regulate the transfertenure of these members of the Force.

What is the justification for exclusion of these categories af oflicers fram
the application of the Rules and whether it is not possible to provide for their
transter-tenure in the Rules itself rather than prescribing through departmental
guidelines”

Ministry's reply

Sports personnel are required 19 be kept in designated Sports Centres for
intensive training from grooming them as outstanding sportsmen. BSF have
slready produced outstanding sportsmen in the country at national and
mtemationa! level The personnel of band team acquires:skills after practicing
for long yearsand if they are posted out every 3 years optimum utilisation of
फैला skill cannot be made As regards Tear Smoke Unit, the: personnel
working there have to work in a highly toxic environment. As-such, younger
personne! ure required to be inducted and frequent rotation of these personnel
are required. The incumbents of technical posts sanctioned in BSF Water
Wing, Engineering cardre: MT workshop, etc. possess technical
qualifications and experience on the relevant trade and they cannot be posted
in the Battalions as replacement of such. skilled/experience personnel 15
difficult.

The enrolled followers are in the category of cook, water carrier,
washerman, sweeper. barber. kahar, ete. and they hail ffom the nearby area of
the field units’static formations where they are posted They are low-paid
employees and do not have any promotional avenues.

11 Point referred Rule 2())

“Family” means the spouse and dependant children of the member of
the Force.

What is the justification for including only spouse and dependant children
within the definition of the term “Family”. If medical grounds of spouse and
dependant children is relevant for deciding posting under Rule | | , the medical



Te 3 — hl

4!

grounds in respect of dependant parents should also be relevant. What are
Ministry’s comments on this?

Ministry's reply

The spouse and dependent children are purely dependent upon
Government servant whereas parents can be looked after by other children. In
Many cases parents also choose their dependency depending upon the place of
posting of a particular son or daughter. Whereas. the wife and children of the
BSF personnel have no such choice In view of the above, dependent parents
are not included in the definition of the family in rule 2(J).

1५ Point referred Rule 3(2)

The provisions contained in sub-rule(1) shall not be applicable to
such members of the Force who hold a post that does not exist in a
Battalion,

What is the justification for the above provision and what re the
situations like where a member of the force halds a post that docs not exist ina
Battalion

Ministry's reply

Posts like Subedar Major (051. Subedar Major (PA), Inspector / PA and
many technical personnel are authorised only in static formation and nat in
Battalion (Bns), hence the need for this rule

\ Point referred Rule 5(1)

Routine transfer to statie formation due to turn over of the members
af the foree on completion of field service The posting to static
formation shall be for a period of three years only and thereafter. the
member of the Force shall revert to his parent Battalion

Provided that in the cases of the members of the Force who belong to
nuitisterial cadre, their tenure with a static formation shall be four years,



=

What is the “Ministerial Cadre” and what are its constituents; what is the
Justification for prescribing a different tenure for them with a static formation?

Ministry's reply

Combatised clericat cadre is: called as “Ministerial Cadre” and its
constituents. are Constable 1917... Assistant Sub Inspector (Clerk), Sub
Inspector (Clerk), Inspector (Clerki, Subedat Major (QS), Sub Inspector
(Steno), Inspector (Steno}, Subedar Major (PA), Inspector (Hindi Translator)
and Subedar Major (Hinds Translator). Functioning of stati formations is
quite different as compared to field formations ({Bns,), After a ministerial
vadre person is posted to a static formation, he requires sufficient time 10
learn Understand the work assruned to him. it has generally been experienced
that. 4 person posted a static formation’ take’ considerable time to understand
his work and 10 be able to work independently. Utilisation of services of a
ministerial cadre person at a particular place for 4 years is in public interest
In view of this, the tenure for ministerial cadre being chair borne has been
prescribed for 4 years.

VI Point referred Rule 8

Criteria for transtee trum statié formation and on repatriation trom
deputation - (1) Every member of the Force on completion of his
Tenure in a static formation or on repatriation from deputation shall be
posted to his parent Battalion if there is a vacancy, In the event of no
vacancy, he will be posted to another Battalion:

Provided that the provisions contained (nthe sub-rule shall apply 10 3
member of the Force wha holds a post Which also exists in a
Battalion

(2) No person from One static formation shall be posted to
another static formanon immediately after completion of one tenure:

Provided that in the cases of the members of the Force who hold a
post which does not exist in a Battalion but only in a static formation,
such members of the Force shall be posted to another static
formation,



a3

(1) 15 it sure that there would definitely be a vacancy in any of he
Battalion when a member of the Force completes his tenure in @ static
formation or repatriates from deputation?

(2) What is the objective sought to be achieved by the provisions of
regulation 8(2). The word ~immediately® used therein renders the provision
vague, Whether government have any objection in making the provisions of
Rule 8(2) more specific?

Ministry's reply

Every member of the Force has been allotted a parent Bn’as per Rule 3 of
the Tenure. On completion of tenure in a static formation/deputation to ex-
cadre post, if vacancy is. available m the parent Bn the person will be pasted to
his parent Bn. In case yacancy is not available at that particular time. he can
be posted to any other Bn considering the past tenures of postings in
sofvidifficult locations

The word ‘immediately’ used in Rule 8(2) means that posting from one
static location to another static location is prohibited. Posting to a static
location is deemed as soft posting: After completion of tenure in a static
location BSF personnel will be posted to their parent Bn or any other Bn
depending upon the vacancy and not to another static formation unless they
hold a post which is not authorised in a Bn

The provisions made in Rule 8 are clear. However, any suggestion of the
Committee on Subordinate Legistation in this regard would be considered by
. the Government.

VIL Point referred Rule 11

Posting and Transfer of Low Medical Category Personne) - A
member of the Farce who is placed in low medical category by duly
constituted medical board may be considered for posting from a
Battalion deployed in extreme hard or hard area 10 a Battalion
deployed in a normal area of a static formation keeping in view the
recommendations of the medical board,



EI

Provided further that personne? having fess than 10 years of service
shall be allowed to complete 10 years of service and those having more than
10 years of service shall be allowed to complete 20 years of service before
initiating action for retirement on grounds of physical unfitness and the tenure
rules shall not apply to such personnel,

AS per the above provision, 8 member of the Force falling under low
medical category can continue to serve for say upto little less than 10 years
before action is initiated for his retirement on ground of physical unfitness
Initiation of action and final decision could again take considerable time
Nothing is indicated in the rules in this behalf The provisions of the rules do
not appear to be very specific in this area. What is Government's intention
behind this Rule and whether the desired results are achieved from the present
provision of rule 11.

Ministry's reply

As per CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, a recurring monthly payment is
admissible to permanent employees who retire on medical grounds with a
qualifying service of not less than 10 years, Medical Board/Review Medical
Boards are held in BSF periodically to assess the suitability of the Force
personnel, Medical Board proceedings are approved by the competent
prescribed authority immediately without loss of time, In cases where Force
personne! are recommended to be boarded out from service and proceedings
thereof are approved by the competent authority, an immediate action is taken
by BSF for boarding out the persons, Desired results are achieved by Rule ||

vil Point referred Rule | 4

Vime Sehedule for issue of transfer orders and implementation thereof —
Posting and transfer orders shall be issued by the competent authoritics by
April or every year strictly था order of seniority-cum-merit of individual
case with due regard to tenures spent in different conditions.

It is not understood how merit and tenure spent in different conditions are
relevant for determining the order of the of issue of transfer orders These
factors can be relevant at the time of deciding the posting transfer but, not at



a5

the time of issue of transfer orders. What are the comments of the Ministry in
this regard”

Ministry's reply

Eligibility of the Force person is determined for his. posting taking into
consideration his previous tenures of pasting including the present tenure in
softhard-extreme hard areas, For example. if a person posted in a Bn ts
empanelled as an instructor and had not earlier served in any training
institution, it means there are merits in his case for considering his case for
Posting 10 ॥ training institution In that case. he can be posted to a Training
Institution Merits of the case are necessary to be seen before deciding the
posting before issuing of posting order.

1X Point referred Rule 17(2)

Subject (0 sub-rule (1), senior member of the Force who holds a
promotional post shall be given preference for deputation

The word “senior member” appearing in the above rule does not appear to
be specific. Who are the senior members contemplated under this rule and
what 5 the justification for giving preference to such senior members: in
depsnation matter

Ministry's reply

There are certain posts in BSF which ure hot promotional posts but
isolated posts such as Head Constable (Fitter). Constable (Daftry) ete. Senior
_ members of the Force means the Force personnel who are having higher inter-
s¢-semiority and holds a promotional post. Intention for putting this clause is
that when a Force person of higher seniority’age group will proceed on
deputation to other organisation he will not only create one vacancy in his
rank in the Force but also will create chain vacancies upto lowest level, After
completion of this tenure of deputation he may also superannuate while on
deputation On the contrary. if a voung person is seat on deputation, after
completion fo this depuration tenure, he will come back to BSF and take 2
yacancy, denying an opportunity to the other person for promotion



=
Statutory Investigation into Railway Accident Rules, 1998

The Statutory Investigation into Railway Accident Rules, 1998 framed
under the Railways Act, 1989 were examined and some points were referred
to the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the 25" August 2000 for their comments.
The Ministry hid furnished their comments on January 15, 2001.
(Annexure-l)

3 The Committee at its meting held on Monday, the 9" May 2001,
considered the comments furnished by the Ministry and accepted the replies of
the Ministry on all the points except on point | wherein 8 factual inaccuracy
regarding laying of rules on the Table of the House had been pointed, Point
ho | as referred, the Ministry’s reply alongwith observation of the Committee
are as under -

Point referred
The Statutory Investigation into Railway Accidents Rules were framed in
the year 1998. What are the reasons that these Rules could not be laid on the
table of the Rajya Sabha for more than one and a half years:
Ministry's Comments
Though the Railway Act, 1989 does not specifically provide for laying
the abave Rules before the Parliament, the same has been submitted as was
dane in cave of earlier Rules, The chronology-of events is under:-
| Gazette Notification issued on 26.12.98.

2. Corrigendum to above issued on 63,99.

Sent for printing in Government Press on 19.3 99

4. (As there were many corrections every time) the finally printed copies
were received on November 1999

5. Note for Ministry for placing the Rules in Parliament sent on 18.12.99

46



47
6 Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 29.2 2000

7 Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23.2000

Committee's observation/suggestion

The Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry of Civil
Aviation are not aware of the correct legal position insofar as. the
requirement of laying of Rules in hand before the Parliament. is
concerned when they say that the Railways Act, 1989 does not specifically
provide for laying of the Rules before Parliament. This is not factually
correct. The Committee draws the attention of the Ministry to Section
199 of the Railways Act, 1989 which provides that all Rules framed under
the Act shall be laid before each House of Parliament. The Ministry of
Civil Aviation should have checked up the position thoroughly before
responding to the Committee. The Committee expects the Ministry of
Civil Aviation to be more careful in future while passing information to
Parliamentary Committees.

Further, the Committee is not convinced with the comments
furnished by the Ministry on the question of treating reports on Railway
Accident as confidential. The Committee still holds the view that such
Report should not be treated as confidential in a routine manner since in
major accidents the public and Parliament are entitled to know of the
causes and remedial action being taken. If necessary, a portion of the
Report may be kept confidential for a period of time and that too for
Teasons to be recorded in writing. The Committee hopes that the
Ministry realises the need to be transparent in its functioning so that
public trust is build up with regard to the efficiency and reliability of
public services. The Committee trusts that the Ministry of Civil Aviation
would review the position and make suitable amendment in the rules
under intimation to it,



yi
No.

(yy

Points raised by Rajya Sabha
Secretariat

Qe

The Statutory Investigation into
Ruilway Accidents Rules, were
framed in the year, (998, What
ate the reasons that these rules
could not be laid on the Table of
the Rajya Sabha for more than
‘one and half years

ANNEXURE
(Vide para 1, page 46)

Comments by the Ministry of
Civil Aviation

(3)

Though the Railways Act, 1989
does not specifically provide for
laying the above Rules before the
Parliament, the same has been
submitted as was done in case of
earlier Rules, The chronology of
events is a8 under--

| Gazette Notification issued on
26.12.98
2 Corrigendum to above issued
on 06.03,99

3. Sent for printing ॥
Government Press on 19.3.99
4 (As there = were = many

corrections every time) the
finally printed copies were
received on November 99

5, Note for Ministry for placing
the Rule in Parliament sent on
18:12:99

4 Laid on the Table of Rajya
Sabha on 29.200,

7, Laid on the Table of Lok
Sabha on 2.3.00

From the above. it may be seen
that there was no delay,



(1)

49
(2)

The Statutory investigation into
Railway Accidents Rules, 1998
have been framed under the
Railways Act, 1989 which is
being administered by the
Ministry of Railways. What is
the justification that the said rules
have been notified by the
Ministry of Civil Aviation;
Whether the. administration of
these rules also vests with the
Ministry of Civil Aviation, if so,
the justification therefore ?

On what ground the
Commissioner can ask for de
1990 inquiry oF re-examination of
specific issues. Shouldn't the
Commissioner record reasons for
doing so and rules to provide
accordingly ?

(3)

The Commissioner of Railway
Safety is working under the
administration control of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation,
dealing with matters Pertaining to
the Safety of rail travel and train
Operation and is charged with
Certain statutory functions as laid
down in the Railways Act, 1989.
These rules are framed by the
Ministry of Civil Aviation, as
requited under Section 122(i) of
Indian Railways Act, 1989.

The Commissioner of Railway
Safety is a competent officer
Performing judicial duties &
enjoying the status of a Civil
Court, while doing the Inquiry,
under Section 166 of Indian
Railways Act, 1989. He may find
that the enquiry done by the
Railway Administration is lacking
in some points or relevant facts
and hence may ask the Railway
Administration 10 do the Inquiry
either de nove or only ask for re-
¢xaminations of specific issues,
It shall be left to the judgement of
the Commissioner.


(1)

(2)

Since railway accident are matter

of general public interest and are

discussed in detail even in
Parliament, what — is the
justification for keeping the
Inquiry Report confidential.

Instead should not the Report be.
got published immediately? If @
portion of the report is deemed to
be unsuitable for publication in
the public interest, it may be with
held for reasons to be recorded.
Would the Ministry consider
drawing the rule accordingly?

The decision to publish a report
or not lies with the CCRS, which
js communicated to Railway
Board in his not forwarding the
Enquiry Report. An accident
report is normally proposed for
publication if it fulfills any one of
the following criteria

(a)The accident had resulted in
large scale deaths/injuries,

involving wide media attention
and public criticism

(b)A number of important
technical issues had been dealt
with, needing attention of
Railway Administration.

(c) The standard of investigation
(either technical ar otherwise) had

been of a high order

As per Rule 5 of the Statutory

Investigation Rules into Railway

‘Accident — 1998, the CCRS and
Railway Board would decide
upon the publication of a report

In case of Railway Board has any
reservation on the
recommendation of the CCRS.
the matter is finally decided by
the Central Government (Ministry
of Civil Aviation), Normally the
report is published when there 18
agreement between the CCRS and
the Railway Board. The Inquiry


(1)

s

51

(2)

(istrict Magistrate or his
representative to attend the

Inguiry conducted Commissioner
of Railway Safery

Under this

(3)

Report by the Commissioner of
Railway Safety which may
sometime include —_ conclusion
framed by him after examining the
material before him to the effect
that one or more Railway servants
concerned were guilty of conduct
amounting to criminal offence. In
such cases it is inadvisable to
publish a Report containing
imputation of an offence to any
Person when legal proceedings are
about to be launched or are

pending against such person,
The decision to retain the
confidentiality of the Inquiry

Report of the CRS. until all legal
cases filed in the Court are
finalized, is based on the opinion
of the Ministry of Law that doing
otherwise may invite charges of
the Contempt of Court and would
prejudice the proper conduct of
judicial proceedings. The Report
could be made public only when
there is no pending prosecution or
there is no likely prosecution and
if there is 8 prosecution, only after
the termination of all the court
proceedings,

1 may be left 10 the discretion of
the District Supdt. of Police/Distt
Magistrate who are responsible
officials to depute any officer to


(1)

(2)

Rule the District Magistrate can
depute any other officer to
represent him at the inquiry. |
may be appropriate if the
minimum level of officer to be
deputed 15 specified in the rule
itself. Similar provision cant be
made in rule 7 also

(i) Whether there is any objection
in fixing the. time fimit for
completion of an inquiry a there
is no mention about it in the
rules?

(ii) The rules contain many
spelling mistakes: This is not
desirable spectally when the rules
run into more than 3 pages.
Whether the Ministry ४००७
reprint them?

(3)

represent him 87 the Inquiry
Incidentally the same provision
had been made in the earlier Rutles
of 1973 aswell

Regarding the time limit for
completion of an Inquiry Report.
guidelines have been issued by the
Railway Board fixing time limit in
completion of various stages of
inquiry.

The Gazette Notification ask
No257. Published in Part Il
Section 3 on 26.12.98 contained

some errors and fence
corrigendum was ixsued. vide
GSR No.63 dated 6.3.99.

Subsequently, copies of the Rules
were pot printed in bilingual
format by N.E. Railway Press,
Gotakhpur. There appears 10 be
some spelling mistakes in English
version, which — were teft
inadvertently. Now the same has
been reprinted and attached
herewith.


vi
The Ozone Depleting Substances {Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000

The Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000
were examined 0 4 questionnaire was forwarded to the Ministry of
Environment & Forests on 16.3.2001 for their comments/clarification, The
Ministry was also requested to send a note on the regulation of production
level prescribed in schedule III for the entire country

2, The Ministry of Environment & Forests vide their O.M. dated 19.04.2001
forwarded their comments/clarifications on the questionnaire alongwith a note
on FC production section phase out.

3. The points referred, the Ministry's comments thereon together with the
observation of the Committee thereon except the ones where the Committee
has noted the point as stated by the Ministry are reproduced below:

| Point referred
Rules 2(h){i)- Definitions:

“manufacture” in relation to any ozone depleting substance includes-

any process or part of a process for making, altering,
finishing. packing, labeling. blending or otherwise treating or any ozone
depleting substance with a view to sell, distribute or use but does not include
the repacking or breaking up of any ozone depieting substance in the ordinary
course of retails business: and

There appears to be a typographical error in rule 2(h)(i} inasmuch as the
words “or otherwise treating or any ozone depleting substance” should be read
a8 “or otherwise treating of any ozone depleting substance" and secondly,
what is the justification for excluding repacking or breaking up of any-azone
depleting substance in the ordinary course of retail business, when packing is
otherwise included within the definition of “manufacture”?



=
a ॥ should be réad as “or othenwise treating of any ozone depleting
substance”.
(id Repacking or
ordinary course of retail
take: place after manufactur
Depleting Substances, repacking may
original packing. Repacking 15. theretore,
manufacture,

breaking up of any ozone depleting substance 10 the
| business has been excluded because these activities
re and original packing In order (0 sell Ozone
be necessary after. production and
excluded from the definition of

Committee’s Observation
fhe Committee noted that the Ministry have accepted the typographical
error as pointed out in Rule 2100) containing definition of tenn

» manufacture”

2 Point referred

Rule 13+ Procedure for registration. cancellation of registration and

appeal against such orders.-

procedure for registration, cancellation of

such orders, The rule, however, does. not
complete

Rule 13 relates to. the

registration and appeal against
specify any time fimit within which the registering authority must

the registration process. Whether Government have any objection in
prescribing some time limit for the purpose?

Ministry's Comments

As per tule, all existing producers have to register within the 3 months
from the date of publication ‘of these rules; Ail dealers, importer, exporter,
industries using ODS have to register with the designated authority within one
year from date of publication of the Rules. The registration 1s valid for 18
months and after each 12 month period, the registration will have to be
renewed. Specific time \imit to complete the registration process has not been
put in the Rules as it was presumed that as ‘and when applications are made
registration would done. However, there is no objection to specify a time Timit
10 complete the process of Registration, Renewal and Cancellation



Committee's Observation

The Committee noted that the Ministry have agreed to specify a time limit
for completing the process of Registration, Renewal and cancellation as
pointed out by the Committee

+ The Committee considered the matter in its meeting held on
12.10.2001, The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of
Environment and Forests have agreed to rectify the typographical error
in Rule 2(h) (i) defining the term “manufacture” and specifying a time
limit in Rule 13 for completing the process of registration , renewal and
cancellation as suggested by the Committee. The Committee hopes that
the Ministry would bring in these changes in the Rules at the earliest.



=
Summary of Recommendations
I

Madras Port Trust (General Provident Fund) Regulations, 1997-
Implemtation 1250 Report of the Committee.

The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Shipping have
carried out amendment in regulation 3(1)(8) Explanation by deleting the words
“who lives with an employee” which was a condition for giving the adopted
child the same status as a natural born child for the purpose of these
Regulations; regulation 6(7) by prescribing a time limit of one month within
which the acceptance by Account Officer is to be conveyed to the
subscriber/employee; regulation 9 by providing for enhancing/reducing of
GPF subscription on two occasions in @ year as is the position in the case of
Central Government Employees; regulation 16(2)(ii) removing the condition

of 12 months for grant of advance after final payment of previous advance and
regulation 20(i)(B) reducing the period from 20 years to 15 years for the
purpose of final withdrawal from the fund.

Coal Mines Pensions Scheme, 1998

The Committee expresses its satisfaction that the Ministry of Coal have
accepted it suggestion and substituted the proviso to clause 4(2) of the scheme
through their notification G.S.R.No.256(E) dated 12.4.2001 (Annexure-IIl)
prescribing the rate of interest to be paid by the employees on exercising

option for becoming eligible for pension,

56



Tit
Central Silk Board Rules, 1955

The Committee is satisfied to note that the Ministry have accepted the
suggestions made by it for amendment in rule 3 regarding fixing a time limit
of one month for writing to Government for nomination of a member on a
vacancy arising in the Board; rule 4 correcting the designation from
“Seeretary” to ‘Secretary General’ in the case of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha.
rule 9(2) prescribing that intimation regarding change of address be given by 8
member to the Secretary “forthwith”. Earlier there was no indication of any

urgency or time limit for such an intimation; rulel7 deleting the word

‘ordinarily’ therein regarding issuance of notice of the meeting of the Board
in order to make the provision specific: rule 21 by substituting “two weeks
time” in place of ‘as soon as possible’ for circulation of the minutes of the
meeting of the Board to each member and to the Central Government in order
to make the provision specific: rule 22(2) Omission of the rule authorising
Board to incur expenditure ypto Rs.S000 on each individual item in view of
the fact that approval of the Ministry is otherwise obtained on each and every
item; rule 28(1)(i) Revision in the upper limit of the pay scale from “Rs.1300

Per mensem™ suitably consequent upon Pay Commission recommendation:

on pay revision for Central Government Employees.

The Committee hopes that Ministry of Textiles would notify the
amendments in the Central Silk Board Rules expeditiously as per the
Suggestion of the Committee under intimation to it.

ST



=I

58

Iv
The Border Security Force (Tenure of Posting and Deputation) Rules,
2000

The Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry of Home Affairs did
not frame statutory rules as contemplated under section 141(2) of the Border
Security Force Act, 1968 all this time upto the year 2000 and the executive
instructions on posting/transfer of Border Security Force personnel also appear
to have been issued as late as in 1991-92 wherein it became difficult to
manage the posting/transfers in the absence statutory rules. The Ministry of
Home Affairs should have gone in for in the beginning itself, The Committee
hopes that such situations will not reoccur. Further the Committee is not
satisfied with the comments of Ministry of Home Affairs on Rule 2 (J)
regarding definition of “family” and it recommends that dependent parents be
made a part of ‘family’ after ascertaining the position with respect to other
similarly situated organisations and the definition be amended suitable.

Vv
Statutory Investigation into Railway Accident Rules, 1998

The Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry of Civil Aviation
are not aware of the correct legal position insofar as the requirement of laying
of Rules in hand before the Parliament is concerned when they say that the
“Railways Act, 1989 does not specifically provide for laying of the Rules
before Parliament. ‘This 5 not factually correct, The Committee draws the
attention of the Ministry to Section 199 of the Railways Act. 1989 which
provides that all Rules framed under the Act shall be laid before each House of
Parliament. The Ministry of Civil Aviation should have enecked up the
position thoroughly before responding to the Committee. The Committee



59

expects the Ministry of Civil Aviation to be more careful in future while
passing information to Parliamentary Committees,

Further, the Committee is not convinced with the comments furnished by
the Ministry on the question of treating reports on Railway Accident as:
confidential. The Committee still holds the view that such Report should not
be treated as confidential in a routine manner since in major accidents the
public and Parliament are entitled to know of the causes and remedial action
being taken, If necessary, a portion of the Report may be kept confidential for
@ period of time and that too for reasons to be recorded in writing. The
Committee hopes that the Ministry realises the need to be transparent in its
functioning so that public trust is build up with regard to the efficiency and
reliability of public services. The Committee trusts that the Ministry of Civil
Aviation would review the position and make suitable amendment in the rules
under intimation to it

VI

The Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000

The Committee considered the matter in its meeting held on 12.10.2001.
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Environment and
Forests have agreed to rectify the typographical error in Rule 2(h) (i) defining
the term “manufacture” and specifying a time limit in Rule 13 for completing
the process of registration , renewal and cancellation as suggested by the
Committee. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would bring in these
changes in the Rules at the carliest.



zy

SIXTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday the 20th December.
2001 in Room No. 63, First Floor. Parliament House, New Dethi.

MEMBERS PRESENT

Shri Dipankar Mukherjee. = — Chairman
Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

Dr. A.R. Kidwai

Shri Rajnath Singh *Surya’

Shri Lajpat Rai

Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
Shri S. Sivasubramaniam

Shri HK. Javare Gowda

Shri Drupad Borgohain

Shri ? 0, Narayanan

0, Shri Suresh A, Keswani

seer aveenNoo

SECRETARIAT
|. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary

2. Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Linder Secretary
3. Shri Surendra Kumar Tripahti, Under Secretary

te 53

2. The Committee then considered its draft 138" Report and adopted it

60



61

after some minor corrections. The Committee decided to present the
teport in the ensuing session of the Parliament.

The meeting adjourned at 3.40 p.m.

*** Relates to matter not included in the Report.

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2489RS—30,07,2002