167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
 
HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT
 
(Presented on 8th March, 2007)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
March, 2007/Phalguna-Chaitra 1928-29 (Saka)
C O N T E N T S
                                                                                               
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
2.INTRODUCTION
 
3.REPORT
 
I. The Counting of Past Services-Implementation of 117th Report of the Committee.
  
II. The Cost Accounting Records (Electricity Industry) Rules, 2001-Implementation of 159 th
Report of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha.
 
 
III. The Custom House (Agents Licensing) Regulations, 2004-Examination by the Committee
on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha.
 
 
IV.The Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993-Implementation
of the 128th  Report of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha.
 
 
V.The Securities and Exchange Board of India (Procedure for Holding Enquiry by Enquiry
Officer and Imposing Penalty) Regulations, 2002- Examination by the Committee on
Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha.
 
VI.
 The Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000-Implementation of 144th Report
of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha.
 
 
4.SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
 
5. MINUTES
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(CONSTITUTED ON THE 4TH SEPTEMBER, 2006)
           
           
1.         Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla                      Chairperson

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
2.         Prof. P.J. Kurien
3.         Dr. Radhakant Nayak
4.         Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
5.         Ms. Mabel Rebello
6.         Shri Vikram Verma
7.         Shri Surendra Lath
8.         Mahendra Mohan
9.         Shri Penumalli Madhu
10.       Shri N. Jothi
11.       Shri  M.V. Mysura Reddy
12.       Shri Ali Anwar
13.       Shri  Harendra Singh Malik
14.       Shri  R. Shunmugasundaram    
15.      Shri Abani Roy
 
SECRETARIAT
1.         Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
2.         Shri Deepak Goyal, Director
3.         Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Under Secretary
4.         Shri R.P. Shukla, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
 
1.         I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been authorized by the Committee to present
the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Hundred and Sixty-Seventh Report of the Committee.
 
1.2
        The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 6th March, 2007.
 
1.3       The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various Rules/Regulations and issues, relating to
them along with the comments received from the Government.  The observations and recommendations of the Committee
are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.
 
 
NEW DELHI
6
th March, 2007
 
DR. (SHRIMATI) NAJMA A.
HEPTULLA                                                            
Chairperson,
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation,
                                      
                                                                           Rajya Sabha
 
Report
       I
                  The Counting of past service for pensionary benefits on mobility between Central Government and Central and
State Autonomous Bodies and vice-versa-Implementation of 117 th Report of the Committee on, Public Grievances and
Pensions, Public Grievances and Pensions Legislation, Rajya Sabha.
 
          "The Counting of past service for the purpose of pensionary benefits on mobility between the Central Government
and the Central and the State Autonomous bodies and vice-versa”  were examined and reported to the House by the
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha on June 12, 1998 vide  its 117 th Report. Extracts from the Report
containing the Committee’s recommendations are enclosed (Annexure-I).  A copy of the report was forwarded to the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of Pension and Pensioners Welfare) on June 16, 1998
with the request that the action taken  report of the Ministry on the recommendations made by the Committee may be
furnished within a period of three months.
 
2.         The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions  vide their communication dated August 3, 1998 stated as
under: -
 

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
“Recommendations of the Committee are being considered in this department but before taking a final decision on
the same the matter requires consultation with various departments including different division of Ministry of Finance.  It is
likely to take more than three months before final decision is arrived at. Further, all efforts will be made to settle the matter
within the stipulated time”.
 
3.         Later on, the Ministry vide their communication dated December 17, 1998 informed as under: -
 
“In order to decide the follow up action on the recommendations of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, the
department has constituted a Committee, which met on 25.8.98.  It has been felt that before taking a final decision in
the matter, it is necessary to work out the likely repercussions, particularly in view of the emerging changed
scenario, wherein the Banking and Insurance sectors are likely to open up to public equity participation, changing
drastically the institutional structures and affecting the conditions of service in these organizations.  It was also felt
that the arrangements of counting of past service has to be on reciprocal basis and, therefore, the institutions in the
Banking and Insurance sector need to be consulted before orders are issued in this regard.  This department is in the
process of consulting Banking/Insurance Division on these two issues.  Separately this department is also
ascertaining the views of the Attorney General in the matter. This Department is pursuing the matter vigorously.
Despite this, it is felt that final action is likely to take sometime in view of the intricacies involved in the matter, This
department, therefore, feels that it may not be possible to take final action in the matter within 6 months.  It is,
therefore, requested that Rajya Sabha Secretariat may please approach the Committee on Subordinate Legislation
for extension of time upto 31
st March 1999.  This department therefore, feels that it may be granted extension of time
up to 31st March 1999”.
 
4.         The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions after being reminded, again sought further extension of
time upto 30th June, 1999.Thereafter, the Ministry vide their communication dated June 28, 1999 informed the Committee as
under:-
 
“That this department is in process of consulting banking/insurance division of the Ministry of Finance on the issue
of counting of service rendered in those Organisations together with the Central Government Service and vise-versa. In this
connection it may be mentioned here that a Committee of Officers consisting of Additional Secretary (Pension), Joint
Secretary (Pension), Joint Secretary (Insurance) and Deputy Secretary (Banking) of Ministry of Finance together with
Director (PW) of Department of Pension and P.W was constituted to consider the matter.  A final meeting of Committee was
held on 21.06.99 and matter now will be finalized on receipt of certain information, which is required from Insurance
Division of Ministry of Finance.  Thereafter, the proposal will be sent for approval of Ministry of Finance, department of
expenditure.  The above process is likely to take time of 6 months for which extension will be required from Committee on
Subordinate Legislation of Rajya Sabha. It is therefore, requested that Committee on Subordinate Legislation may be
approached for further extension of time upto 31
st December 1999. The process will require 6 months and therefore Ministry
have further approached for extension of time up to 31st December, 1999”.
 
5.         The Ministry was granted extension of time upto 31 st December,1999 but at the same time directed to furnish a bi-
monthly progress report in the matter regularly. Later, the Ministry vide their communication dated September 7, 1999
informed as under:-
    
 “On the receipt of recommendation from Committee on Subordinate Legislation of Rajya Sabha, this department
constituted a Committee of Officers consisting of Joint Secretary (Pers.) Ministry of Finance, Joint Secretary
(Insurance) Ministry of Finance, Deputy Secretary (Banking) Ministry of Finance, Addl. Secretary (Pension),
Director (PW), Department of Pension & PW to consider the matter relating to counting of service rendered in
Public Sector Banks including RBI/SBI and LIC/GIC etc. together with central Government Service, for pension
purposes and vice-versa .
  Three meetings of the Committee have been held Banking and Insurance Divisions of
Ministry of Finance indicated in the meeting that the Central Government employees who move over to the
Banks/LIC etc. will be required to deposit additional amount in the pension fund in addition to the pensionary
benefits received from Government. To study its implication, the banking and insurance divisions of Ministry of
Finance have been requested to intimate the details of the amount which would be required to be paid by such
employees in addition to discharge of pensionary liabilities by the Central Government.  The above information is
awaited and for early settlement of the case the matter is being vigorously pursued”.
 
 

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
6.         The Ministry vide another communication dated November 11, 1999 further informed as under: -
 
“The Insurance Division has indicated the modalities of calculation of the past service for pension liability which
could be at variance with the liability that Government would discharge on a Government employee moving over to LIC/GIC
etc. This is under examination. Reply from the Banking Division was not received. The matter was further discussed in a
meeting with the officers of Insurance/Banking Division. The Banking division has not yet formally communicated their
views.  The matter is being vigorously pursued with them. On receipt of the information final decision will be taken in
consultation with Department of Expenditure and Ministry of Law. As regards opinion of the Attorney General, the same has
not been received.  The Ministry of Law has only furnished the opinion of the Additional Solicitor General”.
 
7.         The Ministry, however, vide their subsequent communication dated January 12, 2000 informed the Committee as
under:-
 
“Meanwhile, a petition, on a related subject has been heard by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Mumbai.  In this
case, the petitioner sought counting of past service rendered by him in RBI/NABARD.  The CAT Mumbai considered
the contentions of the petitioner with regard to the definition of central autonomous body in this department O.M.
dated 29.8.84 and also the provisions contained in this department’s subsequent O.Ms dated 14.5.86, 31.3.87, 3.4.87,
10.11.87, 30.5.95 and 13.9.96 and rejected the petition.  The petitioner went in appeal to Mumbai High Court, which
also has dismissed the petition.  This department is in the process of obtaining certified copy of the judgment.  Since
the judicial pronouncements have added a new dimension to the whole issue, it is felt that it would not be appropriate
to take a final decision in the matter without studying the judgments.  Accordingly, the Rajya Sabha Secretariat is
requested to approach the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha for extension of time by two months,
upto 29-2-2000, by which time the copy of the judgment would be obtained, studied and a final decision taken by the
Government”.
 
 The Ministry had again sought for extension of time up to February 29,2000 to furnish their stand.
 
8.         The Ministry on March 2, 2000 furnished their final comments (Annexure-II) in the matter stating that in view of a
judicial pronouncement by CAT Mumbai in a similar case, which had been upheld by Mumbai High Court, no further
consideration in the matter was necessary. The Ministry, thereafter, were asked to furnish copies of the decision of
CAT/Mumbai High Court on the subject. A copy each of the said decision was received from the Ministry on May 24, 2000.
 
9.         In the meantime, a communication, addressed to Chairman, Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha, was
received from Shri Mahendra Kumar Sharma who had earlier brought to the notice of the Committee this case and on the
basis of which the Committee had presented its 117
th report on the subject. Shri Sharma in his letter highlighted certain
issues for the consideration of the Committee, which were not brought to the notice of CAT by the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions (Annexure - III).
 
10.       Thereafter, the Committee considered the subject matter at its meeting held on November 13, 2000. The Committee
did not agree to the Ministry’s request to drop its recommendations.  A reference was sent to the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions on December 8, 2000 wherein they were requested to intimate whether they have at any
stage before or after the Committee presented its 117
th report sought/obtained opinion from the Ministry of Law & Justice or
the Attorney General of India on the question whether the term “Central Autonomous Body” as appearing in the O.M. dated
29.8.84 included Nationalized Banks or Financial Institutions like GIC/LIC etc. The Ministry were also requested to furnish
copies of the advice, if any, for the consideration of the Committee.  The Ministry furnished the reply stating that the
opinions of the Ministry of Law and Justice and the Additional Attorney General were obtained which supported the
contention that the nationalised banks etc. would come under the purview of O.M. dated 29.8.84 (Annexure-IV ).  The
Ministry, however, did not furnish the copies of the opinion sought for in the matter.
 
11.       The Committee considered the subject matter again at its meeting held on June 19, 2001 and decided to report it.  In
the meantime, an unstarred question no. 2458 was replied in the Rajya Sabha on the 8
th August 2002 regarding the new
pension scheme. To this the Ministry of Personnel, etc in their reply stated that Government had set up a High Level Expert
Group in pension to introduce the new pension plan for new Government Employees and this Group has submitted its report
in February 2002.  The proposal made by this group is under examination in the Ministry.
 
12.       In response to the above communication a reference was sent to the Ministry with the request that while considering
the new pension scheme, whether the issue of counting of past service for pensionary benefits has received any consideration

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
and, if so, with what results.  The Ministry in their reply dated the 18th September, 2002 informed as under:-
 
“The new Pension Scheme for Government servants presently under consideration of the Government, aims at
creation of a contributory Pension Scheme.  The modalities of the scheme are yet to be decided.  It may not be
possible to speculate at this stage as to whether in the new scheme that would emerge, counting of past service in
other organizations could be permissible.  This is so, because not only the modalities of the new scheme for the
Government servants are uncertain, even the status of organizations in the Banking and Insurance Sectors could also
undergo change.  In the emerging scenario of economic liberalization, the Banking and Insurance sectors are likely
to open up to public equity participation.  In such an eventuality, drastic changes are likely in the institutional
structures affecting, inter-alia the conditions of service in these organizations.  Since any future scheme for
encouraging mobility between these sectors and the Government can only be effective prospectively, appropriate
decision in the matter can be taken only when the new pension scheme is in operation, after taking into an account
the conditions prevailing in Banking and Insurance sectors at the time.”
 
13.       Thereafter, another reference was sent to the Ministry of Finance on April 17, 2003 requesting them to furnish the
salient features of the proposed pension scheme. The Ministry of Finance vide their communication dated August 8, 2003
further informed as under:-
 
"In view of the Budget announcement 2003-04, Government has decided to introduce a defined contribution pension
scheme for new entrants to Government service, except to the armed forces in the first instance, which shall also be
available on a voluntarily basis, to others. The proposed scheme would be applicable only to those employees who
join the Government service after the scheme is put in operation. Contribution will be shared equally in the case of
Government employees, between the Government and the employees. However, there will be no contribution from the
Government in respect of individuals who are not Government employees. The new pension scheme will be portable,
allowing transfer of the benefits in case of change of employment, and will go into individual pension accounts
with Pension Funds. Pension Funds will be regulated through a new and independent Pension Fund Regulatory and
Development Authority. The scheme would also be available to persons in the unorganized sector on a voluntary
basis".
 
14.       The Committee considered the comments furnished by the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on
the subject at its meeting held on the 16
th September, 2004. The Committee did not agree to the Ministry's request for
dropping its recommendations on the subject as contained in its 117 th Report. Further, the Committee observed that though
the new Contributory Pension Scheme is applicable only for the new incumbents in Central Government Services, its
recommendations as contained in the 117
th report were still relevant for the existing Government employees. Accordingly, a
reference was sent to the Ministry vide this Secretariat's communication dated the 7 th October, 2004 conveying them the
Committee's observations on the matter.
 
15.       In response thereto, the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions vide  their OM dated the 6 th
December, 2004 replied that the financial institutions like the Nationalised Banks, LIC, etc. cannot be treated at par with
other central autonomous bodies for the purpose of pensionery benefits as they are not wholly or substantially financed like
the central autonomous bodies by the Government. It further submitted that the interpretation of Government orders has been
settled in Law through judicial pronouncements and the matters relating to counting of past services under mobility orders
are to be processed as per the existing orders. Thus, the Ministry, reiterating their earlier stand, stated that re-opening of the
matter, which has already been settled and accepted at the stage, will result in administrative problems, financial burden and
litigations.
 
16.              The Committee again considered the matter at its meeting held on the 7 th January, 2005 and decided to have further
information/comments on (i) the background of the matter, the issues involved and the stages through which the matter
progressed (ii) the implications of the Committee’s recommendations and the extent of judicial scrutiny of the issues
involved and (iii) the finality of the judicial decisions which are contrary to the Committee’s recommendations and also if
the matter has gone up to the Supreme Court. The Ministry vide  their latest OM dated the 15 th April 2005 have since
furnished their reply (Annexure-V)  on each of the issues raised therein. However, the Ministry reiterating their stand have
again requested for dropping of this matter.
 
17.     The Committee considered the position as furnished by the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pension vide
their O.M. dated the 15th April, 2005 and noted that the matter had already been settled through judicial pronouncement. The

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
Committee also considered the background of the matter, the judicial pronouncements on the subject and the implication of
implementing the Committee’s recommendations as pointed out by the Ministry and decided not to pursue the
recommendation as contained in the 117th Report.
            *****
II
Cost Accounting Records (Electricity Industry) Rules, 2001.
 
            The Cost Accounting Records (Electricity Industry) Rules, 2001, framed under the Companies Act, 1956 were
examined and a questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of Company Affairs on the January 10, 2003 for
furnishing their comments. The Ministry vide
 their communication dated the 16th February, 2003 furnished their comments.
 
            The Committee considered the subject matter at its meeting held on the 15
th June, 2004. The Committee noted the
comments furnished by the Ministry on the various points raised in the questionnaire except on point no. 1 wherein it desired
that further clarifications be sought. Accordingly, further clarifications was sought on point no. 1 on the 31
st August, 2004,
and reply to the same was received on the 15 th September, 2004. The points raised, Ministry's comments and Committee's
recommendations are as follows:-
 
1.)        Point Raised:-
 
            The Cost Accounting Records (Electricity Industry) Rules, 2001 have been framed in exercise of powers conferred
by sections 642 (1) and 209 (1) (d) of the Companies Act, 1956. Clause (d) of sub section (1) of section 209 of the
Companies Act, which relates to keeping of proper books of accounts by a Company was added in the Act with effect from
the 15
th October, 1965. When did Government include electricity industry for the purposes of keeping proper books of
accounts in terms of section 209 of the Act?
 
            Ministry's Comments (16.02.03):-
 
            The Government, in terms of section 209 (1) (d) of the Act, notified the Cost Accounting Records (Electricity
Industry) Rules, 2001 on 21 st December, 2001 vide GSR 913 (E) requiring electricity industry to keep proper books of
account with effect from the financial year commencing on or after the publication of these rules.
 
            Further query by the Committee (31.08.04):-
 
            Specify the date with effect from which the Electricity Industry was included for the purpose of keeping proper books
of accounts in terms of Section 209 of the Act.
 
 
            Ministry's Comments (15.09.04):-
 
            Cost Accounting Records (Electricity Industry) Rules, 2001, by virtue of Sub- Rule 2 of Rule 1 have become
applicable w.e.f. 21st December, 2001. According to Sub- Rule (1) of Rule 3, every Company in the Electricity Industry to
which these rules apply, shall keep proper books of accounts u/s 209 (1) (d) of Companies Act, 1956 from the financial year
commencing on or after 21.12.2001.
 
 
           
2.)        Point Raised:-
 
            Rule 4- Penalty: "If a company contravenes the provisions of rule 3, the company and every officer thereof who is in
default, including the persons referred to in sub-rule (4) of rule 3 shall, subject to provisions of section 209 of Companies
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and where the contravention is a
continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day, after the first day during which
such contravention continues."
 
            The rules have been framed in pursuance to section 209 of the Companies Act, 1956. Section 209 (5) prescribes for a
penalty of imprisonment up to 6 months and / or with fine up to Rs. 1000/- in case of failure to secure compliance of

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
provisions of section 209 by a company. The provisions of rule 4 are subject to the provisions of section 209 of the Act. On
what basis, Government are supplementing the penal provisions through subordinate legislation; should these appropriately
not form part of the principal Act?
 
            Ministry' Comments:-
 
            The Cost Accounting Records (Electricity Industry) Rules, 2001 have been framed in exercise of powers conferred by
section 642 (1) read with section 209 (1) (d) of the Companies Act, 1956. As per section 642 (2) of the said Act, "any rule
made under sub section (1) may provide that a contravention thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees and where the contravention is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees for every day, after the first day during which such contravention continues."
 
            As the empowering section for making these rules is section 642 (1) of the said Act, the penalty has been provided as
laid down under this section. Such penal provisions exist uniformly in all the rules prescribed under section 209 (1) (d) of
the said Act. Before notifying these rules, same were duly vetted by the Legislative Department also.
 
3.)        Point Raised:-
 
            A perusal of the provisions of the schedule as well as proformae A-F which have been appended to the rules give an
understanding that any company engaged in generation, transmission or bulk supply and distribution and retail supply of
electricity is required to keep a record of a large volume of information with very minute details. Further, the provisions of
the schedule, at a number of places prescribe for maintenance of "proper records"
 in many of the areas like materials,
salaries and allowances, service department expenses, utilities, workshop or repair and maintenance or tool rooms, fixed
assets and depreciation and other overhead expenses, etc.
 
            What is the objective sought to be achieved by prescribing various companies in electricity industry to keep such
detailed records in respect of their activities; secondly, the term "proper records" appearing at different places in the
schedule is also capable of varied interpretation. Whether the Ministry have any objection in substituting the term "proper
records" by some other specific expression?
 
           
 
Ministry's Comments:-
 
Authentic cost data base is not only essential for the industries to improve upon their performance and face
competitive environment, but also is extensively utilized by various Government agencies, revenue authorities, regulatory
bodies and other institutions for meeting their respective objectives. Likely benefits to the companies from such rules have
also been indicated under various para of the rules.
 
            The term "proper records" means records maintained as per normally accepted accounting principles and practices.
The Ministry has no objection in substituting the term "proper records" by some other specific expression.
           
4.)        Point Raised:-
 
            To what extend, the requirement of these rules are being complied with by the various companies falling within its
purview and what feedback, if any, has been received by the Government with regard to the practicability of the strict
compliance of the provisions of these rules?
 
            Ministry's Comments:-
 
            Feedback on compliance of the provisions of these rules would be available after some time as the industry is
required to keep cost records from the financial year commencing on or after 21st December, 2001 in terms of Rule 3 supra.
 
 
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Company Affairs have carried out and notified all the
amendments in Cost Accounting Records ( Electricity Industry) Rules , 2001as recommended by it.
*****

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
III
 
CUSTOMS HOUSE (AGENTS’ LICENCING) REGULATIONS, 2004 2002 - Examination by the Committee on
Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha.
 
                       
The Customs House (Agents’ Licensing) Regulations, 2004 framed under the Customs Act, 1962 were examined and
a questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance on the 28th September, 2004 to which the Ministry
replied on the 19th October, 2004.
 
2.         The Committee, thereafter, discussed the subject matter with the Customs Officials and the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) during its visit to Kolkata on the 25th October, 2004.  The relevant exacts from
the study visit of the Committee were forwarded to the Ministry on the 31st March, 2005 for their action taken note. Further,
the Ministry vide their OM dated the 28th July, 2005 informed the Committee that its recommendations have been
considered and accepted in principle by the Central Board of Excise and Customs and that the matter is under further
examination for effecting necessary changes/ amendments in the regulations.
 
3.         Meanwhile, the Committee decided to have inputs on the subject from the Customs Officials in the Customs
Commissionerate at Banglore during its visit to Hyderbad and Bangalore from the 7
th to 10th November, 2005. The points
referred to the Ministry, their comments/ clarifications and the Committee’s observations during its visit at Kolkata and
Bangalore thereon, are reproduced below: -
 
1.         Point referred
 
The Customs House (Agents’ Licensing) Regulations, 2004 have been brought into effect in supersession of the
regulations of 1984.  What are the consideration that led Government to come out with a new set of regulations in
supersession of the earlier ones and what are the distinctive features of the new regulations?
Ministry's reply
A high powered “Committee on Transaction Cost of Indian Exports” headed by the then Secretary (Revenue) had
recommended in the year 1999, apart from other things, some changes in the CHA regulations to take into account the
changing role of Custom House Agents ( in relation to export activities).
Further, the Kelkar Committee on Indirect Taxes had also made recommendations in December, 2002, for
amendment to the CHALR, 1984, to make them more efficient and competent in promoting international trade.  This has
already been communicated to the field formations under Ministry’s letter F. No. 502/4/2004-CUS-VI dated 8
th March,
2004.
            The salient charges in CHLR, 2004 as compared to CHALR, 1984 are the following: -
1.
                  The system of giving temporary CHA licences has been abolished.
2.                  Written examination would be conducted by DGI on all India basis.
3.                  The CHAs will now be given a time period of seven years to pass both the written and oral examinations to be
eligible for a licence.
4.                  A CHA once licensed would be able to operate at all customs stations all over India after a simple intimation to
the jurisdictional Commissioner.
5.                  The fees to be charged by CHAs from their clients would be determined by market forces.
6.                  The period of validity of CHA licence would be ten years.
7.                  On the demise of the CHA, his legal heir would be allowed to continue with the CHA work subject to his
clearing the CHA examination within two years.
8.                  The educational qualification for CHA is being raised to that of a professional degree holder with working
knowledge of computers and customs procedures.  The CHA will also be required to be familiar with allied laws

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
as well as the Prevention of Corruption Act.
9.                  The H-card holder will continue to work as an H-card holder even if he fails in the Regulation 19 examination
(which would have entitled him to a G-card).
10.              In case of misdemeanor by the CHA, which does not necessitate either suspension or revocation of licence, his
security deposit may be forfeited, in part or in whole.
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
The Committee noted the circumstances under which the regulations of 1984 were superseded by a new set of
regulations in 2004 as also the salient changes brought about through the new regulations related to permitting the legal heirs
to continue with the CHA work subject to his clearing the CHA examination within two years.  The Committee desired to
know the logic behind such a dispensation.  The Committee also sought clarifications on the type of cards available and their
distribution, the manner of calculating the period of 7 years of passing the examination and whether any reservation was
prescribed for the SC/ST.  The Committee was apprised of the position.
 Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
 The Committee noted the position and decided not to pursue the point further.
2.         Point referred
The regulations are supposed to have come into force with effect from the date of their publication in the official
gazette. What is the date of notification of the regulations and on what date these regulations were laid on the Table of both
Houses of Parliament?
 
Ministry's reply
      These Regulations were notified in the Official Gazette on 23
rd February, 2004, in the Gazette of India Extraordinary,
Part II vide GSR  132 (E).
      These Regulations were laid on the Table of the House on the following dates.
      Lok Sabha                      Friday 9th July, 2004
      Rajya Sabha                   Tuesday 6th July, 2004
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
The Committee noted the details regarding the date of notification of the regulations in the official gazette as well as
their laying on the Table of the two Houses of Parliament.
 
Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
The Committee noted the position.
3.      Point referred
 As per regulation 3, any person carrying on the business of a customs house agent should hold a licence granted
under the regulations.  But regulation 3 lays down three exceptions to this.  These exceptions are in the case of (i) an
importer or exporter transacting business solely on his own account, (ii) an employee of any person or a firm transacting
business generally on behalf of such person or firm and holding an I-card or temporary pass issued by the Deputy
Commissioner Customs and (iii) an agent employed for one or more vessels or aircrafts in order solely to enter or clear such
vessels or aircrafts for work incidental to such employment.
(i)
                 What is the basis and justification for granting exceptions as mentioned above?
(ii)The exceptions laid down as above do not seem to be specific, particularly, the words ‘generally’, ‘solely’ and
‘work incidental to’ tend to render the provisions for varied interpretations.  Whether Government have any objection
in reviewing the exceptions so as to make the provisions specific?

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
Ministry's reply
            The licensing of CHAs is only to ensure that the importer/exporter gets the services of competent and efficient
professionals in expeditious clearance.   However, if any importer or exporter wishes to file his own documents and observe
all customs laws and procedures relating to import and export of his own consignment it may not be proper to compel such
importer or exporter to bear the cost of engaging a CHA.
            Similarly, a firm may assign one of its employees the exclusive job of clearing the firm’s consignments.  In this case
also it may not be appropriate to force the firm to engage the services of a CHA.
            In respect of vessels and aircrafts the clearance formalities in respect of regular voyages or flights are mere
technicalities since a vessel docking at a port is technically an import and a vessel leaving a port is technically an export. 
Same is the case with aircrafts.  The agent of the airlines or shipping lines is technically equipped to handle the customs
formalities, and so it would not be fair to compel such airlines/shipping lines to engage the services of CHAs.
            The word “generally” used in clause (ii) above is to cover a situation where the employee may be doing some other
work also in the firm apart from that relating to clearance of cargo.
            As regards use of the words “solely” and “work incidental to” they are meant to differentiate the clearance of
vessel/aircraft coming on regular voyage or trip from, say, regular import of a vessel for use within coastal waters or for
breaking-up.  In respect of aircrafts it would relate to regular import of an aircraft for domestic use in India.  In case of
commercial shipping it is the shipping agent who “solely” handles the import and export formalities and such work is only
“incidental to” his regular employment which is to get cargo booking.  Same is the case in respect of airlines.
            Since these expressions have been in use for more then 20 years  (it was there in the earlier Regulations also) without
any implementation problems no useful purpose will be served in reviewing/amending these provisions now.
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
The Committee had taken exception to the use of terms like “generally”, “solely” and “work incidental to” in
Regulation 3 while prescribing exceptions to the requirement of holding a license by a person to carry on the business of a
customs house agent.
            The Committee was informed that the provisions of Regulations 3 had not caused any inconvenience to the
department and, therefore, the existing provisions could be retained.
Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
            The Committee pointed out that the Ministry had not carried out amendment in Regulation 3 and it desired to know
the views of the representatives at Bangalore on the Committee’s suggestion on Regulation 3.  The Committee noted that the
representatives Bangalore Commissionerate also did not feel the necessity of any change in Regulation 3.
4.
      Point referred
As per regulation 4, the Commissioner of Customs has been authorized to invite applications for grant of such
number of licences as assessed by him to act as customs house agents by means of notice as well as through publication in at
least two newspapers.  What is the basis of assessing the number of licences to be granted? Secondly, whether Government
are putting such notices on Department’s website also and, if so, would it    not be appropriate to provide for it in the
regulations?
Ministry's reply
            The Commissioner of Customs assesses the number of licenses to be granted on the basis of the workload in the
customs stations and the number of CHAs available to handle such work.  Though some guidelines have been framed (1000
documents per CHA per year for major Custom House and 500 documents per CHA per year for other ports) for assessing
requirement of additional CHAs these are more in the nature of guiding principles rather than statutory requirements.
(Instructions F. No. 502/5/93-Custom VI dated 18.5.1994).
            There are no instructions right now that every such notice should necessarily be placed on the Department’s website

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
also.  It is left to the discretion of the Commissioner to decide on the best mode of publication subject to the minimum
prescribed in the regulation.  If the Committee recommends we could instruct all Commissioners of Customs to do so in
future.
            It may not be advisable to make this mandatory by amending the regulations, since the whole process could be struck
down merely on the ground that a Commissioner has not put the notice on the website though he may have published it in
two newspapers as well as put it on the Notice Board of the Custom House.  It is felt that these matters are best addressed
through executive instructions.
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
The Committee noted the explanation furnished by the representatives with regard to the basis for assessing the
number of licenses to be granted.  As regards the suggestion to put the notice on the department’s website, the Committee
noted with satisfaction that the representatives were agreeable to instruct the Commissioner of Customs to place the notice
on the department’s website also in future.
Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
            The Committee noted that Regulation 4 had been amended as per the Committee’s suggestion.
5.         Point referred
Regulation 5 deals with the application for licences, the format of which has been appended to the regulations as
form ‘A’.  Further, regulation 5 lays down certain information, which is required to be furnished by the applicant.
            What is the justification for prescribing the information desired in the main regulations when a format of application
has been appended to the regulations; It is seen that the conditions mentioned in regulation 5 have been briefly summarized
in the form of the application also and to this extent, there is duplication.  Whether Government have any objection in
putting these conditions in the form itself so as to (a) avoid duplication and (b) facilitate the applicant in finding the
conditions at one place which will also reduce the chances of anybody missing to take note of them?  Lastly the application
form appended to the regulation as form ‘A’ is not in the format of an application form.  It only lists desired information.  It
is not possible to put it in the format of an application? 
Ministry's reply
            The application contains a number of columns whereas Regulation 5 merely indicates the names of persons, which
should appear in the application form.
            If the Committee recommends the format of Form-A could be amended to make it in a letter form.  However, the
practice is that form-A is forwarded with a covering letter from the applicant.
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
The Committee noted with satisfaction that the representatives were agreeable to revise the format of form ‘A’ into a
letter form in order to avoid duplication.  The Committee hoped that this would not only avoid duplication but also facilitate
applicants in laying their hand at all the conditions at one place.
Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
            The Committee noted that Regulation 5 has been amended based upon its suggestion but it felt that FORM A was
still not in the appropriate form.  The Committee desired the Ministry to look into this aspect
6.         Point referred
Regulation 6 deals with the conditions to be fulfilled by the applicant for licence.  It states that the applicant under
regulation 5 or a person who has passed the examination referred to in regulation 8 shall have to prove certain specified
things to the Commissioner of Customs.
            In what context, the words “a person who has passed the examination” appear in regulation 6; does the term
‘applicant’ appearing in regulations 5,6 and 8 not refer to a person who makes an application for appearing in the
examination; in this context, regulation 8 clearly specifics that an applicant who satisfies the requirement of regulations 5
and 6 shall be required to appear in the written and oral examination; how a person who has passed the examination can be
an applicant under regulation 6; what are the comments of the Ministry in this regard?

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
Ministry's reply
            Regulation 6 refers to categories of persons, namely:
(i)                  An applicant referred to in clause (b) of Sub-regulation 2 and 3 of Regulation 5, and
(ii)               A person (and not an applicant) who has passed examination referred to in regulation 8.
It is, therefore, clear that a person who has passed the examination under regulation 8 is not an 'applicant’ referred to
under rule 6.
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
The Committee noted the explanation furnished by the representatives that a person who has passed the examination
under regulation 8 is not an 'applicant’ referred to under rule 6
Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
The Committee noted with satisfaction the explanation furnished by the Ministry and decided not to pursue the matter
further.
.7.      Point referred
As per regulation 6(a), the applicant has to prove to the satisfaction of the Commissioner of Customs that he or she is
authorized employee possessing certain specified qualifications.  What is the rationale when the licence is to be granted to
the applicant?
Ministry's reply
            The applicant, in case of a proprietorship or partnership firm, is the proprietor or the partner.  In case of a company
the applicant could be a duly authorized employee .  Thus in either case the qualification relates to the person who will
actually be engaged in the clearance of the goods through customs.
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
The Committee noted the explanation furnished by the representatives to its query regarding the granting of license to
the applicant.
Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
The Committee noted the explanation furnished by the Ministry and decided not to pursue the matter further.
.8.      Point referred
As per regulation 6(b), the applicant has to satisfy the Commissioner of Customs about his financial viability and
furnish proof-evidencing possession of assets of value not less than Rs. 2 lakhs.
            The amount of Rs. 2 lakhs specified in regulation 6(b) seems to be on the lower side.  What are the comments of the
Ministry?
Ministry's reply
            The earlier limit was Rs. 1,00,000 for metros and Rs.50, 000 for other cities.  This has been raised to Rs.2, 00,000 for
all categories, since now a person registered in any station can practice at all the other customs stations.  It is felt that this is
adequate considering the fact that some CHAs may be operating only at small Inland container Depots (ICD)
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
In the Committee’s view, the value of assets prescribed i.e. 2 lakhs, to satisfy the Commissioner of customs on the
issue of financial viability under Regulation 6(b) was very much on the lower side.  The representatives, however, expressed,
the view that the limit had been revised recently from Rs.1 to 2 lakhs for the metros and that the same was adequate.
Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
The Committee noted that the representatives of the Bangalore Commissionerate also held the view that the value of
assets prescribed in Regulation 6(b) was reasonable.
9.         Point referred

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
As per proviso to regulation 8(7), knowledge of Hindi shall be considered as an additional or desirable qualification
in case a person is deputed to work exclusively in the docks.
            What is the rationale behind this?
Ministry's reply
            Normally, the workers at the dock are not conversant in English but in the local language.  That is why one of the
criterion is possession of satisfactory knowledge of a local knowledge of the customs station.  Since Hindi is the National
Language of India it has been incorporated as an additional or desirable qualification- it is not compulsory.
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
 The Committee was informed that Hindi being the national language, its knowledge was prescribed as an
additional/desirable qualification under Regulation 8(7) in case of persons deputed to work exclusively at the docks.
          Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
            The Committee noted that necessary amendment has since been carried out vide Notification dated 7.11.2005
10.       Point referred
As per regulation (8), the holder of licence under regulation 9 may authorize any one or more employees or partners
to appear in the examination on behalf of such holders of licence.  What is the significance for prescribing the requirement of
authorization by the holder of a licence for any body to appear in the examination?
Ministry's reply
            This is to allow persons with hands-on experience of customs clearance formalities to appear for examination under
Regulation 8 so as to enable them to apply for CHA licence on their own later on. Further, certain documents can be signed
only by a person who has passed the regulation 8 examination.  (Refer sub-regulation 5 of regulation 19).
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
The Committee noted the explanation furnished by the Ministry regarding authorization by the holder of a licence to
allow anybody to appear in the examination under Regulation 8.
Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
            The Committee noted the explanation furnished by the Ministry.
11.       Point referred
As per regulation 9 (3), the Commissioner of Customs may reject an application for grant of licence to act as
Customs House Agent if the applicant is involved in fraud or forgery, etc.
            The work ‘involved’ is capable of varied interpretation.  Whether government have any objection in substituting this
work suitably so as to make the provisions specific?
Ministry's reply
            The word “involved” is basically meant to take care of even those cases where some investigation/enquiry may be
still in progress relating to any fraud or forgery involving the applicant.  The Committee may recommend a suitable word as
considered appropriate.
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
The Committee noted that the Ministry had agreed to replace the word “involved” with some more appropriate word,
which is specific and not liable to be interpreted differently.
Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
            The Committee noted that necessary amendment has since been carried out vide Notification dated 7.11.2005.
12.       Point referred
As per regulation 10, before granting a licence, the Commissioner of Customs shall require the applicant to enter into,
if necessary, a surety bond in the prescribed format and shall also require him to furnish a bank guarantee, etc. for an amount

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
of Rs.50, 000/- for carrying out the business as a customs house agent.
            What is the justification for leaving the requirement of surety bond to the discretion of the Commissioner of Customs,
should the regulation not clearly specify in this behalf?  Secondly, the amount of bank guarantee prescribed in regulation 10,
i.e., Rs. 50,000/-seems to be on the lower side.  What are comments of the Ministry in this regard?
Ministry's reply
            The expression used in the Regulation is “The Commissioner of Customs shall require the applicant to enter into a
bond if Form D and, if necessary a surety bond in Form E,,,,,,,”  In this case two types of bonds are there, one is the normal
bond and the  other is a surety bond.  Depending upon the credit worthiness or status of the company seeking the CHA
licence the Commissioner may ask the company to execute the appropriate bond.
            In the earlier Regulations the amount was Rs. 25, 000/- for major Customs stations and Rs., 10,000/- for other
stations.  The Committee may recommend a higher amount if considered necessary.
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
As regards vesting of discretion with the Commissioner of Customs on the requirements of security bond, the
Committee was informed that there were two types of bonds, a normal bond and a surety bond, and depending on the credit
worthiness or status of the company seeking CHA license, the Commissioner could ask the company to execute the
appropriate bond.  The Committee, however, noted with satisfaction that the Ministry were agreeable to increase the amount
of bank guarantee suitable from the existing value of Rs.50, 000.
Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
            The Committee noted that the amount of bank guarantee prescribed in Regulation 10 has been raised from Rs.50,
000/- to Rs.75,000/.  As regards the vesting of discretion with the Commissioner of Customs in the matter of requirement of
sureties bond, the Committee noted the views of Bangalore Commissionerate that such vesting of discretion was fair and
necessary.
13.       Point referred
As per regulation 11, a licence granted is valid for a period of 10 years from the date of issue and its renewal is also
for the same period.
            The period of validity/renewal of licence, i.e., 10 years seems to be on the higher side.  What is the justification for
granting/renewing licnece for such long spells in one go; Can this period not be reduced for a closer scrutiny of the activity?
Ministry's reply
            A period of ten years has been taken to provide some stability to the professional working of CHA.  However, the
licence can always be suspended or revoked in case of gross misdemeanor as indicated in regulation 20.
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
The representatives explained to the Committee the basis for prescribing a 10 year validity period for the license.
Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
The representatives explained to the Committee the basis for prescribing a 10 year validity period for the licence.
14.       Point referred
  Regulation 13 casts a number of obligations on the customs house agent.  Further, the customs house agent is
authorized to transact business through its employees also.
            What is the mechanism in place to ensure that the customs house agent or its employees comply with the obligations
mentioned in regulation 13? What regulatory/determent powers have been vested with the authorities to ensure that the
customs house agents discharge their obligations and to what extent such powers are actually being used by the authorities?
Ministry's reply
            The best way of monitoring the performance of CHAs is through feed-back form the trade including competitors. 
Whenever a complaint is received it is inquired into and appropriate action taken.  Sometimes during investigation of custom

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
offence cases the role of the CHA is also examined and appropriate action taken as considered necessary.
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
The representatives appreciated the point made by the Committee regarding regulatory powers vested with the
authorities for ensuring that the custom house agents discharged their obligations.  The Committee desired Government to
come out with appropriate suggestions in order to have a more regulated system with a higher compliance level.  In this
context, the Committee desired to know the number of Customs Officers suspended in cases where Custom House Clearing
Agents were involved in alleged export frauds involving wrongful claims of export incentives. The Committee desired to
have details of action taken by Kolkata Customs against CHAs and their employees in the last three years to be provided by
Kolkata Customs House, which the representatives agreed to furnish. The Ministry vide their communication dated the 19 th
November, 2004 furnished the information that a total of 7 (seven) Supdts and 12 (twelve) Inspectors were suspended in
alleged export frauds involving wrongful claims of export incentives.
Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
            The Committee noted the position as brought out before it in the matter of compliance of the Regulation in the
Bangalore Commissionerate.
15.       Point referred
As per regulation 14, in case a company holding a licence undergoes any change in directors, etc., it shall forthwith
be communicated by such licensee to the Commissioner of Customs.
            The word 'forthwith’ does not seem to be specific.  Whether government have any objection in prescribing some
time period instead?
Ministry's reply
            The word “forthwith” is meant to convey that the communication be sent as early as possible and due diligence is
observed.  Once a specific time limit is prescribed the provisions will become very rigid and the Commissioner may have no
discretion if the specified time limit is not observed.  Though the word is liable to subjective interpretation, the
Commissioners are senior officers who are expected to take into consideration all facts and circumstances regarding the time
taken by the company to intimate changes in its Directors etc.
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
            The Committee had objected to the use of the word “forthwith” in Regulation 14 and had desired that a specific
period should be prescribed, instead.  The representatives agreed to prescribe 60 days for intimating to the Commissioner of
Customs the change in Directors in a company.
Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
The Committee noted that Regulation 14 has been amended vide Notification dated 7.11.2005.
16.       Point referred
As per regulation 19(8), a customs house agent is required to exercise necessary supervision to ensure proper conduct
of his employees and it makes the agent responsible for all acts/omissions of his employees.
            What are the penal and other consequences that flow in case a customs house agent or his employee violate any legal
provisions in the discharge of their function as a customs house agent?
Ministry's reply
            The penal provisions are provided in Regulation 20 of the CHALR, 2004.
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
            The Committee noted the penal provisions, like revocation of license or forfeiture of part or whole of the security, as
mentioned in Regulation 20, in case a Custom House Agent failed to comply with any provision of the regulations within the
jurisdiction of the Commissioner of Customs or anywhere else.
Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
The Committee noted the position at the Bangalore Commissionerate as brought out before it in the matter of
regulation of activities of employees/agents of Custom House Agents.
17.       Point referred
Regulation 21 provides that the Commissioner of Customs may prohibit any agent for working in one or more section
of the Customs stations if he is satisfied that the agent has not fulfilled his obligation under regulation 13.
            Can the regulation not be modified so as to prescribe that such order of prohibition should carry the reasons recorded
in writing in order to avoid arbitrariness in such decisions?
Ministry's reply
            Through it is not specially mentioned in regulation 21, the general principles of natural justice have to be observed
and any curtailment or suspension of rights of any person can be done only after offering the person to present his case and
after passing a reasoned order.  If the Committee recommend these provisions could be made more explicit in the Regulation
itself.
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)
            . The Committee noted that the Ministry were agreeable to make the provisions of the regulation more explicit in
order to allay any apprehension of arbitrary action.
Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
The Committee noted the position as explained by the representatives of Bangalore Commissionerate.
18.       Point referred
The regulations do not lay down any time schedule for completing the process of scrutiny of application, the conduct
of examination as well as the grant of licence.
            Whether Government have any objection in specifying some time limits so as to ensure time bound completion of
these important activities in the overall interest of efficiency?
            Ministry's reply
            Though no time limit has been prescribed for scrutiny of applications, time limit for holding examination (twice
every year) has been prescribed in Regulation 8.
            No time limit has been prescribed for grant of licence.  However, these could be prescribed through executive
instructions.
            Specifying time limit for scrutiny of application and grant of licence, in the Regulations themselves would make the
regulations very rigid and may result in grant of licences by default.
Committee's Observations (25/10/2004)     
The Committee noted that under Regulation 8, a time limit for holding the examination (twice every year) had been
prescribed even though the Regulations did not prescribe any time schedule for scrutiny of applications.  The Committee was
apprised of the Ministry’s viewpoint that prescribing a schedule for scrutiny of applications might make the regulations very
rigid.  The Committee, however, noted the Ministry’s suggestion to lay down some schedule for scrutiny of applications
through executive instructions.
Committee's Observations (9/11/2005)
            The Committee noted with satisfaction the explanation of the Ministry regarding the time limit for holding
examination.
 
4.         The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance have since published the Customs House Agents
Licensing (First Amendment) Regulations, 2005 vide notification No G.S.R.653 (E) dated the 7
th November, 2005
(Annexure) carrying out the recommendations of the Committee as follows:
 Point 9 (Regulations 8(7)): By omitting the words "an additional or ", thereby making Hindi a desirable qualification

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
instead of " an additional or desirable" qualification in case a person is to be deputed to work exclusively in the dock.
 Point 11 (Regulations 9(3)): By substituting the words "involved in" with the words "convicted of", thereby making
the provision of regulation 9 (3) more specific. As per the earlier provision, the Commissioner of the Customs had power to
reject an application for grant of licence to act as CHA if the applicant was "involved " in fraud or forgery. The Committee
felt that the word "involved in" was not precise.
 Point 15 (Regulations 14):  By substituting the words "such changes shall forthwith be communicated by such
licensee to the Commissioner of customs with the words "such changes shall forthwith be communicated by such licensee to
the Commissioner of customs within a period of sixty days of such changes".  The Committee had desired that the rule
should prescribe some specific time period within which the licensee must communicate the change in the Directors to the
Commissioner of Customs. In Committee's opinion, the word "forthwith" was not specific.
            As regards point no. 5 regarding regulation 5 the Committee recommends that the Ministry should modify the Form
'A' also without which the modification in Regulation 5 vide the Customs House Agents Licensing (First Amendment)
Regulations, 2005 did not lead to the desired result. . On the rest of the points the Committee is satisfied with the explanation
furnished by the Ministry.
*****
IV
Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993- Implementation of 128
th Report of the
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha.
 
 
                    The Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 and the rules framed thereunder were
examined by the Committee. The matter was reported to the House by the Committee on 12th June, 1998 vide its 118th
Report, and the same was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance, Banking Division, for action taken note. The action taken
note furnished by the Ministry was perused by the Committee and the matter was again reported to the House on 14
th March,
2000 vide 128th Report of the Committee. The Committee in its 128th Report had recommended as under: -
            "The Committee considered the subject matter at its meeting held on 1st march 2000. The Committee notes with
satisfaction that its recommendations vide paras 4.4 (b) (d) and (g) have found favour with the Ministry of Finance. The
Committee hopes that the legislation incorporating the Committee's suggestions will be got passed through Parliament by the
Ministry of Finance during the on- going Budget Session. As regards the Committee's recommendation as contained in para
4.4 (g), it notes with satisfaction the comments of Ministry of Finance that the suggestion, which requires amendment to the
rules, would be considered in the next stage. The Committee, in this context, recommends further that the new rules should
also empower the Tribunal to notify the defaulters names even on the website of the DRT/Bank/Financial Institution.
            The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the comments of the Ministry of Finance as also the
recommendations of the Working Group of the Reserve Bank of India with regard to paras 4.4 (a), (e) and (f) of the 118
th
report of the Committee. On the Committee's recommendation vide para 4.4 (a) for restructuring of Debt Recovery Tribunals
and Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunals on the lines of the Revenue Courts and Special Courts with codified rules, the
Committee notes the observation of the Working Group of the Reserve Bank of India in the matter viz. that no specific
advantage is foreseen by effecting such a change. The Committee decides not to pursue this recommendation further. The
Committee also agrees with the suggestion of the Working Group of the Reserve Bank of India on its recommendation as
contained in para 4.4(f) regarding authorization of the Tribunals under the Act/Rules to order deposit of 50% of the
certificate amount while setting aside an ex-party order. The Committee agrees that such issues should be better left at the
discretion of the Presiding Officer of the Debt Recovery Tribunal.
The Committee reviewed its recommendation as contained in para 4.4 (e) regarding lowering of the fiscal limit from

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
Rs. 10 lakhs to Rs. 2 lakhs for the purpose of bringing more cases within the cognizance of the Debt Recovery Tribunals
(DRT). The Committee notes that the Working Group of the Reserve Bank of India also supports the proposal for reduction
in the fiscal limit from Rs. 10 lakhs to Rs. 2 lakhs but, prior to that, they in the first instance want more DRTs so that they are
not overburdened with abnormally large number of cases. The Committee feels that setting up of more DRTs is in fact the
need of the hour and Government should take prompt steps in this regard. The Committee accordingly reiterates its earlier
recommendations for reduction in the fiscal limit from Rs. 10 lakhs to Rs. 2 lakhs so that more number of cases of recovery
due to banks and the financial institutions are covered by the DRTs."                                                                    
                                             
            2.         Relevant extracts from the 128
th Report were forwarded to the Ministry of Finance for necessary action on the
16th March, 2000. The Ministry vide their communication dated 21st May, 2001 furnished the action taken note. The
recommendations of the Committee, opinion of the Working Group and the Ministry's Action Taken Note are reproduced
below: -
 1.        Recommendations of the Committee on para (4.4 (a))  (118th  Report )                            
               Debts Recovery Tribunals and Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunals should be restructured on the lines of Revenue
Courts/Special Courts with codified rules and procedure like code of civil procedure and be liberated from the deemed
judicial status to a full fledged judicial authority exclusively for the purpose of recovery of debts with adequate infrastructure
so as to make the systems meaningful, effective and deterrent.
Opinion of the Working Group
   As regards the suggestion made by the Committee in para 4.4 (a) of the Report, that the DRT and DRATs could be
restructured on the lines of Revenue Courts, Special Courts with codified rules and procedure and liberated from the deemed
judicial status. In the opinion of the working Group, there is no need to make any structural change in the status of the DRTs
or DRATs. While appreciating the suggestion made by the Committee, the Working Group does not find any specific
advantage in making change in the structure of the tribunals as the purpose for establishing the DRTs can be achieved with
same force without being subjected to the rigour of the codified procedure and law. In para 2.28 of the report, the Working
Group has already recommended the penal provision for non-compliance with the order by the tribunal. This will make
DRTs and DRATs more effective and deterrent.
            Action taken note (21/5/2001) 
               Keeping in view the opinion of the Working Group no action appears necessary on this
issue.                                                                           
2.         Recommendations of the Committee on para (4.4 (b)) (118
th  Report )        
   In order to make the debt recovery mechanism effective, meaningful and deterrent, summary powers should be
given to Recovery Officers. Like the Income Tax Officer or the Customs Officer, he should have magisterial powers
including the attachment power.                    
            Action taken note (21/5/2001)    
               Section 19 of DRT Act, 1993 has been suitably amended in order to make the Debts Recovery mechanism
effective, meaningful and deterrent.                                                                        
3.         Recommendations of the Committee on para (4.4 (c))   (118
th  Report )                           
               The geographical jurisdiction of each of the existing Tribunal is very vast. There is an urgent need to have separate
Tribunals for large States so that the burden of cases in the existing tribunals is lessened.
            Action taken note (21/5/2001)                                                                              
               Initially, there were 10 DRTs and one DRAT to deal with the cases of litigants. Keeping in view the large number
of cases pending in DRTs, it was decided to increase the number of DRTs to 22 and DRATs to 5. Action has been initiated

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
to establish seven more DRTs.
            Action taken note (13/10/2006) 
            There are now 30 DRTs and 5 DRATs dealing with the cases of litigants. Action has been initiated to establish three
more DRTs at Ahmedabad, Chennai and Madurai.
4.         Recommendations of the Committee on para (4.4 (d ) )                              
   Recovery Officers should not have more than 300 cases at a time. Accordingly, more number of Tribunals and
under each Tribunal more number of Recovery Officers should be appointed to ensure speedy recovery of bank dues. The
Recovery Officer should be provided with the assistants to act as his representatives to affect the orders passed/to be passed
by him under the provision of Income-Tax Act, to recover the bank dues.
            Action taken note (21/5/2001)                                                                              
               Initially each DRT was sanctioned 19 posts including the post of Presiding Officer. Thereafter the manpower
strength in each DRT had been raised to 29 employees. Further, the Act has been amended suitably. Section 7 sub section (1)
reads as under: -
              "The Central Government shall provide the Tribunal with one or more Recovery Officers and such other officers
and employees as that Government may think fit".
   Subsequently, one additional post of Recovery Officer has been created in each tribunal raising the total manpower
strength to 30 in each Tribunal.
5.         Recommendations of the Committee on para (4.4 (e))  (118
th Report)
               Under Section 1 (4) of the Act, the Central Government may notify that the provision of the Act shall also apply to
cases of not less than Rs. 2 lakhs thereby widening the definition of debts to include the liability of any person to the Bank of
Financial Institution and should also specifically include any Debt secured by mortgage, hypothecation, pledge etc. or
otherwise.                            
Opinion of the Working Group
                In para 4.4 (e), the suggestion made by the Committee is that the Central Government may notify that the
provisions of the Act shall also apply to the cases of not less than Rs. 2 lakh and also widening the definition of "Debt" to
include the liability of any persons to the banks and financial institutions and should also specifically include any debt
secured by mortgage, hypothecation, pledge, etc. The Working Group is of the opinion that having regard to the
infrastructural constraints and large number of court cases, which have been transferred to the DRTs under Section 31 of the
Act, there is acute pressure on the DRTs, resulting in inordinate delay in disposal of applications pending before them. Once
recommendations made by the Working Group to appoint more DRTs is accepted by the Government and the number of
pending cases before them come down, the Government may consider lowering the present limit of Rs. 10 lakh in terms of
Section. 1(4) of the Act, so that more cases of recovery of bank dues are covered by the DRTs. As regards the suggestion to
widen in the definition of "debt", to include debts secured by mortgage, hypothecation, etc., the Working Group finds that
the expression "debt" as defined in Section 2 (g) of the Act, already includes dues from any person whether secured or
unsecured, subsisting and legally recoverable on the date of application. Since the secured debt is already included in the
definition of "debt", it is not necessary to specifically mention debts secured by mortgage, hypothecation, pledge or
otherwise in the definition of the "debt".
            Action taken note (21/5/2001)                                                                              
                        There is already a provision in the Act, which provides that the Government by Notification can empower the
DRTs to adjudicate cases of any amount between Rs. 1 lakh and above. However, because of large number of cases of Rs. 10
lakh and above with the DRTs, at the moment, Government does not consider lowering the limit to Rs. 2 lakhs which will
further increase the burden on the DRTs. Initially, there were 10 DRTs and one DRAT to deal with the cases of litigants.
Keeping in view the large number of cases pending in DRTs, it was decided to increase the number of DRTs to 22 and

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
DRATs to 5. Action has been initiated to establish seven more DRTs. With the increase in the number of DRTs, the debt
recovery process will improve considerably. Once the pendency of cases before DRTs comes down to a reasonable number,
the Government may consider lowering the present limit.
             Government is also considering settlement of cases below Rs. 10 lacs through the mechanism of Lok Adalats.
Supreme Court, to whom a request was made has informed that the Director National Legal Services Authority, have been
advised to examine the matter. This alternative will provide expeditious avenue for disposal of cases below Rs. 10 lakhs.
Action taken note (13/10/2006) 
               Subsequent to the enactment of the Recovery of Debts due to Bank and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 another
legislation named The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002
was enacted to deal with cases of default in repayment of debts above one lakh. In view of the above, there is no need to
reduce the fiscal limit of Rs. 10 lakhs for filing Original Application before the DRTs.
            Keeping in view the opinion of the Working Group no action appears necessary in this issue.
6.         Recommendations of the Committee on para (4.4 (f))                              
               The defendants are generally avoiding participating in the proceedings before the Tribunal, which leads to ex-party
orders being passed by it. However, at the state of certificate proceedings, they appear before the Tribunal and pray for
setting aside the ex-party order on flimsy grounds. There should be a provision in the Act/ Rules to the effect that if the
Tribunal is satisfied and decides to set aside the ex-party order, then that order would be subject to payment of 50% of the
certificate amount.
Opinion of the Working Group
               In para 4.4(f), the Committee has observed that the defendants are generally avoiding participation in the
proceedings before the tribunal, leading to ex-parte orders, but at the stage of certificate proceedings, they appear before the
tribunal and pray for the setting aside ex-parte orders on flimsy grounds. The Committee has, therefore, proposed that there
should be provision in the Act/Rules that if the tribunal is satisfied and decides to set aside ex-parte order, then the order
should be made subject to payment of 50% of the certificate amount. The Working Group in para 2.14 of the report, has
recommended that it should be the duty of the applicant bank/financial institution to ensure that the due service is effected on
the borrower. Once the lending banks/institutions take interest in effecting service of notices on their borrowers, the
borrower is unlikely to remain absent from the proceedings and in spite of the proper service on him, he chooses not to
participate in the proceedings and the ex-parte order is passed by the tribunal, the tribunals should avoid entertaining requests
for setting aside such ex-parte order is passed by the tribunal, the tribunals should avoid entertaining requests for setting
aside such ex-parte orders unless very cogent reasons are shown by the borrower/defendant why he could not participate in
the proceedings on the notified date. In such a case, in the opinion of the Working Group, it should be left to the discretion of
the PO of DRTs to decide whether to set aside such ex-parte order and if so, subject to what terms. However, it will not be
proper to curtail the discretion of the PO by providing payment of 50% of the certificate amount of setting aside such ex-
parte order.
            Action taken note (21/5/2001)                                                                              
   Keeping in view the opinion of the Working Group no action appears necessary in this issue.
7.         Recommendations of the Committee on para (4.4 (g))                              
               Provision should be incorporated in the Act/Rules empowering the Tribunals to notify the names of defaulters in
the newspapers after the decrees have been passed.
Opinion of the Working Group
               The last suggestion made by the Committee in para 4.4(g) is to empower the tribunal to notify the names of the
defaulters after the decrees have been passed. In the opinion of the Working Group, the suggestion is welcomed and we
recommend accordingly. However, such notification of names of defaulters should be done only after the period prescribed

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
for filing appeal has elapsed.
            Action taken note (21/5/2001)                                                                             
               Steps have been taken to incorporate the provisions in the Rules empowering the tribunals to notify the names of
the defaulters in the newspapers after the decree have been passed. The rules have been framed and sent to Legislative
Department., Ministry of Law for vetting.
Action taken note (4/4/2003) 
   The Ministry furnished a copy of the Debts Recovery Tribunal (Procedure) Amendment Rules, 2003 incorporating
the Committee's suggestion on para 4.4 (g) by inserting rule 15 A providing for publishing the names of the defaulters in the
newspapers. (Annexure)
                                                                    
3.         The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance, Banking Division, have taken necessary action
on all of its recommendations as follows:
            · Para 4.4(b):    Section 19 of DRT Act, 1993 has been suitably amended to make Debts Recovery mechanism
effective, meaningful and deterrent. The Committee had recommended that the Recovery Officer of DRT should be given
the magestrial powers of summary proceedings, attachments, etc on the like of Income Tax Officer or the Customs Officer. 
            · Para 4.4 (c):        The number of the Tribunal has been increased to 30 DRTs and 5 DRATs, to lessen the burden of
cases in the existing tribunals.                                    
            · Para 4.4(d):     The Committee had recommended increase  in the manpower of each DRT, which has since been
raised to 30 in each Tribunal.    Initially each DRT had been sanctioned 19 posts, including the post of Presiding Officer.
· Para 4.4 (g):      By inserting rule 15 A , the Government have made provision for publishing the name of the
defaulters in the newspaper.  
            On the rest of the recommendations vide  para 4.4 (a ), (e ) and (f ),the Committee notes the explanation furnished by
the Ministry and have decided not to pursue these points anymore.
*****
V
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Procedure for Holding Enquiry by Enquiry Officer and Imposing Penalty)
Regulations, 2002 - Examination by the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha.
 
 
 
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (Procedure for Holding Enquiry by Enquiry Officer and Imposing
Penalty) Regulations-2002 framed under the SEBI Act, 1992 were examined and a questionnaire was forwarded to the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on the 31
st December 2003, to which the Ministry replied on the 12th
May, 2004. The Committee also discussed the matter with the representatives of SEBI and the Ministry of Finance on the 7th
February, 2005 at Mumbai.  The points referred to the Ministry, their comments/clarifications and the Committee’s
observations thereon are reproduced below: -
I. Point raised- Regulation 5(1) – Appointment of Enquiry Officer:
As per Regulation 3, no order can be passed except after holding enquiry, Regulation 5(1) specifies that Chairman or
the Member may appoint an enquiry officer and shows that holding of enquiry is not mandatory.
   Ministry’s comments : (12.5. 2004)
In case of contravention of any provisions of the SEBI Regulations, four options are available, namely: -
(a)     Initiate proceedings for suspension or cancellation of registration of an     intermediary by appointing an enquiry
officer.
(b)     Initiate proceedings for imposition of monetary penalty under Chapter VIA of the SEBI Act, 1992 by appointing an

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
adjudicating officer.
(c)          Initiate proceedings under sections 11, 11B or 11D of the SEBI Act for       passing directions or cease and desist
orders.
(d)          Initiate proceedings for prosecution under section 24 of the SEBI Act.
The word ‘may’ has been used in the Regulation 5(1) giving an option to the Chairman/Member to take recourse to
enquiry proceedings.  The use of the word ‘shall’ could give an impression that in case of contravention of the Regulations,
the only possible course would be the appointment of enquiry officer for recommending minor or major penalty and that
other actions such as adjudication of monetary penalty, proceedings for passing directions or cease and desist orders or
prosecution proceedings will be precluded.  Such use may be viewed as contrary to the statutory intention behind sections
11, 11B, 11D, 24 and chapter VIA of the SEBI Act, which may not be competently done by means of subordinate
legislation.
     Committee’s observation :(7.2.2005)
The Committee noted that the explanation furnished by the SEBI was satisfactory.
 
II. Point raised- Regulation 7/Regulation 22
 
What is the justification of making separate Regulation 22 for manner of service of notice and whether same cannot
be included under Regulation 7.
     Ministry’s comments: (12.5. 2004)
Issue of notice has been provided at four places in the Regulations i.e.,
(a)    Regulation 7 – The notice by enquiry officer under Regulation 6 shall be served in the manner specified in
Regulation 22
(b)    Regulation 13(2) – Show cause notice to be issued by Chairman/Member upon receipt of Enquiry Report.
(c)    Regulation 13(5) – On the recommendation of enquiry officer, a notice is to be issued to the intermediary where the
Chairman/Member proposes to impose major penalty instead of the minor penalty recommended by the Enquiry
Officer.
(d)
    Regulation 16(2) – Issue of showcause notice in case of summary procedure.
Therefore, a common provision has been made, for the manner of serving of showcause notice in Regulation 22 to
avoid repetition of the same in all the above provisions i.e., notices issued under above four Regulations, can be served in a
manner as given in Regulation 22.
      Committee’s observation :(7.2.2005)
The Committee noted with satisfaction the position explained by SEBI.
III. Point raised- Regulation 8- Reply by intermediary
 
As per Regulation 8 the intermediary to whom the notice has been issued shall submit his written statement.
(i)                  Is it permissible to compel the intermediary to file written statement
(ii)                Whether it would be more appropriate to provide for recording of reason for extending the period to submit
written statement.
   Ministry’s comments: (12.5. 2004)
(i)                  We concur with the views of the Committee and hence would initiate necessary steps to substitute the word
‘shall’ by the word ‘may in Regulation 8.
(ii)                We are agreeable that the enquiry officer should be authorized to extend the period for submission of written
statement by ‘recording’ the reasons in writing therefor’.  We propose to amend the Regulations to give effect to
the proposal
   Committee’s observation :(7.2.2005)

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
(i)                  The Committee noted that SEBI had accepted its suggestion for substituting the word “shall” with the word
“may”.
(ii)                 The Committee noted that SEBI had accepted its suggestion to authorize the enquiry officer to extend the period
of submission of written statement by recording the reason in writing.
   Action Taken by the Ministry (7.6.2005)
The Ministry have notified the amendment as suggested by the Committee.
IV. Point raised-  Regulation 13- Imposition of penalty
 
What is the justification empowering enquiry officer to recommend imposition of penalties.
    Ministry’s comments: (12.5. 2004)
The enquiry officer after considering reply and submissions made at the time of hearing gives his findings as well as
recommendation for the penalty.  One more opportunity to show cause is given on the findings and recommendation.  The
intermediary can make written submissions in respect of findings and also in respect of proposed penalty.  Oral hearing is not
essential in all cases.  However, if the above procedure is not followed, the intermediaries will be required to be given one
more opportunity for oral hearing by Chairman/Member in respect of penalty to be imposed.  This may result in lengthening
the time taken in enforcement action pursuant to enquiries.
    Committee’s observation :(7.2.2005)
The Committee took note of the explanation furnished by the SEBI and found it  satisfactory.
V. Point raised- Regulation 13(2)- Issue of showcause notice
 
The issue of showcause notice should be accompanied by a copy of enquiry report.
    Ministry’s comments: (12.5. 2004)
A copy of enquiry report is invariably sent alongwith the showcause notice under Regulation 13(2).  We are
agreeable to the suggestion that it is appropriate to provide in the Regulation itself that the showcause notice shall be
accompanied with the report of the enquiry officer.
   Committee’s observation :(7.2.2005)
The Committee noted that SEBI had accepted its suggestion that a copy of the enquiry report should be sent by the
Chairman or member along with the showcause notice and  had assured the Committee to amend the provisions accordingly.
    Action Taken by the Ministry (7.6.2005)
The Ministry have notified the amendment as suggested by the Committee.
 
VI. Point raised-  Regulation 13(3)- Intermediary shall reply
 
Is it possible to compel the intermediary to respond to the showcause notice.
     Ministry’s comments: (12.5. 2004)
We are agreeable with the views of the Committee and propose to substitute the word ‘shall’ by the word ‘may’ in
Regulation 13(3).
     Committee’s observation :(7.2.2005)
The Committee noted that SEBI had accepted its suggestion to substitute the word “shall” by the word “may”.
      Action Taken by the Ministry (7.6.2005)
The Ministry have notified the amendment as suggested by the Committee.
 
VII. Point raised-  Regulation 13(4)- Chairman/Member to pass order
 
Time limit to be specified within which Chairman/Member to pass the order.

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
        Ministry’s comments: (12.5 2004)
The corresponding provisions in earlier Regulations provided for a time limit of 30 days from the hearing date within
which the Chairman would have to pass orders.  In two cases, where the order could not be passed within the said limit, SAT
held that if the order is not passed within the stipulated time, then in such cases Chairman/Member becomes functus officio
and thereafter no order can be passed.  Therefore, the amendment has been made to provide for passing the order ‘as soon as
possible’ so that the intermediary shall not escape penalty on mere technicalities.  Though it is desirable, it is not always
possible to adhere to a rigid time limit within which the Chairman/Member should pass the order in view of the various
technicalities and peculiarities which may be present in a particular case.  Some cases require further inquiries/investigation
in view of the submissions of the party or may require appreciation of voluminous evidence.  Some may involve complicated
questions of law on which legal opinion may have to be taken.  In some other cases, the order is not being able to be passed
on account of litigation pending before Courts/Tribunals.  Therefore, it is felt that a rigid time limit which may lead to non-
compliant orders being treated as non est in law may seriously jeopardize regulatory efforts in such cases.
It is further felt that such time limits are not mentioned in any relevant regulatory statutes.  Even in respect of
adjudications by Adjudication Officers of SEBI, section 151(2) of the SEBI Act, 1992 read with rule 5(1) of the SEBI
(Procedure for Holding Inquiry by Adjudication Officers and Imposing Penalty) Rules, 1995 do not specify any time limit
within which the Adjudication Officer should pass the order imposing monetary penalty.  Even in respect of original
regulatory adjudications under other statutes, no provisions are found wherein time limits have been stipulated for passing of
orders.  An example is section 13 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 read with rule 4(8) of the Foreign
Exchange Management (Adjudicating and Appeals) Rules, 2000 which merely say that the Adjudicating Authority can by
order, impose appropriate penalty.  Similar were the provisions under section 50 of the erstwhile Foreign Exchange
Regulation Act, 1973 read with rule 3 of the Adjudication Proceedings and Appeal Rules, 1974.  Section 11AC of the
Central Excise Act, 1944 read with rules 25 to 27 of the Central Excise Rules, 2002 and section 122 of the Customs Act,
1962 also do not contain any time limit for passing an order of imposition of penalty or confiscation of goods.
     Committee’s observation :(7.2.2005)
The Committee noted that SEBI had accepted its suggestion to find out a via-media and amended the regulations
appropriately with regarding prescription of time limit for passing order by the Chairman/ Member.
     Action Taken by the Ministry (7.6.2005)
The Ministry have notified the amendment as suggested by the Committee.
VIII. Point raised-  Regulation 13(2)/Regulation 13(5)
When show cause notice is proposed to be issued in every enquiry under Regulation 13(2), what is the objective
sought to be achieved by Regulation 13(5)
        Ministry’s comments: (12.5. 2004)
The objective of regulation 13(5) was that the show cause notice in cases where the enquiry officer has recommended
minor penalty and the Chairman/Member proposes to impose major penalty should specifically state the proposal and give
opportunity to make written submissions against the proposal.  We agree that there is some overlapping in the above
provisions which needs to be removed with suitable amendment.  Necessary steps would be taken in this regard.
     Committee’s observation :(7.2.2005)
The Committee noted that SEBI had accepted its viewpoint that there was overlapping in the above provisions and
had assured the Committee to amend the provision suitably.
     Action Taken by the Ministry (7.6.2005)
The Ministry have notified the amendment as suggested by the Committee.
IX. Point raised-  Regulation 21- Amendment of relevant Regulations
 
Would it not be more appropriate if Regulation 4 refers to the various Regulations as amended from time to time

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
rather than they exist on a point of time.
     Ministry’s comments: (12.5. 2004)
We appreciate the point raised by the Committee and would amend Regulation 4 accordingly.
     Committee’s observation :(7.2.2005)
The Committee noted that SEBI had accepted its suggestion that it would be more appropriate if regulation 4 refers to
the various regulations as amended from time to time rather than they exist on a point of time. Accordingly, they promised
the Committee to amend the provision.
     Action Taken by the Ministry (7.6.2005)
The Ministry have notified the amendment as suggested by the Committee.
X. Point raised 16(3)(i) and 16(2)- Time limit for filing written statement
 
Whether the word ‘ordinarily’ can be deleted and the time can be allowed to be extended subject to recording reasons
in writing.
    Ministry’s comments: (12.5. 2004)
We are agreeable with the views of the Committee and propose to amend the Regulation 6(3) (i) and 16(2)
accordingly.  However, we would like to mention that the word ‘ordinarily’ has been interpreted by the Supreme Court to
mean “in the large majority of cases but not invariably” and that it “necessarily implies the exclusion of extraordinary or
special circumstances”.  It was in this context that the word ‘ordinarily’ was used in the above provision to lay down an
indicative time limit with the requisite flexibility for special cases.
    Committee’s observation :(7.2.2005)
The Committee appreciated the explanation provided by the SEBI for the inclusion of the word “ordinarily” and
noted that even so, the SEBI had accepted its suggestion for deleting the word and to amend the provision accordingly.
    Action Taken by the Ministry (7.6.2005)
The Ministry have notified the amendment as suggested by the Committee.
          2.     The Ministry vide their communication dated the 12th July, 2006 furnished a copy of their notification S.O.
779(E) dated 7th June, 2005 publishing the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Procedure for Holding Enquiry by
Enquiry Officer and Imposing Penalty) (Amendment)  Regulations-2005 carrying out all the amendments as per the
Committee’s suggestion. (Annexure)
3          The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) have taken
necessary action on its recommendations and notified amendments to the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Procedure
for Holding Enquiry by Enquiry Officer and Imposing Penalty) Regulations-2002 as follows:
       ·  Regulation 8
: (i) The word 'shall ' has been substituted with the word ' may', thereby making it non obligatory on
the intermediary to file written statement in case of issue of notice to him; and
(ii) By authorizing the enquiry officer to extend the period of submission of written statement subject to  "recording
the reason in writing" by inserting the words ' to be recorded in writing ' after the words  'for sufficient reasons' in regulation
8.
 
            ·  Regulation 13 (2 ) :
  By inserting the words 'enclosing therewith a copy of the report of the enquiry officer', there
by making it mandatory that a copy of the enquiry report  must accompany the show cause notice.
            ·  Regulation 13 ( 3) :   By substituting the word 'shall'  with the word 'may' ,  so as  not to compel the intermediary to
respond to the show cause notice.
 

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
            ·  Regulation 13 (4):  By substituting regulation 13 (4) so as to prescribe a time limit of 120 days for passing order by
the Chairman/ Member for imposition of penalty. 
 
            · Regulation 13(5):
   By omitting regulation 13 (5 ) the provision of which were  overlapping with the provisions of
regulation 13 (2).
 
            · Regulation 21    :        Regulation 4 enumerates the Regulation for contravention of which an enquiry may be held. 
Regulation 21 prescribes amendments in Regulation 4. The Committee had pointed out that under regulation 4 the reference
to regulations enumerated therein should be as amended from time to time. Accordingly, Regulation 4 have been acceded by
Government by adding the words "the following regulations as amended from time to time".
            · Regulation 16( 3)(i) & (2) :
 The word 'ordinarily' has been substituted by the words 'Provided that the Enquiry
Officer may extend the time mentioned under sub-legislation (2 ) for sufficient reasons to be recorded in writing', thereby
removing ambiguity in the provision regarding extension of time during the enquiry.
            The Committee, however, notes with satisfaction the explanation furnished by the Ministry with regard to Regulation
5 (1) (point no 1), regulations 7 and 22 (point no 2), and regulation 13 (point no 4).
 
*****
VI
The Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000- Implementation of 144
th Report of the Committee.
 
 
          The Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000 framed under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 were
examined by the Committee.  The matter was reported to the House on the 21 st November 2002 vide  its 144th Report. The
Committee in its 144th Report had recommended as under: -
 
            “The Committee notes the replies of the Ministry of Environment and Forests on point nos. 1 and 2 regarding
framing of rules.  The Committee expresses its satisfaction that the Ministry have made amendments in rule 2 (c) and (d)
relating to definitions of the words authority and person, respectively; in rule 3 by substitution the word may by shall; in the
Schedule by substituting Note 3 regarding silence Zone by a new one as per its suggestion.  The Committee is further
satisfied to note that the Ministry of Environment and Forests have agreed to its suggestions on rule 4 regarding permissible
limit and actual noise levels and to the assigning of responsibilities to the authority in this regard and on rule 8 regarding
opportunity to hear the original complaint and permission to an NGO or private person to file a complaint directly with the
authority.  The Committee hopes that amendment in the rules as agreed to would be carried out expeditiously under
intimation to it.”
 
 2.        Relevant extracts from the 144
th Report were forwarded to the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the 2nd January
2003, for necessary action on the Committee’s recommendations on rule 4 regarding permissible limit and actual noise levels
and to the assigning of responsibilities to the authority in this regard (Point no 5) and rule 8 regarding opportunity to hear the
original complaint and permission to an NGO or private person to file or complaint directly with the authority (Point no 8). 
In their reply dated the 11th June 2004 the Ministry, however expressed a view that there was no need for amending the said
Rules.
 
3.         The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on 7 th January 2005.  The Committee was not convinced with the
th

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
reply dated 11  June 2004 furnished by the Ministry regarding rules 4 and 8 of the Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control)
Rules, 2000.  It also took note of the fact that earlier the Ministry had no objection in making necessary changes in these two rules
based upon the Committee’s suggestion.  Keeping in view the public importance of the subject matter and the comments of the
Ministry, the Committee decided to hear the representatives of Ministry of Environment & Forests for clarifications/elucidations
on the subject.
 
4.         Accordingly, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests was invited to appear before the Committee at 3.00 PM on
22nd June 2006 for oral evidence. The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of Environment & Forests in the
matter. The representatives of the Ministry, while accepting the need for amending Rules 4 and 8 expressed their regret in the
delay in amending these rules. The Ministry also submitted a draft notification to amend the rules as per the Committee’s
recommendation. On 10th July, 2006 a copy of the verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was forwarded to the Ministry
for necessary action.
 
5.         On 19.10.2006 the Ministry forwarded copy of their Gazette Notification No. SO 1569 (E) dated 19
th September, 2006.
(Annexure) carrying out necessary amendments in rules 4 and 8 based upon the recommendation of the Committee.
 
6.         The Committee notes with satisfaction that based upon the its recommendation the Ministry of Environment & Forests
have amended Rules 4 by adding a new sub rule (3) which places an obligation upon the SPCBs and PCCs to collect, compile and
publish technical and statistical data in consultation with the CPCB relating to noise pollution and measure devised for its effective
prevention, control and abatement. The Committee feels that this would result in better and effective implementation of the rules.
            The Committee further notes with satisfaction that Government have amended rules 8 as well thereby providing an
opportunity to the complainant also to be heard while the Authority regulating noise levels reviews its orders based inter- alia on a
complaint, as suggested by it.
*****
Summary of Recommendations
 
I
 
The Committee considered the position as furnished by the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pension vide
their O.M. dated the 15th April, 2005 and noted that the matter had already been settled through judicial pronouncement. The
Committee also considered the background of the matter, the judicial pronouncements on the subject and the implication of
implementing the Committee’s recommendations as pointed out by the Ministry and decided not to pursue the
recommendation as contained in the 117
th Report.
II
 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Company Affairs have carried out and notified all the
amendments in Cost Accounting Records ( Electricity Industry) Rules , 2001as recommended by it.
 
III
 
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance have since published the Customs House Agents
Licensing (First Amendment) Regulations, 2005 vide notification No G.S.R.653 (E) dated the 7
th November, 2005
(Annexure) carrying out the recommendations of the Committee as follows:
 Point 9 (Regulations 8(7)): By omitting the words "an additional or ", thereby making Hindi a desirable qualification
instead of " an additional or desirable" qualification in case a person is to be deputed to work exclusively in the dock.

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
 Point 11 (Regulations 9(3)): By substituting the words "involved in" with the words "convicted of", thereby making
the provision of regulation 9 (3) more specific. As per the earlier provision, the Commissioner of the Customs had power to
reject an application for grant of licence to act as CHA if the applicant was "involved " in fraud or forgery. The Committee
felt that the word "involved in" was not precise.
 Point 15 (Regulations 14):  By substituting the words "such changes shall forthwith be communicated by such
licensee to the Commissioner of customs with the words "such changes shall forthwith be communicated by such licensee to
the Commissioner of customs within a period of sixty days of such changes".  The Committee had desired that the rule
should prescribe some specific time period within which the licensee must communicate the change in the Directors to the
Commissioner of Customs. In Committee's opinion, the word "forthwith" was not specific.
            As regards point no. 5 regarding regulation 5 the Committee recommends that the Ministry should modify the Form
'A' also without which the modification in Regulation 5 vide the Customs House Agents Licensing (First Amendment)
Regulations, 2005 did not lead to the desired result. . On the rest of the points the Committee is satisfied with the explanation
furnished by the Ministry.
IV
 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance, Banking Division, have taken necessary action
on all of its recommendations as follows:
            · Para 4.4(b):    Section 19 of DRT Act, 1993 has been suitably amended to make Debts Recovery mechanism
effective, meaningful and deterrent. The Committee had recommended that the Recovery Officer of DRT should be given
the magestrial powers of summary proceedings, attachments, etc on the like of Income Tax Officer or the Customs Officer. 
            · Para 4.4 (c):        The number of the Tribunal has been increased to 30 DRTs and 5 DRATs, to lessen the burden of
cases in the existing tribunals.                                    
            · Para 4.4(d):     The Committee had recommended increase  in the manpower of each DRT, which has since been
raised to 30 in each Tribunal.    Initially each DRT had been sanctioned 19 posts, including the post of Presiding Officer.
· Para 4.4 (g):      By inserting rule 15 A , the Government have made provision for publishing the name of the
defaulters in the newspaper.  
            On the rest of the recommendations vide para 4.4 (a ), (e ) and (f ),the Committee notes the explanation furnished by
the Ministry and have decided not to pursue these points anymore.
V
 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) have taken
necessary action on its recommendations and notified amendments to the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Procedure
for Holding Enquiry by Enquiry Officer and Imposing Penalty) Regulations-2002 as follows:
       ·  Regulation 8
: (i) The word 'shall ' has been substituted with the word ' may', thereby making it non obligatory on
the intermediary to file written statement in case of issue of notice to him; and
(ii) By authorizing the enquiry officer to extend the period of submission of written statement subject to  "recording
the reason in writing" by inserting the words ' to be recorded in writing ' after the words  'for sufficient reasons' in regulation
8.
            ·  Regulation 13 (2 ) :
  By inserting the words 'enclosing therewith a copy of the report of the enquiry officer', there
by making it mandatory that a copy of the enquiry report  must accompany the show cause notice.
            ·  Regulation 13 ( 3) :
   By substituting the word 'shall'  with the word 'may' ,  so as  not to compel the intermediary to
respond to the show cause notice.
            ·  Regulation 13 (4):
  By substituting regulation 13 (4) so as to prescribe a time limit of 120 days for passing order by
the Chairman/ Member for imposition of penalty. 

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
            · Regulation 13(5):    By omitting regulation 13 (5 ) the provision of which were  overlapping with the provisions of
regulation 13 (2).
            · Regulation 21    :        Regulation 4 enumerates the Regulation for contravention of which an enquiry may be held. 
Regulation 21 prescribes amendments in Regulation 4. The Committee had pointed out that under regulation 4 the reference
to regulations enumerated therein should be as amended from time to time. Accordingly, Regulation 4 have been acceded by
Government by adding the words "the following regulations as amended from time to time".
            · Regulation 16( 3)(i) & (2) :
 The word 'ordinarily' has been substituted by the words 'Provided that the Enquiry
Officer may extend the time mentioned under sub-legislation (2 ) for sufficient reasons to be recorded in writing', thereby
removing ambiguity in the provision regarding extension of time during the enquiry.
            The Committee, however, notes with satisfaction the explanation furnished by the Ministry with regard to Regulation
5 (1) (point no 1), regulations 7 and 22 (point no 2), and regulation 13 (point no 4).
VI
 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that based upon the its recommendation the Ministry of Environment & Forests
have amended Rules 4 by adding a new sub rule (3) which places an obligation upon the SPCBs and PCCs to collect, compile and
publish technical and statistical data in consultation with the CPCB relating to noise pollution and measure devised for its effective
prevention, control and abatement. The Committee feels that this would result in better and effective implementation of the rules.
            The Committee further notes with satisfaction that Government have amended rules 8 as well thereby providing an
opportunity to the complainant also to be heard while the Authority regulating noise levels reviews its orders based inter- alia on a
complaint, as suggested by it.
Confidential
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON   SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA.
VI
Sixth Meeting
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 6 th March, 2007 in Room No. 126-C (Chairperson’s Room) Third
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla                        Chairperson
2.         Ms. Mabel Rebello
3.         Shri Surendra Lath
4.         Shri Ali Anwar
5.         Shri R. Shunmugasundaram
6.         Shri Abani Roy
 
SECRETARIAT
1.
                  Shri Deepak Goyal, Director
2.         Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Under Secretary
3.         Shri R. P. Shukla, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee took up for consideration its draft 167
th Report on rules/ regulations it had examined.  The
Committee considered and adopted the Report and decided to present the same to the House on the 8 th March, 2007. The
Committee authorized its Chairperson and in her absence Shri Abani Roy and Ms. Mabel Rebello, Members, to present the
same to the House.
3.         The meeting adjourned at 4.00 p.m.
 
New Delhi
th
DEEPAK GOYAL
 DIRECTOR

167th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/167thReport.htm[25-10-2016 16:44:04]
6  March, 2007
 
 
           
                                                                                                                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 