{n r 
Com. 1-113 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION 
HUNDRED AND SEVENTH REPORT 
(Presented on the 30th March, 1995) 
.......... 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
Mar~h. !995/Chaitra, 19!7 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
l. COMYOSIOON OF THE CoMMITTE!; ............. . .... . . .. 
2. THt. Rt.POKT 
I. lntroduclion ..... ........ ......... ......... ........... .. 
II Pon Trum Pension Regul31ions ..... .. ... .. .... .. 
3. ANNI;XUKE . ..... ................................ . ........ .. 
PAGES 
(i) 
1 
2-13 
14-J.'i 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMI'ITEE 
(1994-951 
I Shn H. llanumanrhappa-Citairmun 
2 Shn Romda' Agarwal 
3 . .Shri Mrsa R. Gane~un 
4 Dr bhwar Chandl1l Gupra 
5. Shri Raon Jcrhmalani 
11. Shn Chimanbha1 Mchra 
7. Shn Ra)tndra Prasad Mody 
8 Shn Ahmed Mohmedhbai Parel 
9. Shn Ramachandran Pillai 
10. Shn V. Rajeshw•r Rao 
II Sbn K N Sinoh 
12. Shn Shanker Da"al Singh 
13. Shri Gopal"nh G, Solanki 
14. Shri Som Pal 
IS. Sbrl Nyodck Yonggam 
SECR.F!'ARIAT 
Smr. V.majn N Snrn•, Dlrecror 
Shri Om Purli:ush Under Stercrary 
Shri H.C Scrhi, Commiuee Officer 
(i) 
• 

REPORT 
I 
INTRODUCTION 
I. the Chairman of the Commiuee on Subordinate Legislation, having 
been authorised by the Committee to present the Repor: on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Hundred and Seventh Repon of the Commiuec. 
1.1 The Commillee considered and adopted the Repon at its meeting 
held on the 9th March, 1995. 
1.2 The mauers examined by the Commiuee arising out of the scrutiny 
of various Rules/Regulations and the issues, related therewith, elongwith 
the comments of the Government received thereon, and the observations 
and recommendations whtch, in the opinion of the Committee, should be 
brought 10 the notice of the House. nrc contained in the succeeding 
puragraphs of the R~port. 
j 

n 
PORT TRUSTS PENSION REGULATIONS 
2. Madras Pori Trust and Calcuna Pon Trust Pension Regulallons were 
exammed and certain points were referred to the Min1stry of Surface 
Transport on the 4th July, 1994 and 6th July. 1994 rc.<pc.:tively for their 
comments. 
2.1 The requisite comments were furnished b)' the Madras Port Trust 
and the Calcuna Port Trust during tbe Comminee's discussions with them 
at Madras on the lith July, 1994 and at CaJa. •. a on the 15th July, 1994 
re~pectively . 
2.2 Points referred and comments received thereon from the Madra~ 
Port Trust are reproduced below: 
(I) Pomt rt/trr<d 
Whether the Madras Port Trust Pension Regulation, 1987 have sance 
been amended; if so. the demit~ thereof? 
Comments 
The Madras Port Trw.t (Pension) Regulations. 1987 have been amended 
cwicc so far. first in the ycor 1990 and second in the year 1991, with the 
approval of Central Government v1de Ministry of Surface Transport's 
Nocification respectively Nos. GSR 931(E) dated the 30ch November, 1900 
and GSR 214(£) dated the 1 Sth April, 1991 which have been published 10 
Part II Section 3 Sub·scct!On (i) of the Extraordinary tssue of the Gnt.cllc 
of India dated the 30th November, 1990 and 15th April. 1991 respectively 
Our of the two amendments. the first amcndm~nt issued in the year 1990 
relates to Regulation 56 nnd Regulation 56-A which deal wilh 'Righi to 
wHhhold or withdraw Pension' in cases where a pensioner is found tn 
departmentaVjudicial procecdin~. guilty of grave misconduc1 and tn case. 
where the proceedmgs arc pcndtng at the time of retirement of the 
delinquent employees, for withholding of Deatb-cu:m·Rctircment Gratuity 
and paymenl of provisoonal pcnsoon. pending conclusion of the proceedings 
and 1ssuc of final orders thereon 
The second amendment issued tn tbe year 1991 rcla1cd to Rcgulatton 
19·A and 19·8 , which deal v.ith 'Additions to qualifying service in Special 
circumManccs' g.vmg "'elghtagc to quaUfying service of not e~ceeding five 
)cars for the grant of penstonary bco1cfits in cases of employees who rcurc 
voluntaril)' from the Trust'' service, in accordance with the provi;ions of 
che Madra' Port Trust Employees' (Retirement) Regulations . 

3 
(2) Point rt/trred 
Rtgulorion 7(1v) 
"Where the Chief Medical Officer bas declared an employee lit for 
further service of less laborioU$ character than tbac which lit liad 
been doing he should, provided be is willing to be so employed, be 
employed on lower pose and if there be no muns of employina 
him even in a lower post, be may be admitted to innlld pe.WOO." 
Wbac is the criterion for selecting a lower post on which an invalid 
person will be employed? Whether hi$ pay will be protected in the lower grade? 
Comments 
The Madras Port Trust (Pension) Regulations have been framed based 
on the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 of the Government 
where it is clearly staced vldt Rule 38(4) that a Government servant fit for 
further service of less laborious character than that which be bad been 
doing, he should, provided be is willing to be so employed, be employed 
on lower post and if there be no means of employing him even on a lower 
post, he may be admitted to Invalid pension. 
Insofar as the Madras Port Trust is concerned, all the candidates for 
employment in the Trust's service, whether peDl!anenc or temporary, 
should, before enrry be examined by the Trust's Medical Officer and found 
fie for employment in accordance with the instructions laid down. Taking 
into consideration the nature of work, the different categories of posts 
have been classified into different medical classifications as Group A·Al, 
A2 and A3; Group B-Bl and B2; and Group C-CI and C2. 
In order to ensure the continued abilhy of employees in Groups A and 
B to discharge their duties with safety, they will be required to appear for 
re-examination at the slated intervals as specified in the Trust's Medical 
Manual. If any employee in such periodical examination is found medically 
unfit for continuation in service in the post held by him, he will be 
mcdtcally examined whether he could be given any alternative employment 
in a post requiring lower medical standard wbicb will invariably be lower pose. 
Woth regard to protection of Pay, normally protection of Pay is not 
admissible under the Rules. However, in Madras Pon Trust, a Scheme wu 
devised in the year 1986, wbicb was later on convened into the Madras 
Pon Trust Employees' (Contributory Loss in Wages Compensation) 
Regulations, 1989, with the object of compensating the loss in wages chat 
may be suffered by such persons who have been given alternate employ· 
ment on medical grounds. Under these Regulations, an employees who are 

. ,; 
4 
holding the posts with hogh medical classification of Groups A and B are 
required to contribute, each month, a sum of Rs. 21· with equal 
contribution from the Trust and these moneys are remincd into B Fund. In 
ca5es uf those employees who arc given alternate employment and where 
there is Joss in wugcs. compensation is granted each month from the above 
fund. The quuntum of compemarion is the loss either in full or in part, in 
the time-rate wage suffered by the employee on the basis of national basic 
pay drawn .n the appropriate rime scale applicable to the post which the 
employee was holding at the time of alternate employment vis-a-vis the 
actual time-rate wage in the alternate post. The compensation payable 
under this fund shall nor be neared as Pay for any purpose including retirement benefits. 
(3) Point referred 
Regulati(ln 8(i) and (ii) 
.. Compensation Pension-of an employee is selected for discharge 
owing 10 the abolition of his permanent pose. he shall. unles.' be os 
appointed at least to another equivalent post have the option of: 
(i) tuking any compensation pension 10 which he may be entitled 
for the service he has already rendered; or 
(ii) accepting another appointment on such pay as may he offered 
and continuing 10 count his/previous service for pension." 
Whether the Ministry have any objection in prescribing a definite lime 
limn within which a person whose permanent post bas been abolished will 
be offered either compensation pension or another appointment'! If an 
employee accepts nnorhcr nppomtment, whether his pay will be protected? 
Cununtnls 
The Madras Port Trust (Pcn~ion) Regulations were framed based on tbc 
Central Civil Services Pension Rules, 1972 and the Governmcm's orders in 
the moucr of liberalisation of pensionary benefits arc followed from time 
to lime. If the Government prescribes any definite time limit or any other 
rules for offer of another appointment and protection of pay in the Central 
Civil Services Pension Rules, the same will be prescribed in the Madras 
Port Trust (Pension) Regulations ai<O. 
(4) J>omt referred 
Regulouon ] I 
.. Commutation or periods or absence wnhout leave imo extraordi· 
nary leave:- The appointing authority may commute rerrospcctovely 
period.• or absence "•thout lca>e into leave without allowance." 
The appointing authorny may commute the period of absence wothout 
leave into extraordinary leave for how many days; please elucidate? 

Comments 
In the maucr of commuting the period of absence without leave mto 
extraordinary leave. the provision• contained in the Central c,v,f Scrv•ces 
(leave) Rules. 1972 arc be1ng fortowed by this Port. 
The authority competent may commute. the period of absence without leave •nro extraordinary leave as under:-
(a) ln respect of permanent employees. the maximum penod of extraor­dinary leave admissible 1s five }Cars. 
(b) lo the ca.e of temporary employees-extraordinary leave. ranging 
from 3 months to 24 momhs, may be granted sobJect to tbe conduions specified in the rules. 
(5) Pomt r~ferrcd 
What is the jusufication for mcnuonmg different (fates under Regula­
tions 29 and JO for the purpo~c of idhor relief of ·--lily pension? 
Cununcnts 
The Government announced ~dhor relief to those pensioners who were 
in recc•pt of smart pcn~ion, wnh effect from 1st Scpteml>er, 1969. T11e 
above benefit was extended ro art the Port pensioners including Class I and 
II Off•cers with the npproval of the tloard. The definition uf Pay fur 
P<'RS•onury benefits In respect of Chts.l Ill and IV employees was tlclinkecl 
from Centr<tl Government pattern nnd liberalised with Mfcct from 1st January, 1969. 
The Cemral Government nnnounccd ntlditional adhoc relief to us 
pensioners who retired rriur ro 1st January, 1973 with effect from hr 
January, 1973 (lfl Pay Comm•ss•on). This additional adhoc relief was 
,' extended to Class I Jnd If Offteers of the Trust who retired before 1st 
January, 1973 on the >ume unalogy of the Govcrnmem O.M. and also to 
Class Ilf and IV employee; who retired before 1st January. 1969 as they 
did not derive the benefit of the enlarged definition of Pay. 
(6) Pourt r~f~rrccl 
Rrgululloll J9 
"The form of appfi~ation. procedure for medical examinatton and 
payment or commuted value •hall be such •• may be prescribed b) the Chairman from time 1n umc. • 
Whether the form of applieatiOII, procedure for medical examinatiOn and 
payment of commuted \'alue have 'incc been prescribed by the Chairman, 1f so. the c:lct;ul' the1cor-• 

b 
Comments 
As already ~tatcd, the Madra.~ Port Trust (Pension) Regulations were 
framed ba,ed on the Central Civil Services Pension Rules. 1972 and lhe 
form of Bpph.:atton. procedure for medical examination and payment of 
contmutc.J value have been prescribed by the Chairman. based on the 
Ccnunl Ctvtl ~crvtees (Commutation of pension) Rules, 1981. 
2 • Poanl> referred and comments received thereon from the Calcuua 
Pon T:~>l are repre>duccd below:-
(!) Pmnt reft'Tud 
fh, M•;or Pun Tru>t Act came into force in 1%3 whereas the Calcuna 
Pon Trust Employees' (Pension) Regulations were framed in 1988. What 
arc the rca.wn' for unrca50nable delay of 25 year< in framing the 
Regulauon~, How the Pen>~on was regulated prior to framing of the 
Ret:ulallons• 
Comment> 
The MaJor Port Trusts Act, 1%3 "as made applicable to the Pon of 
Calcutta watb effect from 1·2·1975 by an amendment of the MPT Act (Act 
29 of 1974). 
It •~ adminetl thM there had been a dela) in framing and adopting the 
Cttlcuttu Port Trust employees· (PcnslOa) Regulations. 1988. Prior to 
adopuon of said regulation grant of pcnsaon 10 CPT employe"-'> were dealt 
with in accordance with the Central Civil Scrvaccs. (Pension), Rules, 1972. 
In ft1ct, tl.• emwhilc Commissioners for the Port of Calcuua adopted the 
then prcvailutg Pension rules intruduced by the Government of India for 
C:cntntl Government employees in 1950. The amendments to the Central 
Civil Services (Pcnsaon) Rules. 1972. made from time to time by the 
Government of India were equally applied to the CPT employees until the 
Ct~lcuua Port Trust Employees' (Pension) Regulations, !988 came mto 
force 
(2) Po1111 rtftrrtd 
Whether Cakutta Por1 Trust Employees' (Pension) Regulations. 1988 
have ever been amended: if •o. the dcta1ls thereof? 
Cumrncnts 
So amendment to the C;akuua Pon Tru~t Employer>' (Pension) 
Rcsulauons. 19!>8 have been mauc >0 far. Thes.c Regulatiom were m•de 
on the hnes or the Central CIVIl Services (Pension) Rule>. 1972. Accord· 
ingl), modificauonsl'.tmcndments to the Central Civil Servaces (Pension) 
Rules. 1972 as ha,·e been mumatcd by the Minisuy of Surface Transpon. 
Go,·ernmcnt of lndau. from ume 10 11me have been tmplememed by the 
Port Trust with the •anction of the Board pending fom1al amendment to 
the Regulation' so that the benefits could be extended to the employees 
Without any delay. 

7 
The following modificmions which were approved by the Government of 
India from time 10 tome have been ompiemented;-
(i} Grant of famtiy pcn•ion 10 eligible family members of an 
employee after a lapse of a period of one year who suddenly 
disappears and whose whereabouts are not known bas been 
implemcmcd. 
(ii) Order of rouonahsatoon of age limu at 2S yeass for the purpose 
of cnutlemcnt of famoly pen•ion for som and unmarried daugh­
ters of the employees of Calcutta Pon Trust. 
(iii) Grant of monomum penso01vfamoly pension at Rs. 375.00 per 
month irrcspecuve of ddonuion of pay bas been unplemented. 
(iv) The pnncople of Cal;ulauon of Pcnston @SO% of the average 
emoluments h!!S been implemented. 
(v) The mwumum amount of pension admissible per month has been 
r•oscd 10 Rs. ~SOOI· per month on respect of all employees as in 
Central Govemmcnt 
(vi) The ceiling of the amount of death-cum-retirement gnnuity has 
been r ai~l·d from R~. 5\1,000/· to Rs. 1.00,0001-. 
(vio) Ex·gratia pa~ment @150 per month to the dependents of the 
conuibutOl)' provident fund bcncficoaries who had retired or 
died prior to l l-81\ ha.~ l>ecn implemented. 
(viii) Service gratuuy @ half mouth's emoluments for every 6 
monthly period of >Crvicc lor the entire service has been 
extended to all permancn1 employees who arc on Central 
Governmenr definition of p~y for rcrircment benefit and who 
huve qualifyong ~crvH < of less than 10 ~~= and alw to 
temporary employees who hove pul in not less then 10 years of 
qualifying 'crvicc and ~Nho arc on Central Government defini· 
tion of pay retiring on superannuation or on being declared 
permanently mcapacirarcd for further service. 
(ill) The umount of Spc•ial Conrribuuon for Class I and II Officers 
who are on Comributory Provident Fund Scheme ha• been 
raised from R' ~0 .()()()1. to 1 ,00 .000~ 
(x) Rcviston of Pension' famol~ pension for excrciswg opuons to 
come over from libcraliscd definotoon of pay to Central Govern­
ment dcfinotoon oi pay for those retired I died on or before 
13·8-90 has been omplemente<!. 
(xi) Revrscd rate> of family pensoon has been implemented in respect 
o! the dependents of those employees who reured or died after 
1-1-86 
(xu) Basic pa) as dcfmcd unJcr FR-9(2l)(a)(i) and Special Dearness 
Allowance are taken into account for reekoniog emolumentS of 
pensoon ior those who have retired or will be retiring on or after 
• 

8 
1·1·88 on Centnl Government definition of pay. Relief on 5ucb 
pension Is allowed over CPI fi!7 on the existing formula i.e. 5% of 
Pension for every 20 point rise in the CPI subject to a minimum of 
Rs. S'· and maximum of Rs. 25'-. 
(xiii) Pension or family pension as weU as the relief and additional relief 
on pension allowed from time to time upto fiJ7 CPJ in respec1 of 
the pensioners and family pensioners who retired on or before 31· 
12·85 have been consolidated and regarded as revised pension. 
Rebcf on revised Pension ts admissible over CPJ fiJ7 on the 
eXJsUog formula. 
(3) Pomt rtftrrtd 
Rtgultmon 6 
Pension subject to future good conduct; 
(l)(a) Future good conduct shall be an implied concfition or every grant 
of pension and its continuance under these regulations. 
(b) The appointing authority may, by order in writing withhold or 
withdraw a pension or part thereof, whether permanently or for a 
specified period, if the pensioner is convicted of a serious crime ar 
is found guilty of grave misconduct: 
Provided further that where a part of pension is withheld or 
withdrawn, the amount of such pension shall not be reduced below 
the amount of rupees sixty per mensem. 
(2) Where a pensioner is convicted of a serious crime by a coon of Law, 
action under sub-regulation (1) shall be taken in the light of the judgement 
of the coun relnting to such conviction. 
(3) In a ease not falling under sub-regulation (2). if the authority 
referred to in sub-regulation (!) considers that the pensioner is prima facie 
guilty of grave misconduct, it shall before passing an order under sub­
regulation (1). 
(a) serve upon the pensioner a notice specifying the action proposed 
to be taken against him and the ground on which n is proposed to 
be taken and calling upon htm to submit withtn fifteen days of the 
receipt of •the nottcc or such funber umc not exceeding fifteen 
days as nfay be allowed by the appointtng authority, such 
representation as he may wish to make against the proposal, and 
(b) take uno consideration the representation if any, submitted by the 
pensioner under clause (a). 
(4) An appeal against the order passed by the Authonty under sub­
regulation (I) shall lie to the Chairman and to the Central Government as 
the ease may be. 
Explanatio~ The impression "gra•·e misconduct" includes the com· 

9 
municarion or d1sclosure of any secret official code or pass word or any 
sketch, plan mode, article, note document or iniormarioo (wbicb wu 
obtained while holding orfice under the Trustees) so as to prejudicially 
affect the •nterests of the Trustees." 
(i) The term 'future good conduct' appearing in Regulation 6{1) (a) is 
vague. What are the criteria for determining that the panicular conduct is good or bad? Please explain. 
Comments 
The Regulation 6{1) (a) has been framed on tbe line of tbe Rule 8(1) (a) 
of Central C1vil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972. There is as such no written 
cntcria for determining whether conduct of a panicular employee or 
pensioner IS good or bad but Regulations 6(1) (B). 6(2). 6(3) and 6(4) of 
Calcutta Port Trust Employees (Pension) Regulations, 1988 clearly stipu. 
late the circumstances when the appointing authority may withhold or 
withdraw a pension or part thereof 
(i1) What will be the fate of the amount withheld or withdrawn from 
pcns1on: whether it will be deposited with the Government treasury or it 
will be goven back to the employee concerned in due. course of time? 
Comments 
The Calcu11a Port Trust is a Local Authority within the meaning of 
Section 3(31) of the Central· Clauses Act (Act No. 10 of 1897). As such the 
amount withheld or withdrawn from pension remains deposited with the 
Treasurer, Calcutta Pori Trust. In case the payment of the amount of 
pension remains withheld for a specified period, the amount of pension so 
withheld is restored after the specified period is over. The arnounr 
withheld during th1s specified period is merged with the funds of Calcutta 
Port Trust. Similarly when a pension or pan of a pension is wi:hbeld 
permanently, rhc same is merged with the funds of the Calcutta Port Trust. 
(4) Point rtferred 
Regulation 14(3) 
"Where the Chiei Medu:al Offocer of the Board hilS declared an 
employee fit for further service of less laborious character than 
that which he had been doing, he should, proVIded be is wiUing to 
be so employed. be employed on lower post and if there be no 
means of employing him even on a lower post. be may be admitted 
to oovalid pension." 
What IS the crnerion for selccrmg a lower post on wbicb an mvalid 
person will be employed? Whether his pay wiU be protected in the lower grade? 

Comm<nll 
Regulation 24(3) of the Calcuna Port Trust Employees' (Pension) 
Regulations, 1988 corcupomh to the Rule 38(4) of the Central Civil 
Services (Pension) Rules, 1972. There is as such no written criteria (or 
sel«IID& a lower po~t on which an .o,·alid pensioner can be employed. In 
the event of an employee, bcmg declared fit by tbe Chief Medical Officer, 
Cakutta Pon Trust for further sctvtce of less laborious eharaeter tban what 
he h~d been doioj, normally he " appomtcd to a lower post which does 
not mvolve worl; of labonous character For example, when a Potter (Pay 
Scale Rs 1055·1 n ~) is found not fit to d...charge the labonous work of that 
post, he m3y be absorbed on hts own request in the post of Peon (Pay 
Scale Rs 1~1425) the duties in that post heins less laborious than tbose 
of Potters. In that event, Ius pay wblch he dre" in the ongmal higher post 
is protected But 1 the mou :nurn pay in the time-scale o[ the lower post is 
lower than has pay m respect of the old post held regularly, he shall draw 
that maxtmum as hts 1nlt1al pay 
(5) POint r~ftmd 
Htgulunon 25 
"If n employee tS sdected for discharge o .. mg to the abolition iii 
his pnmanent post, he shall, unlcs~ he rs •ppointed to another 
post the condttions of whi•h •re deemed b} the authority compe­
tent to t.l i ~chargc him to be at least equal to th~Jsc of his own, have 
the optiOn: 
(u) of tukmg cnmpcnsation pcns1<>11 to whtch he mo} he entitled 
r,.r the •crvicc he hnd rendered or 
(b) of accepting another appmntmcnt <>n such pay as may b< 
offcrcJ and contlllUing to •o\lllt hrs previOus service for pension." 
Whether the Mllll>ltY huvc any objCCIIOn iu rrc"'nbtng a definite time 
hnlil within which a person whose permanent post ha-' been abolished will 
be of!ctcJ c1thcr compensation pcmion ur anutbcr ~ppotntmcnt• If an 
etnplu~cc accepts anuther appotntmcnt, whether hi' pay "'i'l he pro tected~ 
Comm4.!nls 
It 1s dcs1rabk rh • eftmt• 1 me lim1t " pr,;.cnbeu .... uhm which ti 
person whose pcrmanc 1 pust h~s to.cn obc-hshcd '"II t-~ o!tcrcd either 
compensatum pcn,1on or anoth•r pp mtm nt 
In Q~ "'ben un employe a.: cnts dO dppo>tnlmonl aitcr bc1ng declared 
surplus on nbo1·• vn >I pe "' • poM hi~ pa) i~ P'otoctcd. 
(b) Putlll r~ftrrtd 
RtguiDIIOn 43 
"Should the dmount "! pcns1orvocath<um·rot emtnt gratu•IY 
granted to an c:m"'< 'ce be afterwards iound to be in exec~ of tbat 
to whteh he IS eo111 :->dcr thc~c regulation• he shall be Clllk:d 

II 
upon by lhe finandal Adviser and Ch1cf Accounts Officer to 
refund <uch execs.~. For tlus purpose the employee concemcu .<hall 
b.: >crvcd with a notic~ by a Fonnncial Adviser and Chief Accounts 
Officer requiring h1m 10 refund the excess payments wilhin a 
penod of t~~<n nwnths from 1hc dale of receipt by him of the 
n<>IJcc. On his 131lurc 10 comply with the not1ce. the Financidi 
A<lvJSer and Ch1cf Accounts Officer shall order that such c.~ce" 
payment ;hall be adjusted b) short payment of pension in fulure in 
one or more. insl•lmcms as be ,..ill 1hink lit." 
Whal cmcna are kepi m m1nd by lh~ Financial Advi>cr and Chief 
Accoums Olhecr tn lixmg one or more instalmcnl< for adju>ttng !he excc<s 
paymcn1 of pension on case of fatlurc of the employee concerned 10 comply 
"·nh the notice rcquinng him lo refund the excess payment "1thm a period 
of 1wo months 
Cummtnb 
There " no latd Jown guidelines m connection with the fixation ol !he 
Instalment lor rcco\cry of exec« paymcnl nf pension m <a« the pcn"oner 
fail' I<> rcJund lhc ~mount of pen,ion paid tn <'XCe<.' "ithin two month•. 
The: Jtmnunt n( pcnston r~ud in CXCCS.\ is recovered in instalments keeping 
'" view the anwunr of pens"'" drawn and !he amoun1 lo be rccov<rcd. In 
fixmg the num~r ~nd amount of tn~1.1lmcn1 !he J'inancwl harJ.<hip 10 be 
faced h)' lhc pcu.,inncr "alway< kepi in mind and a liheral 'icw is taken. 
2.4 The Cmnmillcc dJ<cus.,cd the subJect matter w1th 1he rcprcseltlalives 
or C'och111 Pori Trust on the l51h September, 1994. a! Trivandrum and 
Vishakhurnwam Port Tru~t on the 21<1 September. 1994 at llydcrabad 
2.5 On lhc 21,t Ocrnh<r. 1994 1hc rch:vam extract; (Annc.wrc I) from 
1hc swdy nmc "" the vis11 ol lhc Committee 10 Madras and C'alculla from 
H11h In loth July, I'IIJ4 WCr< lurwardcd 10 lhc ~hni'lry ot Surface 
T1Jn~por1 Wllh 1he rcquc<t 10 11111matc lhc ac1ion taken l>y !hem m 1he 
ligh1 uf lhc oh<ervatiun• mndc by 1hc Cammillcc dunng the satd 
dtscu~~ion 
2.6 Thcreaf!Cr, on the 29th November, 19<>~ the rckvant extraots 
(Annexure II) from rhe studv note on the vbit of the C'omm1ttce to 
Trivandrum . l!nngalorc nnd I lyc.lcraba<.l from l~th to 23rd September. 1994 
were also fon.ardtd In !he Minl'try of Surf3ce Transport 
2 7 The C"ommmcc held d"c""'"'"S m Goa wnh 1he n:presentatrvcs of 
the Mormu~ao P<1rt Tru\1 on the 6rh Fcbru3'), 1995 (oorc on lhe 
diSCUSSion placed al Annexure III) ~nd "ilh the reprcscntatrves or lhc 
Jowahar Lal 1\chru PJ\n Tru,l m Bomoay on the I01h Fcbrua'). 1995 
(note on 1hc discussion placed al Annc\urc IV) and decided 10 repon lhe' 
mallcr 10 I he lluu't. 
2.8 Tb~ Committee i> or the con•id<rcd view that the term 'periods' 
undtr th• rtKulalion rt~ardin~ commutation of periods of absence 

' 
12 
wilhoul leave into c<~ruordinary lea.-., is yague and h~nce recommends that 
~c \11nbtry \hould spedfy a maximum period of !h·e years for the purpose 
in the Re~ulatlon.~ its.lf expeditiously under intimation to it. 
2.9 l'be Committee feel~ that the term ·~ess laborious chancier" 
incorporated In the Pori Trust Regulations which does not proted 1 
workman·~ pay If he Is demoted to a lower grade in view of his ph)Sical 
inabillt) under doctor's advice, is not reasonable. The Committee, while 
appreclatlnJl the a.rcumtnt of the Port Authorities that if such protection I> 
allo,.td, thl\ rna~ be<omt a precedent and many workmen may misuse this 
facUlty, recommends that suitable check may be exercised In use of ml>nst 
but lhot should nol become a deterrent in genuint cases. The Commi«tt, 
according!), recommends that the pay of a workman should be protected 
t><n if he ;, posted to a lower grade, so that he does not sufl'er any loss In 
P<ll>ion, or rellrtmtnt. The Commitree also recommends that lnsltad of 
rel)ing on a •lnl!lt Doctor's ad' ice, a \fedical Board and an Appellate 
Medical Board ma) bt constiluted for curbing any misuse by workmen. 
2.10 ,\, regard\ the douSt' "Pen,ion ~ubject to fwure good conduct'' 
under Port Tru<l\ Rogulallons, tht Committee feels that pension is paid for 
Ute po•t 'e" ite of on emph>}ec. How can this he conditioned to the future 
good condu<·t of an emplo)te? This rule is ver) vague. future misconduct 
or criminal acthllie< can altract punl•hments, penalties a< per the laws or 
the lund bul JWnsion cannot be held to be subject lo future good conduct. 
lienee this rule should be deleted. 
2.1 I Re~ordlnft the clause "Additions ro qualifying Service In special 
circumstunces", lhe Committee feels that the pro•isioo Is a little ambiguous 
uud rec11mmends that the same may he rendered simple hy amending the 
rclevunt rcgululion. The Committee hopes that the same will he done 
extwdltiously, under Intimation to it. 
2 12 1\> regards clause relating to "An interruption in the Sen·ice of an 
ern~loyee", the Committee feels that this clause would encourage unauthor· 
bed absence afler aulhurlsed leave and recommends that suilllble amend· 
ment be mode to this regulation so as to eliminllte the ~xisling ambiguity. 
2.13 Tbt Committee r<commrnds that a lime limit of six mooths should 
be prescribed within which a perwn whose P<rmanent post bas been 
abolished, will be offered either compensation P<DSion or another appoint· 
mcnt. 
~. 14 Tbe (ommltltt feels thor Regulation U(ii) & (iii) of Madras Pon 
Trust Pen<ion Rtj:ulation<, 1987 and identical Regulations of orhcr Ports 
"'hkb are bn,cd on Central Ch·iJ Sen·i~ Rules sbo-. the existence or child 
labour and r<'<ommtnds that this clau"" should be deleted. 
2 I< The (ummllttt also note. the a,.,;urance gh·en b} some ports lo form 
a )Uh·c.:ummillt.>t.• to revlrw their rtSpKth ·e p-ension Regulations and lo c:arry 

• 
r 
13 
out necessary amendments therein. Tb* Committee hopes that !be sam* wW 
be done txp~ltlousJy, under lntlmallou 1o 11. 
2.J6 WbU* dlsl:usslne wltb tbe autborllles or Mormueao Port Tnast, !be 
authorllles obsen~ that all tbe rtjtulatJoiiS are out-deled and need 
ameodmeni.J and the p~ess b on to amend all tbe 33 nplatfoiiS and tbat 
some ptm!ns are already on the job and sudJ exercise wW be cnmpJded 
witbln tbe next 6 montbs, Aller r10allsation, tbe proposed rteulalloiiS will be 
sent to the Government (or uamtoatJon aod approval, TM authorttJes aJro 
assured that they wW requ*SI tbe Government 1o send 1 copy ot nc.b 
proposals to tbt Committee. 
2.17 Tho Commiu.. furtber ncommends tbal In order lo mamtalo 
uolforn•ltylo the Rules and RqulaUons of all ~or Pons, tho CbaJrmon o1 
all tbe m~or pori.J should sit to&etber for removal or anoma!Jes Jn tbe Rules 
10d Re&ulallons or vlrfous Ports. Tbe Commlttee notes tht ISSUranc:e a!vtn 
by tbo R<presentallve, Ministry or Surface Transport tbat dforts 1o thb 
'tKArd are berne made and tbe sucgesUons or the COIIlDlJUee will be Clrrl~ on. 
N~w [)Eun: 
M~rrlt 9, 1995 
•I RS2"<>0 "' 
H.HANmfANTHAPPA 
Chairman, 
Commiuu on Subordinate Legislation 

ANNEXURE-I 
[Vide Para 2.5] 
NOTE ON nrE VISIT OF nrE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAIYA SABHA TO MADRAS AND CALCUTIA 
FROM lOTH TO 16TH JULY, 1994 
In pursuance or the decision taken at fts meeting held on the 15th June, 
1994 tbe Committee on Subordinate Legislation visited Madras and 
Calcutta from lOth to 16th July. 1994, and held discussiODJ on various 
Rules/Regulations with the concerned autborities. 
1.2 A brief note on the diSCUSSions beld by the Comminee is pn 
subject-wise in the succeeding paragraphs: -
JUL Y 11. 1994 
(11.50 A.M.) 
THE MADRAS PORT TRUST (PENSION) REGULATIONS, 1987 
2. The Committee went round on cruise the Madras Pon and were 
apprised of the activities of the Pon. The Committee :uscmblcd at 11.50 
A.M. on the 11th July. 1994. in Mandapam Hall or Hotel Chola Shercton, 
Madras and held discussion with the representatives of Madras Pon Trust 
and the Ministry of Surface Transport (Pons Wing). 
MEMDE><S PRESENT 
Shri II. Hanumanthappa-Chuirman 
Shri Misa R. Gancsan 
Shrl V. Rajeshwar Rao 
Shri K.N. Singh 
Shri Gopalsinh G. Solanki 
Shri Nyodck Yonggam 
SECRETIIRIIIT 
Smt. Vanaja N. Sarna, Director 
Shn Om Parkash. Undu Secret aT}' 
Shri A.K Singh. Commillu Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES oF MAORAS PoRT TRUST 
Sbri M. Kalaivanan. Chairman 
Shri K Dhikpathy, Traffic Manager 
Shri V. Meenakalusundaram. Chief Engineer 
Shn S. Muthusrimvasan, F.A. & C.A.O. 
Shri K.A. Vcnkatesan. Secretary 
Capt. P.P. Mokasbi. Deputy Port Conservator 
14 

IS 
Dr. A. Sankaranarayanan. Chief Medieal Officer 
Shri S. Chelladurai. ControUer of Stores 
Shri M.C. Thanu Plllai, Additional Chief Mechanical Engineer 
Shri N. Velu, Deputy Chairman of Madras Dock labour Board 
Shri M.P. Maghendhran, Commandant, C.I.E.F. 
RErRESet<TATlVES OP TliE MINISTRY -oF SURFACE TRANSPORT 
(PORTS WtNC) 
Shri R. Ravi Kumar, Under Secretary 
2.1 AI the outset, Shri M. Kalaivanan. Chairman o( Madras Port Trust 
welcomed the Comminee and introduced the Heads of the Departments of 
the Port Trust. The Chairman of the Commillee also introduced the 
Members and Omcers of the Commillee. 
The Comminee then initiated discusston in the light of the questionnaire 
and reply furnished by the Ministry of Surface Transport. 
2.2 The Commiuec sought to know whether the Madras Port Trust 
(Pension) Regulauons, 1987 have been laid down on the Table of the 
Rajya Sabha, if so. the details thereof? 
The Ministry replied that the Madras Port Trust (Pension) Regulations, 
1987 as approved by the Central Government have been laid on the Table 
or Rajya Sabha on 12th August. 1987 as required under Section 124{4) of 
the Major Port Trusts Act. 1963. 
The Committee noted the reply. 
2.3 The Comminee sought to know whether the Madras Port Trust 
(Pension) Regulations, 1987 have since been amended, if so, the ' detail~ 
thereof? 
The Ministry informed that it has been amended twice so far. The ftrst 
amendment issued in the year 1990 relate.• to regulations 56 and 56 A and 
the second amendment issued in the yea.r 1991 relates to regulations 19A 
and 198. 
The Committee noted the comments of the Ministry. 
2.4 RLgulutton 7{tv) 
"Where the Chief Medical Officer bas declared an employee fit for 
further service of less laborious character than that which be had 
been doing he should, provided he is willing to be so employed, he 
employed on lower post and if there be no means of employing 
him even in a lo,.er post. he may be admiued to invalid pension." 
The COmiJlltee sought to know what is the criterion (or selecting a 

16 
lower post on whicb an mvalid person will be employed? Wbether his pay 
will be protected in the lower grade? 
The Ministry replied that this provision is based on rule 38(4) of C.C.S. 
(Pension) Rules, 1972. Taking into consideration the nature ol work, the 
different categories of posts under the Post Trust have been classified into 
different medical classifications as Group A-AI, A2 and A3 Group B-Bl 
& B2 and Group C-CI &: C2. In order to ensure the continued ability of 
employees in Grouj,s A & B to discharge their duties with safety, they will 
be required to appear for re-examination at the slated intervals as specified 
in the Trust Medical Manual. If any employee in such periodical 
examination is found medically unfit for continuation in service in the post 
held by him, he could be given any alternative employment in a post 
requiring lower medical standard which will invariably be a lower post 
which was accepted by the Committee. 
With regard to protection of pay. the Committee noted that a scheme 
was devised in the year 1986, wbich was later on convened into the 
Madras Pon Trust Employees' (Contributory loss in Wages Compensation) 
Regulations, 1989 with the object of compen.'Witing the loss in wages that 
may be suffered by suth persons who have been given alternate employ. 
ment on medical grounds. The compensation payable under this fund shall 
not be treated as pay for any purpose including retirement benefits. 
The Committee expressed dissatisfaction that though the loss of wages 
are compensated by the Regulations but the employees at the lime of 
retirement are losers as the pay is nor protected for the retirement benefit 
and directed that the Regulations be amended so as to ensure that the pay 
of the employee. is protected when he is assigned lower post on medical 
grounds. 
2.5 Rtg~<lation 8 
Compensation Pension-If an employee is selected for discharge 
owing to the abolition of his permanent post, he shall. unless he Is 
appointed at least to another equivalent post have the option or-
(i) takin& any compensation pension to which he may be entitled 
{or the service he has already rendered; or 
(ii) accepting, another appointment on such pay as may be offered 
and continumg to count blS previOus service for pension. 
The Committee sought to know whether the Ministry have any ODJCCiion 
in prescribing a defirute lime limit witlun which a person whose permanent 
post has been abohshcd will be offered either compensauon pension or 
another appointment; If an employee accepts another appomtment, 
whether bis pay will be protected? 
The Ministry replied that t1us provision is based on C.C.S (Pension) 
Rules, 19n and the Government's orders in the matter of hbc:ralisation ol 
:nsionary benefits are !bllowed from lime to time. If the Government 

17 
prescribes nny definite time limot or any other rules for protection or pay 
in the C.C.S (Pension) Rules, the same will be prescribed in the Madras 
Port Trust (Pension) Regulations also. 
The Commillce was not satisfied with the position stated and fell that a 
definite time limit should be prescribed in the Regulations itself and 
recommended that the Ministry should amend the Madras Port Trust 
(Pension) Regulations. 1987 accordingly under intimation to it. 
2.6 RegulatiOn /2(il) 
"Service rendered before attaining the age of eighteen years shall 
not count as service qualifying for pension except for compe~tion 
gratuity." 
Discussong Regulauon 12, the Chauman of the Commiuec advised that 
the Ministry should make the necessary amendments in clause (ii) of 
regulation 12 kcepong in view the words .. qualifying service for pension .. in 
the said clause, which gives an impression that children below 18 years are 
also employed. 
2.7 Rtgulution /9 
An employee appointed to ~ post shall be cligtble to add to his 
service qualifying for superannuation pension (but not for any 
other class of J>ension) the actual period not exceeding one fourth 
of the length of service or the aciUal period by which his age at the 
time of recruitment exceeded twenty-five years or a period of five 
years. whichever is less, if the post of which he is appointed is 
one:-
(i) to which candidate of more than twcnty·fivc years or age arc 
normally rccruncd; ond 
(ii) for which post·gruduutc research or spcc•ali<t quulificativn ur 
experience in scoentific, tcchnologtcal or professional ficiJs " 
essential, 
Provtdcd that thts c:onccssJUn shall not b.: admtssiblc to an 
cmplo~ec unkss h1s actual qualif}tng service at the time he quns 
scrv•ce i!. not lcs.~ th..Jn rcn )"Car:; 
Referring to RcguldtJon IY relaung to .. Addiuoru to qualifyong ServJCe 
tn •pecial eircum~tJncc>'', the Chairman of the Committee pointed out that 
the pro'·•Mon ·~ a lntlc omb1guous and directed lhat the same may be 
rendered simple by amending Regulation 19 This suggeSlion was accepted 
by the Port Trust . 

18 
2.8 Rtgulotlon 20 {ii) 
An interruption in the service of an employee entails forfeiture of 
his past service, except in the following cases:-
(i) Unauthorised absence in continuation of authorised leave of 
absence so long as tbc post of absentee is DOt filled in 
substantively. 
As regards clause (ii) of regulation 20. the Chairman of the Committee 
doubted that thiS clause would encourage unauthorised absence and 
recommended that suitable amendment be made to this regulation so as to 
eliminate the c1usting ambiguity . 
2.9 Regulation 21 
Commutation of periods of obscnoe without leave into extraOrdj. 
n~ry leave:-Tbe appointing authority may commute retrospec­
tively periods of absence without leave into leave without allo­
wance. 
The Commillee sought to know that the appointing authority may 
commute the period of absence without leave into extraordinary leave for 
how many days: pleas<: elucidate? 
The Ministry replied that tn the matter of commuting the JScriod of 
absence without leave into extraordinary leave, the provisions contained in 
the Central Civil Services (leave) Rules. 1972 arc being followed by this 
Pon. 
The authority competent may commute the period of absence without 
leave into extraordinary leave as undcr:-
(a) In respect of pertlHKient employees. the maximum period of 
extraordinary leave admissible is five years. 
(b) In the ca.~c of temporary cmploycc~Ex 1 raordinary leave, ranging 
from 3 months to 24 months. may be granted subject to the 
condotion. specified in tbc rules . 
The Commouee was of the considered view that ohe term ·periods' under 
the said regulations Is vnguc . hence. recommended that the Ministry 
should amend the regulation 21 with a view to specify a maximum period 
of five years for the purpose in the regulation itself expeditiously under 
inuntalion to lt. 
2 10 The Committee noted the JUStification given for mentionong 
different dates under regulations 29 and 30 for the purpose of adhoc relief 
or family pension . 
2.11 Regulat1011 )9 
"The form of application. proocdurc for medical examination and 
payment of commuted value shaJJ be such as may be prescribed by 
the Chairman from tome to time ." 

19 
The Commiuee sought 10 know whether the form of application, 
procedure for medical examination nnd payment of commuted value bave 
since been prescribed by the Chairman, if so, the details !hereof? 
The Ministry replied that the form of application. procedure for medical 
examanalion and paymenl of commuted value have been prescribed !be 
Chairman based on lhe Ccn1ral Civil Service (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1981. 
Not agreeing with lhe position slated the Commiuec fell !bat !be 
procedure of medical examinalion required some technical knowledge 
which !be Chairman may no1 have and a Medical Board should be 
coos1o1u1ed which would be able to prescribe the procedure for medical 
examinatiOn, hence, lhe Commiuee recommended 1ha1 lbe Ministry should 
amend lhe Rcgulalions aeeordingly under inlimation to it. 
2.12 The Chairman of the Pon Trust informed that !bey have constituted 
a Commiuec of ofncers to review llle entire Pension Regulations. The 
Chairman of the Commiuee directed that the repon of the Commiuce be 
expedited and Commiuec be kept informed of the progress made in the mallcr. 
2.13 The discussion ended wuh a mutual vote of thanks. 
JULY 15. 1994 
(2.00 P.M.) 
CALCUTTA PORT TRUST EMPLOYEES' (PENSION) REGULA­
TIONS. 1988 
7. The Commillee assembled at 2.00 p.m. on the 15th July, 1994 in 
Belvedere Hall of Hotel Oberoi Grand, Calcuua, and held discussion with 
the representatives of CalcutUI Port Trust and the Ministry of Surface 
Transpon (Pons Wing). 
M£MOEI<S PREsENT 
Shn H. Hanumanthappa-£'hairmall 
Shri Misa R. Ganesan 
Shri Chimanbhni Mehta 
Shri K.N. Singh 
Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
Shri Gopalsinh G Solanki 
Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Undtr Sterttary 
Shri A.K. Singh, Commiuu 0{/it:tr 

20 
RIWRE.st.NTATIVES oF CALCVITA PoRT TRuST 
Dr Bokrnm Sarkar, Chairman 
Shri C S. Samal. Deputy Chairman 
Shn P.N Sen, Secretary 
Shn B Sengupta. Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer 
Shri P 0 Sircar, Deputy Chief Accounts Officer 
REPRESENTATIVE OF noE MtNISTltv oF SuRFACE TRAP.'SPORT (PORTS Wt~<c) 
Shri R.K Srivastava, Deputy So:<:reta'ry 
7.1 Or. Bokram Sarkar, Chairman of Calcutta Port Trust welcomed 1he 
Commnoec and introduced the executives of Pon Trust. The Chairman of 
ohc Commoncc ulso introduced the Members and officers of the Com­
mince. 
The Committee. then. initoated discussion in the light of the quemon­
n3irc and reply furni£hcd by the Ministry of Surface Transport. 
7.2 Th" MaJor Port Trusts Act came into force in 1963 whereas the 
Calcutta PMt Trust Employees' (Pension) Regulations were framed in 
1988. The Commottec •ought oo know what arc the reasons for unrea.on· 
able dclny of 25 )'C~r~ on framing the Regulations? How ohe Pension was 
regulntcd prior to frJming of the Rcgulntions? 
The Ministry replied that the Major Pon Trusts Act, 1963 was made 
applicable to the Port of Calcutta with effect from 1.2.1975 by Mujor Port 
Trusts Amendment Act. It os admitted that there had been a delay in 
framing nnd adopting the Calcutta Port Trust Employees' (Pension) 
Regulation~. 1988. Prior to adoptto11 of the said Regulatoons, grant of 
pension to Calcutta Pott Tru>t Employee• was deah with in accordance 
with the Central Civil Servoce$ (Pcnswn) Rules. !972. 
The C'omnwtec expressed ll> deep concern over the unreasonable dciH~ 
or more than twelve years in framong the Regulations and was of the 
considered view that by non-framing of Regulations Go,emmcnt intends 
to bye-pass the ~rutiny of ParUamcnt. The Committee hopes that the 
MoniStry should avoid such delays on future and would be more careful in 
making the Subordinate Legislation 
7 3 The Commottee sought to know whether the Calcutta Port Trust 
Employees' (Pen>OOn) Regulation.\. 198&. laid on the Table of the Rajya 
Sabha. 
The MonoSir~ replied ohat the Calcuua Pon Trust Employees (Pension) 
Regulations. 1988 "'ere laKI on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on the 16th 
November, 1988 .. 
The Commottec noted the reply 

21 
7.4 The Commitlee sought to know whether Calcutta Pon Trust 
Employees' (Pension) Regulations . 1988 have ever been amended? 
The Committee was informed that no amendment to the Calcutta Pon 
Trust Employees' (Pcn>ton) Regulations, 1988 bas been made so far. 
The$<: Regulations were made on the lines of the Central Civil Services 
(Pension) Rule~ . 1972. According!}, modificationslamendments to the 
Central Civtl Service.' (Pension) Rules, 1972 as have been mtimated by the 
Ministry of Surface Transport from time to time have been implemented 
by the Pon Tru~l. 
The Commlllcc directed that all the amendments made in the Central 
Civil Services (Pension) Rules be mcorporated in the Calcuna Pon Trust 
Employees' (Pension) Regulations . 
1.5 Regulutron 6(1} (a} 
"Future good conduct shall be an tmplicd condition of every grant 
of pension and its continuance under these regulations ." 
The term "future good conduct" appearing in Regulauon 6(1)(a) is 
vague The Comminec sought to know "hat arc the criteria for detcrmin· 
ing that the particular conduct " good or bad~ 
The Ministry replied that Regulation 6( l)(a) has been framed on the line 
of Rule S(l)(a) of Central C1vil ScTVJces (Pens10n) Rules. 1972. There is. 
as such, no wnttcn criteria for determining whether conduct of a particular 
employee or pensioner 1S good or bad . But Regulations 6(1)(b), 6(2). 6(3) 
and 6(4) of Calcutta Pon Trust Employees' (Pension) Regulations, 1988 
clearly stipulate the circumstance~ when the appointing authority may 
withhold or withdraw a pension or part thereof . 
After discussion the Min1stry accepted that the term_ "Future good 
conduct" is quite vague and agreed to delete the same from the 
Regulations. The Committee recommended that the said term be deleted 
expediiJously under intimation to it. 
7.6 Regulmoon 6(1 )(b) 
"The appomung authortty may. by order in writing, withhold or 
wuhdraw u pension or pan thereof. whether permanently or for a 
specific period, if the pensioner JS convicted of a serious crime or is 
found guilty of grave misconduct " 
The Committee sought to know what will be the fate of the amount 
withheld or withdrawn from pension, whether it will be deposncd with the 
Go\'ernmcnt treasury or it "'ill be SJ'Cn back oo the employee concerned in 
due cour:.c of lime? 
The Mmistry replied that Calcutta Port Trust is a Local Authonty "'othm 
the meaning of Section 3(31) of the General Clauses Act (Act No. 10 of 
1897). As such the amount "uhhcld or withdrawn from pension rema1ns 
deposited wuh the Tcasurcr. Calcutta Port Trust. In case the payment of 

the amount of penston remams wuhhcld for a spcclficd pcnod, the amount 
of pc•l~ion so withheld ts restored a(ter the specified period is over. The 
amount wuhhcld dunng !Ius 'pcctlied per~od is merged "'ith the funds of 
Calcutta Port Trwot Similarly when a pension or part of a pension is 
"'llhheld permanently. the •am<: "' merged -.ith the funds of the Calcutta 
Port Trull 
The Comm&llcc noted the comments of the Minhtrv. 
7.7 R,·~ulutwll 14(31 
"Where the Cb&e! Mcd&cal Ohlcer ol the Board h» declared an 
cmplo)·cc !11 lor further service of less laborious char"tcr than 
that wh.-h he had been domg. he should, provided he is willing to 
be so cmplo)Cd, be emplovcd on lo...,er post and t! there be no 
means or cmploymg him even on 3 lower post. he may be adrmned 
to mvahd pcnston " 
The Commute<: sought to know the cntcnon io: selecting a lo.,.er post 
on wtuoh an &n,·ahd person w1ll be emplo~ed? Whether his pa) will be 
p1utccted 111 the lower grade'' 
The Mtn"tr) 1ephed that the provisiOn corresponds to the Rule 38(~) of 
the Ccl\lrdl Cml Scm"s tPcns&on l Rules. 1972 There JS 3> such no 
Wflllcn ~nlcflon lor ;clc"&ng a lo"cr post on which an mvalid pcrs0n cnn 
be employed. In the even t uf on employee. bcmg declared lit by the Chief 
Medical orr.~cr. Calcutl<l Port Trust for further serv ice nf less IJbOfiOUS 
ehnrnetcr than whut he had been cJomt. normally be is appointed tn n 
lower post which dOc> n<1l itwnlve work of laborious character. In thnt 
event hi> puy which he drew In the orig inal higher post i~ protected B1111f 
lhl.' maximum pay 1n lht..· tame.; ~:.4th~ uf the luwcr po$1 i~ lowc.r than Ius pa~ 
m rC,f"'CI 11! lh• old po>t hdll regularly he ;hall draw that maximum ,., 
hb uai11al P'" 
Th.: Comn·uucc c~prcs~..:.d lh~~ali~fat.:tion that the posy I:\ Olll protc~tcd 
either 10 the 'CIVI"' pcm•ll ot r,, th• cllrcmcnt benefits ~nd directed thai 
thr Rcgul.11ion he JmcnUcd 'u J;. h l:O~urc thou the p.s)· uf the cmJ'IIO)'CC is 
prutcC~cd "'hen he 1; assigned lowo:r po>t on medical grounds. 
7.~ Rt'g11latum ~~ 
'"If an employee "sclcctc•l for discharge owning to the abolition of 
Ius peamancnt post. he shall, unless be 1S appointed to another 
po•t the conditiOn' nf "h&.:h arc deemed by the authority compe· 
tent to d&>eh;ugc h1m to be atlea>t equal to thmc of hi:. o,.n, have 
the optt<>n -
(d) of lakang Cllmf"'ll'dta.>ll pcn"on to whi<h he ma) l>t cnt&tlcld (or 
the service he had rendered. or 
(b) or nccpeung another uppomtmcnt on such pa) "-' ma) be offered 
und cont~numg to count hi(; previous service for pension " 

The CommtUee sought to know whether the Ministry have any objec­
tion in prescribmg a dcfim!e lime limn within whic h a person whose 
permanent pose ha£ been abolished will be offered either compensation 
pension or another appomtment, If an employee ac;cep15 another 
appom!mcnt, whether h11 pay will be protected• 
The Mmt>try replied !bat tt is de~trabl) that a defintte tunc limit i; 
prescribed wi!htn whtch a person w as.: permanent p<»l has been 
abohshed wtll be offered eather .ompensation pension or another 
appomtmcnt. In case when an cn•ploycc accepts an appointment after 
b<:mg declared surplus on aboliao n of permanent post be; pay 11 pro­
tected 
The Committee recommended that a definite time limn should be 
provtded by amendang regulation 25 upcditiously under mumBtion to It 
7 9 Rrgulutwn 4J 
"Should be omount of peostonldcath-cum-rcttrcmcnt gratuil\ 
crunted to an cmpiO)CC be afterwards found t<• be tn '"'c's of 
that to winch he ·~ cntt!lcd under these regulation' he shall be 
culled upon by the FmanciJI Adviser and Chic! Accounts Offtcer 
to refund such execs,, for thi~ purpo;c the employee concerned 
shall be served wilh o notice b) a Fmuneial AJvis~r and Chief 
Aeeoun" Officer requtrmg him to refund The excess pnymem• 
wrthtn a n riod of two mo n th~ from the date of rcceapt by hun 
of the; notice. On has fatl urc to com ply with the notTcc. the 
Financtn l Advisct nnd Chrci Accounts Offi cor shall order thai 
such exec'> payment shall be adjus ted by payment of pension rn 
fu rurc in one or mor~ i nsT~ I m"nt~ ~s he will thtnk fit." 
The Commlti<'C sought 10 ~ now whal cmcria arc kept m mmd h} The 
Finnnciol Adviser and Chic.•t A~count Officer in ft.xing one or mor(' 
rn\lalmcnts for ;t<IJU~tin~ the c'cc;s payment of pension 10 case ol 
fatlurc of the employee concc1 ned to wmpl) wnh The not~ec requrnng 
him to refund the cxcc>s pa)ment "'llhtn a pcnod oi two month>' 
The MuuMry rcphcd that there •~ no latd down guidchncs m connec­
htln '-''llh the fnalion ui tht: IIU.UJJmcnt!lo fur TCCOVCi}' of t"XCCSS pii,)IDCRt 
<•I pension tn case the pensioner iath "' refund the amount of pcnsaon 
p.aid In C)...,.,:!l.~ ~nhm two mon1h~ T he amou01 of pc:m1on patd tn exec~ 
is roco' ercd 10 tnst~lmcnts kccpmg rn \'tcw the amount of pension 
dra" n and the umount to be rc<os-rcd . In fixing the number and 
amount oi tn>talmcnt the fmancral hani<hip to b.: f:tccd b• the penstoncr 
L' alv.~)S kept 10 rnmd and a h~ral vtcw is taken~ 
The Comnuttcc wa• not satt>lrcd \lollh the reply o: the Mim>try and 
felt that $<>me gutdelrncs to be prc,,ntx;d for FA and C r\.0 for 
fnmg one or murc anstalmcnt< ior adjusung the c~cc"' payment ul 
p..:n~uon an CA~C Of fadurt! Of InC cmplo\t.~C concerned to complY w11h th~:: 

24 
nottce requiring him to refund the excess payment within a period of two 
months. The Committee, therefore, recommended that Regulation 43 be amended accordingly. 
7.10 The Committee also noted !bat the representatives of Calcuua Pon 
Trust have agreed to form a SuD-committee to review the whole Pension 
Regulations and to carry out necessary amendments therein . 
7 II The discussion ended with a mutual VOle or thanks . 
• -.f , , . 
. 
The Commtttee. thereafter. dispersed. 

ANNEXURE-II 
(Vide para 2.6] 
SEPTEMBER 15 & 21. 1994 
COCHJN/VJSHAKHAPATNAM PORT TRUST-NON·FRAMJNG OF 
PENSION REGULATIONS 
4 The Commiuee assembled on 15th September, 1994 on Conference 
Hall of Hotel Mascot, Trivandrum and on 26th September, 1994 in Qutb 
Shah Room of Hotel Krishna Oberoi, Hyderabad and held discusstons llfith 
the representatives of the Ministry of Surface Transpon (Pons Wing). 
Cocbin Pon Trust and Vishalchapatnarn Pon Trust respectively. 
MEMoERS PRESENT AT TRJvANoRuM 
Shrt H Hanumanthappa-cha~rman 
Shri V Rajcshwar Rao 
Shri Gopalslnh G. Solanki 
Shri Nyodck Yonggan 
MeMOERs PRESE><T AT HvDERAIIAo 
Shri II. Hanumonthappa-Ch01rman 
Shri Misa R. Goncsan 
Shn Chimanbhai Mehta 
Shri Y. Rajcshwar Rao 
Shri K. N. Singh 
Shn Oopalsinh 0 Solanki 
Shri Sompal 
Shri Nyodck Yonggam 
SEC'RE'fARIAT 
Shn Om Praka.<h, Undtr Secrttar) 
Shri A.K Singh C:ommmtt O[{ictr 
REPRESENTAnvE.< oF COCJnr< POKT TRvST 
Shri C K Ramachandran, Deputy Chatrman 
Shri P.J Mathew, Financtal Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer 
Shn V Ramakrishnan. Deputy Secretary 
REPRE>P .. TAnvs or VtsttAKttAPATNAM P<>trr TReST 
Shri T Gopal Rao, Chairman 
25 

26 
Shn K.V Gupta, Senior Deputy Financial Adviser and Chief AccounL\ Officer 
RtPRrstN1xnv~, OF nrE. Mr"JSTR'V OF Sr RFACE TRA"SPOR~ CPOkTs WrM.) 
Shn 1\nand Kumar, Deputy Secretary (At Trivandrum) 
Shri P Kalyanasundram. Under Secretary (At Hyderabad) 
4 I Shri C.K Ramachandran, Deputy Chairman of Cochin Pon Trust 
and Shri T. Gopal Rao. Chairman of Vishakbapatnam Port Trust 
welcomed the Comminee and introduced their team of executive• rn their 
re~pccttve mecungs. The Chairman of th< Commiuec olso rntroduced the 
Mcmbe" nnd Office~ of the Commillec. Thereafter, both Sbrt Ramachan­
dran and Shn Gopal Rao gave brief account of their rc~pccuve Port Trusts 
and replied to the quenes ra!sed by the Chairman and Membe" of the Commtuee. 
The Commiuee, thereafter. tnniated discussion in the light of the 
questionnaire and replies furnrshed by Coehin and Vishakhapatnam Port Trusts. 
4.2 The Major Port Trum A<t came into force in 1964, which provides 
for framing of Regulations by the Port Trusts. The Comminee sought to 
kno", what arc the reasons that the Pension Regulations have not been 
framed by the Cochin and Vishakhapatnnm Port Trusts. where..~ other 
Pon 1 rusts hove frotmed these Rcgu lations. 
Cochin Port Tru~t~ replrcd that 11 was declared a; a Major Port in 1964 
under the provisiom, of Major Pon Trusts Act. 1963 Consequcm to this. 
in cxerd:.c vf powel'!< conferred b1· Section 126 read with Sections 12S and 
l34 of til~ Act. the Cent al Government framed the Major r>ort Trusts 
(Adap tation or Rules) Regulauons. 1964, for Vishakhapatnam. Cochin and 
Kandln Ports. Since the Pens10n Scheme was introduced rn Cochin Pon 
TruM from 1962, the Centra! Civil Services r>ension Rules whtch were 
app lic.able at the time of framing of the Regulations in 1964 continued to 
apply. Subsequently when the question of Imming vanous rules and 
regulations under the Act arose, a view was taken by the Ministry in 1982 
that the Indian Ports Associations may be entrusted with the work of 
framing untform regulation>. Later the: Indian Pons Assoctations diseon­
unucd tha> tA<ercisc in 1987 on the advice of tbt Ministry . 
Thereafter. the\' were following the Government orders on subJects on 
whteh the Port dtd not have separate Regulations, wnb the approval or the 
Central Government , When they approached the Central Government for 
approval for •mplementat ion of a 'ct of orders on Penston. the Ministry, in 
thctr lcucr No. PR·I2012112-9J·PEI dated 16th March. 1993 advised that 
the Pon should frame ns own Regulattoos on Pension unmediatcly. 
Accordmgly, the Pon has framed Draft Peru1on Regulations which lS being 
placed before the Port TruM Board after veuiog by the legal Adviser 
The Vrshakhapatnam Port Trust replied thor the Major Pvr1 Trusts Act 

27 
1963 ha> come inro force 111 Vr,hakhapatnam Port with effect from 29th 
February. 1964. Under MaJOr Pori Trusts (Adaptation of Rules/Regula­
tions) 1'.164 lhc Pon adopled the Pensron Rules contained in C.S.R . 
Liberaliscd Pensron Rules, 1950 and Family Pension Rules. 1964 and 
C.C.S (Pcnsron) Rules. 1972 wrth amendments from time to time issued by 
the Government. In rmplcmenting the Government u 'ers and amend­
ments thereon from ume to time the Pon bas not faced so far any 
difficulty either from management side or from pensioners side by not 
having any Regulations. 
The Commrttce took a serioU> note thai by non framing of Pension 
Regulauons, the Mimslry t> avoiding lhe scrutiny by Parliament and 
\lrongly recommended thai bolh lhc Pom should have Pen>ion Regula­
lions and <.liree1ed the Mmistry 10 iramc Pension Regulations c~peditiou.sly 
under inlimatron to it. 
4,J The Comm111cc sought to knov. lbe other areas in respect of whrcn 
Regulations have not been framed by !he Cocb.in and Vishakhapatnam 
Porr Trusts? 
The Cochm Pon Trust replied !hal Pcnsron, Fcstrval Advance and 
Mcdrcol Reimbursement Rcgulnuons have been framed and arc on draft 
sragc 
In respect of other rlerns such as T A .. H.R.A .. C.C.A .• fixat.-.~n oi pay, 
Staff C'ur Rules, Service Condrtions of Ex·Scrviccrllen' Convcy•ncc Atlv· 
nncc, l onvcyancc Allowance etc. they arc following !he Cemral Govern· 
mcn1 Orders by vinue of the provisions wtdcr Regulurion 4 of MPT 
(Adaptation ol Rules) Rcgularions. 1964. Regularions for the above 
matters arc ycl to be framed 
The Vishukhopatnam Port Trusr replied thai for House Building 
Advance and T A Rules no separate regulations have been framed. They 
arc followrng the Central Govcmmcnc Order under Vishakhaparnam Pon 
Trust Adaplation Rcgulauons. 
The Comminee noled the reply o( borh !he Pon Trusts. 
4 4 Central Civil 5crvrces Pcn~ron Rules do nor apply 10 the Port Trusrs 
untJI ~nd unlcs..' they arc adopted by the Ports. The Commrnce sough• '" 
know. how the pension of !he employees rs regulated m the absence of 
Pension Rcgulauons~ 
Borh !he Pon TruMs replied !hal rhe Rules and Orders of the Central 
Govcrnmcnl on rhc subtcct. as amended from lime ro time, (to the extenr 
made applicable b~ !he Government to the Pon Trusts) arc foiJo.,ed by 
the Ports "'>lh lhe approval of the Central Government under the 
Provisions of Regulauon J of Major Pon Trusts (Adaptarion of Rules) 
Rcgularrons. 196-1. 
The Commutcc noted rhe repl) 
~.) I he t.:ommmee sought 10 know. how many persons have rc1ircd 
• 

28 
during I be las1 lwo years. Whet her any of !hem have rcpresemed 
agninsl 1he fixauon of !heir pension; if so, the dclails !hereof? 
The Coch1n Pori Trust replied that 177 employees rclired itt 1992 and 
459 rclired in 1993. No representation agamst the faxatioo of pension has been received so for. 
The Vishakhapatnam Port Trust replied lha1 1071 employees relired 
durms the last two years (This includes the employees who retired 
under the Voluntary Retiremenl Scheme). There arc no represematioo 
from pcn;10ncrs' side wJth regard lo fixalion of pension. 
The C'ommmec nolcd bo1h lhe replies 
4.6 The Commmee sought 10 know. bow a pension is determined itt 
1he case or persons who have been declared fit for funber service of 
less laborious character than lhat which they had been doing earlier? 
8o1h lhe Pon Trum replied lhat no case of 1h1s 1ypc has arisen in 
nny of the sa1d two Ports so far and that such type of cases can be 
dcall wnh 1n accordance wnh lhe provisions contained 10 Cemral Civil Services Pension Rules. 
The Comm111ce noted lhe reply 
4.7 The C'omrn1llcc sought 10 know, how a pcns1on of a person 
declared tnvalid by lhc Chief Medical Officers' is fixed. Whether lhe 
MmiSiry have any objcc1ion iu fixing his pension on the ba.1is of salary 
he had drawn, if he had not been d.:da rcd invalid by the Chief Medical Officer? 
Both lhe Port Trusts replied 1ha1 pension of a person declared invalid 
by 1hc Chief Medical Office~ is calclllatcd ou 1hc same mclhod as thai 
of superannuation pension i.t on lhc basts of the las1 lO months' 
average pay bused on 1hc pay he was drawing prior lo lhc dole of Invalidation as per C.C.S. Rule.. 
The Comnuncc polmed oul that the term "less laborious Character" 
10 the C.C.S Pen>ion. Rules which docs no1 prolect a workman's pay tf 
he ts demolcd to a lower grade 10 view of his physical mabilily under 
do<'! or's advtce •• not rca.onablc The Com mince, accordingly. inisis1cd 
thai the pay of a workman should be pro1cc1cd C\'Co if he is pos1ed 10 
a lower graue For this suggestion. the Visakhapatnam Pon Trusl 
Authoriltc' SIJicd I hat tf such protect ion is allowed. this may become a 
prccedcm and many "Orkmen may misuse this iacility. The Commmec 
for lhis argument pomted out lhat instead of relying on a single 
Doctor's advice, a Medil:ill Board and an Appellate Medical Board may 
be constnurcd for curbmg anv such misuse. 
Commmec dtscussed on the Dearness Relief Calculations on Pension 
paymenl @ 5% on Pcnsion/Famoly Pensions (Subject to a maximum nf 
R< 251.) lor every ro<o~•>< or ZO.potnl in 11 monthly average Consumer 

Price Index. The Comminee pointed out that il is contrary to the interests 
of workers and the work force. 
4.9 The Comm ,ttce also poinrcd ou1 that provisions (a) & (b) of Rules 
13 of C C.S. Pension Rules. which is almost copies by the Pon Trust is 
indirect! encouraging cbiJd labour and stated that this clause should be 
deleted by taking up the matter >¥itb the Government. 
4.10 The Comnuttee pointed out that the words Pension subject to 
future gOOd conduct' under Rule 8 of C.C.S. Pension Rules is prejudicial 
to the interests of the employees. It further stated that payment of pension 
IS for the past service and performance and not for future gOOd conduct. 
They also stated that this clause may be deleted. 
4.11 The Commutec pointed that Rule 38 of C.C.S. Pension Rules 
regarding 'invalid pension' should also be looked into. 
4 12 The Committee finally suggested that the rules require thorough 
scrutmy and also ~uggcstcd to the Ministry to frame common rules for all Port Trusts in the country. 
With the above ob;crvutions. the Comnuttee concluded the meeting and 
advised the Chairman to submit a revised note to tlte Committee within 10 dny.~. 

ANNEXURE-UI 
{Vide para 2. 7] 
NOTE ON TilE VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION. RAJYA SABHA TO GOA 01'\ 6TH FEBRUARY 
1995 
11.00 A.M. 
The Committee as..:mbled in the Conference Hall of Mormugao Pon 
Tru.\1 and held doscusso\lns on the Mormugao Port Employees (Pen.,ion and 
Graruol\) Rcgulallons. 1966 
1\.iEMaEI<.' PRESENT 
I Shn II. Hanumaruhappa-chwrnum 
2 Shn M"a R Ganc•an 
3 Shn V Rojet.hw.,r Ri1n 
4 Shn K N. Singh 
5 Shri ~urn Pal 
SEC'RETI\RJA1 
I' Shn Om Parkash. Undl"r Stcretary 
~ Stm H C Sethi. Comtmtru Officer 
1 Shn S K. Thakrnl P.S to Chairman 
Ru•~<B&><TATIVE.i> o o MoRMUO AO PoRT TRUST 
I. Shri -\.P Bhatikar. Chairman 
2. Cnpr R Rnrn Kumar. Deputy Chaim1an 
3 Shu S.< [l:~. Secretary 
4. Shri R.V. Nadkarm. Chref Mechanical Eng111cer 
5 Shri P S. Ravrndr•n PF & CAO 
t>. Shn F D'Co>l•, fraffic Manager 
7 Shn R.A. Kamat, Chrcf Engineer 
S. Dr. U <1. RaiJ.,;.,r. Chtcf Medtcal Officer 
9 Shn C.V. Charatc. Marcnals Manager 
10. Shri S G Vcngurlenkar, Deputy Director 
II Shn D. Arumugam. Deputy Chairman, MDLB 
12. Shn M.D. Saxena, Deputy Commandant 
13. Capt B Gomes. Harbour Master 
RrPREM r<TATIVE or nrE Mu<b'TRY OF SuRFACE TI\--..><SPORT 
Shn P. Kalyan&sundoram, Under Secretary 
,\t the out~t. the Chairman. MPT. Shri A.P. Bharikar welcomed the 
CommlliCC and Introduced his officers Tbe Chairman Of the Commille< 
alw introduced the Membe" and Officers of the Commitree and asked the 
30 

31 
Chairman of MPT 10 give a brief account about the progress and working 
of the Port. 
The Chairman, MPT onformed tbe Committee tbat the Pon came into 
CX15tence in 1885 and it completed us 100 years in 1985. The Centenary 
celebrations were attended, among others, by tbe Hon'ble late Prime 
Mimster. Shri RaJiY Gandhi. He also informed the Committee that the 
tonnage handled by the Port can be judged by its performance for the year 
ending 1992·93 when a record tonnage of 163.14 lakhs of cargo were 
ach1eved. He also informed tbc Committee that this Pon is the fifth largc51 
Pon in the Country. The Committee Chairman enquired regarding 
decrease in profitS for 1991-92 and inereii5C in profits for 1992-93. The Pon 
Cha11man informed that it was due to increase in torriffs which is done 
once in three years and also du~ to 500 to 700 postS lying vacant. He also 
informed 1he Comm111cc that no fmancial assis1ance is being received by 
this p,,n from the Government of India. 
Shn Sompal. M. P. wanted to know about the potential for development 
of the Port and 1mmed1ate plans bemg token up by the Port to wh1ch the 
Port Cha~rman replied that two deep berths in place of the exJStmg ones 
arc proposed to be developed with the assistance of Asuln Development 
Bnnk. 
The case is pending with the Government. He also stated th~t the 
potential for thi! Port ha~ increased as a result of the libernlisation of 
economy. conversion of metre gnugc rail line into broad gauge and the 
demand for Port services. The Port authorities ha"e also prepared a plan 
for an Outer Harbour with 11 berths which is estimated tO-cost about Rs 
2.000~ crorcs. He also 1nformcd that since the Port did not ha,·e so much 
of finance, it needed to be privatised. On a ponued cnqu•ry, tbe Chairman 
of the Porr informed the Comm&tree tltat they have short-listed some 
companies and have also taken naval area for Bharat Petroleum Corpora­
tion for its future expansion. Shri Sompal. M.P. asked the reason~ for 
deciding to go for expans1on by privatisation It "'as conveyed to ihc 
Commiuee that it was due to the policy of Government of India in tbil. 
rcgord. SimultaneoiY.ily. he also informed the Commiuee that private 
sector is in a beucr position to raise the financial resources. On a further 
enquiry by Shri Misa R. Gancsan. M.P .. he informed that dock labour ;_, 
used for carrying cargo from ship 10 wharf and from wharf to sh1p 1\s 
regards reduction in labour force. the Port Chairman informed that it was 
due to cut of 10% in the administrative expenditure as per Government 
poh• . The Chairman then lUked about the non-availability of candidates 
belonging 10 the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Communities 
The Port Chairman in formed that though they bave spent a lot of mObey 
by way of newspaper advertisements for inviting applications from SC & 

32 
ST candidates yet no ~uitable candidates were found. The Committee 
Chairman wa• not convinced with the reply that posts of Safai Karam· 
charics even have not been filled up. Shri Sompal. M P. suggested chat if 
interviews for such posts arc held outside Goa. the problem could be 
solved co some extent. The Chairman of the Pon assured the Committee 
that the suggestion wiU be considered. 
Initiating the discussion on the Agenda. the Chairman. MPT informed 
the Committee that some minor amendments have been made in the 
Mormugao Pon Employees (Pension and Grntuity) Regulations. 1966, 
occasionally. He also informed that the last amendment '" the above 
Regulations took place m 1981. He informed the Committee that the 
prc<ent regulations have become outdated and need amendments. In this 
connection. he mformed the Commincc that some persons arc on this job 
after finalisation the MPT will send to Government . and if these 
amendments arc approved by the Government. the present Regulations 
will be amended accordingly 
As regards pension. the Pon Chairman informed the Commincc that the 
present rules have a provision of a maximum pension of Rs. 645'. On the 
other hand. he also informed that the employes of this pon are free either 
to opt for pension under our regulation~ or under the Pens10n Scheme of 
the Government of India when the Chairman asked abour the provision 
which gtves thi< oprion the MPT could not satisfy the Commiuce. He also 
informed the Commmcc that the retiring employees opt for pensrlln under 
Government . Pension scheme as it is more allraetivelbencficial. The 
Chauman of the Commillce then asked them to give an example for 
calculating the pension under the Mormugao Porr Employees Regulations. 
1966, which wa .~ explained to the Commtllcc. The Commiuee was not 
satisfied with the reply and observed bow can the employees who were 
entitled to receive a pension of 12()()1.. rupees were getting a meagre 
pension of R~. 6451. and was of the considered view that there is 
s<>ntcthing wrong in interpretation. The Port Chairman a<;Sured the 
Committee th:n this aspect would be looked into . He also informed the 
Cornmiuce that all the 33 regulations arc out-dated and informed the 
Commiuce that the present regulations will be amended shonly and will be 
~nt to the Mintstry The Chairman of the Committee observed if 
according to Chairman of Pon Trust all the regulations are out-dated and 
arc going to be amended better 10 wait for amended regulations and there 
IS no need to di~uss the out-dated regulations. The Chairman of the 
Commiuce observed that the Ministry of Surface Transport is also not 
fulfilling the cOmmnmenL\ made before the Comminee. The Committee 
was earlter informed that in order 10 mamtam uniformity in the rules and 
regulations of all major pons Chairman of all the major Pon Trusts would 
sit together for removal of anomalies •n the Rules and Regulation.\ of 
various Port Trusts so that untformuv cs maintained. Shri P Kalyanasun­
daram, Under Secretary. Mini~try or Surface Transpon informed the 

Committee that efforts in this regard are being made and then suggestions 
given by the Committee will be looked into. 
The discusston concluded with mutual vote oi thanks. 

ANNEXURE-IV 
[Vrdr para 2.7) 
NOTE ON THE VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA TO BOMBAY ON lOTH FEBRU· ARY, 1995. 
4.00 P.M. 
The Commonee first VISited the Bulk and Container terminals of 
Jawaha!lal Nehru Port Trust to have the first-hand information on the1r 
working. The Chairman of the Pon. Shri K. Nalinakshan, explaJDed in 
detail the working of these terminals as well as the future expansion plam 
thereof Thereafter, the Comminee assembled in the Conferen~ Room of 
J N.P T. h> discuss the Nhava Sheva Port Trust Employees (Oassifieation, 
Control and Appeal) Regulallons and the Pension Regulations 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
I Shri II Hanumanthappa-Chairman 
2 Shri Mis8 R. Gancsan 
3 Shri V. Rojeshwar Rao 
4 Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
5 Shri Sompal 
I. Shn Om Parkash, Undtr Suwary 
2. Shri H .C Sethi, Commi/lu Offictr 
). Shri S K ThakraJ, P.S. to Chairman 
R£PR&sENTATIV£S OF J.N P.T. 
Shn K Nalinakshan, Cbaorman 
2 Dr Jose Paul. Deputy Chamnan 
3. Shri K V Natarajan. Ch1ef Manager 
4. Capt. R.J . Saldanha, Deputy Conservator 
S. Shri A B. Gadgil, Scmor Manager 
6. Shri J . Chakraborty, Seruor Manager 
7 Shri A.K Sen. Manager" 
8. Shri lndresh Kumar. Manager 
9 Shri M.G Ahore. Manager 
10 Shn S.S Nagar. Deputy Manager 
.1. Sh., r Pllronik, Manager 
34 

REPR£SEI'ITATIVE OF Til~ MII'IISTRY OF SURFACE TRA. .. SPORT 
Shn P Kalyanasundaram. Under Secretary 
The Chairman of the J.N.P.l •• Shti K l'<alinakshan we~med tlle 
Commntee and totrodueed officers of the Pon Trust. The Cb8ltman of the 
Commtuee also mtrodueed the Members and Officers of tbe Commiuee . 
Thereafter. tlle Chamnan of tbe Pon gave a bncf ovemew or th.: 
acttvtlles and worlung of tlle Pon. He informed the Committee tllat tbc 
Pon handled S milhoo toones of cargo out of which 2.9 million tonocs ,.,., 
bulk cargo n:laung to food and fen.lizcrs. He also mformed the Commit­
tee that at present thts Pon is unloadmg 2 lacs of containers per year and 
this capacity is to be increased to 2.35 lacs containers in the near future . 
He abo informed the Commtttee that work on this Pon started in 196-: 
and the Port became operative Ill 1985 with a total cost of 1000 crorcs 
received from the World Bank . Mr. Nalinakshan also informed that for 
further cxpan<ion and development of the Pon. Government have permit· 
ted for private parttcipation as the funds can be raised from private parties 
On this the Commiucc Chnirmnn raised an objection as to why the Port 
was thinkmg of privatisotion. They should approach the Planning Commis· 
S10n wnh their proposuls for the expansion and development of the Pon 
The Chariman also suggested to the Port authorities that they should 
approach the Central Government for expediting the clearance of Plans 
since the Port hM a very high potential for its growth The Chauman also 
observed that privntisation of cverythi11g bas become the altitude of the 
bureaucracy The Chainnon suggested to the Port authorities to write to 
the Central 1 •l.lVernmeot that the Commutec m tls deliberations pointed 
out that the) .hould approach the Central Government for more funds for 
further g•o"th c•pansion and d•vclopment oi this important Pon 
Thr C'omm1ttec Chatrman duccted the rcpres.:ntauve of lbe MmtStrv ~ . 
S<Jrfac~ Tnn,port. Shri P. Kalyan. ;unda 1m to approach the Members Ol 
the Committee 10 New Delht after a week 10 receive the quesuonna.ire . 1f 
any, from the Members and the replies to the questionn<tire may be 
fumtshed to the Secrctanat at the earliest 
Comtng to the mam agenda. the: Commmee felt that smce tlle replies to 
the Memoranda were sausfactor }. there was no scope ior d~>cussion . 
Regardmg Pcnston Rcgulauons the Chairman of the Committee 
d~tcctcd the h>rl authonucs to ir.m c •hc1r Pe~s;or. Rc~•JI>Ilons cxpedtll 
o"sly •o that the penston eases nf the rcllring em;>lovees ate not dcf.,c d 
for want of Penston Regulation< 
Th~ mc~'ing 1hon adjourne d wuh • mur 4i vote t:·i lh . .u:ks. 
35 