184                     COSL 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION 
HUNDRED  AND  EIGHTY  FORTH  REPORT 
ON 
THE  BIO-MEDICAL  WASTE  (MANAGEMENT  AND 
HANDLING)  RULES,  1998 
 
(Presented on 17th July, 2009) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
July, 2009/Srawan, 1931 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ........................................ (i) 
2. I NTRODUCTION .................................................................... (iii) 
3. R EPORT ............................................................................. 1-19 
4. M INUTES............................................................................ 20-21 
5. A NNEXURES ........................................................................ 22-107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE 28TH MAY, 2008) 
 
 1. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla    ------ Chairperson 
 2. Prof. P. J. Kurien 
 3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 4. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 5. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
 6. Shri Vikram Verma 
 7. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
 8. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
 9. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
 10. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
 11. Shri Abani Roy
  
 12. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 13. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
 14. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
 15. Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
S
ECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
 3. Smt. Shubhashree Panigrahi, Deputy Director 
 4. Shri R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director 
 5. Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Research Officer 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
1. I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
having been authorized by the Comm ittee to present the Report on its 
behalf, do hereby present this One Hu ndred and Eighty Fourth Report of 
the Committee. 
1.2 The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting 
held on the 14th July, 2009 
1.3  The matter examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of 
various Rules/Regulations and issues, relating to them along with the 
comments received from the Government. The observations and 
recommendations of the Committee ar e contained in the succeeding 
paragraphs of the Report. 
 
 
DR. (SHRIMATI) NAJMA  A. HEPTULLA 
Chairperson, 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
Rajya Sabha. 
NEW DELHI ; 
14th July, 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT ON 
THE BIO-MEDICAL WASTE (MANAGEMENT AND 
HANDLING) RULES, 1998 
  The Bio-Medical Waste (Managem ent and Handling) Rules, 1998 
were framed under Sections 6, 8 and 25 of the Environment (Protection) 
Act, 1986 The Rules were notified on the 20th July 1998 that deal with 
the duties of occupier of the institution generating the bio-medical waste, 
treatment and disposal, segregation,  transportation and storage of bio-
medical waste. The Rules also prescribe the authorities for granting 
authorization and monitoring the implementation of Rules. It also 
prescribe the procedure for reporting and record maintenance. The Rules 
have six Schedules. Schedule I prescribes 10 categories of bio-medical 
waste and procedure of their disposal , Schedule II prescribes color code 
of the container for respective categories of bio-medical waste. Schedule 
III prescribes the label for bio-medi cal waste bags/con tainers. Schedule 
IV prescribes label for transport of such waste, Schedule V provides for 
the standards for the treatment and disposal of bio-medical waste and 
Schedule VI provides that waste treatment facilities like incinerators and 
autoclaves should have been installed,  in all health care facilities by 
December 2002. 
2.   The Rules were examined and a questionnaire on the subject was 
sent to the Ministry of Environment & Forests on January 24, 2000 for 
their comments. The comments/clarifications of the Ministry of 
Environment & Forest on the points raised in the questionnaire were 
received on February 1, 2000 (Annexure-I). 
3.  The Committee found that the Ministry’s replies to most of the 
queries pertained to only couple of Central Government Hospitals located 
in Delhi. The Committee, therefore is constrained to infer that as though 

Rules framed under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 had all India 
jurisdiction, its implementation has remained very limited. 
4.  The Committee observed that the Rules were silent about the waste 
generated in Pathology labs. It was informed that the waste generated in 
Pathological labs is to be disposed off as per the guidelines for the 
Category I Bio Medical waste. 
5.  The Committee was also informed that steps were being taken to 
create awareness among those running/working in the hospitals, clinics, 
as also the doctors, paramedics an d other stakeholders regarding the 
handling, management and disposal of bio-medical, wastes. The 
following steps were proposed: 
z Poster giving guidelines for disposal of Bio-Medical Waste 
are displayed at the points of waste generation; 
z  Color coded bags are placed to collect segregated waste 
meant for disposal as per prescribed methods; 
z  Awareness programmes for the doctors, paramedic and other 
staff of the hospital; Hospit als are supposed to create 
mechanism to monitor the points where biomedical waste is 
generated and to educate the staff to segregate the waste 
before it is consigned for consummate disposal; 
z  Bio-Hazard symbols are prominently displayed at various 
places in the hospitals; and 
z  Management of bio-medical waste is included in the under-
graduate and post graduate curricula. 
6.   The Committee discussed the subject matter with the 
representatives of State Governme nt of Rajasthan (Department of 

Environment & Forests, Health and Animal Husbandry) and the Union 
Ministry of Environment and Forests on the 9th February, 2000 at Jaipur. 
The study note on the said discussion is placed at (Annexure-II). 
7.   During the interaction, the Committee raised the issue of setting up 
common facilities by the Municipal bodies to be utilized by small private 
hospitals and nursing homes. The Committee also inquired if financial 
assistance from Central Government was required for setting up such 
facilities. The Committee was informed that most of veterinary hospitals 
in the State did not figure in the category of occupiers needing 
authorization. The State representatives also informed the Committee 
about the financial constraints faced by the State Governments in 
installing the incinerators. 
8.   In its written reply, the Ministry of Environment and Forests 
informed that there were 157 Common Bio-medical waste treatment 
facilities in various States/UTs of which only 13 were operated by the 
Government institutions like Government Hospitals or Municipal bodies. 
9.  The Committee was further informed that detailed guidelines have 
been issued for the design and construction of Bio-medical waste 
incinerators and common Bio-medical waste treatment facility. The Rules 
prescribe to ensure complete disinfection with adequate chemical 
treatment. 
10.   Apprehending the slow progress in setting up the incinerators, the 
Committee suggested that till the incinerators were established in cities, 
deep burial may be allowed for the disposal of bio-medical waste in the 
cities with a population of more than 5 lakhs. Similarly, the liquid waste 
and chemical waste were being discharged in drains without adequate 
treatment. It was also pointed out that incineration ash was required to be 

disposed off in municipal land fills. In the reply, the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests submitted that 
“Since availability of land is a problem in cities, till incinerators 
are established in the cities, the Bio Medical waste may be 
transported outside the cities (rural areas) for deep burial 
purpose” 
11.   The Committee however expresses its serious concern over 
tardy progress in setting up the common bio-medical waste treatment 
facilities. Only 157 common bio-medi cal waste treatment facilities in 
various States is highly inad equate, not to speak about the 
mismanagement and poor handling of  infectious bio medical wastes, 
we are thus exposing a large populat ion to grave health hazards. The 
Committee also finds that the G overnment institutions like 
Government Hospitals and Municipali ties are not interested at all in 
setting up such facilities. The Committee recommends that the 
Central Government and the Stat e Government through Pollution 
Control Boards and District level Chief Medical Officers must design 
and implement a programme for setting up decentralized bio-medical 
waste treatment facilities at least one in each Municipal area. 
12.   The Committee also considers that treatment of bio-medical 
waste is inherent in the definiti on of ‘Sanitation” and “Public 
Health” and these are the respons ibilities of the Panchayats and 
Municipalities as per Eleventh and Twelfth Schedules of the 
Constitution. Instead, the Committ ee finds that under the present 
Rules State/UT Governments have been given the nodal role for 
establishing the prescribed author ity for implementing these Rules 
and for the grant of authorizat ion. The Committee therefore, 
recommends that the local bodies sh ould have greater role in the 

implementation of these Rules. Th e necessary finances and technical 
support should be provided to thes e local bodies for setting up the 
prescribed facilities for bio-medical waste handling, management and 
treatment. For better coordination at the District level, the 
Committee recommends that Chief Medical Officer (CMO) of the 
District or equivalent officer shou ld be made nodal officer for 
authorization and implementation of these Rules. 
13.   The Committee also apprehends that Rule 8(1) read with 
Schedule VI generally ignore the vete rinary institutions. Considering 
the recent cases of epidemics caused due the animal waste/residues, 
the Committee recommends that it is important that both Rule 8(1) 
and Schedule VI should make cl ear’ provisions for veterinary 
institutions. 
14.  The Ministry of Environment & Forests further in formed that the 
Bio-Medical Waste (Management and Handling) Ru1es, 1998, have been 
amended twice i.e. on March 7,2000 and June 2,2000 and as per the 
second amendment the State pollution Control Boards and the Pollution 
Control Committees shall be prescribed authority in respect of the States 
and Union Territories, respectively, for implementing the provisions of 
the rules (Annexure-III A and III B). 
15.   The Committee again discussed the subject matter with the 
representatives of the Maharashtra State Pollution Control Board along 
with the Union Ministry of Environment & Forests at Mumbai on 
September 29,2000. (Annexure-IV). 
16.   The issue was raised regarding lack of adequate manpower 
available with State Pollution Control Boards to implement the Rules. In 
the written reply the Ministry of Environment and Forest submitted that 
“States have been provided with financial assistance including 

Maharashtra for strengthening thei r Bio-Medical Waste and hazardous 
Waste management Cells. 
17.   It was also observed that segregation of infected Bio-Medical 
Waste remained a basic problem and that the hospital staff was not 
inclined to various orientation programmes. It was underlined that the 
Schedule VI provided for setting up treatment facilities by small hospitals 
and nursing homes, however, their performance had been lackluster. 
18.   In the reply, the Ministry stated- “The Schedule VI was to give 
different time frame to various sizes of healthcare facilities for their 
preparedness so as to comply with the requirement of installing the 
requisite treatment facilities as laid  down under the Rules. However as 
the time frame given was over in December 2002, all healthcare facilities 
were expected to implement all the stipulated provisions of the Rules” 
19.   The Committee further discussed the subject matter with the 
representatives of State Government of Kerala along with the Union 
Ministry of Environment and Forests at Thiruvanthapuram on Ju1y 
10,2001. A copy of the study note containing observations/suggestions 
made by the Committee is enclosed as (Annexure-V ). 
20.   During the discussions the Committee reiterated the need for setting 
up the common facilities for the group of hospitals and that the State 
Governments should make the land available for this purpose. The 
Committee were of the view that there should be a common incinerator in 
every district. 
21.   It was informed that the comm on facilities were now available in 
the districts of Palakkad, Thrissur, Malappuram, Kozhikode, Kannur, 
Kasargod, Kollam, Thiruvananthapuram in the State of Kerala”. 

22.   Meanwhile the Government on 19th March 2002 issued National 
Guidelines on Hospital Waste Management. (Annexure-VI) 
23.   The Committee continued its discussion over the subject with the 
representatives of State Governme nts of Goa along with the Union 
Ministry of Environment and Forests at Panaji on June 19, 2002. A copy 
of the study note containing observations/suggestions made by the 
Committee is enclosed as (Annexure-VII) 
24.   During its interactions at Goa the Committee observed that the 
number of applications received for authorization were proportionately 
very less. It was also observed that the Governments’ reluctance in taking 
punitive action against defaulting units under the provisions of 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, was adversely effecting the 
implementation of the Bio-Medical Waste (Handling and Management) 
Rules. The Committee felt that the State Governments should promptly 
issue notices and prosecute the defaulting units. 
25.   The Committee was informed that the State Government of Goa 
was acting more as a facilitator than a regulator and that it had helped in 
getting cooperation from private nursing homes for setting up common 
facilities for treatment and disposal of bio-medical waste. However, the 
Member Secretary also stated that though the State Government was 
hesitant in taking punitive action against the defaulters but the time had 
come to see effective implementation of the Rules. 
26.   The Committee observed inconsistency in the replies. On the one 
hand the State Government stated that “though the State Government was 
hesitant in taking punitive action against the defaulters but the time had 
come to see effective implementation of the Rules” on the other hand the 
CPCB in the written reply submitted that 

“As per the latest information furnished by the State Pollution 
Control Board to the CPCB, there were no health care facilities 
reported to be violating the Bio-Medical Waste management and 
handling Rules as on 31st March 2008”. 
27.   The Committee finds such rep lies regarding the reported 
violation of Bio-Medical Waste Rules, inconsistent, specious and 
evasive. The reply of CPCB was based on the cases of violation 
reported to the State Pollution Control Board (SPCB). Obviously, the 
concerned SPCB on its own accord , has not made an attempt to 
locate such cases of violation. The Committee therefore takes serious 
note of State Governments’ in ability to monitor and enforce the 
Rules. 
28.   The Committee continued its discussion over the subject with the 
representatives of State Governments of Karnataka along with the Union 
Ministry of Environment and Forests at Bangalore on June 20, 2002. A 
copy of the study note containing observations/suggestions made by the 
Committee is enclosed as (Annexure-VIII) 
29.   During its interactions with the representatives of the Government 
of Karnataka the Committee asked the Central Government to review 
Rule 8(1) as exemption of establishments serving less than 1000 patients 
per month from seeking authorization was not justified since such 
establishments were large in number and generated collectively large 
quantity of bio-medical wastes. 
30.  In the written reply the Committee was informed that 
“The Rule 8(1) exempts small bio-medical waste generators from 
obtaining authorizations from the SPCBs/PCCs, but they have not 
been exempted from their responsi bility to take all necessary steps 

to ensure that such waste is handled without any adverse effect to 
human health and environment, as stipulated in the Rule 4 of the 
said Rules.” 
31.   The Committee was also of the view that Karnataka was 
concentrating in major hospitals in cities only. In their view, the bed 
capacity in smaller towns and villages also needed to be assessed. 
32.   In the written reply it was stated that the Central Pollution Control 
Board had addressed all States including Karnataka to ensure strict 
compliance of the Bio-Medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules 
in all health care establishments. 
33.   The Committee observes that while  Rule 8(1) exempted a large 
number of establishments from seek ing authorization, Rule 4 did not 
make specific provisions for the di sposal of bio-medical waste. The 
Rule 4 makes only a general requirement on all the establishments. 
Considering the large number of instances where common facilities 
have not been established at reaso nable distances for treating and 
disposing off the waste, the Co mmittee apprehends those smaller 
establishments which are excluded from Rule 8(1), may find a 
convenient excuse to circumvent  the Rules. The apprehensions 
expressed by the Committee were corr oborated by the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests in their written reply to the Committee’s 
query during its meeting on the 26th August 2008, regarding the 
constraints faced in implementing the Rules. It was stated- 
“Many small health clinic/nursing homes in name of servicing less 
than 1000 patients per month, do not apply for authorization to the 
respective SPCBs/PCC and go scot -free from monitoring net of 
SPCBs/PCCs.” 

34.   The Committee therefore recommends that the limit of 1000 
patient per month should be realis tically reduced and that the local 
bodies should be asked to set up common facilities for the treatment 
and disposal of Bio-Medical waste. 
35.   The Committee had made observations and raised queries during its 
study visits. However, it took the Ministry six years to furnish the Action 
Taken Note that were furnished on 25th August, 2008, only when the 
Committee decided to have the oral ev idence of the representatives of the 
Ministry. The Action Taken Note of the Ministry is place at ( Annexure-
IX) 
36.   The Committee takes a delay of six years in furnishing the 
Action Taken Note on its observations/queries very seriously and 
feels that such a delay in furnishing  the Action taken Note can not be 
justified in any other way. The Co mmittee expresses its displeasure 
on this and expects the Ministry to be careful in future. 
37.   The Committee had the oral evid ence of the repres entatives of the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests on 26th August, 2008. The 
Committee felt that the implementation of the rules has left much scope 
for improvement. A copy of the issues raised by the Committee is 
enclosed as (Annexure-X ). 
38.   The Committee made a specific observation regarding overlapping 
jurisdictions of several Ministries like Ministry of Environment and 
Forests, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the Ministry of 
Urban Development. 
39.   The Committee sought to know the reason for delay in notifying the 
Bio-Medical Waste (handling and management) Rules 1998 that were 

notified after 12 years of passage of parent Environment (Protection) Act, 
1986. The Committee was informed that- 
“necessity for notifying the Rules pertaining to Bio-medical waste 
management was felt after the directions were Issued by Hon’ble 
Supreme Court for installation of pollution control devices in 
hospitals in Delhi in matter of B.L. Wadhera Vs Union of India in 
year 1995.” 
40.  The Ministry fu rther stated that : 
“The Environment (protection) Act, 1986 does not specify any time 
limit for notifying any Rules under it. The same are notified for 
various subjects as and when the need for notifying the Rules on 
any subject is felt” 
41.   The Committee finds Ministry’s excu se for delay of 12 years in 
notifying the Rules patently unt enable. Despite existence of a 
comprehensive legislation passed by  the Parliament in Environment 
(Protection) Act, 2006, the Govern ment waited for the directions of 
the Supreme Court. It appears that the Government remained 
oblivious of the need for such Rule s till they were awakened by the 
Court order. The Committee fi nds it unacceptable that the 
legislations passed by the Parliame nt are not being enforced in the 
letter and spirit by the Government. Despite repeated 
recommendations made by this Commi ttee in its 9th, 10th, 31st and 
47th Reports asking the Govern ment to frame sub-ordinate 
legislations within six months of  a Statute coming to force, the 
Ministries were not inclined to fr ame subordinate legislations that 
made the Act operational. This ap athy of concerned Ministry is 
extended to field formations who implement the Rules and it was 
evident to the Committee in the indi fferent attitude of the States in 

the implementation of Bio-Me dical Waste (Management and 
Handling) Rules. 
42.   The Committee also enquired about the constraints faced in 
implementation of the Rules. The Mi nistry of Environment and Forest 
enlisted the constraints as following: 
(i) Segregation of infected BMW from the general and 
innocuous waste is the key factor for effective management 
of BMW. Many Government/ private hospitals do not 
provide adequate funds for providing necessary equipments 
such as bins and colour coded plastic bags for segregation of 
infected BMW at source. 
(ii) The paramedical staff such as nurses, ward boys and 
karamcharis, are not aware of proper segregation and 
handling of BMW and also the BMW Rules due to lack of 
proper awareness and training programmes. 
(iii) Several hospitals send the mixed BMW of infectious as well 
as noninfectious nature to the municipal dump sites, 
contaminating the entire municipal waste. 
(iv) In several States, there is no adequate common treatment 
facilities/incinerators for proper treatment and disposal of 
BMW generated in small healthcare facilities. 
(v) Many small health clinics/nursing homes in the name of 
servicing less than 1000 patients per month, do not apply for 
authorization to the respecti ve SPCBs/PCCs and go scot-free 
from the monitoring net of the SPCBs/PCCs. Thereby 
sending the BMW to municipal dumpsites. 

(vi) Due to inadequate manpower, the SPCBs/PCCs are not in a 
position to effectively monitor and take necessary action 
against the HCEs non-complying with the BMW Rules. 
(vii) Many hospitals having their own captive incinerators are 
inefficient in controlling the emissions and meeting the 
stipulated standards because either they have single chamber 
incinerators or incinerators without air pollution control 
systems. 
(viii) Many hospitals also do not provide for proper treatment of 
their liquid effluents. 
(ix) Several hospitals do not have the necessary facilities such as 
autoclaves, microwaves and shre dders for proper disinfection 
and mutilation of the infected BMW. 
(x) The doctors and superintendents of hospitals do not take 
management of BMW seriously and, therefore, do not 
provide the necessary equipments and manpower for proper 
management of BMW. 
(xi) Considering the fact that hospitals provide health services to 
the people, the SPCBs/PCCs usually do not consider to take 
necessary legal action such as disconnection of 
electricity/water and closing do wn the hospitals. Therefore, 
the hospitals also do not take proper management of BMW 
seriously. 
43.   Considering the above constrai nts, the Committee finds that 
multiplicity of agencies at ev ery level has only made the 
implementation of the Rules co mplicated and inefficient. The 
Ministry’s claim that every Ministry ( i.e. Environment and Forests, 

Health and Family Welfare and Urban Development) involved in 
implementation of these Rules ha s earmarked role, is unacceptable 
because of the admission by the Ministry of Environment and Forests 
that Medical and paramedical staff remained indifferent and 
ignorant of rules. SPCBs despite being prescribed authority, lacked 
staff to monitor the implementation  and that common facilities could 
not be established due to lack of  space and land. The Committee is 
surprised to note that even after 11 years of notifying the Rules, the 
country had only 157 common bio-me dical waste treatment facilities. 
Obviously, not all the Districts had such facilities. And such a 
situation is a very sad reflection on  the earnestness in implementing 
the Rules. The Committee repeatedly noted the tendency of shifting 
the onus from Ministry to Stat e Pollution Control Boards, from 
SPCB to Hospitals and local muni cipal authorities. Therefore the 
Committee is inclined to infer that  in the instant case, though the 
Rules were framed under a Central Le gislation, in practice there is 
serious lack of monitoring of impl ementation of the legislation. The 
Committee finds it a classic case where the implementation of 
Subordinate Legislations  framed under a Central Act has been 
overwhelmingly delegated to the St ate agencies without any effective 
monitoring by the Ce ntral Ministry or CP CB beyond customary 
annual reporting. 
44.   The Committee was also informed that by March, 2007, there were 
even less than 50 cases against the defaulting healthcare facilities. 
45.   The Committee considers th at by not invoking penalty 
provisions against the defaulting fa cilities, the Government is only 
encouraging violation of Rules. The Committee recommends that the 
Rules should be strictly enforced ag ainst defaulting Units. However, 

it is equally incumbent upon th e Government to provide common 
facilities for the treatment of bi o-medical waste at a reasonable 
distance. 
46.   Subsequently, the Committee decided to have discussions with the 
representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of 
Environment and Forests and Union Territory of Puducherry alongwith 
the representatives of Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical 
Education & Research at Puducherry on 15th September, 2008 and with 
the representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
Ministry of Environment and Forests and State Government of Tamil 
Nadu alongwith the representatives of Apollo Hospital and Christian 
Medical College, Vellore at Chennai on the 19th September, 2008 
(Annexure-XI). 
47.   The Committee was informed that internal training programmes for 
the hospital staff are conducted by individual hospitals like JIPMER, 
Apollo and Christian Medical College, Vellore to spread awareness about 
the Rules. However, the witnesses also admitted that lack of awareness, 
motivation, inadequate manpower and high cost of bio-medical waste 
disposal were the major constrai nts faced by hospitals in the 
implementation of Rules. 
48.   The Committee recommends that  special training in waste 
disposal and management should be imparted to all the employees in 
the hospitals and that special co urses could be started by the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests and the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare for this purpose. 
49.   Regarding the course in bio- medical waste management started 
by the IGNOU, the Committee felt that IGNOU being a distant 

education university, was not th e right university to conduct the 
course. Bio-medical waste manageme nt being a practical oriented 
discipline can not be taught th rough correspondence courses. A 
uniform model should be prepared by the Ministry of Environment 
and Forests and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
50.   The Committee further recomme nds that research institutions 
like ICMR in collaboration with CPCB and WHO should develop the 
course in bio-medical waste manage ment, which should be included 
in the medical and paramedica1 cu rricula by the MCI and Indian 
Nursing Council. The Committee also su ggests that it is essential that 
waste disposal techniques are update d to make them affordable for 
even the smaller clinics that operate in localities. 
51.   The Committee also received the representations from a wider 
spectrum of public and the stake holders through a Press advertisement 
(Annexure- XII) and after considering them, it compiled the suggestions 
contained in the representations. It also sought the views of the 
Government over the suggestions (Annexure-XIII). 
52.   The Committee noted with satisfac tion that the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests had agreed with suggestion on the need for 
proper training and awareness program amongst hospital/health 
staff as there was lack of awa reness and shortage of trained 
personnel to run the facilities. 
53.   The Committee also noted that th e Ministry had agreed for the 
development of pictorial communi cation material related to 
segregation of waste and precautions to be taken during handling the 
waste, for illiterate staff working at health care facilities. And that 
the Ministry of Health and Fam ily Welfare and the Centre for the 

Environment Education (CEE) had al ready developed such pictorial 
communication material. 
54.   The Committee recommends that the translation of the 
pictorial communication material from English into various other 
Indian (regional) languages, printi ng and distribution of the same to 
various health care facilities (HCFs) is also required. 
55.   The Committee was informed that  the Ministry agreed to the 
suggestion that the concerned SPCB  may develop website or a toll 
free phone number for receiving complaints and for taking necessary 
action against the violators of Bio-Medical Waste Rules. 
56.   Regarding the suggestion that affordable instrumentation should be 
made available for the treatment and disposal of the waste at the facility 
itself. The M/o Environment and Forests replied that while it may not be 
possible to provide the necessary treatment and disposal facilities for each 
and every Health Care Facility (HCF); particularly by the small clinics, 
dispensaries and nursing homes at the health care facility itself, “certain 
instruments/equipments such as needle and syringe destroyers, 
disinfection facilities for infected wa stes and storage of such wastes in 
cold containers till the same are transported to a common treatment 
facility may be required to be provided in all HCFs.” 
57.   The Committee expects that the Ministry will make efforts to 
provide instruments/equipments such as needle and syringe 
destroyers, disinfection facilities fo r infected wastes and storage of 
such wastes in cold containers till the same are transported to a 
common treatment facility. 
58.   To the suggestion that advisory bodies should be set up in each 
State and it should be consulted regularly on matters relating to 

implementation of rules, the Ministry replied that there was already a 
provision in the BMW Rules in this regard. However, such bodies were 
either not existing or not functioning effectively in several States. The 
Ministry further suggested that a Ta sk Force may be required to be 
constituted in each district comprising of representatives from the 
concerned SPCB, Health Department, Municipality, District Collector’s 
Office and Police Department in addition to a representative of an NGO, 
to regularly monitor and recommend necessary action against the 
violators of BMW Rules to the implementing authority. 
59.   The Committee is pleased to note the suggestion by the 
Ministry of Environment and Fo rests and recommends that a Task 
Force should be constituted in ea ch district comprising of the 
representatives of concerned SPCB, Health Department, 
Municipality, District Collector’s  office and the Police Department 
alongwith few credible NGOs. 
60.   The Committee notes with satisfaction that MoEF is 
considering amending BMW Rules fo r inclusion of a provision to 
ensure segregation of bio-medical wast e according to its type in each 
hospital. 
61.   To the suggestion that the Ministry should clearly identify, at the 
central level, the bodies which would be responsible for the 
implementation of the bio-medical waste rules, the Ministry replied that – 
"At the Central level the Ministry of Health, CPCB and MoEF are 
the bodies responsible for implementation of BMW Rules. However, 
Ministry of Urban Development may also be made responsible in 
this regard, since considerable amount of bio-medical waste, which 
is not infected, is required to be disposed of in the municipal 
dumpsites." 

62.   Going by the performance in implementation of Rules, the 
Committee is convinced that the principle of collective responsibility as 
enunciated by the Ministry of Environment and Forests in its above reply, 
has been patently subverted. The multiplicity of agencies has only 
resulted in inefficient implementation. 
63.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the three 
Ministries at the Central level must  evolve a joint body of senior 
officers that will be directly respons ible for the implementation of 
Rules or lack of it. Similar bodies could be created at the State levels 
too. And there should be a Task Forc e at the District level to enforce 
and streamline compliance of Rules. 
64.   The Ministry of Environment and Forests agreed with a suggestion 
for regular monitoring of waste processing facilities like autoclaves, 
microwaves, incinerators, etc. by  CPCB/PCBs. However it was also 
stated that “Presently only random monitoring of such facilities is being 
done by CPCB/SPCBs due to shortage of manpower.” 
65.   The Committee recommends that such monitoring at the 
district level should be done by  the Chief Medical Officer or his 
equivalent in the District. 
66.   The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has agreed 
with the suggestion that initial lic ensing and renewal to healthcare 
facilities should be subject to proper bio-medical waste management. 
If bio-medical waste management is not proper there should be a 
provision to cancel authorization of that healthcare facility/hospital. 
67.   To a suggestion that storage time of up to 48 hours may not be right 
for a hot and humid climate, and it should be reduced to 24 hours, the 
Ministry argued that in such hot an d humid climate areas the concerned 

SPCB should ensure either to reduce to  24 hours or storage of the BMW 
wastes in cold containers till they were transported to common facility, on 
a case to case basis. 
68.   The Committee finds it rather ironic al that in most of the cases 
of implementation of a Central legi slation, the Mini stry has passed 
the onus to the concerned SPCB. At  the same time, the Ministry is 
also cognizant of the shortage of manpower with SPCBs. The 
Committee finds such replies reflect lack of earnestness on the part of 
Ministry of Environment and Fore sts which is the administrative 
Ministry to implement the Rules. Obviously, the consequences of 
lackluster performance in the implementation of Rules are to be seen 
such dilatory replies. 
69.  The Committee noted with due care that the Ministry conceded 
that provisions relating to safety of workers, especially the nursing 
and waste handling staff did not fi nd mention in the existing Rules 
and that there was a need to include  rules relating to human safety 
along with measures for harm  reduction and precautionary 
measures. In view of this the Committee strongly recommends that 
necessary amendments may be brough t covering the vital aspects of 
safety of workers particularly th e nursing and waste handling staff 
and thereby reducing the chances of other human exposure. 
70.   The Committee expects that the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests shall take expeditious steps to implement the above 
suggestions. 
Conclusion 
71.   In conclusion, the Committee ex pects that the Ministry shall 
take due cognizance of the view s and concerns expressed by the 

Committee. The Committee has already taken a view that bio-
medical waste handling and manageme nt could have been a subject 
matter of local bodies under the Sche dules Eleven and Twelve of the 
Constitution. Yet, the Central Go vernment framed the Rules under 
Section 6 read with Section 3, Sect ions 8 and 25 of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986. The Committee, however, observes that 
having enacted the legislation, the Rules have delegated sweeping 
powers of authorization, implementa tion and monitoring to the State 
Governments and SPCBs, with CPCB retaining the role of receiving 
the annual Reports from the res pective SPCBs. The Committee 
wonders that the CPCB with its six regional offices could not achieve 
much with regard to efficient implementation of the rules. During the 
consideration of the subject the Committee observed serious 
institutional disjoints at critica l levels in entire  scheme of 
implementation. Multiplicity of age ncies has only complicated the 
problem which resulted in be low par performance in the 
implementation of Rules. The Commi ttee is of the view that after 11 
years of notifying these Rules, there is urgent need of appraisal and 
comprehensive review. The Committee is convinced that in present 
arrangement, the Rules can not be implemented and monitored 
effectively and, therefore, there is an  obvious need of streamlining it 
with defined control and command structure and multidisciplinary 
task force at the District level. The Committee therefore recommends 
that the administration of the Bio-Medical Waste (Management and 
Handling) Rules, 1998 should be  shifted from Ministry of 
Environment and Forests to Ministry  of Health and Family Welfare. 
It considers that Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is 
technically and admini stratively better equi pped to monitor the 
treatment and disposal of bio-medi cal wastes in the hospitals. The 
Ministry of Health and Family We lfare is also the administrative 

Ministry for setting institutions  and standards of the medical 
education and training of medical doctors and paramedical staff and 
the Committee considers it necessa ry that the bio-medical waste 
management should be part of their curricula. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on 14th July, 2009 in the 
Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 1. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla    ––    Chairperson 
 2. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
 3. Shri Vikram Verma 
 4. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
 5. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
 6. Shri Abani Roy 
 7. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 8. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
 9. Shri Birendra Kumar Baishya  
 10. Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
S
ECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri N.K.Singh, Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
 3. Smt. Subhashree Panigrahi, Deputy Director  
 4. Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Research Officer 
Representatives of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) 
 1. Shri Rahul Sarin, Secretary 

 2. Smt. Vibha Puri Das, Additional Secretary  
 3. Dr. S.K.Sarkar, Joint Secretary 
 4. Shri K.G.Verma, Director 
  At the outset the Committee cons idered the draft 182nd and 183rd 
Reports of the Committee on the Statutory Orders laid on the Table of the 
Rajya Sabha during its 215th and 216th Sessions and Banking 
Ombudsman Scheme, 2006 respectively. Both these Reports were 
adopted without any change. 
2.   As regards the draft 184th Report of the Committee it was agreed to 
recommend that the administration of Bio-Medicial Waste (Management 
and Handling) Rules, 1998 may be shifted from Ministry of Environment 
and Forests to Ministry of Health and Family Welfare which was 
technically and administratively better equipped to monitor the 
implementation. After brief discussi on the Committee adopted the draft 
184th Report also with slight modifications. 
3.   The Committee then authorized the Chairperson and in her absence 
Ms. Mabel Rebello and in her absence Shri Biswajit Daimary to present 
the Reports to the House on 17th July, 2009. 
4.   The meeting was adjourned at 4.15 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-I 
QUESTIONNAIRE ON BIO-MEDICAL WASTE (MANAGEMENT 
AND HANDLING) RULES, 1998 
 
Rule No. Clarification sought by 
CSL 
MOEF Comments 
Rule3 (3): 
“Authorisation” means 
permission granted by 
the prescribed authority 
for the generation, 
collection, reception, 
storage, transportation, 
treatment, disposal and/ 
or any other form of 
handling of bio-medical 
waste in accordance with 
these rules and any 
guidelines issued by the 
Central Government. 
Whether the Ministry have 
issued any guidelines as 
envisaged under Rule 3 (3) 
and if not, the reasons 
therefore; what is the 
justification for making a 
provision for “guidelines” 
in addition to the rule 
under examination for the 
purpose of “authorization” 
under the rules. 
Ministry of Health have 
issued Draft Guidelines 
and circulated them to 
concerned 
Ministries/Experts. Inputs 
received from 
Ministries/Experts will be 
used in finalising the 
guidelines. 
Rule 6 (1) : 
"Bio-medical waste shall 
not be mixed with other 
wastes." 
What is the mechanism to 
check that bio-medical 
waste is not mixed with the 
other wastes in order to 
obviate the tedious 
procedure of disposal of 
bio-medical waste. How 
the Ministry is 
contemplating to address 
this problem? 
Prescribed Authority 
constituted at State/UT 
level under Rule 7 of 
BMW Rules is required to 
grant authorization to 
hospitals etc. for various 
activities concerning bio-
medical wastes including 
storage and disposal (Form 
I of Rules) and would 
monitor effective 
Implementation of 
conditions prescribed in 
the Authorization Letters, 
including proper storage 

and disposal. 
Rule 6(4): 
Notwithstanding any-
thing contained in the 
Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988, or rules 
thereunder, untreated 
biomedical waste shall 
be transported only in 
such vehicle as may be 
by the competent 
authority as specified by 
the Government.  
Whether the “competent 
authority” under this sub-
rule has been specified, if 
so, the details in this 
regard. What are the 
specifications of vehicle 
that has been contemplated 
to transport the bio-
medical waste and 
taken/contemplated to 
ensure that such waste 
does not affect the human 
health and environment 
during transportation? 
Competent Authority shall 
be the same as under Rule 
7 who would authorise the 
vehicles to transport bio--
medical wastes. 
Specifications for vehicles 
have been given in the 
guidelines being issued by 
in this respect. 
Rule 6(5) :  
“No untreated bio-
medical waste shall be 
kept stored beyond a 
period of 48 hours: 
Provided that if for any 
reason it becomes 
necessary to store the 
waste beyond such 
period, the authorised 
person must take 
permission of the 
prescribed authority, and 
take measures to ensure 
that the waste does not 
adversely affect human 
health and the 
environment,”  
If for reasons, the bio-
medical waste has to be 
kept stored beyond a 
period of 48 hours, what 
are the additional 
precautions that have to be 
ensured so that such waste 
does not adversely affect 
human health and 
environment. Whether 
there are any prescribed 
norms that have to be 
followed, if so, the details 
in this regard?  
Untreated bio-medical 
wastes should not be 
stored beyond 48 hours. 
Hospitals will have to 
ensure that untreated 
wastes are invariably 
disposed of within 48 
hours. Stricter guidelines 
are required to be 
developed by experts 
before any authorisa-tions 
could be allowed to store 
wastes beyond 48 hours. 

Rule 7(7) :  
Every application for 
authorisation shall be 
disposed of by the 
prescribed authority 
within ninety days from 
the date of receipt of the 
application.  
The period of ninety days 
for disposal of the 
application for 
authorization appears to be 
on higher side. Whether it 
would be possible to 
reduce this period to 45 
days? Whether there are 
any norms for determining 
the minimum level or 
status for the prescribed 
authority and the powers 
conferred upon it; whether 
all the states and Union 
Territories have  
appointed the prescribed 
authority as contemplated 
under the above rule 
Whether there is any right 
to appeal against an 
application for 
authorization and if not, 
whether Government 
would consider making a 
provision for the same in 
the interest of natural 
justice. 
Initially; a period of 99 
days has been prescribed 
to process application for 
authorisation. As the 
experience is built-up, this 
period could be reduced. 
As per information 
available so far, 19 States / 
UTs have designated 
prescribed authorities 
under Rule 7(1). 
Provision for appeal has 
been given under Rule 13. 
Rule 8(1) : 
Every occupier of an 
institution generating, 
collecting, receiving, 
storing, transporting, 
treating, disposing 
and/or handling bio-
medical waste in any 
other manner, such 
The sub-rule has exempted 
those occupiers providing 
treatment service to less 
than 1000 patients per 
month for applying for 
grant of authorization, 
What is the justification 
for this and in what way 
their activities would be  
monitored; 1000 patients 
In a town, there are large 
number of dispensaries and 
clinics generating small 
quantity of bio-medical 
wastes in order not to 
burden the prescribed 
authority with large 
number of authorization 
applications, a cut-off limit 
of equal to and more than 

occupier of clinics, 
dispensaries,pathological 
laboratories, blood banks 
providing treatment/ 
service. to less than 1000 
(one thousand) patient 
per month, shall make an 
application in form 1 to 
the prescribed authority 
for grant of 
authorization. 
per months is not a small 
figure. In what manner 
disposal of medical waste 
contemplated in case of 
such establishment 
attending to less than 1000 
patients per month. 
1000 patients has been 
kept in consultation with 
experts. 
Rule 8 (3) : 
Every application in 
form I for grant of 
authorization shall be 
accompanied by a fee as 
may be prescribed by the 
Government of the State 
or Union Territory. 
With a view to ensure 
uniformity, whether it 
would be possible to 
prescribe the amount of fee 
for different categories by 
appending a schedule to 
the rule itself ? 
This has been left to State 
Governments who may 
decide about the fee 
keeping in view socio-
economic status of their 
populace. 
Rule 9 : 
Advisory Committee: 
The Government of 
every State/Union 
Territory shall constitute 
an Advisory Committee. 
The Committee will 
include experts in the 
field of medical and 
health, animal husbandry 
and veterinary sciences, 
environmental 
management, municipal 
administration, and any 
other related department 
or organisation including 
Rule 9 envisages an 
Advisory committee in 
each State/union Territory. 
The rule is silent on the 
terms and conditions of the 
members of this committee 
and the procedure that will 
be followed to achieve its 
objectives. Whether, 
Central Government have 
any information about the 
constitution of such 
committee in all 
States/Union Territories in 
The Advisory committee is 
meant to advise the 
Government and the 
Prescribed Authority on 
matters pertaining to 
implementation of rules. 
16  States/UTs have 
already appointed such 
Advisory Committees. 
Broad composition has 
already been laid down 
under this Rule, 

non-governmental 
organisations. The State 
Pollution Control The 
State Pollution Control 
Board/Pollution Control 
Committee shall be 
represented. As and 
when required, the 
committee shall advise 
the Government of the 
State/Union Territory 
and the prescribed 
authority about matters 
related to the 
implementation of these 
rules.   
the country, if so, the 
details in this regard? 
As regards the composition 
of the Committee, whether 
it would be possible to 
include therein the 
representation of the 
occupier and operators as 
defined under the rules? 
Schedule VI While prescribing a 
Schedule for waste 
treatment facilities, all 
hospitals and nursing home 
in towns with population 
of 30 lakhs and above have 
been instructed to install 
these facilities by 31st 
December, 1999 
irrespective of the number 
of beds they are having. 
On  the other hand in 
towns with population of 
below 30 lakhs, time has 
been given in accordance 
with the number of beds, 
more the time given for 
arranging for the facilities. 
What is the justification 
for this discrimination? 
Whether it is not possible 
A phased time table has 
been given for 
implementation of Bio-
medical Waste Rules, 1998 
as per Schedule VI taking 
into consideration socio-
economic status of people 
and their paying capacity 
for the extra service 
provided by hospitals and 
nursing homes in 
metropolitan cities. Other 
smaller towns have been 
given more time so that 
hospitals and nursing 
homes existing there could 
create necessary 
infrastructure to comply 
with the rules. 

for Government to bring 
uniformity in this regard? 
10. These rules have a very 
wide area of operation. 
What is the monitoring and 
enforcement machinery for 
the implementation of 
provision of these rules at 
the central and the State 
levels? Whether the 
Central Government 
monitor the implemenation 
of these Rules, if so, the 
details in this regard and if 
not the reasons therefor? 
Monitoring and 
enforcement is to be done 
by the Prescribed 
Authority which in case of 
most of the State/UTs is 
State Pollution Control 
Board.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-II 
STUDY NOTE ON THE DISCUSSIONS ON THE BIOMEDICAL  
WASTE (MANAGEMENT AND HANDLING) RULES, 1998  
HELD AT JAIPUR ON THE 9TH FEBRUARY, 2000 
  The Committee met at 12.00 noon on Wednesday the 9th February, 
2000 at Jaipur for discussion on the Biomedical Waste (Management and 
Handling) Rule, 1998 framed under the Environmental Protection Act 
1986 with the representatives of the State Government of Rajasthan 
(Departts. of Environment and forest s, Health and Animal Husbandry), 
the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests and the Central Pollution 
Control Board. 
Members 
 l. Miss Saroj Khaparde    ---–    Chairperson 
 2. Shri Sukh Dev Singh Libra  
 3. Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah  
 4. Prof. A. Lakshmisagar 
 5. Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat 
Secretariat 
 l. Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary 
 2. Shri S.K.Tripathi, Committee Officer 
Representatives of the State Govt. of Rajasthan 
 I. Deptt. of Environment and Forests  
  1. Shri Anil Vaish,  Principle Secretary  
      (Environment) 
  2. Dr. Akshya Bhargava, Member Secretary  
      State Pollution Control Board 

 II. Deptt. of Health  
  Shri Ram Lubhaya, Spl. Secretary Medical & Health   
 III. Deptt. of Animal Husbandry  
  Shri Gurdev Singh, Se cretary Animal Husbandry 
Representatibve of the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests 
  Shri Haq, Director 
Representative of the Central Pollution Control Board 
  Shri Lalit Kapoor 
2.   The discussion began with an opening remark of the Chairperson of 
the Committee wherein she spelt out the scope and functions of the 
Committee together with the objective of its visit. This was followed by 
the mutual introduction of Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of various Departments present in the meeting. The 
representatives were asked to make a brief presentation on the subject and 
come forward with suggestions, if an y, for amendments/modifications of 
the Biomedical Waste (Management and Handling) rules, 1998 
particularly, in the light of their experience during the course of the 
implemeptation. 
3.  The representatives of the Department of Environment and Forests 
informed the Committee that the Chairman, State Pollution Control Board 
had been designated as prescribed authority for implementation of the 
said rules who had already started in ter-actions with different NGOs etc. 
to create public awareness. The Board had identified so far 1157 
hospitals/nursing homes, dispensaries, clinics, pathological laboratories, 
veterinary institutions, animal houses etc. in the State. They were 
planning to organise a one day work shop on Bio-medical Waste for the 

representatives of private hospitals, NGOs, Municipalities etc. alongwith 
manufacturers of incinerators, microwave, autoclave etc. The Committee 
was informed that only three appl ications were received so far for 
authorisation under the rules. They intended to implement the rules in two 
phases. In first ph ase hospitals above 50 beds would be covered while in 
second phase other hospitals etc. would be brought within the ambit of 
the rules. 
4.   They had brought to the notice of the Committee certain difficulties 
in implementation of the rules. According to Rule 6(5) no untreated 
medical waste should be kept stored beyond a period of 48 hours. Various 
categories of medical waste like category 1 (human- anatomical waste) 
category 2 (animal waste) were the biomedical wastes of organic nature 
and subjected to rapid degradation which would result into adverse 
impact on human health and environment The suggested treatment of 
such wastes was in the form of in cineration autoclaving, microwaving 
and deep burial. The time schedule  prescribed for establishment of 
incinerator, microwaving and autoclaving was upto 31st December, 2002. 
The only method available with them was deep burial which had been 
restricted to the cities with a population of less than 5 lakhs. They 
suggested that the above method of deep burial may also be allowed in 
the cities with population of more than 5 lakhs till incinerator etc. are 
established in those cities. Similarly category 8 (liquid waste) and 
category 10 (chemical waste) were to be disinfected by chemical 
treatment and finally allowed to be discharged into drains. But liquid 
waste could not achieve the norms pres cribed under the rules. The result 
would be that such waste would be allowed to be discharged without 
adequate treatment. It was also pointed out that incineration ash specified 
as category 9 waste was required to be disposed off in municipal land fill 

while the similar waste had been categorised as category 12 under the 
Hazardous Waste (Management & Hand ling) Rules 1998 for which the 
disposal was secured land fill. Another problem pointed out by them was 
that parameters relating to disinfection had not been prescribed and in the 
absence of which complete disinfection could not be ensured by the 
occupier or the operator. 
5.   They had also suggested for establishment of common facilities by 
the Municipal Corporation which could be utilized by the large number of 
small private hospitals and nursing homes. Financial crunch and non 
availability of basic details were the other problems. They pleaded for 
adequate financial assistance from the Central Government as also proper 
technical know how and training of large manpower. Under the rules 
different types of wastes were to be stored in different plastic bags. The 
proposed ban on use of plastic ba gs would create another problem. 
Besides, the rules were silent on wastes generated by blood and urine 
tests. 
6.   The representatives of the Department of Animal Husbandry 
informed the Committee that most of the veterinary institutions operating 
in the State did not appear to fall in  the category of occupiers that might 
need an authorisation became these institutions used to handle less than 
1000 patients per months as required under the rule 8 (1). However, a 
couple of polyclinics might fall un der that category. The Committee was 
also informed that for animal carcass disposal a plant would be ready by 
the end of the current year in Jaipur. A similar plants would be installed at 
Jodhpur shortly. These two plant would undoubtedly take care off some 
of the bio-medical waste of the veterinary polyclinics at these two places. 
7.  The representatives of the Department of Health apprised the 
Committee that there were seven hospitals in the State having and 

capacity of 500 and above. These hospitals were to set up medical waste 
treatment facilities by December 31, 1999. The quantity of bio-medical 
waste generated by these hospitals and waste treatment facilities available 
with them was also brought to the notice of the Committee. All hospitals 
in the State had been directed to constitute Committees to examine and 
advise for implementation of these rules. Due to financial constraints and 
delay in finalization of appropriate technology the establishment of 
incinerator had been delayed. The Committee was further informed that 
there were 17 hospitals in the State with bed capacity between 200 to 500 
and bio-medical waste treatment facilities were to be installed in these 
hospitals by the end of this year. 
8.   The representatives of the Union Ministry of Environment and 
Forests present in the meeting informed the Committee that draft 
guidelines for disposal of bio-medical waste were in the process of 
finalization. The Committee was not satisfied with the slow pace of 
progress on the part of Government in finalization of the draft guidelines. 
It desired that the draft guidelines sh ould be finalized at the earliest for 
proper implementation of the said rules. The discussion remained 
inconclusive. 
  The meeting concluded with a mutual vote of thanks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE--III A 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
NOTIFICATION  
New Delhi, the 2nd June, 2000 
  S.O. 545(E).– In exercise of the powers conferred by sections 6, 8 
and 25 of the Environment (Protect ion) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986), the 
Central Government hereby makes the following rules further to amend 
the Bio-Medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998, 
namely:– 
1.  (1) These rules may be called the Bio-Medical Waste 
(Management and Handling) (S econd Amendment) Rules, 
2000. 
  (2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in 
the Official Gazette. 
2.   In the Bio-Medical Waste (M anagement and Handling) Rules, 1998 
(hereinafter referred to as the said rules), in rule 3, – 
(i)  in clause (7), after the wo rds “carried out”, the words “and 
includes common treatment facilities,” shall be added; 
(ii)  after clause (7), the following clause shall be inserted, namely 
:- 
 ‘(7a) "Form" means Form appended to these rules;’. 
3.   In the said rules, in rule 6, af ter sub-rule (5), the following sub-rule 
shall be inserted, namely :- . 

“(6) The Municipal body of the area shall continue to pick up and 
transport segregated non bio-medical solid waste generated in 
hospitals and nursing homes, as well as duly treated bio-medical 
wastes for disposal at municipal dump site.” 
4.   In the said rules, in rule 7, for sub-rule (1), th e following sub-rule 
shall be substituted, namely.– 
“(1) The prescribed authority for enforcement of the provisions of 
these rules shall be the State Pollution Control Boards in respect of 
States and the Pollution Control Committees in respect of the 
Union Territories and all pending cases with a prescribed authority 
appointed earlier shall stand transferred to the concerned State 
Pollution Control Board, or as the case may be, the Pollution 
Control Committees.” 
5.   In the said rules, in rule 8 after sub-rule (3), the following sub-rule 
shall be inserted, namely:  
“(4) The authorization to operate a facility shall be issued in Form 
IV, subject to conditions laid therein and such other condition, as 
the prescribed authority, may consider it necessary.” 
6.   In the said rules, in rule 9, the words “The State Pollution Control 
Board/Pollution Control Committees shall be represented” shall be 
omitted. 
7.   In the said rules, in rule 13, after the words “prefer an appeal”, the 
words and letter “in form V” shall be inserted. 
8.  In the said rules, after rule 13, the following rule shall be inserted, 
namely:- 

Common disposal/incineration sites.----14, Without prejudice to rule 5 
of these rules, the Municipal Corporations, Municipal Boards or Urban 
Local Bodies, as the case may be, shall be responsible for providing 
suitable common disposal/incineration sites for the bio-medical wastes 
generated in the area under their jurisdiction and in areas outside the 
jurisdiction of any municipal body, it shall be the responsibility of the 
occupier generating bio-medical waste/operator of a bio-medical waste 
treatment facility to arrange for suitable sites individually or in 
association, so as to comply with the provisions of these rules”. 
9.  In the said rules, in Schedule I, - 
(i)  in the sub-heading, for the word “option”, the words “Waste 
Category No.” shall be substituted; 
(ii)  in the sub-heading, after the words, “‘Waste Category” the 
word “Type” shall be added; 
(iii)  in the sub-heading, for the words “Treatment and Disposal”, 
the following, shall be substituted, namely :--- 
 “Treatment and Disposal Option+” 
 + Options given above are based on available technologies. 
Occupier/operator wishing to use other State-of-the-art 
technologies shall approach the Central Pollution Control 
Board to get the standards laid down to enable the prescribed 
authority to consider grant of authorisation”; 
(iv)  against Category No.6, in the second column:, for the word 
“Solid” the word “Soiled” shall be substituted; 
(v)  against Category No.7, in  second column, for the word 
“shaprs”, the word “sharps” shall be substituted. 

10.  In the said rules, in FORM I, for the heading, the following heading 
shall be substituted namely :--- 
  “Application for Authorisation/Renewal of Authorisation” 
11.   In the said rules,  after Form III and the entr ies relating thereto, the 
following, FORMS shall be added, namely :--- 
  “FORMS IV & V” 
  (attached) 
 “FORM IV 
[see rule 8(4)] 
(Authorisation for operating a facility for collection, reception, treatment, 
storage. transport and disposal of biomedical wastes.) 
1. File number of authorisation and date of issue 
.......................... ....................... 
2. .............................of....................................................is hereby 
granted an authorisation to operate a facility for collection, 
reception. storage, transport and disposal of biomedical waste 
on the premises situated at .................................... …………. 
3.  This authorisation shall be in force for a period of 
.................... Years from the date of issue. 
4.  This authorisation is subject to the conditions stated below 
and to such other conditions as may be specified in the rules 
for the time being in for ce under the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986. 
Date..................   Signature..................... 
........................        Designation 

Terms and conditions of authorisation* 
1.   The authorisation shall comply with the provisions of the 
Environment  (Protection Act, 1986, and the rules made thereunder. 
2.   The authonsation or its renewal shall be produced for inspection at 
the request of officer authonsed by the prescribed authority. 
3.   The person authorised shall not rent, lend, sell, transfer or otherwise 
transport the biomedical wastes without obtaining prior permission of the 
prescribed authority. 
4.    Any unauthorised change in personnel, equipment or working 
conditions as mentioned in the application by the person authorized shall 
constitute a breach of his authorisation. 
5.   It is the duty of the authorised person to take prior permission of the 
prescribed authority to close down the facility. 
FORM V 
(see rule 13) 
  Application for filing appeal against order passed by the prescribed 
authority at district level or regional office of the Pollution Control Board 
acting as prescribed authority or the State/Union Territory level authority. 
1.   Name and address of the person applying for appeal: 
2.  Number, date of order and address of the authority which passed 
the order which appeal is being made  (certified copy of order to be 
attached). 
3.    Ground on which the appeal is being made. 

4.    List enclosures other than the order referred in para 2 against which 
appeal is being filed. 
       Signature ...................... 
Date :      Name & Address ................. 
[F. No.23(2)/96-HSMD]  
V. RAJAGOPALAN, Jt. Secy. 
Note:- The Principal rules were published in the Gazette of India vide 
number  
  S.O. 630(E) dated 20-7-98. and subsequently amended vide S.O. 
201(E)  
  dated 6-3-2000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-III B 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 6th March, 2000 
  S.O. 201(E).– In exercise of the powers conferred by sections 6, 8 
and 25 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 ( 29 of 1986) , the 
General Government hereby makes the following rules further to amend 
the Bio-Medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998, 
namely:--- 
1.  (1) These rules may be called the Bio-Medical Waste 
(Management and Handling) (Amendment) Rules, 2000. 
  (2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in 
the Official Gazette. 
2.   In the Bio-Medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 
1998, for Schedule VI, the following Schedule VI shall be substituted, 
namely:---  
“Schedule VI 
(see rule 5) 
SCHEDULE FOR WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITIES LIKE 
INCINERATOR/AUTOCLAVE/MICROWAVE SYSTEM 
A. Hospitals and nursing homes in towns  
 with population of 30 lakhs and above By 30th June, 2000 or earlier 
B. Hospitals and nursing homes in towns
with population of below 30 lakhs 
 

(a) with 500 beds and above 
(b) with 200 beds and above but less
than 500 beds 
(c) with 50 beds and above but less 
than 200 beds 
(d) with less than 50 beds 
By 30th June, 2000 or earlier 
By 31st December, 2000 or earlier 
 
By 31st December, 2001 or earlier 
By 31st December, 2002 or earlier 
C. All other institutions generating bio-  
medical waste not included in A and 
B above. 
By 31st December, 2002 or earlier 
 
 [F. No.29-l/2000-HSMD]  
V. RAJAGOPALAN, Jt. Secy. 
Note :- The principal rules were published in the Gazette of India vide number  
  S.O. 630(E) dated 20th July, 1998. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-IV 
STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF BIO-MEDICAL WASTE 
(MANAGEMENT AND HANDLING) RULES, 1998, AND 
AMENDMENTS THEREOF 
  The Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India in 
exercise of the powers conferred under Section 6,8, and 25 of 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 has notified the Bio-Medical Waste 
(Management and Handling) Rules, 19 98. These Rules apply to all those 
who generate, collect, store, transport, treat, dispose or handle Bio--
Medical Waste (BMW) in any form. 
2.   In pursuance of these Rules, the State Government has notified 
Member Secretary, Maharashtra Pollution Control Board as the 
“Prescribed Authority” (PA) under Rule 7 of BMW Rules, 1998 for 
implementing the same in the State of Maharashtra. 
BIO-MEDICAL WASTE MANAGEMENT IN MAHARASHTRA: 
3.   It is estimated that there are about 20,000 hospitals and clinics in 
the State of Maharashtra generating BMW. There are approximately 5000 
Medium and Large Scale Institutions generating BMW in the Mumbai 
city. Most of these institutions are neither having adequate Bio-Medical 
Waste treatment facilities nor applied for authorization. As per the Rules, 
Municipal Corporations are responsible for providing suitable common 
disposal/incineration sites for the BMW generated in the area under its 
jurisdiction. Uptill now, not a single proposal has come from Municipal 
Corporations or any private agency regarding setting up a facility for 
BMW treatment. 
4.   Since the inception of the Rules, 752 Institutions have applied for 
authorization and 400 Authorizations have been granted so far. Regional 

Officers have been directed that necessary action may be taken against 
them under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. Inventory of institutions 
covered under BMW Rules, 1998 is not available with the Board. Due to 
manpower constraints, it is impossible for the Board to inventorize the 
institutions, therefore, Board intends to carry out the task through some 
private agency. 
5.   It is also necessary that the common Treatment and Disposal 
Facilities are developed by the Public Health Department and Local 
Bodies, which can be used by the Health Institutions in the State. In 
absence of such common facilities, it will not be possible to effectively 
implement the BMW Rules. 
FEES  STRUCTURE: 
6.   Government of Maharashtra notified the Authorization fees based 
on Capital Investment vide letter No. ENV. 1098/559/P.K.68/K-l, dated 
09.03.1999. Government of Maharashtra revised the fees structure based 
on number of beds after receiving the representations regarding 
unaffordable fees structure, vide Letter No. ENV/2000/280/P.K.20/T.K.3 
dated 20-04-2000. The two fees structure are as follows: 
OLD FEES STRUCTURE  REVISED FEES 
STRUCTURE  
(Based on capital investment)  (based on number of beds) 
VALIDITY = 3 
YEARS 
VALIDITY= 
1 YEAR 
FEES FOR   
Criteria Fee (Rs.) Criteria Fee (Rs.) 3 YEARS 
(Rs.) 
Above 100 Cr. 1,00,000/- ©Up to 50 beds 2,500/- 7,500/- 

50 - 100 Cr. 60,000/- 52- 200 beds 5,000/- 15,000/- 
10 - 50Cr. 40,000/- 201-500 beds 10,000/- 30,000/- 
5 - 10 Cr. 10,000/- 501 and above 15,000/- 45,000/- 
1 - 5 Cr. 5,000/-  (B) BMW 
treatment 
10,000/- 30,000/- 
  Facilitator   
60 lac - 1 cr. 2,000/- ©BMW 
Transporter 
7,500/- 22,500/- 
10 lac - 60 lac 1,000/- (D) Institutions 2,500/- 7,500/- 
Less than 10 lac 200/- Generating &   
  Handling BMW   
  except A,B,C   
 
AMENDMENTS IN THE RULES: 
  Since the inception of the Rules, The Ministry of Environment and 
Forests, Government of India amended the Rules twice as follows: 
1st Amendment : dated 6th March, 2000  
Schedule VI- Schedule for Waste Treatment Facilities 
Institutions Old Period Amended Period 
(A) Hospitals and Nursing
Homes in towns with     population 
of 30 lac and above 
31-12-1999 30-6-2000 

(B) Hospitals and Nursing Homes 
in towns with population of below 
30 lac: 
  
a) With 500 beds and above 3 1-12-1999 30-6-2000 
b) 200 beds to 500 beds 31-12-2000 31-12-2000 
c) 50 beds to 200 beds 31-12-2001 31-12-2001 
d) Below 50 beds 31-12-2002 31-12-2002 
For all institutions not covered 
above generating BMW 
31-12-2002 31-12-2002 
    
2nd Amendment: dated 2nd June, 2000  
  The main points are as below: 
1. The Prescribed Authority for enforcement of the provisions 
of these rules shall be State Pollution Control Boards in 
respect of States and Pollution Control Committees in respect 
of Union Territories. 
2. In Schedule-I, Category No. 6 of BMW is changed from 
‘Solid Waste’ to ‘Soiled Waste’. . 
3. The Municipal body of the area shall continue, to pick up and 
transport segregated non-biomedical solid waste generated in 
hospitals and nursing homes, as well as duly treated BMWs 
for disposal at Municipal dump site. 
4. The authorization format is notified in form -IV. 

5. The Municipal Corporations, Municipal Boards or Urban 
Local Bodies, as the case may be, shall be responsible for 
providing suitable common disposal/incineration sites for the 
BMW generated in the area under their jurisdiction and in the 
areas outside the jurisdiction of any Municipal Body, it shall 
be the responsibility of the Occupier generating 
BMW/Operator of a BMW treatme nt facility to arrange for 
suitable sites individually or in association, so as to comply 
with the provisions of these Rules. 
6. Occupier/Operator wishing to use other state-of-the-art 
technologies shall approach the Central Pollution Control 
Board to get the standards laid down to enable the Prescribed 
Authority to consider grant of authorization. 
SUGGESTED ACTION: 
1. Segregation is the key to Bio-Medical Waste Management 
Scheme since it reduces total treatment cost and chances of 
infecting health care workers. It also reduces chances of 
general waste becoming infectious. It is necessary on part of 
Public Health Department, Urban Development Department, 
Local and Municipal Bodies, In-Charge of Health 
Administration to arrange training/awareness programs for 
the institutions in their jurisdiction. 
2. Since small institutions cannot afford installing a full-fledged 
treatment system it will be beneficial for them to go for 
Common Treatment Facility. As per second amendment in 
BMW Rules, 1998, Municipal and Local Bodies should play 
an important role in initiating the Common Treatment 
Facility in the jurisdiction of their area. 

3. As per the BMW Rules the authorization is to be granted for 
the period of three years including an initial trial period of 
one year from the date of i ssue. Since the revised fees 
structure notified by the Government of Maharashtra is valid 
for one year, the Board has to collect fees three times the 
revised fees structure so as to comply the prescribed period of 
authorization as per authorizatio n process. These fees do not 
seem to be affordable for the medium and small scale 
institutions like Nursing Homes, Pathological Laboratories, 
Blood Banks, etc, particularly having investment less than 
Rs. 1 crore covered under the Rules. This is one of the main 
reasons behind the reluctance in applying for the 
authorization. Thus the fees structure needs to be revised 
again. 
4. As per Rule 9 of BMW Rules, 1998 the State Government 
shall constitute an Advisory Committee. The Committee 
should inc1ude experts in the field of Medical and Health, 
Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Science, Environmental 
Management, Municipal Administration and any other related 
department or organisations including NGOs. Similarly, as 
per Rule 13 of BMW Rules, 1998 the State Government shall 
constitute an Appellate Authority so that any person 
aggrieved by an order made by Prescribed Authority may 
prefer an appeal to such authority The Government of 
Maharashtra is taking necessary steps in this regard. 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-V 
II 
THE BIO-MEDICAL WASTE (MANAGEMENT AND 
HANDLING) RULES. 1998 
  The Committee met at 11.30 AM on Tuesday, the 10th July, 2001 
at Thiruvananthapuram and held discussion with the representatives of 
the Department of Environment and Forests, Government of Kerala and 
the Central Ministry of Environment and Forests on the Bio-Medical 
Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998 
  The following were present: 
  Members 
 1. Shri Khan Ghufra n Zahidi  ---- Convener 
 2. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’  
 3. Shri Lajpat Rai 
 4. Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
  Secretariat 
 1. Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary  
 2. Shri Surendra K. Tripathi, Committee Officer 
I.  Representatives of the Depart ment of Environment and Forests 
of  
  the State Government of Kerala  
 1. Shri Paul Thachil, Chairman, 
  Kerala State Pollution Control Board 
 2. Prof. M. Jayakumar, 
  Director and Ex-Offici o Additional Secretary  
  Science, Technology and Environment Deptt. 

 3. Shri K.V. Indulal, Member Secretary,  
  Kerala State Pollution Control Board 
 4. Dr. A.K. Radhakrishnan, Additional Director,  
  Health Services 
 5. Dr. M. O. Annamma, Director-in-Charge,  
  Medical Education Directorate 
II.  Representatives of  Medical Associations 
 1. Shri O.J. Paul, Secretary, 
  Catholic Hospital Association of India 
 2. Dr. R. V. Asokan, President, 
  Indian Medical Association 
 3. Dr. A.K. Sabhapathy, President, 
  Qualified Private Medical Practitioner’s Association 
III.  Representatives of the Cent ral Ministry of Environment and 
  Forests/Central Pollution Control Board  
 1. Dr. (Mrs.) Indrani Chandrasekhar, Director 
 2. Shri Lalit Kappor, Sr. Analyst 
  Central Pollution Control Board 
2.  Meeting commenced with the mutual introduction of Members and 
the representatives of the Central and State Governments and other 
representatives from the field of Medicine/Hospital, present in the 
meeting. Thereafter the Director an d Ex-Officio Additional Secretary, 
Deptt. of Science, Technology, Government of Kerala gave a brief 
account of the scenario in the State with regard to the Bio Medical Waste 
(Management and Handling) Rules, 1998. He informed the Committee 
that Kerala was having largest share of 26% of the total hospitals in the 
country. In view of that he emphasised that the Rules should be strictly 

implemented in the State. He apprised the Committee that it was not 
possible for each and every hospital to provide incinerator facility due to 
financial constraints and under utilisa tion. Therefore, there was need to 
set up common facilities of incinerator for groups of hospitals. The 
representatives of the Medical Asso ciation apprised the Committee that 
incinerators were outdated technology in the world and were causing 
pollution. He suggested that law should provide for updated technology 
of disposal of waste. He also suggested that there should be common 
incinerator facilities in every district and Government should provide land 
for incinerators as there were objection to opening of incinerator at some 
places. It was also suggested that such common incinerators should be 
placed under the control of the local bodies. 
3.  In response to the issue of outdated technology of incinerator, the 
representative of the Central Pollution Control Board emphasised that 
incinerators were not outdated techno logy in the world. It was further 
added that besides incinerator the other treatment were also available 
under the rules. 
4.   The Representative of Private Hospital apprised the Committee that 
hospitals were not fully aware of the various rules regarding disposal of 
waste and they were taking up that aspect through seminars and 
workshops. Representative of the nursing institutes suggested that the 
subject of disposal of Bio-Medical Waste should be included in the 
curriculam of the para medical training in order to enhance the awareness 
on it. During the discussion the representatives of the State Government 
agreed to consider the suggestion of making the land available for 
incinerators by the State Government. 
5.  On perusing the status note given by the Central representatives, the 
Committee expressed its concerned over the number of defaulting 

hospitals in the country which included very reputed and big hospitals. 
The Committee was of the view that Government hospital should not lag 
behind in implementation of the rules. In fact they should be the leaders 
or a role model. The Committee was of the view that Government may 
consider providing funds for disposal facilities. The representatives of the 
Central Ministry of Environment and Forests informed the Committee 
that they would also consider the suggestion to provide land for 
incinerators at appropriate places. It was agreed that time schedule in the 
rules was not being adhered to at many places. The Committee was 
further informed that the Government was considering a national scheme 
for common facilities with the fund s from the Central/State Governments 
alongwith financial institutions. The Committee desired that the scheme 
may be expedited in the public interest. 
  The meeting concluded at 12.50 
P.M. with mutual vote of thanks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-VI 
NATIONAL GUIDELINES ON HOSPITAL WASTE 
MANAGEMENT BASED UPON THE BIO-MEDICAL WASTE 
(MANAGEMENT & HANDLING) RULES, 1998 
The Bio-Medical Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 1998 were 
notified under the Environment Protection Act, 1986 (29 of 1986) by the 
Ministry of Environment and Forest, Government of India on 20th July, 
1998. The guidelines have been prep ared to enable each hospital to 
implement the said Rules, by developing comprehensive plan for hospital 
waste management, in terms of segregation, collection, treatment, 
transportation and disposal of the hospital waste. 
1.  POLICY ON HOSPITAL WASTE MANAGEMENT  
The policy statement aims “to provide for a system for management 
of all potentially infectious and hazardous waste in accordance with 
the Bio-Medical Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 1998 
(BMW, 1998). 
2.  DEFINITION OF BIO-MEDICAL WASTE  
Bio-Medical Waste means any waste, which is generated during the 
diagnosis, treatment or immunisation of human beings or animals 
or in research activities pertaining thereto or in the production or 
testing of biologica1s, including categories mentioned in the 
Schedule-I of the Bio-Medical Waste (Management & Handling) 
Rules, 1998. 
3.  CATEGORIES OF BIO-MEDICAL WASTE  
Hazardous, toxic and Bio-medical waste has been separated into 
following categories for the purpose of its safe transportation to a 

specific site for specific treatment. Certain categories of infectious 
waste require specific treatment (disinfection/decontamination) 
before transportation for disposal. These categories of bio-medical 
waste are mentioned as below:
- 
Category No. 1--- Human Anatomical Waste 
This includes human tissues, organs, body parts. 
Category No. 2--- Animal Waste 
This includes animal tissues, organs, body parts, carcasses, 
bleeding parts, fluid, blood and experimental animals used un 
research; waste generated by veterinary hospitals and colleges; 
discharge from hospitals and animal houses. 
Category No. 3--- Microbiology and Biotechnology Waste 
This includes wastes from laboratory, cultures, stock or specimens 
of microorganisms live or attenuated vaccines, human and animal 
cell culture used in research and infectious agents from research 
and industrial laboratories, wastes from production of biologicals, 
toxins, dishes and devices used for transfer of cultures. 
Category No. 4--- Waste sharps 
This comprises of needles, syringes,  scalpels, blades, glass etc. that 
may cause puncture and cuts. This includes both used and unusable 
sharps. 
Category No. 5--- Discarded Medicines and Cytotoxic drugs 
This includes wastes comprising of outdated, contaminated and 
discarded medicines. 

Category No. 6--- Soiled Waste 
It comprises of items contaminated with blood, and body fluids 
including cotton, dressings, soiled plaster casts, linens, beddings, 
other material contaminated with blood. 
Category No. 7--- Solid Waste 
This includes wastes generated from disposable items, other than 
the waste sharps, such as tubings, catheters, intravenous sets, etc. 
Category No. 8--- Liquid Waste 
This includes waste generated from laboratory and washing, 
housekeeping and disinfecting activities. 
Category No. 9--- Incineration Ash 
This consists of ash from incineration of any bio-medical waste. 
Category No. 10--- Chemical Waste 
This contains chemicals used in production of biologicals and used 
in disinfection insecticides, etc. 
4.  SEGREGATION OF WASTE  
4.1  It should be done at the site of generation of bio-medical waste, e.g. 
all patient care activity areas, diagnostic services areas, operation 
theatre, labour rooms, treatment rooms, etc. 
4.2  The responsiblity of segregation should be with the generator of 
bio-medical waste, i.e.. Doctors, Nurses, Technician, etc. 
4.3  The Bio-medical waste should be segregated as per categories 
applicable. 

5.  COLLECTION OF BIO-MEDICAL WASTE:  
Collection of Bio-medical waste should be done as per Bio-Medical 
Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 1998 (Rule 6- Schedule-
II. The collection bags and the containers should be labelled as per 
guidelines of Schedule III, i.e., symbols for bio-hazard and 
cytotoxic. A separate container shall be placed at every point of 
generation of general waste be disposed of through Municipal 
Authority. 
The trolleys which are used to collect hospital waste should be 
designed in such a way that there should be no leakage or spillage 
of bio-medical waste while transporting to designated site. 
5.1  Type of container and colour  for collection of Bio-medical 
waste: 
Category Type of container Colour Codind 
 
1. Human Anatomical Waste Plastic bag Yellow 
2. Animal waste Plastic bag Yellow 
3. Microbiology & Bio- Plastic bag Yellow/Red 
 Technology Waste   
4. Waste sharp Plastic bag, Puncture  Blue/White/ 
  proof container translucent 
5. Discarded Medicines & Plastic bag Black 
 Cytotoxic Waste   

6. Solid waste (Soiled) Plastic bag Yellow/Red 
7. *Solid Waste (Plastic) Plastic bag Blue/White 
8. Liquid waste ---- ---- 
9. Incineration ash Plastic bag Black 
10. Chemical waste (solid) Plastic bag Black 
 
5.2  All the items sent to incinerator/deep burial (Cat. 1,2,3,6) should be 
placed in yellow coloured bags. 
5.3  All the Bio-medical waste to be sent for Microwave/Autoclave 
treatment should be placed in Red coloured bags. (Cat. 3, 6 & 7) 
5.4  Any waste which is sent to shredder after 
Autoclaving/Microwaving/Chemical treatment is to be packed in 
Blue/White translucent bag. 
5.5  Location of containers:  
All containers having different coloured plastic bags should be 
located at the point of generation of waste. i.e. near OT tables, 
injection rooms, diagnostic service areas, dressing trolleys, 
injection trolleys, etc. 
5.6  Labelling: All the bags/containers must be labelled bio-hazard or 
cytotoxic with symbols according to the rule s (Schedule III of Bio-
medical Waste Rules, 1998). 
5.7.  Bags : It should be ensured that waste bags are up to three-fourth 
capacity. tied securely and removed from the site of the generation 
to the storage area regularly and timely. 

5.8  The categories of waste (Cat 4,7,8 & 10) which require pre-
treatment (decontamination/disinfection) at the site of generation 
such as plastic and sharp materials, etc., should be removed from 
the site of generation only after pre-treatment. 
5.9  The quantity of collection should be documented in a register. The 
colour plastic bags should be replaced and the garbage bin should 
be cleaned with disinfectant regularly. 
6.  STORAGE OF WASTE  
Storage refers to the holding of Bio-medical waste for a certain 
period of time at the site of generation till its transit for treatment 
and final disposal. 
6.1  No untreated bio-medical waste shall be kept stored beyond a 
period of 48 hours. 
6.2  The authorised person must take the permissoin of the prescribed 
authority, if for any reason it be come nccessary to store the waste 
beyond 48 hours. 
6.3  The authorised person should take measures to ensure that the 
waste does not adversely affect human health and the environment., 
in case it is kept beyond the prescribed limit. 
7.  TRANSPORTATION  
7.1  TRANSPORTATION OF WA STE WITHIN THE HOSPITALS: 
7.1.1 Within the hospital, waste routes must be designatied to aviod the 
passage of waste through patient care areas as far as possible. 
7.1.2 Separate time schedules are prepared for transporation of Bio-
medical waste and general waste. It will reduce changes of their 
mix up. 

7.1.3. Dedicated wheeled containers. trolleys or carts with proper label (as 
per Schedule IV of Rule 6) should be used to transport the waste 
from the site of storage to the site of treatment. 
7.1.4 Trolleys or carts should be throughly cleansed and disinfected in 
the event of any spillage. 
7.1.5 The wheeled containers should be designed in such a manner that 
the waste can be easily loaded, remains secured during 
transportation, does not have any sharp edges and easy to cleanse 
and disinfect. 
7.2  TRANSPORTATION OF WASTE FOR DISPOSAL OUTSIDE 
THE HOSPITAL. 
7.2.1 Notwithstanding anything contained in the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988 or rules threrunder Bio-medical waste shall be transported 
only in such vehicles as may be authorised for the purpose by the 
competent authority. 
7.2.2 The containers for transpotation must be labeled as given in 
schedule III and IV of BMW, 1998. 
8.  TREATMENT OF HOSPITAL WASTE (Please see Rule 5, 
Schedule  
  V &VI)  
8.1  General waste (Non-hazardous, non- toxic, non-infectious.) The safe 
disposal of this waste should be ensured by the occupier through 
Local Municipal Authority. 
8.2  Bio-Medical waste  

Monitoring of incinerator/autoclave/microwave shall be carried out 
once in a mouth to check the preformance of the equipment. One 
should ensure: 
(i) The proper operation and Maintenance of the 
incinerators/autoclave/microwave. 
(ii) Attainment of prescribed te mperatures in bo th the chamicers 
of incinerator while incinerating the waste. 
(iii) Not to incinerate PVC plastic materials. 
(iv) Only skilled persons operate the equipment. 
(v) Proper record book shal l be maintained for the 
incinerators/autoclave/microwave/ shredder. Such record 
book shall have the entries of period of operation, 
temperature/pressure attained while treating the waste 
quantity for waste treated etc. 
(vi) The scavengers shall not be allowed to sort out the waste. 
vii) Proper hygiene shall be maintained at, both the waste 
treatment plants site as well as the waste storage area. 
(viii) Categories 4, 7, 8 and 10 should be treated with chemical 
disinfectant like 1% hypochlorite solution or any other 
equivalent chemical reagent to ensure disinfection. 
8.2.1 Incineration: The incinerator should be installed and made 
operational as per specifications under the BMV rules 1998 
(Schedule V and an authorizat ion shall be taken from the 
presecribed authority for the  management and handling of bio-
medical waste including installation and operation of treatment 
facility as per Rule 8 of Bio-Medical Waste (Management and 

Handling) Rules, 1998. Specific requirement regarding the 
incinerator and norms of combustion efficiency and emission 
levels, etc. have been defined in the Bio-Medical Waste 
(Management and Handling) Rules 1998. In case of small hospitals, 
joint facilities for incineration can be developed depending upon 
the local policies of the Hospital and feasibility. The plastic bags 
made of chlorinated plastics should not be incincrated. 
8.2.2 Deep burial:  Standard for deep burial are also mentioned in the 
Bio-medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998 
(Schedule V), The cities having less than 5 lakh population can opt 
for deep burial for wastes under categories 1 &2 
8.2.3 Autoclave and Microwave treatment:  Standards for the 
autoclaving and Microwaving are also mentioned in the Bio-
Medical Waste (Management and Handing) Rules, 1998 (Schedule 
V). All equipment installed/shared should meet these specifications. 
The waste under category 3,4,6 and 7 can be treated by these 
techniques. 
8.2.4 Shredding: The plastics IV bottle, IV sets, syringes, catheters, etc. 
sharps (needles, blades, glass, et c.) should be shredded but only 
after chemical treatment/Microwaving/Autoclaving, ensuring 
disinfection. 
8.2.5 Needles destroyers can be used for disposal of needles directly 
without chemical treatment. 
8.2.6 Secured landfill:  The incinerator ash, discarded medicines, 
cytotoxic substances and soild chem ical waste should be treated by 
this option (Cat. 5,9 & 10). 

8.2.7 It may be noted there are multiple optins available for disposal of 
certain category of waste. The individual hospital can choose the 
best option depending upon treatment facilities available. 
8.2.8 Radioactive Waste: The management of the radioactive waste 
should be undertaken as per the guidelines of BARC. 
8.2.9 Liquid (Cat. 8) & Chemical Waste (Cat. 10):  
(i) Chemical Waste & Liquid Waste From Laboratory:  
Suitable treatment dilution or 1% hypocholorite solution as 
required shall be given before disposal. 
(ii) The affluents generated from the hospital should conform to 
limits as laid down in the Bio-Medical Waste (Management 
& Handling)  Rules, 1998 (Schedule V). 
(iii) The liquid and chemical waste should not be used for any 
other purpose. 
(iv) For discharge into public sewe rs with terminal facilitiles, the 
prescribed standard limits should be ensured. 
9.  SAFETY MEASURES  
9.1  Parsonal Protection: 
Hospitals and health care authorities have to ensure that the 
following personal protective equipment are provided. 
  (i) Gloves 
   (a) Disposable gloves 
   (b) Latex surgical gloves 
   (c) Heavy duty rubber gloves  (uptil elbows) for cleaners. 

(ii) Mask: Simple and cheap mask to prevent health eare workers 
against aerosots splashes and dust. 
(iii) Protective glasses. 
(iv) Plastic aprons 
(v) Special Foot wear, e.g. gum boots for Hospital waste handler.  
9.2  Immunuization against Hepatitis B and Tetanus shall be given to all 
hospital staff. 
9.3  All the generators of bio-medical waste should adopt universal 
precautions and apporpriate safety measures while doing 
therapeutic and diagnostic activities and also while handling the 
bio-medical waste. 
9.4  All the sanitation workers engaged in the handling and transporting 
should be made aware of the risks involved in handling the bio-
medical waste. 
9.5  Any worker reporting with an accident/injury due to handling of 
biomedical waste should be given prompt first aid. Necessary 
investigations and follow up action as per requirement may be 
carried out. 
9.6  Reporting Accident & Spillages 
  The procedure for reporting ac cidents (as per Form III of BMW 
Rules, 1998) should be followed and the records should be kept. 
The report should include the nature of accidents, when and where 
it occurred and which staff were directly involved. It should also 
show type of waste involved and emergency measures taken. 
10.   TRAINING  

10.1  All the medical professional must be made aware of Bio-medical 
Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 1998. 
10.2  Each and every hospital must have well planned awareness and 
training programme for all category of personnel including 
administrators to make them aware about safe hospital waste 
management practices. 
10.3  Training should be conducted category-wise and more emphasis 
should be given in training modules as per category of personnel. 
10.4  Training should be conducted in appropriate language/medium and 
in an acceptable manner. 
10.5  Wherever possible audio-visual material and experienced trainers 
should be used. Hand on training about colour coded bags, 
categorization and chemical disinfections can be given to 
concerned employees. 
10.6  Training should be interactive and should be include demonstration 
sessions. Behavioural science approach should be adopted with 
emphasis on establishing proper practices. Training is a continuous 
process and will need constant reinforcement. 
11.  MANAGEMENT & ADMINISTRATION  
11.1  The Head of the Hospital shall form a Waste Management 
Committee under his Chairmanship. The Waste Management 
Committee shall meet regularly to review the performance of the 
waste disposal. This Committee should be responsible for making 
hospital specific action plan for hospital waste management and for 
its supervision, monitoring implementation and looking after the 
safety of the bio-medical waste handlers. 

11.2  The Heads of each hospital will have to take authorization for 
generation of waste from appropriate authorities well in time as 
notified by the concerned State/U.T.Government and get it renewed 
ad per time schedule laid in the rules. The application is to be made 
as per format given in form I for grant of authorization. (Please See 
page 18 of notified BMW Rules.) 
11.3  The annual reports accident reporting, as required under BMW 
rules should be submitted to the concerned authorities as per BMW 
rules format (Form II and Form I II respectively) (Please see pages 
19 & 20 of BMW Rules) 
12.  COORDINATION  BETWEEN  HOSPITAL  &  OUTSIDE  
AGENCIES 
12.1  Municipal authorities: As quite a large percentage of waste (upto 
90%) generated in Indian hospital belongs to general category (non-
toxic and non-hazardous) the hospital authorities should have 
constant interaction with municipal authorities so that this category 
of waste is regularly taken out of the hospital premises for further 
disposal. 
12.2  Coordinated efforts should be made by health authorities and 
municipal authorities to involve pr ivate sector/NGO's for creation 
of common facilities for treatment. 
12.3  Health authorities in coordination with municipal authorities should 
facilitate optimal utilization of waste treatment facility in the area. 
12.4  Coordination with NGO's and Environmental Groups for public 
awareness & education. 
12.5  Sharing of facility: Hospital which are not on a possession of their 
own facility for treatment may get their waste treated in a shared 

facility. The hospital having additional capacity may extend their 
facility to nearby smaller hospital or health care units. 
12.6  There should be coordinated agencies to take care of 
exigencies/disruption of waste treatment equipment in a unit.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-VII 
STUDY  NOTE  ON  THE  VISIT  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON 
SUBORDINATE  LEGISLATION  OF  RAJYA  SABHA  TO  GOA  
AND BANGALORE  FROM  JUNE  18-21,  2002 
Meeting with representatives of State Government of Goa along with 
the officers of Ministry of Environment and Forests on Bio- Medical 
Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000 
  The Committee had discussions wi th the representatives of the 
State Government of Goa along with the officers of the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests on the Bio-medical Wastes (Management and 
Handling) Rules, 2000 at 10.00 a.m. on 19th June 2002 at Panaji. The 
following were present:- 
 1. Shri A. Vijaya Raghavan       ------      Chairman 
  Members  
 2. Shri M.V. Rajashekaran 
 3. Shri Ravula Chandra Sheker Reddy  
 4. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
  Secretariat 
 1. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary  
 2. Shri R.B. Gupta, Under Secretary 
  Representatives of Government of Goa  
 1. Shri Anil Paruleker, Member Secretary, GSPCB 
 2. Dr. Rajan Kunkolienkar, Medical Superintendent, GMC Hospital, 
Goa 
 3. Dr. N.P.S. Varde, Director, Science, Tech. and Environment 
 4. Dr. Arvind Salilkar, DG, DGHS 

  Representative of Ministry of Environment and Forests  
 1. Dr. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Raghupathy, Addl. Director 
  The discussion began with a brief introductory note from the 
Chairman of the Committee. He, in the first instance, introduced the 
Members of the Committee, which was followed by a brief statement on 
the Committee’s scope and functions as  well as the purpose of the study 
visit, particularly, in the light of the business already transacted by it on 
the Bio-Medical Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998. 
  Thereafter, Shri Anil Paruleke r, Member Secretary introduced his 
team of officers and stated in brief the status of implementation of the 
Bio-Medical Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998 in Goa. 
The Committee was informed that Goa, in all, had 136 Health Care Units 
as per the following details:-  
(1)  500 beds and above - 1 
(2)  200 beds and above but less than 500 - 2  
(3)  50 beds and above but less than 200 - 13  
(4)  13 beds and ahove but less than 50 - 120 
  Out of these 136 Health Care Units, 70 had applied for 
authorization and 37 of them had been granted by the Advisory 
Committee constituted under rules on 10th September, 1999. The State 
was charging an authorization fee of Rs. 200. Out of the existing units, 17 
had treatment disposal facilities and 16  of them had autoclave and one of 
them had an incinerator. The State did not have any common facility for 
treatment of disposal of bie-medical waste so far, but proposals in this 
regard were under Government’s consideration. 
  While noting the above position, the Committee, at the very outset, 
drew the attention of the representatives towards the news-item captioned 

“MMC scheme on sorting of waste come a cropper” appearing in the 
Herald Reporter of June 18, 2002, wherein it had, inter-alia, been pointed 
out that the schemes for disposal of bio-medical wastes had failed to take 
off. The Committee desired that Government of Goa should take a note of 
the position as brought out in the news-item and take necessary corrective 
action. 
  The Committee felt that the Status note as furnished by the Ministry 
of Environment and Forests on the implementation of rules in the State of 
Goa was very brief and it did not give a clear position about the extent of 
implementation of the rules in the State. The Committee, accordingly, 
desired the representatives of the State Government to spell out the 
difficulties, if any, they were encountering while implementing the Bio-
Medical Wastes Rules in the State. The Committee held the view that the 
number of applications received for authorization was proportionately 
very less and the number of authorizations granted were even lesser. The 
Committee desired to know the reasons for which the various 
establishments felt shy of applying for authorization and also the reasons 
for which the authorization could no t be granted in all cases where 
applications were received. The Committee wanted to know whether this 
state of affairs was due to inappropriateness of rules and, if so, the 
remedies contemplated for setting right the provisions of the rules. 
  In response to the above queries, the Committee was informed that 
the biggest hospital in Goa having 955-bed capacity did have incinerator 
facility. Besides, the Government of Goa had entered into a MoU with an 
Ahmedabad based company to install appliances for plasma pyrolysis 
technology on a pilot scale at Goa Medical College. The Government of 
Goa was also considering a proposal to set up a combined bio-medical 
waste and handling disposable facility for other hospitals in Government 
and private sector and a project with an estimated cost of Rs. 80 lacs was 

under submission to Government. It was further added that the 
Government of Goa was receiving full cooperation from the government 
hospitals and other establishments generating bio-medical wastes and as 
such there was nothing to suggest by way of problems in the 
implementation of the rules. 
  He added that, at Goa, Government was acting more as a facilitator 
rather than a regulator and this had, in fact, helped in getting cooperation 
from the private nursing homes also for setting up of common facilities 
for treatment and disposal of bio-medical wastes. 
  The Member Secretary also mentioned about the difficulties in the 
way of prosecuting the defaulters. Basically, the rules have been notified 
under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 which has its own 
requirements for issue of notice (section 5) and prosecution (section 15) 
in case of default. Uptill now, Government had been hesitant in taking 
positive action due to opposition from the public but it was time for them 
to see how the rules could be implemented effectively. The Committee 
felt that this mild attitude of Government was, in fact, adversely affecting 
the implementation. 
  The Committee also sought reaction of representatives of 
Government of Goa on provisions of Rules which exempted hospitals, 
clinics having less than 1000 patients per month from seeking 
authorization. The Committee felt that the collective waste of such units 
could be very large which could not be neglected. The Committee also 
wanted to know whether there was any difficulty in identification of 
hospitals, clinics, etc., which crossed the exemption limit, i.e., which had 
more than 1000 patients per month. The Committee desired the State 
Government to take action against such hospitals, clinics, etc. 

  Summing up the discussions, the Committee emphasized upon 
paying more attention towards ensuring implementation of the rules by 
the State Government by inter-alia resorting to issue of notices and 
prosecution as some other States are doing. The Committee asked the 
representatives to comment on whether the rules needed more teeth for an 
effective implementation and what impediments, if any, they were 
coming across for proper management of bio-medical wastes in the State. 
  The Meeting concluded with mutual vote of thanks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-VIII 
MEETING  WITH  THE  REPRESENTATIVES  OF  STATE  
GOVERNMENT  OF  KARNATAKA ALONG  WITH  THE  
OFFICERS OF  THE  MINISTRY  OF  ENVIRONMENT  AND  
FORESTS  ON  BIO-MEDICAL  WASTES  (MANAGEMENT  
AND  HANDLING)  RULES, 2000. 
  The Committee had discussions wi th the representatives of the 
State Government of Karnataka along with the officers of the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests on the Bio-medical Wastes (Management and 
Handling) Rules, 2000 at 11.15 a.m. on 20th June 2002 at Bangalore. The 
following were present:- 
 1. Shri A. Vijaya Ragh avan,     ------      Chairman 
  Members 
 2. Shri M. V. Rajashekaran 
 3. Shri Ravula Chandra Sheker Reddy  
 4. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
  Secretariat 
 1. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary  
 2. Shri R.B. Gupta, Under Secretary 
  Representatives of Government of Karnataka 
 1. Shri N. Gokulram, Principal Secretary, Deptt. of Forest Ecology 
and 
  Environment 
 2. Shri P. Manivanan, Member Secretary, Karnataka State PCB 
 3. Dr. Balakrishnaiah, Director, Technical Cell, Deptt. of 
Environment  

 4. Dr. (Smt.) V.S. Rajamma, Deputy Director, Karnataka, Health 
System  
  Dev. Proj 
 5. Col. Dr. Menezes V.J., Command Hospital, Bangalore 
  Representative of Ministry of Environment and Forests 
 1. Dr. (Mrs.) Lakshmi Raghupathy, Addl. Director 
  The Chairman, at the outset, introduced the Members of the 
Committee. Before coming to the agenda, the Chairman of the Committee 
stated briefly about the functions of the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation of Rajya Sabha and the purpose of the study visit. He made a 
reference to the discussions the Committee had on the subject in the past 
including at Goa. 
  In response, the representatives of the State of Karnataka 
introduced their team officers and made a small presentation before the 
Committee on the implementation of the rules in the State of Karnataka. 
The presentation included the status of  the authorization in the State, the 
amount of fee charged towards authorization so far as well as the steps 
taken by the Board towards the proper management of bio-medical waste. 
The Committee was informed that Karnataka State Pollution Board was 
designated as the prescribed Authority and the Department of Forest 
Ecology and Environment was the Appellate Authority. Apprising the 
Committee about the implementation of the rules, it was stated that the 
process of inventrization had since been completed, but authorization had 
been given only to 20% of the establishments. The discussion with the 
representatives of Government of Karnataka generally centered on the 
following issues:-  

1.   Authorisation Fees - The Committee noted the following 
authorization fee structure which was prevalent in the State:- 
(i) Rs. 100/- per annum per bed for all bedded Health Care 
Establishments (HCE) 
(ii) Rs. 1000/- per annum for all non-bedded HCE providing 
services to more than 1000 patients per month. 
(iii) Fee for operators/handlers and transporters Rs.5000/- per 
annum. 
  The Committee was informed that the Government of Karnataka, 
had till May, 2002, collected Rs.1l5 lacs from 1999 onwards by way of 
charging fees. The Karnataka State Pollution Control Board had served 
notice to 30 units for non-compliance under Section 5 of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986. In this context, the Committee was informed that 
the action of the Government of Karnataka to collect authorization fee 
had been challenged in the court by some occupiers on the ground that 
such a charge of fees could be done  only under an authority in the Act 
and not otherwise and that the Environment Protection Act did not 
authorize levy of any such fees. The litigations were directed both against 
the Central Government and the State Government. As per the Court 
Orders, Karnataka State Pollution Control Board is issuing authorization 
without charging fees an d the process of issuing authorization has been 
expedited. The Committee was critical of  authorization fee structure as it 
felt that whatever fee was levied, was ultimately passed over to the 
patients and, therefore, it need to be kept at a nominal level. In 
Committee’s view, the Government and the Corporation did owe a 
responsibility and, therefore, the activity of handling of bio-medical 
wastes should be treated as a service to the Society. The Committee 
desired tire representatives of the Central Government as well as 

Government of Karnataka to review the provisions of the Act/Rules so 
that Government had a proper and legal base to levy authorization 
charges. 
2.  Procedure for identifying exempted Health Care 
Establishments - It was pointed out by the representatives of 
Government of Karnataka that they were experiencing a difficulty in 
identifying the establishments which had less that 1000 patients per 
month. They informed the Committee that they had no definite means for 
ascertaining this fact and, therefore, they were forced only to go by the 
information that was furnished by the various establishments. In this 
context, the Committee, in the first instance, felt that the exemption of 
establishments having less than 1000 patients per month was not very 
justified since such establishments might be large in number and 
generating collectively large volume of bio-medical waste. It was, 
however, pointed out by representatives of State Government that, no 
doubt, the rules exempted such establishments from seeking 
authorization, but they were definitely obliged to disperse of the medical 
waste in an authorised manner as per the rules. 
  As regards, the difficulty in the identification of the exempted 
establishments, the Committee pointed out that the Government of 
Karnataka could use their state mach inery for ascertaining the actual 
number of patients serviced by any establishment in order to check the 
tendency to avoid seeking of authorization. 
3.  Avoidance of authorization by establishments -  The Committee 
drew attention of the representatives of the Government of Karnataka to 
the provisions of rules 10, 11 and 12 relating to annual report, 
maintenance of records, reporting etc. and desired to know whether such 
or any similar provisions of the rules were in any way the cause of 
avoiding authorization by private establishments. 

  The Committee desired the representatives of State Government to 
respond on the point whether any simplification was possible here and 
whether that would help encourage seeking of authorization. 
  Besides the above issues, the Committee made the following 
observations: 
(i) Karnataka is, no doubt, ahead of other States in the matter of 
implementation of the Bio-medical Wastes (Management and 
Handling) Rules, 1998, but still, the matter needs to be 
attended on priority. In Committee’s opinion, Karnataka had 
been concentrating on hospitals in major cities only. In 
Committee’s view, the bed capacity in smaller towns and 
villages also need to be assessed.  
(ii) There was a need for a closer monitoring of the 
implementation of the rules. It was suggested that the 
representatives of people’s body, district panchayats, etc., 
should be included in the Advisory Committee. 
(iii) The Karnataka State Pollution Control Board should strive 
for setting up at least one common facility in each of the 4 
major cities. 
  The meeting concluded with a mutual vote of thanks. 
  Thereafter, the Committee visited the Command Hospital at 
Bangalore where they were shown th e treatment and disposal facilities 
which were available in the hospital. 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-IX 
ISSUES MENTIONED IN THE STUDY REPORTS OF VISITS OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA TO  
VARIOUS STATES AND THE ACTION TAKEN 
Sl. No. Issues Raised Action Taken  
1. Rajasthan   
i. The Draft Guidelines should be 
finalised at the earliest for proper 
implementation of the BMW Rules. 
The CPCB has already developed 
guidelines for (i) Design and 
Construction of Bio-medical 
Waste Incinerators; and (ii) 
Common Bio-medical Waste 
Treatment Facility in 2003 and 
communicated to the concerned 
authorities for implementation. 
They are also available on the 
CPCB’ s website. 
ii. Till incinerators are established in the 
cities deep burial may be allowed for 
disposal of BM wastes in cities with 
population of more than 5 lakhs. 
The deep burial of BMW is 
allowed in towns and rural areas. 
Since the availability of land is a 
problem in cities, till incinerators 
are established in the cities, the 
BMW may be transported to 
outside the cities (rural areas) for 
deep burial purpose. 
iii. Parameters relating to disinfection 
have not been prescribed, in the 
absence of which complete 
The Rules prescribe to ensure 
complete disinfection with 
adequate chemical treatment. 

disinfection may not be ensured by 
the occupier or the operator. 
Therefore, the parameter 
prescribed is that there should be 
complete disinfection. 
iv. The Rules were silent on wastes 
generated by blood and urine tests. 
The Rules prescribe that the 
wastes contaminated with 
infectious blood and urine are 
Bio-medical wastes and they 
have to be treated and disposed 
off according to the methods 
stipulated in Schedule-I of the 
Rules. 
v. Establishments of common facilities 
by municipal bodies for utilization by 
the large number of small Private 
Hospitals and Nursing Homes. A 
required financial assistance from 
Central Government and proper 
awareness on training of the staff 
involved in handling BMW 
There are 157 CBWTFs 
(including 8 under installations) 
in various States/UTs of the 
country. Out of which 13 
facilities are either operated by 
Government institutions like 
Municipal Corporations, Govt. 
Hospitals itself etc. or through 
private participation. 
With the aim to bring up 
CBWTFs in States/UTs where 
there is lack of such facilities, the 
CPCB had proposed to 
SPCBs/PCCs such as Andman 
Nicobar Islands, Bihar, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, 
Pondicherry and Tripura in May 

2006 to set up CBWTFs with 
financial assistance of CPCB. 
However, there was no response 
from the SPCBs/PCCs in this 
regard. 
2. Maharashtra  
i. Additional manpower required for the 
SPCH for implementation of several 
laws required under the E(P) Act, 
1986. 
States have been provided 
financial assistance including 
Maharashtra fo r strengthening 
their Bio-Medical Waste and 
Hazardous Waste Management 
Cells. 
ii. Segregation of infected BMW was a 
basic problem. There was very poor 
response to various orientation 
programmes organized for hospital 
staff. 
Maharashtra is one of the States 
identified for implementation of 
the GEF assisted project on Bio-
Medical Waste Management, 
having awareness generation as 
one of the components. 
iii. Common treatment facilities are 
required for utilization by small 
nursing homes/hospitals, as they 
could not afford installing fulfledged 
systems. 
In Maharashtra, 34 common 
treatment facilities are already 
available as on March, 2007. 
iv. As Schedule-VI provides for 
installing treatment facilities by small 
hospitals/nursing homes upto 
December, 2002, they were not 
taking any steps to install the 
The Schedule VI was to give 
different time frames to various 
sizes of healthcare facilities for 
their preparedness so as to 
comply with the requirement of 

treatment facilities. installing the requisite treatment 
facilities as laid  down under the 
Rules. However, as the time 
frame given is over in December, 
2002, all healthcare facilities are 
expected to  implement all the 
stipulated provisions of  the 
Rules. 
3. Kerala  
i. There was a need to set up common 
facilities for groups of hospitals and 
the State Govt. should make the land 
available for this purpose. There 
should be a common incinerator 
facility in every district. 
The common facilities are now 
available in the districts of 
Palakkad, Thrissur, Malappuram, 
Kozhikode, Kannur, Kasargod, 
Kollam, Thiruvananthapuram in 
the State of Kerala. 
ii. The subject matter of Bio-medical 
waste should be included in the 
curriculum of paramedical training in 
order to enhance the awareness in it. 
IGNOU has developed a six 
month certificate course 
exclusively on biomedical waste 
management. This is expected to 
make available trained manpower 
for proper implementation of the 
Rules. 
iii. The Govt. hospitals should not lag 
behind in implementation of the 
Rules. In fact they should be leaders 
or a role model. Government may 
also consider providing funds for 
setting up of disposal facilities. 
Instructions had been issued by 
the State Government to 
Directors of the Health Services 
Department, Indian System of 
Medicine, Homeopathy Deptt., 
and Veterinary Deptt. for 

ensuring compliance to the Rules 
by the Institutions under their 
jurisdiction. 
4. Goa  
i. The number of applications received 
for obtaining authorizations were 
proportionately very less and the 
number of authorizations granted 
were even lesser. 
During the year 2006-07, number 
of applications, received were 
182 and all the units were 
granted authorization. 
ii. The Committee felt that the mild 
attitude of government in taking 
positive actions against the defaulting 
units under the provisions of 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
was adversely affecting the 
implementation of the BMW Rules. 
The State government should issue 
notices and prosecute the defaulting 
units. 
As per the latest information 
furnished by the State Pollution 
Control Board to the CPCB, 
there were no health care 
facilities reported to be violating 
the BMW Rules as on 31st 
March, 2008. The CPCB also has 
separately addressed all the State 
Pollution Control Boards for 
taking strict action against the 
defaulting units for proper 
implementation of the Rules.  
5. Karnataka  
i. The Committee desired that the 
Central Govt. may review the 
provisions of the Act/Rules so that 
there is a legal base to levy 
authorization charges. 
Action is in process for 
considering an amendment in the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 
1986 for providing charging of 
authorization fee etc. 

ii. The Committee felt that exemption of 
establishments serving less than 1000 
patients per month from seeking 
authorization was not justified, since 
such establishments large in number 
and generate collectively large 
quantity of  Bio-medical wastes. 
The Rule 8(1) exempt small bio-
medical waste generators from 
obtaining authorizations from the 
SPCBs/PCCs, but they have not 
been exempted from their 
responsibility to take all 
necessary steps to ensure that 
such waste is handled without 
any adverse effect to human 
health and environment, as 
stipulated in the Rule 4 of the 
said Rules. 
iii. The Committee was of the view that 
Karnataka is concentrating in major 
hospitals in cities only. In their view, 
the bed capacity in smaller towns and 
villages also needed to be assessed. 
The Central Pollution Control 
Board has addressed all States 
including Karnataka to ensure 
strict compliance of the BMW 
Rules in all health care 
establishments. 
iv. The Karnataka SPCB should strive 
for setting up of at least 1 common 
facility in each of the four major 
cities. 
In Karnataka, there are 11 
common facilities in different 
cities catering to the respective 
health care facilities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-X 
WRITTEN  REPLIES  TO  THE  POINTS  RAISED  DURING  
ORAL EVIDENCE  BEFORE  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION,  RAJYA  SABHA,  HELD  ON  
26.8.2008,  ON  BIO-MEDICAL  WASTE  (MANAGEMENT  &  
HANDLING)  RULES,  1998 
1.  Issue: The constraints encountered in implementing the BMW 
Rules. 
  Reply: (i) Segregation of infected BMW from the general and 
innocuous waste is the key factor for effective management of 
BMW. Many Government/private hospitals do not provide 
adequate funds for providing necessary equipments such as bins 
and colour coded plastic bags for segregation of infected BMW at 
source. 
  (ii) The paramedical staff such as nurses, wardboys and 
karamcharis, are not aware of proper segregation and handling of 
BMW and also the BMW Rules due to lack of proper awareness 
and training programmes. 
  (iii) Several hospitals send the mixed BMW of infectious as well as 
non-infectious nature to the municipal dump sites, contaminating 
the entire municipal waste.  
  (iv) In several States, there are no adequate common treatment 
facilities/incinerators for proper treatment and disposal of BMW 
generated in small health care facilities. 
  (v) Many small health clinics/nursing homes in the name of 
servicing less than 1000 patients per month, do not apply for 
authorization to the respective SPCBs/PCCs and go scot-free from 

the monitoring net of  the SPCBs/PCCs. Thereby sending the BMW 
to municipal dumpsites. 
  (vi) Due to inadequate manp ower, the SPCBs/PCCs  are not in a 
position to effectively monitor and take necessary action against the 
HCEs non-complying with the BMW Rules. 
  (vii) Many hospitals having their own captive incinerators are 
inefficient in controlling the emissions and meeting the stipulated 
standards because either they have single chamber incinerators, or 
incinerators without air pollution control systems. 
  (viii) Many hospitals also do not provide for proper treatment of 
their liquid effluents. 
  (ix) Several hospitals do not have the necessary facilities such as 
autoclaves, microwaves and shredd ers for proper disinfection and 
mutilation of the infected BMW. 
  (x) The doctors and superintendents of hospitals do not take 
management of BMW seriously and, therefore, do not provide the 
necessary equipments and manpower for proper management of 
BMW. 
  (xi) Considering the fact that ho spitals provide health services to 
the people, the SPCBs/PCCs usually do not consider to take 
necessary legal action such as di sconnection of electricity/water 
and closing down the hospitals. Therefore, the hospitals also do not 
take proper management of BMW seriously. 
2.  Issue: Are there any overlappings with regard to the jurisdictions of 
functions/responsibilities of MoEF, Ministry of Health and Family 
:Welfare (MoH&FW) and Ministry of Urban Development 
(MoUD) in  implementing the Rules. 

  Reply: The main function of MoEF as an Administrative Ministry 
of BMW Rules, is to ensure that the Rules are properly 
implemented by the respective SPCBs/PCCs and CPCB for proper 
management of infected BMW. The MoEF also undertakes 
promotional activities such as providing financial support for 
conducting awareness and training programmes to the medical and 
para-medical staff for effective management of BMW and 
implementing of the BMW Rules. It also makes necessary 
amendments to the Rules and develop necessary guidelines for 
proper management of BMW through the CPCB. 
  The MoH&FW being the administrative Ministry for promotion of 
health of the people, is responsible to ensure provision of adequate 
equipments for segregation of infected BMW, treatment and 
disposal facilities for the waste in the hospitals under their 
jurisdiction. They are also respon sible for conducting training and 
awareness programmes to the hospital staff. They also develop 
guidelines for effective management of BMW. 
  The MoUD being the administrative Ministry for proper 
management of municipal solid waste (MSW), is responsible to 
ensure that the infectious BMW generated at HCEs is not carried 
away along with the n on-infectious MSW. In case any hospital is 
not segregating the infectious BM W from the general waste, they 
can refuse to take such  waste from such hospitals and they are also 
required to inform the concerned SPCB/PCC for taking necessary 
action against the hospital. 
  From the above mentioned functions of various authorities it 
appears that each authority is having their own respective functions 

and responsibilities. However, certain functions are also 
overlapping. 
3.  Issue: Why it took 12 years to notify BMW Rules after the 
enactment of E(P) Act, 1986. 
  Reply: The necessity for notifying the Rules pertaining to bio-
medical waste management was felt after the directions were issued 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court for installation of pollution control 
devices in hospitals of Delhi, in the matter of B.L. Wadhera Versus 
Union of India in the year 1995. Later, the Ministry of Environment 
and Forests issued a draft notification inviting objections from the 
public in October, 1997 and thereafter the Bio-medical Waste 
(Management & Handling) Rules, 1998, were notified in July, 
1998. 
  The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 does not specify any time 
limit for notifying any Rules under it. The same are notified for 
various subjects as when the need for notifying the Rules on any 
subject is felt, as has happened in the case of Hazardous Waste 
(Management & Handling) Rules, 1989, Municipal Waste 
(Management & Handling) Rules, 2000, The Batteries 
(Management & Handling) Rules, 2001 etc. After the enactment of 
the E(P) Act, such Rules have been notified before as well as after 
the notification of BMW Rules under the E(P) Act. Still several 
Rules are being notified as per the need and requirement for 
protection of’ environment. Therefore, notification of various Rules 
under the E(P) Act is a continuous process and the same are 
notified as and when the same required. 
4.  Issue: What are the methods adopted in advanced countries for 
management of BMW. 

  Reply: The bio-medical wastes are commonly treated by 
incineration/autoclaving/microwaving/chemical disinfection in 
advanced countries. Common and ce ntralized facilities are also 
being practised in these countries as being practiced in our country. 
Following are the methods, being followed in some of the advanced 
countries: 
Technologies/Methods being adopted in advanced countries 
USA: 
  More than 90 per cent of potentially infectious medical waste is 
incinerated. In August 1997, EPA promulgated regulations governing the 
emissions from medical waste incinerators (MWIs). These regulations 
include: 
z  Stringent air emission guidelines for States to use in 
developing plans to reduce air pollution from medical waste 
incinerators built on or before June 20, 1996. 
z Final air emission standards fo r medical waste incinerators 
built after June 20, 1996. 
  These guidelines and standards will substantially reduce the 
emissions from the MWI. 
  One anticipated outcome by adoption of the new MWI standards 
and guidelines is the exploration of use of alternative technologies for 
treating medical waste. Due to the high cost of compliance with the MWI 
standards, EPA expects that few health care facilities are likely to install 
new MWIs and that many facilities are likely to discontinue use of 
existing MWIs. “EPA expects that operation of 50 to 80 per cent of the 
2,400 existing MWIs could be discontinued. As an alternative to MWIs, 

treatment facilities are likely to switch over to other methods of waste 
disposal such as off-site centralize d disposal facilities or onsite 
disinfection technologies. Some potential alternative treatment 
technologies include thermal treatment ( e.g., microwave technologies), 
steam sterilization ( e.g., autoclaving), electropyrolysis, and other 
chemical and mechanical systems. 
  Many States in USA have regulations requiring medical waste 
treatment technologies to be certified, licensed, or regulated. Individual 
States have their own requirements. 
Germany: 
  The specific treatment of clinical waste (waste from health service 
facilities) concentrates on a relati vely small portion of the total waste 
generated by these facilities. A maximum of 5 % (roughly 5,000 tonne 
per annum) of the total waste generated by hospitals and other health 
service facilities consists of infectious waste, along with organs and body 
parts. This waste must be treated us ing a thermal process specified by the 
Robert Koch Institute. Methods allowed include sterilisation/disinfection 
using steam, or incineration. Germany operates one stand-alone 
incinerator for special clinical waste in Kiel/Wellsee. In two municipal 
waste incineration plants (Augsburg and Bielefeld) infectious waste is 
incinerated in separate incineration units. To reduce emissions, the flue 
gas formed is channelled into the municipal waste incinerator’s flue gas 
treatment plant. As is normally the case with all centralised treatment 
solutions, a part of the infectious wa ste is transported to hazardous waste 
incinerators in containers licensed for the purpose. 
 
 

UK: 
  At the present time a number of  hot-oil, autoclave/microwave, 
chemical disinfection and steam sterilisation systems are known to be 
licensed and operating at a merchant commercial scale in the UK. These 
facilities do not handle recognisab le anatomical waste for aesthetic 
reasons as all identifiable human tissu es, whether infected or not, are 
supposed to be disposed of by incineration. One gasification plant is also 
known to be licensed and operating at a merchant commercial scale in the 
UK. 
5.  Issue: Is there any scheme/system for BMW collection from 
various health care facilities in the country. 
  Reply: As per the provisions of BMW Rules, it is the responsibility 
of the generation of BMW to segregate, collect, store, transport, treat and 
dispose of the BMW, as per the tr eatment methods prescribed in the 
Rules either in his own premises or in a common treatment facility. 
  There are 149 Common Bio-medical Waste Treatment Facilities 
(CBWTFs) and other 8 are yet to commission/trial basis/under installation 
in the country as on March, 2007. These CBWTFs collect bio-medical 
wastes from various healthcare facil ities and transport for treatment and 
disposal. State-wise details are given in the Annexure. 
6.  Issue: How segregation of hazardous BMW and non-hazardous 
BMW is done. 
  Reply: As per the BMW Rules, the segregation of infectious BMW 
has to be done and the segregated waste has to be put in different colour--
coded bins for appropriate treatment and disposal non-hazardous waste is 
segregated separately and sent to municipal landfills. 

  The sub-rule (1) of Rule (6) of Bio-medical Waste (Management & 
Handling) Rules, 1998 states that bio-medical waste shall not be mixed 
with other wastes. Further, sub-rule (2) of the Rule  (6) stipulates that bio-
medical waste shall be segregated into-containers/bags at the point of 
generation in accordance with Schedule II prior to its storage, 
transportation, treatment and disposal. The containers shall be labelled 
according to Schedule III of the BMW Rules. 
  The Schedule II of the Rules specifies colour coding and type of 
containers for disposal of bio-medical wastes. The stipulated colour 
codings are yellow, red, blue/white translucent and black for different 
categories of wastes. 
7.  Issue: Whether incineration of BMW is causing pollution. 
  Reply: The incineration of bio-medical wastes is one of the 
stipulated treatment methods in the Bio-medical Waste (Management & 
Handling) Rules, 1998. The Rules further stipulate operating and 
emission standards of incinerator in order to check adverse affect to 
human health and environment. The standards stipulate provisions of 
combustion efficiency, temperatures in the chambers, stack height and 
limit of various pollutants such as particulate matters, Nitrogen Oxides, 
Hydrochloric Acid (HCI) and volatile organic compounds. Further, in 
order to avoid formation of toxic pollutants, the Rules have prohibited the 
incineration of chlorinated plastic waste and wastes treated with any 
chlorinated disinfectants. If the incinerator meets these standards, 
pollution due to incineration will be minimal without causing any adverse 
effect on environment. 
8.  Issue: How the needles/syringes are dealt with after use. 

  Reply: The needles have been categorized under ‘waste sharps’ in 
the Schedule-I of the BMW Rules. After use, the needles are required to 
be broken and destructed in a needle cutter kept in the hospitals at each 
location wherever the injections are given. The waste sharps shall be 
disinfected by chemical treatment/autoclaving/microwaving followed by 
mutilation/shredding. The rules do not have provisions for disposal of 
wastes after imparting requisite treatment as stipulated in the Rules. 
However, the guidelines on common bio-medical waste treatment facility 
prepared by CPCB recommends for dis posal of disinfected sharps in 
secured municipal landfills. 
  Issue: Whether there is any check on the private common treatment 
facilities. 
  Reply: The private Common Bio-Medical Waste Treatment Facility 
(CBMWTF) operators are required to obtain authorization from the 
respective SPCB/PCC of UT before setting of such facility as per Rule-9 
of the BMW Rules. The SPCBs/PCCs issue such authorization with 
certain conditions for proper treatment and disposal of BMW. 
Subsequently, the SPCBs/PCCs of UTs inspect and monitor these 
facilities to verify compliance to the conditions stipulated. The CPCB 
also randomly checks such facilities and wherever the facilities are found 
not complying with the stipulated conditions, necessary action is taken by 
the respective SPCB/PCC of UT, including closure of such facility. 
10.  Issue: Whether the private hospi tals are also following the norms 
like the Government hospitals. 
  Reply: As per the BMW Rules, all the healthcare facilities are 
required to comply with the prescribed norms/standards irrespective of 
whether they are private or Govern ment hospitals. Necessary action can 
be taken by the respective SPCB/PCC for non-compliance. As per the 

Rule (4) of the BMW Rule it shall be the duty of every occupier of an 
institution generating bio-medical waste which includes a hospital, 
nursing home, clinic, dispensary, veterinary, animal house, pathological 
laboratory, blood bank by whatever name called to take all steps to ensure 
that such waste is handled without any adverse effect to human health and 
the environment. The BMW Rules, therefore, are applicable to all bio-
medical waste generators irrespective of whether Government or Private 
owned. 
11.  Issue: Is there any provision for issuing certificates like ISO, for 
hospitals. 
  Reply: There is no provision in the BMW Rules for issuing such 
certificates like ISO to hospitals. 
12.  Issue: The BMW incineration ash contains some hazardous 
chemicals contaminating water and soil, if not properly disposed of. How 
this is dealt with? 
  Reply: As per the Schedule II of the BMW Rules, the incineration 
ash is required to be segregated in black colour plastic bags and disposed 
of in a secured landfill. The same is not allowed for disposal on land or in 
water bodies. By disposing on secure landfills, leaching of hazardous 
chemicals, if any, is prevented. 
13.  Issue: What are the problems the hospitals are facing? Which are 
the agencies that are involved into it and where does the real problem lie? 
We would also like to know the Ministry’s views and suggestions for 
making the implementation of the existing rules more effective, or, if any 
amendments are needed thereto. 
  Reply: The real problem faced by hospitals in complying with the 
BMW Rules is proper segregation of the infected BMW. Since only about 

15% is the infected BMW and 85% is uninfected and innocuous general 
municipal waste, by proper segregation the quantity of waste required to 
be treated and disposed of will be minimized. Another problem for proper 
management of BMW is lack of awareness and training of the 
stakeholders for proper handling and segregation of BMW. Other 
problems include, lack of adequate trained manpower, non-availability of 
funds for procuring the required materials and equipments as well as for 
treatment and disposal of BMW by the hospitals. The agencies 
responsible for implementation of the BMW Rules, namely, SPCBs/PCCs 
of UTs are also short of manpower to inspect and monitor the issued 
authorizations and take follow-up actions against the violators of the 
Rules. The State Pollution Control Board (SPCB)/Pollution Control 
Committee (PCC) is the prescribed authority for implementation of 
provisions of the Rules in the respective State/UT. Recently, Central 
Pollution Control Board conducted an interaction meet on 08/8/2008 at 
New Delhi where representatives from various SPCBs/PCCs, Deptt. of 
Health of some States/UTs, CBWTF facility operators, IMA and some 
bigger hospitals participated. An action plan including policy for 
implementation of the BMW Rules and amendments required in the 
BMW Rules were discussed and th e same has been sent to all 
SPCBs/PCCs for their comments so as to initiate necessary action for its 
implementation. Further, implementation of the Bio-Medical Waste 
(Management & Handling) Rules, 1998 and amendments thereof involve 
watch on healthcare facilities which are operating in quite a large 
numbers in every State/UT. The manpower mainly available in 
SPCBs/PCCs and CPCB are already stretched with priority and 
voluminous areas of implementation such as Water Act, Air Act, 
Environment (Protection) Act, Hazardous Waste(Management & 
Handling) Rules, Court matters etc. Inadequate availability of manpower 
and requisite infrastructure in SPCBs/PCCs and CPCB is also a problem 

for effective incomplete implementation of the Bio-medical Waste 
(Management & Handling) Rules, 1998 and amendments thereof. 
14.  Issue: The Committee would like to  know the facilities available in 
our hospitals. We would like to know, according to the Act, which was 
passed in Parliament, what measures have been taken for the disposal of 
bio-medical waste? How do you dispose it of and what pattern are you 
following? In case, some people are violating those rules and hospitals 
are not complying with it, what action the Ministry of Health as well as 
the Ministry of Environment is taking? What punishments are there and 
what regulations are applied for it? We would like to have brief 
information. 
  Reply: As per the BMW Rules, provisions are made for treatment 
and disposal of various categories of BMW by adopting different 
treatment methods. The treatment methods include incineration deep 
burial, autoclave/microwave disinf ection, chemical disinfection; 
shredding and disposal into secured landfills. Some large hospitals in the 
country have their own treatment and disposal facilities such as 
incinerator, autoclave/hydroclave/microwave and shredder for treating 
bio-medical wastes, while small hospitals/clinics get the same treated and 
disposed of at the common treatment facilities available in their 
respective State/UT. The BMW Ru les were notified under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (EP Act). The EP Act provides 
penalties for non-compliance of the Rules made under the Act. As per 
Section-5 of the EP Act, directions can be issued by the concerned 
SPCB/PCC to the violating units for its closure. Directions can also be 
issued to the concerned authorities to disconnect electricity/water or any 
other service for non-complying units under Section-5 of the E(P) Act. 

  Further, the section 15 of the Act stipulates provisions of penalty 
for contravention of the provisions of the act and the Rules, orders and 
directions and the same is reproduced as below: 
(1) Whoever fails to comply with or contravenes any of the 
provisions of this Act, or the rules made or orders or 
directions issued thereunder, shall, in respect of each such 
failure or contravention, be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to five years with fine which may 
extend to one lakh rupees, or  with both, and in case the 
failure or contravention continues, with additional fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during 
which such failure or contravention continues after the 
conviction for the first such failure or contravention. 
(2) If the failure or contravention referred to ill sub-section (1) 
continues beyond a period of one year after the date of 
conviction, the offender shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years. 
15.  Issue: Very often we mention guidelines. Now rules have come out. 
Is there any provision which clash w ith it or is that guidelines are 
supplementary to the rules. We are not very clear about that. Whether 
there is any executive instruction on that? 
  Reply: The BMW Rules are notified under the EP Act and the 
Rules will always be supreme vis-a-vis any guidelines which are issued. 
There is no clash between Rules and guidelines. Guidelines will help in 
implementation of the Rules. 

16.  Issue: Is there any mechan ism in place for monitoring and 
implementation at State as well as National level? This needs to be 
properly, adequately and comprehensively clarified by the Ministry? 
  Reply: As per the provisions of the BMW Rules, the respective 
SPCB/PCC is the prescribed authority for implementation and monitoring 
at the State/UT level. The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) also 
randomly monitors the implementation of the BMW Rules in various 
States of the country. In case th e CPCB observes any violations of the 
Rules, it can direct the concerned SPCB/PCC to take necessary action 
against the defaulting units including closure of the unit. 
17.  Issue: Is there any provision for the closure of the hospitals 
violating the rules? 
  Reply: As per Section-5 of the EP Act, the respective SPCB/PCC 
of UT can issue closure orders of the hospitals for violating the Rules. 
18.  Issue: There was a ruling by the Supreme Court saying harsh 
actions needed to be taken against defaulters whether those concerns of 
the judiciary have been incorporated in the rules or not? 
  Reply: The Hon’ble Supreme Court has issued certain directions for 
taking necessary measures for non- compliance of the Rules against the 
defaulting hospitals which were duly considered while finalizing the 
BMW Rules. 
19.  Issue: There are 21 Central level common facilities for treatment of 
hazardous wastes (TSDFs). Are they adequate for the whole of India? 
  Reply: Presently, there are 21 common treatment, storage and 
disposal facilities (TSDFs) for proper disposal of hazardous wastes and 
some more are in the process of being developed in various States of the 

country. The States which are developi ng TSDFs are required to have an 
MoU signed with the neighbouri ng States which are having such 
facilities, for disposal of BMW till their own facilities are developed. 
20.   Issue: If the unit uses the common facilities for waste disposal do 
they charge something for that? 
  Reply: The units which use common TSDFs are required to become 
members of such facilities and pay for treatment and disposal of their 
wastes. 
21.  Issue: We wanted to be clearly spelt out the responsibilities? What 
are the proper division of functions between various Ministries, 
authorities and agencies like Boards so that it will be possible for us to 
make recommendations?  
  Reply: The role of the Ministry of Environment and Forests is to 
frame necessary rules and regulati ons for proper management of the 
BMW, which are uniformly applicable throughout the country. The 
Ministry also plays promotional role by providing necessary financial 
assistance for conducting training and awareness programmes regarding 
the BMW Rules. The Ministry of Urban Development is responsible for 
proper management of urban/munici pal waste which is non-infectious, 
generated from the hospitals. The SPCBs/PCCs of UTs are responsible 
for implementation of the BMW Rules. The Ministry of health is 
responsible for providing necessary infrastructure facilities in the 
hospitals for proper management of BMW. They are also responsible for 
developing necessary guidelines and supporting awareness and training 
programmes for hospital staff. Hence, the responsibilities of various 
authorities and Ministries are prov ided in the respective rules and 
regulations. 

22.  Issue: The status of Court cases in all State may be provided. 
  Reply: As per the information available with CPCB, the number of 
court cases against defaulting healthcare facilities as on March, 2007 is as 
below: 
Assam 01 
Bihar 06 
Chhattisgarh 12 
Himachal Pradesh 01 
Karnataka 01 
Maharashtra 01 
Madhya Pradesh 17 
Orissa 06 
West Bengal 02 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AVAILABILITY  OF  COMMON  BIO-MEDICAL  WASTE 
TREATMENT  FACILITIES  (CBWTFS)  IN  THE  COUNTRY --- 
STATE/UT WISE 
(As per the information received from the SPCBs/PCCs) 
Sl. No. SPCB/PCC No. of CBWTFs  
 1 Andhra Pradesh 11 
 2. Assam* 2 
 3. Bihar* 3 
 4. Chandigarh 1 
 5. Chhattisgarh 5 
 6. Daman & Diu and Dadra & 1 
 Nagar Haveli  
 7. Delhi 2 
 8. Gujarat 12 
 9. Haryana 3 
10. Himachal Pradesh 2 
11. Jammu & Kashmir 1 
12. Jharkhand 1 
13. Karnataka 11 
14. Kerala 1 
15. Maharashtra 34 
16. Madhya Pradesh * 17 
17. Meghalaya* 1 

18. Orissa* 2 
19. Punjab 4 
20. Rajasthan 6 
21. Tamil Nadu 11 
22. Uttaranchal 2 
23. Uttar Pradesh** 20 
24. West Beneal 4 
   Total        157  
Total number of CBWTFs operating = 149 
Total number of CBWTFs yet to commission/ on trial basis/under installation = 8  
(*One CBWTF each in these States and **two in the U.P.) 
Total number of CBWTFs = 157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-XI 
STUDY  NOTE  ON  THE  BIO-MEDICAL  WASTE  
(MANAGEMENT  AND  HANDLING)  RULES,  1998 
  The Committee on Sub-ordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha had 
discussions on the Bio-medical Waste (Management and Handling) 
Rules, 1998 with the representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare and the Ministry of Environment and Forests alongwith the 
representatives of Jawaharlal Institute of Post-graduate Medical 
Education and Research (JIPMER) and Union Territory of Puducherry at 
Puducherry on 15th September, 2008 and with Apollo Hospital, Christian 
Medical College, Vellore and the Government of Tamil Nadu alongwith 
the representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests at Chennai on 19th September, 
2008. The following Members and officials were present: 
I.  At Puducherry on 15th September, 2008  
  Members 
 (1) Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla    ------     Chairperson  
 (2) Ms. Mabel Rebello  
 (3) Shri Vikram Verma  
 (4) Shri Raghunandan Sharma  
 (5) Shri Penumalli Madhu  
 (6) Shri Ali Anwar Ansari  
 (7) Shri Abani Roy  
 (8) Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
  Secretariat 
 (1) Shri Mahesh Ti wari, Joint Director 

 (2) Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Assistant Director 
  Representatives of the Minist ry of Environment and Forests  
 (1) Shri M.Subba Rao, Director 
 (2) Shri B.P. Shukla , Zonal Officer, Central Pollution Control Board 
(CPCB), 
  Bangalore 
 (3) Shri Bharat K.Sharma, Envir onmental Engineer, CPCB, New Delhi 
  Representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
 (1) Ms. Gayatri Mishra, Deputy Secretary 
 (2) Shri K.S. Na gi, Under Secretary 
  Representatives of Un ion Territory of Puducherry 
 (1) Shri Ramesh Tiwari , Secretary (Environment) 
 (2) Shri S.Kumarasami, Secretary (PWD) 
 (3) Shri TN Balakris hnan, Secretary (Health) 
 (4) Dr. Dilip Kumar Baliga, Direct or (Health and Family Welfare) 
 (5) Shri M. Arunachalam, Member Secretary, Pondicherry Pollution 
Control 
  Board 
 (6) Shri E. Vallavan, Director, Local Administration Department 
Representatives of Jawaharlal  Institute of Post-graduate 
Medical Education  a nd Research (JIPMER) 
 (1) Dr. KVSK Subba Rao, Director  
 (2) Dr. A.K.Das, Me dical Superintendent 
 (3) Dr. P.H. Ananthanaryanan, Senior Professor  
 (4) Dr. S. Badrinath, Senior Professor 

 (5) Dr J. Balachandran, Senior Professor 
 (6) Dr. A. Thumbunathan, Deputy Medical Superintendent 
 (7) Dr. Jeyaram, Officer in charge, Bio-medical Waste Management  
 (8) Dr. R. Ravindran, Officer in charge, CRAFT 
II.  At Chennai on 19th September, 2008  
  Members 
 (1) Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla   ------    Chairperson 
 (2) Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
 (3) Shri Abani Roy 
 (4) Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 (5) Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
  Secretariat 
 (1) Shri Mahesh Tiwa ri, Joint Director  
 (2) Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Assistant Director 
  Representatives of the Minist ry of Environment and Forests  
 (1) Shri M.Subba Rao, Director 
 (2) Shri B.P. Shukla , Zonal Officer, Central Pollution Control Board 
(CPCB), 
  Bangalore 
 (3) Shri Bharat K. Sharma, Environmental Engineer, CPCB, New 
Delhi 
  Representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
 (1) Ms. Gayatri Mishra, Deputy Secretary 
 (2) Shri K.S. Na gi, Under Secretary 
  Representatives of the Government of Tamil Nadu  

 (1) Shri P.W.C. Davidar, Special Secretary (Health) 
 (2) Shri V.K. Subburaj, Secret ary (Health & Family Welfare) 
 (3) Shri R. Balakrishnan, Chairman, Tamil Nadu Pollution Control 
Board 
 (4) Shri R. Ramachandran, Member Secretary, TNPC Board 
 (5) Shri S. Balaji, AOD, Chief Engineer 
  Representative of Apollo Hospital 
 (1) Dr. B.M.S. Nagaraj 
  Representatives of Christian Medical College, Vellore 
 (1) Dr. Isaac  
 (2) Shri J.P. Peter 
  The Committee wanted to know the method of disposal of bio-
medical waste in the hospitals and the problems and practical difficulties 
being faced by hospitals and the State Pollution Control Boards in the 
disposal of bio-medical waste. 
  The Committee was informed that the statutory body to oversee the 
implementation of the Bio-medical Waste Rules in Puducherry is the 
Puducherry Pollution Control Committee and in Tamil Nadu it is the 
Tamil Nadu Pollution Contral Board. It was also stated that as per the 
Guidelines, the generator of bio-medical waste is responsible for its 
segregation, management and disposal. The generators include doctors, 
nurses and other medical staff. 
  The Committee noted that colour-c oded polythene bags are used for 
identification and segregation of different types of wastes. For example, 
yellow bags for infected waste and black bags for general and non-
infected waste, etc. The various steps involved in waste management are 

generation, segregation, collection in specific colour bags, transportation, 
storage, treatment and final disposal. The various instruments used for 
bio-medical waste treatment are incinerator, autoclave, shredder, 
compactor, etc. 
  The Committee was informed that internal training programmes for 
hospital staff are conducted by the individual hospitals like JIPMER, 
Apollo and Christian Medical College, Vellore to spread awareness about 
the rules. The Committee was also informed that lack of awareness, lack 
of motivation, inadequate manpower and high cost of bio-medical waste 
disposal were some of the major constraints faced by the hospitals in the 
implementation of the rules. 
  The Committee notes that bio-medical waste management is given 
low priority and that there is still lack of awareness about the rules. A 
hospital may be very inefficient in the management of bio-medical wastes 
but it may still be rated as the best institute. 
  The Committee was also informed that private players are used for 
the collection and disposal of bio-medical waste. The Committee feels 
that the Government should take up this job instead of outsourcing it to 
private players. 
  The Committee recommends that special training in waste 
disposal/management should be impart ed to all employees in hospitals 
and that special courses could be started by the Ministry of Environment 
and Forests and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare regarding 
this. The Committee was informed that IGNOU had started a six month 
course on waste management but the Committee feels that IGNOU, being 
a distance education university, is not the right university to conduct the 
course. Bio-medical waste management, being a practical oriented field 

cannot be taught through correspondence courses. A uniform model for 
training should be prepared by the Ministry of Environment and Forests 
and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
  The Committee also wants the Ministry of Environment and Forests 
to explore the feasibility of providing grants/funds to NGOs to conduct 
awareness programs and seminars on the issue. 
  The Committee suggests that an enormous fee should be imposed 
for non-compliance with the rules so that the hospitals feel the pinch and 
act as a deterrent in future. The fee/fines may also be recovered from the 
salaries of officials found violating th e rules to ensure that the employees 
are more responsible and the rules strictly followed. The Committee feels 
that closing down an institution/hospital is not the solution as the patients 
are made to suffer for no fault of theirs. 
  The Committee also suggests that not only hospital but clinics and 
laboratories should also be brought under the purview of the Bio-medical 
Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-XII 
SUGGESTIONS  RECEIVED  BY  THE  RAJYA  SABHA 
SECRETARIAT  ON  THE  BIO-MEDICAL  WASTES  
(MANAGEMENT AND  HANDLING)  RULES,  1998  (BMW  
RULES)  AND  THE COMMENTS  OF  MINISTRY  OF  
ENVIRONMENT  AND  FORESTS  (MOEF) 
S.No. Suggestions Made Comments of MoEF  
1. Proper training and awareness 
program amongst hospital/health 
staff is required as there is lack of 
awareness and shortage of 
trained personnel to run the 
facilities. 
We agree. 
 
 
 
 
2. Development of pictorial 
communication material related 
to segregation of waste and 
precautions to be taken during 
handling the waste, for illiterate 
staff working at healthcare 
facilities. 
We agree. The Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare and the Centre for 
the Environment Education (CEE) 
have already developed such pictorial 
communication material. However, 
translation of the same from English 
into various other Indian (regional) 
languages, printing and distribution 
of the same to various health care 
facilities (HCFs) is required. 
3. Providing needle and syringe 
destroyers, different coloured 
polybags, puncture proof 
containers to health care 
providers to improve compliance 
The concerned health care authorities 
are required to provide such 
equipments/instruments in all health 
care facilities as per the BMW Rules. 

with the rules. It is the responsibility of the 
concerned State Pollution Control 
Boards .(SPCBs) to ensure 
compliance in this regard by all the 
HCFs. 
4. Development of a website or a 
toll free phone number to 
entertain concerns and register 
complaints related to violation of 
set standards related to bio-
medical waste management and 
disposal. 
The concerned SPCB may develop 
such website or a toll free phone 
number for receiving complaints and 
for taking necessary action against 
the violators of BMW Rules, since 
they are the concerned authorities for 
implementation of the Rules. 
5. Affordable instrumentation 
should be made available for the 
treatment and disposal of the 
waste at the facility itself. 
It may not be possible to provide the 
necessary treatment and disposal 
facilities by each and every HCF, 
particularaly by the small clinics, 
dispensaries and nursing homes at the 
health care facility itself. However, 
certain instruments/ equipments such 
as needles and syringes destroyers, 
disinfection facilities for infected 
wastes and storage of such wastes in 
cold containers till the same are 
transported to a common treatment 
facility may be required to be 
provided in all HCFs. 
6. Advisory bodies should be set up 
in each State and it should be 
There is already a provision in the 
BMW Rules in this regard. However, 

consulted regularly on matters 
relating to implementation of 
rules. 
such bodies are either not existing or 
not functioning effectively in several 
States. A Task Force may be required 
to be constituted in each district 
comprising of representatives from 
the concerned SPCB, Health 
Department, Municipality, District 
Collector’s Office and Police 
Department in addition to a 
representative of an NGO, to 
regularly monitor and recommend 
necessary action against the violators 
of BMW Rules to the implementing 
authority. 
7. Registration of hospitals that do 
not set up treatment/disposal 
facility or join a common facility, 
should be cancelled. New 
hospitals should not be allowed 
to commence operation without 
making sure that it has a facility 
for treatment/disposal of bio-
medical waste. 
We agree. The MoEF is also 
considering to amend BMW Rules 
for inclusion of a provision in this 
regard. 
8. Segregation of bio-medical waste 
according to its type should be 
ensured in each hospital. 
There is already a provision in BMW 
Rules in this regard. However, the 
concerned SPCB should ensure strict 
compliance by all HCFs in this 
regard. 

9. The Ministry should clearly 
identify at the Central level, the 
bodies which would be 
responsible for the 
implementation of the biomedical 
waste rules. 
At the Central level the Ministry of 
Health, CPCB and MoEF are the 
bodies responsible for 
implementation of BMW Rules. 
However, Ministry of Urban 
Development may also be made 
responsible in this regard, since 
considerable amount of bio-medical 
waste, which is not infected is 
required to be disposed of in the 
municipal dumpsites. 
10. The Ministry should have a 
formal mechanism in place for 
discussions with the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare 
regarding implementation of the 
rules and whether the rules need 
modification, based on the 
problems encountered by the 
hospitals in the implementation 
of these rules. 
We agree. 
11. The Ministry should put in place 
a mechanism for which 
performance of the States on the 
implementation of bio-medical  
waste rules could be monitored 
and ensure penalty for weak 
compliance by States. 
There is already a provision in BMW 
Rules for submitting annual reports 
regarding BioMedical Waste 
management by each SPCB to the 
CPCB by 31st March every year. 
Based on the examination of the 
performance, the concerned SPCBs 
are advised to take further necessary 

follow up action in the matter. In our 
federal structure, it may not be 
possible to levy penalty on States for 
weak compliance. 
12. Regular monitoring of waste 
processing facilites like 
autoclaves,  microwaves, 
incinerators, etc. should be done 
by CPCB/,PCBs. 
We agree. Presently only random 
monitoring of such facilities is being 
done by CPCB/SPCBs due to 
shortage of manpower. 
13. Government should allocate 
separate fund for Government 
institutions for the management 
of bio-medical wastes. 
Ministry of Health at the Central 
level and the Department of Health at 
State level are responsible for 
allocation of funds in this regard. 
14. BMW collection bags should be 
available at Primary Health 
Centres, Municipality Offices, 
etc. and to the public at nominal 
payment. A leaflet containing 
information on BMW may also 
be handed over to the recipients 
of the said bags. 
We agree. However, a mechanism 
need to be developed for collection 
and transporting of BMW wastes 
from the public (home treatment) 
either to the specific clinic providing 
such home treatment or to a common 
treatment facility so that the untreated 
waste may not be disposed of along 
with municipal wastes. 
15. Initial licensing and renewal to 
healthcare facilities should be 
subject to proper BMW 
management. If BMW 
management is not proper there 
should be a provision to cancel 
We agree. 

authorization to that healthcare 
facility/hospital. 
16. Storage time of up to 48 hours 
may not be right for a hot and 
humid climate, and it should be 
reduced to 24 hours. 
In such hot and humid climate areas 
the concerned SPCB should ensure 
either to reduce the storage time to 24 
hours or storage of the BMW wastes 
in cold containers till they are 
transported to common facility, on a 
case to case basis. 
17. Safety to workers, especially the 
nursing and waste handling staff 
finds no mention in the rules. 
Human safety along with 
measures for harm reduction and 
precautionary measures should 
be highlighted in the rules. 
Universal precautions to the safety of 
workers may be required, to be 
included in the BMW Rules. 
18. Rural BMW managements needs 
a different approach and this 
should be mentioned in the rules. 
There already exists a provision for 
deep burial of BMW waste in rural 
areas instead of incinerating the 
same.  
19. There should be a specified 
agency for spreading awareness 
about the rules. 
The IGNOU is already conducting 
training and awareness programmes 
for the stakeholders of BMW 
management. However, the 
concerned SPCBs/PCCs may identify 
suitable other agencjes in their 
respective States/UTs for this 

purpose. 
20. There are no clear and concise 
Guidelines from CPCB or any 
other Government authority as 
regards the struct ure for levying 
of charges by service providers 
for BMW handling and 
incineration. 
The CPCB guidelines contains a 
provision for fixing of treatment 
charges by the service providers in 
consultation with the concerned 
SPCBs/PCCs. However, the 
concerned HCFs may also be 
required to be involved in fixing such 
treatment charges. 
 
 
 