PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
HUNDRED AND FIFTY FIRST REPORT  
  
(Presented on December 22, 2003) 
  
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
                                          December 2003/, 1Pausa 1924 (Saka) 
                                                                E-mail: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
       Website: http//parliamentofindia.nic.in 
 
C O N T E N T S 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
INTRODUCTION 
  
REPORT  
  
1.The Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 
  
2.The Cochin Port Trust Employees (CCA) Regulations, 1964. 
  
3.The Vishakhapatnam Port Employees (GPF) Regulations, 1993 
  
4.Rules framed under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999. 
  
5.The National Dairy Development Board (Enforcement of Claims) Regulations, 2000. 
  
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
  
MINUTES 
  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE 26TH JUNE, 2003) 
  
      1.    Shri A. Vijayaraghavan                    Chairman 
2. Shri Kapil Sibal  

3. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
4. Dr. A. R. Kidwai 
5. Shri G. K.  Vasan 
6.   Shri B.P. Singhal  
7        Shri Dina Nath Mishra  
8        Shri  Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
9        Shri Uday Pratap Singh  
10    Dr.  V. Maitreyan  
11    Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
12    Shri N.K. Premachandran  
13    Shri Drupad Borgohain 
14    Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
15    Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh ‘Lalan’ 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1.      Shri N. C. Joshi, Joint Secretary 
2.      Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary 
3.      Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary 
4.      Shri P. Naryanan, Committee Officer 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
      I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this 
Hundred and Fifty First Report of the Committee. 
. 
1.2  The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on  18th 
December, 2003 
  
1.3The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various 
Rules/Regulations and issues, related therewith, along with the comments of the 
Governments received thereon.  The observations and recommendations which, in the 
opinion of the Committee, should be brought to the notice of the House, are contained in 
the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.  
  
NEW DELHI 
18.12.2003 
  
A. 
VIJAYARAGHAVAN                                                              
Chairman 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha 
 

REPORT 
I 
Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 
  
The Committee examined the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 framed under the 
Minerals (Regulation & Development) Act, 1957 and a questionnaire on the subject was 
forwarded to the Ministry of Mines for their comments/ clarifications on the 30th 
October, 2001.  The Committee discussed the matter with the representatives of the 
National Mineral Development Corporation and the Ministry of Mines and the Ministry 
of Steel at Hyderabad on the 8th November 2001. The points referred to theMinistry, 
their comments/ clarifications and the observations of the Committee thereon are 
reproduced below: 
  
I           Point referred  
            Whether the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 and amendment thereto have been 
laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha and    if so, the date of laying thereof?   
  
            Ministry’s reply 
            The Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 (MCR, 1960) were laid on the Table of the 
Rajya Sabha on the 6th December 1960, and all amendments thereto have been 
regularly laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha, the last amendment in Mineral 
Concession Rules, 1960 dated the 22nd January 2001 was laid in Rajya Sabha on the 2nd 
March 2001. 
  
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted that the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 and amendments 
thereto were laid on time.  
  
II         Point referred Rule 9 (2) (a): - Application fee 
             
            “A fee calculated in accordance with the provisions of Schedule II.” 
  
               The amount of application fee indicated in Schedule II are nominal. Whether 
Government have any objection in increasing the amount of application to @Rs.500/- 
for first square Km. and Rs.100/- for each additional square Km or any other 
reasonable amounts? 
  
Ministry’s reply 

The Department of Mines may have no objection to an increase in fees payable. 
The Department of Mines has received representations from various State 
Governments also that the application fees are meager and these should be suitably 
enhanced. The matter is already under examination in the Department. However, while 
fixing these rates, it may be kept in view that the fees, by their very nature, are designed 
to cover mainly the processing costs, and, therefore, increasing the existing rates, i.e, to 
Rs 250 for first square kilometer or part thereof, and Rs 50 for each additional square 
kilometer seem justified. 
            Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted with satisfaction that the Ministry had accepted the 
Committee's suggestion regarding suitable revision of application fee.  
  
III        Point referred Rule 9 (2) (d) and Rule 22 (3) (d): -  Valid clearance certificate 
  
               Rule 9(2)(d)  
               "Every application shall be accompanied by a valid clearance certificate, in the 
form prescribed by the State Government, of payment of mining dues, such as royalty 
or dead rent and surface rent payable under the Act or the rules made thereunder, from 
the Government or any officer of authority by that Government in this behalf.” 
Rule 22(3)(d)  
"Every application for the grant or renewal of a mining lease shall be 
accompanied by a valid clearance certificate, in the form prescribed by the State 
Government of payment of mining dues, such as royalty or dead rent and surface rent 
payable under the Act or the rules made thereunder, from the Government or any 
officer or authority authorized by that Government in this behalf.” 
What is the justification for authorizing the State Governments to prescribe the 
form of clearance certificate; whether Government has any objection in prescribing the 
form in the rules itself? 
Ministry’s reply 
The form of the valid clearance certificate depends on the manner of collection of 
the amounts payable under the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1957 and the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960. Rule 64 of the Mineral Concession Rules, 
1960 empowers the State Governments to specify the manner of collection of the mining 
dues. The State Governments also notify the Minor Mineral Concession Rules in 
exercise of powers under section 15 of the Mines and Minerals (Development and 

Regulation) Act, 1957, and generally specify similar modes of collection of mining dues 
for major minerals under rule 64 of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 and for minor 
minerals under the State Minor Mineral Concession Rules. Since the manner of 
collecting fees and deposits vary from State to State, as per the convenience of the State 
concerned, the format of the clearance certificate has not been specified in the Mineral 
Concession Rules, 1960. It is felt, specifying the format may impinge upon the 
delegation of powers already enjoyed by the States. 
            Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted the Ministry's reply. 
  
IV        Point referred Rule 9 (3): - 
  
“The State Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax the 
provisions of clause (d) of sub-rule (2) of Rule 9.” 
What are the circumstances under which the State Government may relax the 
provisions of Rule 9 (2) (d) and whether Government have any objection in indicating 
the nature/type of such circumstances in the rules itself? 
Ministry’s reply 
Rule 9(2) (d) of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 states that the application 
for prospecting license should be accompanied by a valid clearance certificate of the 
payment of mining dues. Rule 9(3) empowers the State Governments to relax this 
condition for reasons to be recorded in writing.  
            The instances in which the State Governments use the discretionary power to 
relax the condition are recorded in the case files maintained by the States, and the 
instances of such relaxation come to the notice of the Central Government only if any of 
such cases are challenged in Revision Applications. The State Governments have been 
seen to use the discretionary power in cases where the applicant had paid dues and 
could produce counterfoils of treasury challans to that effect, although the competent 
authority had not formally issued the clearance certificate, cases where the certificate 
could not be furnished by all members of the partnership firm or all members of the 
private limited company in time, or in cases where the party fails, despite best efforts, to 
produce the valid clearance certificate within ninety days of giving a sworn affidavit 
that no dues are outstanding, for reasons like illness. 
  
            Since use of the discretionary power to relax requirement of a valid clearance 
certificate along with an application for grant of renewal of a prospecting license is 

entirely in the revenue interest of the State Government, it is perhaps not necessary to 
lay down strict conditions for allowing such relaxation. The provision that the reasons 
for relaxation should be recorded in writing is enough safeguards that the power is not 
misused, and also provides flexibility to the State Government to attend to genuine 
difficulties. 
  
Committee’s observations 
The Committee noted the Ministry's reply.  
  
V         Point referred Rule 14 (1) (i): -         Conditions of a prospecting   licence 
  
           “The licensee shall pay such prospecting fee as may be fixed by the State 
Government, being not less than fifty paise and not more than five rupees per hectare 
of land covered by the license for each year or part of a year of the period for which 
the license is granted or renewed.”  
  
           The rule provides very nominal amount of prospecting fee to be paid by the 
licensee.  Whether Government have any objection in raising the prospecting fee up to 
a reasonable level which is relevant to the current times? 
  
Ministry’s reply 
The prospecting fee has been deliberately kept at a nominal amount since the 
licensee does not win any mineral on the basis of prospecting, and there are no 
commercial gains from prospecting exercises. Moreover, if the licensee wins minerals in 
excess of what is provided in the rules, he is liable to pay royalty. Therefore, in 
consideration of the fact that these rates were fixed decades ago, the fee payable may be 
increased to not less than Rupee one and not more than rupees ten per hectare of land.   
  
            Committee’s observations 
            The Committee was satisfied to note that the Ministry has agreed to revise the 
prospecting fees as suggested by it.  
  
VI        Point referred Rule 20 (1): -              Security deposit 
  
           “An application for a prospecting license shall, before the deed referred to in 
sub-rule (1) of rule 15 is executed, deposit a security for the due observance of the 

terms and conditions of the license a sum of five hundred rupees in respect of every 
square kilometer or part thereof for which the license is granted.” 
  
           The rule, provides very meagre amount of security deposit for due observance of 
the terms and conditions of the licence. Whether Government has any objection in 
raising this amount suitably?    
  
Ministry’s reply 
The Department of Mines has no objection, and a security deposit up to Rupees 
2500 appears reasonable. 
             
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee was satisfied to note that the Ministry had no objection in raising 
the amount of security deposit as suggested by it.  
  
VII         Point referred     Rule 22 (1) and (3) (i) (a): -         Application fee 
for   grant    of    mining lease  
  
           “Rule 22(1): An     application for the grant of a mining lease in respect of land 
in which the minerals vested in the Government shall be made to the State Government 
in Form I through such officer or authority as the State Government may specify in 
this behalf.” 
  
           “Rule 22(3)(i)(a) : Every application for the grant of renewal of a mining lease 
shall be accompanied by – a fee of five hundred rupees” 
  
(i)                  Rule 22 (1) does not prescribe any application fee for grant of mining lease. 
(ii)                The amount of fee for renewal of a mining lease is meagre.  
  
Whether Government have any objection in prescribing the amount of 
application fee for grant of a mining lease as well as raising the amount of fee for 
renewal of a mining lease? 
  
Ministry’s reply 
Rule 22(1) of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 prescribes the procedure of 
application for grant of mining lease while rule 22(3) prescribes the documents and 
other accompaniments to such an application for mining lease. The application fee for 

grant of mining lease is already prescribed in rule 22(3) (i) and there is perhaps no 
separate advantage in doing so in rule 22(1) itself. 
  
The Department of Mines has received representations from various State 
Governments also that the application fees are meager and these should be suitably 
enhanced. The matter is already under examination in the Department.  
  
            Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted with satisfaction that the Ministry has agreed to revise the 
application fees for grant of mining lease as suggested by it.   
  
VIII   Point referred Dead Rent: - 
  
The term `Dead Rent’ has been used at a number of places in the rules like rules 
9 (2) (d), 22 (3) (d), (27), etc.  The meaning of these words is not clear.  Whether 
Government has any objection in defining the terms `Dead Rent’, in the rules itself? 
  
Ministry’s reply 
The term "dead rent" is defined in Law in precise terms, and therefore the term 
was not separately defined in the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1957 or in the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960. For instance, Osborn's Concise 
Law Dictionary (Universal Law Publishing Co. Pvt Ltd, 1993) defines "dead rent" as 
the minimum rent payable under a mining lease, irrespective of whether minerals are 
won or not'. Also, so far, no instances have come to the notice of the Central 
Government where the definition and application of the term dead rent as used in the 
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and the Mineral 
Concession Rules, 1960, have been challenged in any court of law. 
  
            Committee’s observations 
            The Committee was not satisfied with the Ministry's comments and desired that 
they may examine the possibility of defining the term in the Rules itself.  
  
IX        Point referred Rule 22 (3): -  (last proviso) 
             
            “Provided that the applicant shall   deposit such further deposit as may be asked 
for by the State Government, within one month from the date of demand of such 
deposit.” 

  
            The proviso does not mention any purpose for which the applicant is required to 
make further deposit.  Whether Government have any objection in mentioning the 
purpose for such further deposit is required? 
  
Ministry’s reply 
Rule 22 of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 relates to application for grant of 
mining leases. Rule 22(3)(i) prescribes that an application fee and inter alia a valid 
clearance certificate shall accompany the application. Rule 22(3) (ii) provides that apart 
from these, a deposit shall accompany for meeting the preliminary expenses in 
connection with the grant of mining lease. The proviso to this Rule prescribes that the 
applicant shall deposit such further deposit as may be asked for by the State 
Government, and it is, therefore, clear that the purpose for such additional demand is 
only for meeting additional expenses in connection with the grant of mining lease. The 
expenses in connection with the grant of mining lease depend on the size of the area, and 
the topography. The State Government is required to deploy staff for surveying and 
measuring angles for demarcation of the area and expenses connected with such 
demarcation vary from area to area and hence it may be necessary to ask for a deposit 
over and above Rs 1000 as provided for in the rules in specific cases.  
             
Committee’s observations 
The Committee noted the Ministry's reply. 
  
X         Point referred Rule 27 (1) (f) and 28 (1): - 
  
            Rule 27 (1) (f) 
"the lessee shall commence mining operations within one year from the date of 
execution of the lease and shall thereafter conduct such operations in a proper, skillful 
and workman-like manner.” 
  
            Rule 28 (1) 
"Subject to the other conditions of this rule where mining operations are not 
commenced within a period of two years from the date of execution of the lease, or is 
discontinued for a continuous period of two years after commencement of such 
operations, the State Government shall, by an order, declare the mining lease as lapsed 
and communicate the declaration to the lessee.” 

  
(i)                  Whether there are any guidelines and norms for conducting mining operations 
in a proper, skillful and workman-like manner as provided in rule 27(1)(f)? 
  
(ii)                Provisions of rule 27 (1) (f) and 28 (1) are contradictory:  On one hand, it is 
mandatory on the part of a lessee to commence mining operation within one year from 
the date of execution of the lease while on the other hand a mining lease shall be 
declared as lapsed if mining operations are not commenced within a period of two years 
from the date of execution of the lease.  Whether Government has any objection in 
rectifying the position? 
  
Ministry’s reply 
There appears to be a typographical error in rule 27 (1) (f) as has been presented 
for comments, since the rule already provides that the lessee shall commence mining 
operations within two years from the date of execution of the mining lease. 
             
            The guidelines and norms for conducting mining operations in proper skilful and 
workmanlike manner are provided in the Mineral Conservation and Development 
Rules, 1988, framed under section 18 of the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1957, and these rules have been already reviewed by the Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation of the Rajya Sabha. 
  
            Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted the Ministry's reply.  
  
XI        Point referred Terms `Determination’ and `Determine’: - 
  
At a number of places terms `Determination’ and `Determine’ have been used in 
the rules like rules 27, 29, etc. Meanings of those terms are not clear. Whether 
Government has any objection in defining these terms in the rules itself? 
  
Ministry’s reply 
The term "determination" is defined in Law in precise terms, and, therefore, the 
term was not separately defined in the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1957 or in the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960. For instance Osborn's 
Concise Law Dictionary (Universal Law Publishing Co. Pvt Ltd, 1993) defines 
"determination" as "to come to an  end". Also, so far no instances have come to the 

notice of the Central Government where the definition and application of the term 
determination or determine as used in the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1957 and the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 have been challenged.  
  
            Committee’s observations 
            The Committee was not satisfied with the Ministry's Comments and directed 
that they may re-examine the feasibility of defining these terms in the Rules.  
  
XII      Point referred  
  
Section 4A of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957 
provides for termination of prospecting licenses or mining leases.  But the Mineral 
Concession Rules, 1960 not provide anywhere in this regard. Whether Government 
would clarify the position? 
  
Ministry’s reply 
The Section 4A of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1957 provides the general restrictions of the circumstances in which, in the interest of 
regulation of mines and mineral development etc, preservation of natural environment, 
public health etc, the prospecting licenses or the mining leases may be terminated. The 
Provisions already made in the Act have not been replicated in the rules, the former 
being the principal legislation.   
  
            Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted the Ministry's reply. 
  
  
XIII     Point referred Rule 29 (1) (a): - Restriction on determination of lease 
  
            “Rule 29(1)(a) The lessee applies for such surrender of mineral at least 6 months 
before the intended date of surrender.” 
  
(b)                                *            *               * 
  
Provided also that surrender of the lease area by the lessee shall be permitted 
only thrice during the period of the lease on fulfilling the conditions -  that at least a 
period of five years has  elapsed since the last surrender.” 
             

What is the objective sought to be achieved by the above provisions.  The period 
of 6 months for applying surrender of mineral before the intended date of surrender 
and the period of five years for allowing next surrender of a mineral are unreasonably 
on the higher side.  Whether Government has any objection in reducing these periods to 
two months and two years, respectively? 
  
Ministry’s reply 
If a mining lease is granted for a group of minerals, the notice period of six 
months has no adverse repercussion on the lessee, because no royalty will be charged if 
the particular mineral is not produced. However, the surrender of mineral requires a 
notice of six months at least in order to enable the State Government to process the 
application, and satisfy itself that the mineral has been actually depleted for economic 
exploitation, for any such surrender depicts revenue loss to the State Government. 
Already in case of the area being properly surveyed and being contiguous, such 
surrender is permitted from the date of the receipt of the application. Further, the 
lesseealso has to fulfil the condition ofrule 23 of the Mineral Conservation and 
Development Rules, 1988, under which in the interest of mineral conservation, for 
which a duty has been cast upon the Central Government by the Parliament, Central 
Government, through the Indian Bureau of Mines is also required to satisfy itself to 
prohibit such abandonment or allow abandonment with such conditions as may be 
specified in the permission. MCDR requires a notice of ninety days before abandonment 
of mining for the Central Government to complete the process of evaluation.  
  
Further, under rule 34 of Mineral Conservation and Development Rules, 1988, 
the lessee is required to undertake the phased reclamation and rehabilitation of land 
affected by mining operations, which is required to be completed before the conclusion 
of such operations and abandonment of mines.  
  
In order to enable all competent authorities to complete various duties assigned 
to them the notice period of six months is considered adequate. 
  
Surrender of area being permissible one in five years is linked to the provision of 
Scheme of mining, which is submitted every five years. Logically, at the time of 
submitting the scheme of mining for next five years, depletion of any mineral would also 

be planned for. These provisions act as checks and measures against possible slaughter 
mining and help in mineral conservation.    
  
            Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted the Ministry's reply. 
  
XIV     Point referred Rule 37 (2) and Rule 45(ii):- 
  
Rule 37 (2) 
"Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-rule (1) the lessee may, subject to the 
conditions specified in the proviso to rule 35, transfer his lease or any right, title or 
interest therein to a person   who has filed an affidavit stating that he has filed an up-
to-date income tax return, paid the income tax assessed on him and paid the income tax 
on the basis of self-assessment as provided in the Income Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), on 
payment of a fee of five hundred rupees to the State Government.” 
  
Rule 45 (ii)  
"The provisions of rule 35 shall also apply to such leases.” 
  
            The above rules refer proviso to Rule 35, but Rule 35 has already been 
omitted.  Whether Government have any objection in modifying these sub rules, 
suitably? 
  
Ministry’s reply 
It is correct to state that the erstwhile rule 35 of Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 
was omitted on the 27th September 1994. The reference to the omitted rule was deleted 
from rule 37 (2) vide GSR 743 (E) dated the 25th September 2000, but inadvertently the 
reference continues in rule 45 (ii). The inadvertent mistake is being rectified.  
  
            Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted with satisfaction that the Ministry has agreed to rectify 
reference to an omitted rule, which was inadvertent.  
XV       Point referred Rule 44 (i): -   Conditions of a prospecting licence 
  
            “The licensee shall pay the granter such prospecting fee as may be agreed upon, 
being not less than fifty paise and not more than five rupees per hectare of the land 

covered by the license for each year or a part of the year of the period for which a 
license is granted or renewed.” 
  
            The amount of prospecting fee prescribed in the above rule is meagre.  Whether 
Government has any objection in raising the amount suitably? 
  
Ministry’s reply 
The prospecting fee has been deliberately kept at a nominal amount since the 
licensee does not win any mineral on the basis of prospecting, and there are no 
commercial gains from prospecting exercises. Moreover, if the licensee wins minerals in 
excess of what is provided in the rules, he is liable to pay royalty. Therefore, in 
consideration of the fact that these rates were fixed decades ago, the fee payable may be 
increased to not less than rupee one and not more than rupees ten per hectare of land.  
  
            Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted that the Ministry has agreed to revise the prospecting fee 
as suggested by it.  
  
XVI     Point referred Proviso under Rule 59 (1) (e) (ii): - 
  
“Provided further that where an area reserved under rule 58, (or under section 
17A of the Act) is proposed to be granted to a Government Company, no notification 
under clause (ii) shall be required to be issued. 
  
The above proviso refers to Rule 58, which has already been omitted. Whether 
Government has any objection in modifying the provisions suitably? 
  
Ministry’s reply 
Section 17A of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, 
as amended since 25th January, 1994 lays down the provisions under which mineral 
bearing areas can be reserved by the Government. While such areas can be reserved by 
the Central Government, in consultation with the State Government, under sub-section 
17A (1) for conservation purposes, under subsection 17A (1A), the Central Government 
can reserve mineral bearing areas for exploitation by the Central Public Sector 
Undertakings. Under subsection 17A (2), the State Governments can reserve areas for 

exploitation by the State Public Sector Undertakings, after obtaining approval of the 
Central Government for the same.  
  
However, prior to 22nd August 1986, when section 17A was inserted in the Mines 
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, reservation for exploitation by 
the Central and the State Public Sector undertakings were done by the State 
Governments under Rule 58 of the Mineral Concession Rules 1960. Thereafter, till the 
omission of rule 58 of Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 on the 13th April 1988, the State 
Governments were empowered to reserve mineral bearing areas for exploitation both 
by the Central and State Public Sector Undertakings. 
  
The Courts have held that all reservations made under rule 58 of the Mineral 
Concession Rules, 1960 till 13th April 1988 continue to be valid till these are rescinded. 
Therefore, the reference to erstwhile rule 58 of theMineral Concession Rules, 1960 in 
the proviso to rule 59 (1) (e) (ii) continue to be relevant.   
  
            Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted the Ministry's reply. 
  
XVII    Point referred Rule 64 (A): - 
  
“The State Government may, without prejudice to the provisions contained in 
the Act or any other rule in these rules, charge simple interest at the rate of twenty 
four per cent   per annum on any rent, royalty or fee other than the fee payable under 
sub-rule (1) of rule   54 or other sum due to that Government under the Act or theses 
rules or under the terms and conditions of any prospecting license or mining lease from 
the sixtieth day of the expiry of the date fixed by that Government for payment of such 
royalty, rent, fee or other  sum and until payment of such royalty, rent, fee or other 
sum is made.” 
  
            The rate of interest to be charged for default in payment of rent, royalty or fee or 
other sum due to the Government is on the higher side.  Whether Government have any 
objection in reducing the rate of interest up to 12 or 15 per cent keeping in view the 
current economic scenario of reduced interest rates on capital? 
  
Ministry’s reply 

The rate of interest prescribed under the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 
purports to be penal interest. Mining dues are the most important source of non-tax 
revenue of the State Governments. The lessee is expected to pay the mining dues on 
schedule. Even the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of Interest is 14 per cent. Any lowering 
of rate of interest could encourage the lessee to indulge in practices to the detriment of 
revenue interest of the State Governments, mineral conservation and development.  
             
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted the Ministry's reply. 
  
2.         Relevant extracts from the study note on the above discussions were forwarded 
to the Ministry of Mines for necessary action on the 1st February 2002. The Ministry 
furnished the Action Taken Note on the 4th April, 2002 accepting the Committee’s 
suggestions on point   no. 2 on    Schedule II, Rule 9 (2)(a); point no. 5 on Rule 14 (1) (i); 
point no. 6 on Rule 20 (1); point no. 7 on Rule 22 (1) and 3 (i); point no. 14 on Rule 37 
(2) and 45; point no. 15 on Rule 44 (i).  The Ministry also furnished a copy of the 
notification G.S.R. 21 (E) dated the 11th January 2002 publishing the Mineral 
Concession (Amendment) Rules, 2002. 
  
3.         Thereafter on the 16th August, 2002, the Ministry furnished the following Action 
Taken Note on point no. 8 regarding the term ‘Dead Rent’ and point no. 11 regarding 
the term ‘Determination and Determine’: -  
            “Department of Mines in their earlier comments on Point No. 8 and Point No. 11 
have explained that the term dead rent, determination are precise terms in law 
and therefore, these have not been separately defined in Mines and Minerals 
(Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 or the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960. For 
instance, Osborn’s Concise Law Dictionary (Universal Law Publishing Co. Pvt. 
Ltd, 1993) defines “dead rent” as the minimum rent payable under a mining 
lease,’ “determination” as “to come to an end”.  These terms “dead rent” and 
“determination” are defined in Law in precise terms, and therefore, these terms 
were not separately defined in the Mines and Minerals (Development & 
Regulation) Act, 1957 or in the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960. Also, so far, no 
instances have come to the notice of the Government where the definition and 
application of these terms dead rent, determination or determine as used in the 

Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 and the Mineral 
Concession Rules, 1960 have been challenged. 
                        The matter has been examined in consultation with the Ministry of Law 
and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs. 
                        The Ministry of Law in support of the contention of the Department that 
the natural meaning of the words under reference I normally adhered to in the 
absence of a definition in the statutes/rules and it has not so far had any 
implication or challenge in the Court of Law, have cited the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court judgment in the case of Ajay Pradhan Vs. State of M.P.  AIR 1988 SC 
1975.  The relevant extracts from the judgment are reproduced below: 
            “A rule must be interpreted by the written text.  If the precise word used are 
plain and unambiguous, the statute/rules and it has not so far had any legal 
implication or challenge in the Court is bound to construe them in their ordinary 
sense and give them full effect.  The plea of inconvenience and hardship is a 
dangerous one and is only admissible in construction where the meaning of the 
statute is obscure and there are alternative methods of construction. Where the 
language is explicit its consequences are for Parliament, and not for the Courts, 
to consider.” 
                                    In view of the legal opinion, therefore, the definition of ‘dead rent’ 
and ‘determination/determine’ in the mining statute is not required, as these 
terms are not intended to give any specific meaning other than their natural 
meaning to these words. 
                                    The above issues with the approval of competent authority.” 
  
4.         The Committee at its meeting held on the 20th May, 2003 considered the matter 
and noted the above comments of the Ministry on point no. 8 and 11. The Committee 
notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have since carried out and notified the 
following amendments in the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 as per its suggestions vide 
notification G.S.R. 21 (E) dated the 11th January, 2002, publishing the Mineral 
Concession (Amendment) Rules, 2002: 
(i) Schedule II 
[Rule 9(2)(a)] 
by reasonably  revising the application fee for prospecting 
licenses- (i) to rupees two hundred and fifty for first 
square kilometer or part thereof; and (ii)  rupees fifty for 
each additional square kilometer as suggested by the 
Committee; 

  
(ii) Rule 14(1)(i) by substituting the words 'being not less than fifty paise 
and not more than five rupees' with the words 'being not 
less than rupee one and not more than rupees ten' thereby 
suitably revising the prescribed fee payable by the 
licensee; 
  
(iii) Rule 20(1) by substituting the words 'a sum of five hundred rupees' 
with the words 'a sum of two thousand and five hundred 
rupees' thereby suitably revising the security deposit 
payable by an applicant for prospecting license;  
  
(iv) Rule 22(1)&3(i) by substituting the words 'a non refundable fee of five 
hundred rupees' with the words 'a non refundable fee of 
two thousand and five hundred rupees' thereby suitably 
revising the fee payable for renewal of mining lease; 
  
(v) Rule 37(2) & 45 by omitting clause (ii) of rule 45 where reference to rule 
37(2) was inadvertent; and 
  
(vi) Rule 44(i) by substituting the words 'being not less than fifty paise 
and not more than five rupees' with the words 'being not 
less than one rupee and not more than ten rupees' thereby 
suitably revising the prospecting fee payable by the 
licensee.  
 
II 
The Cochin Port Employees (Classification, 
Control and Appeal) Regulations, 1964 
  
            The Committee examined the Cochin Port Trust Employees (Classification, 
Control and Appeal), Regulations, 1964 framed under the Major Port Trusts Act, 
1963.  Certain points were referred to the Ministry of Shipping on the 7th February 1997 
for their clarifications/comments. 
2.         The Committee discussed the subject matter with the representatives of the 
Cochin Port Trust and the Ministry of Shipping at Cochin on the 17th February 

1997.  The relevant extracts from the study note on the discussions were forwarded to 
the Ministry on the 18th November 1997 for their comments.  The Ministry of Shipping 
vides their communications dated the 28th August 1998 and the 2nd November 2000 
furnished the action taken notes.  The points where the Ministry have agreed to 
Committee's suggestions or where the Committee did not agree with the Ministry’s view 
point, along with the Committee's observations thereon are as under: - 
Point No.1 
Point raised  (7.2.97) 
Whether these regulations and subsequent amendments were laid on the Table 
of both the Houses of Parliament; is so, the details thereof? 
  
Committee’s further query  (18.11.97) 
The Committee was not satisfied with the reply given by the Cochin Port Trust and was 
of the view that unless the amendments are laid on the Table of both the Houses of 
Parliament along with the original Rules and Regulations, Members would not be able 
to understand the modifications and its implications of the amendments.  The 
management of the Port Trust and the representative of the Ministry agreed to the 
suggestion of the Committee that the original regulations should be placed along with 
amendments in all cases where the original regulations had not been laid and the same 
would be implemented in the near future. 
  
Ministry's Action Taken Note   (28.8.1998) 
            The required number of copies of the Regulation in cases where the original 
regulations were not laid on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament are awaited 
from the Port Trust. 
  
Ministry’s Action Taken Note  (2.11.2000) 
      Rules/Regulation have been laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on the 22nd August 
2000. 
  
Point No.2 : Regulation 3(3) 
Point raised (7.2.97) 

“If any doubt arises as to whether these regulations or any of them apply to any 
person, the matter shall be referred to the Central Government, whose decision thereon 
shall be final.” 
  
What is the rationale behind this clause, which makes the Central Government 
the final adjudicating authority?  Whether an appeal shall lie against the orders of the 
Central Government in this regard?  Please elucidate. 
  
Committee’s further query  (18.11.97) 
            The Committee noted the proposal of the Port Trust to amend the regulation by 
substituting the  words “whose decision thereon shall be final” with the words “who 
shall decide  the same”. 
  
Ministry's Action Taken Note (28.8.1998) 
      The Government accepts the recommendations of the Committee for amending 
Regulation 3(3).  Action is being taken to notify the amendment. 
  
 Ministry’s Action Taken Note  (2.11.2000) 
      Amendment has been made and sent to press for publication in the Official Gazette 
on 31st October, 2000.  Printed copies are awaited. 
  
Point No.3: Regulation 4 
Point raised  (7.2.97 
“Where it is considered necessary to make special provision in respect of an 
employee inconsistent with any of these regulations, the authority making the 
appointment may for reasons to be recorded in writing and with the concurrence of 
such employee, make special provisions and thereupon these regulations shall not apply 
to such employee to the extent to which such special provisions are inconsistent with 
these regulations.” 
  
(i)           What is the rationale behind this clause? 
(ii)         Whether there are any criteria/guidelines under which an employee is exempted 
from the application of these regulations?  If so, the details thereof? 
  

(iii)        There is a printing mistake in line 3 of this Regulation. The word “within” 
should read as “writing”.  This patent error needs to be rectified by issuing a 
corrigendum. 
  
Committee’s further query  (18.11.97) 
      The Committee while taking note of the comments furnished by the Port Trust was 
of the view that some criteria or guidelines should have been there in these regulations 
and directed the Port Trust/Ministry of Shipping to review it and furnish their 
comments. 
  
Ministry's Action Taken Note  (28.8.1998) 
      The Government has no objection to delete Regulations.  Action is being taken to 
notify the amendments. 
  
Ministry’s Action Taken Note  (2.11.2000) 
Amendment has been made and sent to the press for publication in the Official 
Gazette on the 31st October, 2000.  Printed copies are awaited. 
  
Point No.4 : Regulation 9 (3) 
Point raised  (7.2.97) 
“An employee who is detained in custody, whether on a criminal charge or 
otherwise for a period exceeding 48 hours shall be deemed to have been suspended with 
effect from the date of detention, by an order of the Chairman or the appointing 
authority, as the case may be and shall remain under suspension until further orders 
are made by the Chairman or the appointing authority.” 
  
The term ‘otherwise” appearing in the regulation is vague.  Whether the 
Ministry have any objection in specifying the said term in the regulation itself? 
  
Committee’s further query  (18.11.97) 
            The Committee took note of the reply furnished by the Port Trust for amending 
the regulation by deleting the words “whether on a criminal charge or otherwise” but 
expressed its apprehension that still this provision could be misused.  The Chairman of 
the Committee desired to know whether there was any provision by which the authority 
could take back a suspended employee once the police themselves come to the 

conclusion that there was no necessity to chargesheet he and that the case was 
fabricated.  The Chairman of Cochin Port Trust stated that they should apply it only 
when there was a question of moral turpitude.  He also observed that the provision of 
the said clause would be invoked only then so that the interests of the employees were 
protected. 
  
Ministry's Action Taken Note (28.8.1998) 
            The Committee’s recommendation for amendment of Regulations 9(3) is 
accepted by the Government.  Action is being taken to notify the amendment. 
  
Ministry’s Action Taken Note  (2.11.2000) 
Amendment has been made and sent to the press for publication in the Official 
Gazette on 31st October, 2000.  Printed copies are awaited. 
  
Point No.6: Regulation 10(ii) 
Point raised  (7.2.97) 
“Withholding of increments or promotion;”  
The period of rigour or punishment in withholding of increments or promotion is 
not mentioned therein.  Whether it is with or without cumulative effect?  Whether there 
is any objection if reasonable minimum and maximum time limits are prescribed for the 
same? 
  
Committee’s further query  (18.11.97) 
      The Committee noted the reply of the Port Trust for prescribing a minimum period 
of 6 months and a maximum period of 3 years for withholding of increments or 
promotion. 
  
Ministry’sAction Note (28.8.1998) 
      The Government accepts the recommendations for amendment of Regulation 10 
(ii).  Action is being taken to notify the amendment. 
  
Ministry’s Action Taken Note  (2.11.2000) 
Amendment has been made and sent to press for publication in the Official 
Gazette on the 31st October, 2000.  Printed copies are awaited. 

  
Point No.7 : Regulation 10(iv) 
Point raised  (7.2.97) 
“Reduction to a lower grade or post or to a lower time scale or to a lower stage in 
a time scale;” 
  
(i)                  The above provision may be invoked prejudicially with a view to victimizing 
an employee.  Whether the Ministry has any objection to limit the reduction 
to a lower grade or post for a specified period and whether any guidelines 
have been provided to reduce the time scale only by lowering a single stage 
and not more than one stage? 
  
(ii)                Whether on restoration, the period of reduction shall operate to postpone 
his future increments and if so, to what extent? 
  
Committee’s further query  (18.11.97) 
      The Committee noted the reply of the Port Trust for amending the regulation in line 
with the Central Government Rules. 
  
Ministry's Action Taken Note (28.8.1998) 
The Government accepts the recommendations for amendment of Regulation 10 
(iv).  Action is being taken to notify the amendment. 
  
Ministry’s Action Taken Note  (2.11.2000) 
Amendment has been made and sent to the press for publication in the Official 
Gazette on 31st October 2000.  Printed copies are awaited. 
  
Point No.9 :Regulation 12(2) 
Point raised  (7.2.97) 
“The disciplinary authority shall frame charges on the basis of the allegations on 
which the inquiry is proposed to be held.  Such charges, together with a statement of the 
allegations on which they are based, shall be communicated in writing to the employee, 
and he shall be required to submit, within such time as may be specified by the 
disciplinary authority (a) to such authority or (b) where a board of inquiry or inquiring 

officer has been appointed under sub-regulation (3) to that Board or Officer, a written 
statement of his defence and also to state whether he desires to be heard in person”. 
  
The term ‘within such time as may be specified’ delegates unguided and 
unspecified discretionary power to the disciplinary authority and is liable to be used 
with discrimination.  Whether there is any objection in prescribing a definite time limit 
in this regard so that the power may not be misused? 
  
Committee’s further query  (18.11.97) 
      The Committee directed that 20 days time may be provided for submission of 
written statement of defence  by the delinquent official. 
  
Ministry's Action Note (28.8.1998) 
The Government accepts the recommendations for amendment of Regulation 
12(2).  Action is being taken to notify the amendment. 
  
Ministry’s Action Taken Note  (2.11.2000) 
Amendment has been made and sent to the press for publication in the Official 
Gazette on 31st October, 2000.  Printed copies are awaited. 
  
Point No.10 : Regulation 12(6) 
Point raised  (7.2.97) 
“The disciplinary authority may nominate any person to present the case in 
support of the charges before the authority inquiring into the charges (hereinafter 
referred to as the inquiring authority).  The employee may present his case with the 
assistance of any other employee including a retired employee who retired from service 
not earlier than 3 years from the date of commencement of the assistance but may not 
engage a legal practitioner for the purpose unless the person nominated by the 
disciplinary authority is a legal practitioner or unless the disciplinary authority, having 
regard to the circumstances of the case, so permits.” 
  
The  above provision appears to be violative of the   principles of natural 
justice.  This also appears to be violative of the Fundamental Rights guaranteed by Article 
22 of the Constitution under which no accused shall be denied the right to  consult and to 

be defended by a le gal practitioner of his choice.   Whether the Ministry have any 
objection in amending the above provision suitably? 
  
Committee’s further query  (18.11.97) 
      The Committee while noting the reply of the Port Trust expressed its concern that 
this provision appeared to be violative of Article 22 of the Constitution under which no 
accused shall be deprived of the right to consult and to be defended by a legal 
practitioner of his choice.  The Chairman of Cochin Port Trust stated that there would 
not be any problem in allowing legal assistance.  The Committee directed that Cochin 
Port Trust/Ministry of Shipping may review this provision and send their comments to 
the Committee at the earliest. 
  
Ministry's Action Note (28.8.1998) 
      Regulation 12(6) is being examined by the Ministry as per the direction of the 
Hon’ble Committee. 
  
Ministry’s Action Taken Note  (2.11.2000) 
      Matter is being taken up with the Ministry of Law. 
Point No.12 : Regulation 12(14) 
Point raised  (7.2.97) 
“Orders passed by the disciplinary authority shall be communicated to the 
employee who   shall also be supplied with a copy of the report of the inquiring 
authority and where the disciplinary authority is not the inquiring authority,  a 
statement of its finding together with brief reasons for disagreement, if any, with the 
findings of the inquiring authority, unless they have  already been supplied to him.” 
There is no mention of the definite time limit for the communication of the 
orders of the disciplinary authority to the employee.  Whether the Ministry has any 
objection if a time limit is fixed for such communication? 
  
Committee’s further query  (18.11.97) 
      The Committee noted the reply of the Port Trust to the effect that it had agreed to 
provide for a period of 30 days for communicating the orders of the disciplinary 
authority to the employee. 
  

Ministry's Action Note  (28.8.1998) 
The Government accepts the recommendations for amendment of Regulation 
12(14).   Action is being taken to notify the amendment. 
  
Ministry’s Action Taken Note  (2.11.2000) 
Amendment has been made and sent to the press for publication in the Official 
Gazette on 31st October 2000.  Printed copies are awaited. 
  
Point No.13 : Regulation 28(1) 
Point raised  (7.2.97) 
“Notwithstanding anything contained in these regulations – 
(i)                 The Central Govenrment 
(ii)               (Deleted) 
(iii)             The chairman or 
(iv)             The appellate authority, within six months of the date of the orders proposed 
to be reviewed may at any time either on his or its own motion or otherwise, 
call for the records of any inquiry and review any order made under these 
regulations or under the rules repealed by Regulation 29 from which an 
appeal is allowed but from which no appeal has been preferred or from 
which no appeal is allowed and may; 
xxxxx                          xxxxx                          xxxxx”             
What criteria are applied in taking suo motu action for calling the records of any 
inquiry and review any order? 
  
Committee’s further query (18.11.97) 
            The Committee was not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Port Trust.  The 
Members of the Committee wanted to know whether there was any criteria in taking 
suo motu action for calling the records of any enquiry and review any order.  The 
Committee was informed that there were no guidelines as such.   The Committee then 
directed that this provision should be reviewed by both the Port Trust and Ministry of 
Shipping and reply sent to it at the earliest. 
  

Ministry’s Action Note (28.8.1998) 
            The suggestion of the Committee is being examined. 
  
Ministry’s Action Taken Note  (2.11.2000) 
  
      The port has been requested to propose amendment to the provisions in line with the 
Central Government. 
  
3.         The Ministry of Shipping vide their communication dated the 20th November, 
2000 informed the Committee that the amendments have been carried out in 
Regulations 3(3), 4, 9 (3), 10(ii), 10 (iv), 12(2) and 12(14), vide Notification GSR No. 843 
(E) dated the 31st October, 2000. The Committee was also informed about the pendency 
of action on point nos. 10 and 13 that related to Regulations 12 (6) and 28 (1), 
respectively. 
4.            In the meanwhile, the Committee again discussed the subject matter with the 
representatives of the Cochin Port Trust and the Ministry of Shipping at Cochin on 
January 23, 2001.  During the discussions, the Committee noted that the Ministry of 
Shipping was consulting the Ministry of Law on Regulations 12(6) and 28(1).  The 
Committee desired that further action might be taken expeditiously in the light of the 
legal opinion to which the Ministry of Shipping agreed.  
5.            The Ministry of Shipping vides their communication dated the 5th May 2001 
furnished their comments on Regulations 12 (6) of the Cochin Port Employees (CCA) 
Regulation.  The Ministry after consulting the subject with the Ministry of Law as well 
as the Department of Personnel & Training informed that the provisions of rule 14(8) 
(a) Of the CCS Rules were not violative of the Constitution and it did not prohibit 
engagement of a legal practitioner in all departmental proceedings and a disciplinary 
authority could permit the charged officer to engage a legal practitioner in deserving 
cases.  Regulation 12(6) of the Cochin Port Trust Employees (CCA) Regulation was 
based on Rule 14(8)(a) of the CCS Rules 1965.  In view of the comments of the Ministry 
of Law, the Ministry of Shipping was in favour of keeping status quo in this regard.  
6.                  The Ministry of Shipping vide another communication dated the 19th February, 
2002, while reiterating their earlier comments on Regulation 28(1) stated that the 
provisions of review in Regulation 28(1) of the Cochin PortTrust Employees (CCA) 
Regulations was based on the provisions of  ‘Revision’ in Rule 29 of CCS Rules 
applicable to the in respect of Central Government employees.  The Ministry further 

clarified that Rule 29 of the CCA Rules does not provide for any criteria regarding 
taking of suo motu action for calling the records of enquiry and revising   any order as 
that would put a limitation  on the powers of the revising authorities in taking suo motu 
action.   The Ministry, therefore, stated that the existing Regulation 28(1) need not be 
amended.  
7.         The Committee considered the Ministry's comments on Regulations 12 (6) and 
28 (1) at its meeting held on the 7th May 2003 and noted the same. 
8.         The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have agreed to the 
Committee’s suggestions and carried out the amendments as under: - 
(i)                  In Regulation 3(3) by substituting the words “whose decision thereon shall 
be final”  by the word “for decision”. The Committee had objected to the 
vesting of power to take final decision with the Central Government. 
  
(ii)                Deleting Regulation 4 being superfluous. 
(iii)               In Regulation 9(3) deleting the words  “whether on a criminal charge or 
otherwise” being superfluous. 
  
(iv)              In Regulation 10(ii) by providing a minimum period of 6 months and the 
maximum period of 3 years for withholding of increments or promotion and 
by inserting sub-regulation (iii) regarding reduction to lower stage as 
suggested by the Committee.  
  
(v)                In Regulation 10(iv) by restricting the reduction to a lower grade or post for 
a specified period and by inserting a new sub-regulation 10(iv)(a) providing 
for guidelines for reducing the time scale by lowering only by a single stage 
and not more than one stage. 
  
(vi)              In Regulation 12(2) by substituting the words “within such time as may be 
specified by the disciplinary Authority” by the words. “Within a period of 20 
days” in order to make the provisions more specific.  
  
(vii)             In Regulation 12(14) by inserting the words “within a period of 30 days” 
after the word “communicated” in order to fix a time limit for 
communicating orders of the disciplinary authority. 
(vii)  

 
            III 
Vishakapatnam Port Employees (GPF) Regulations, 1993 
  
      The Vishakapatnam Port Employees (GPF) Regulations, 1993 framed under the 
Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 were examined and a questionnaire on the subject was 
forwarded to the Ministry of Shipping on the 10th October, 2001 for their comments on 
the issues raised therein.  The points raised by the Committee and the Ministry’s 
comments thereon are at Annexure-I. 
2.                  The matter was taken up with the representatives of the Vishakapatnam Port 
Trust along with the Ministry of Shipping on the 9th November 2001 during the 
Committee’s study visit to Vishakapatnam.  During the course of discussions, the 
Ministry had agreed to the Committee’s suggestions on point nos. 2,3,5 and 9.  The 
Committee noted  the Ministry’s comments on the remaining points. Relevant extracts 
from the study note on the above discussion were forwarded to the Ministry on the 1st 
February 2002 for necessary action.  The Ministry vides their communications dated 
the 3rd April, 2002 and the 7th August, 2002 forwarded the Action Taken Note on the 
subject.  The Points referred, the Ministry’s comments, Committee’s further 
observations and the action taken by the Ministry on point Nos. 2,3,5 and 9 are as under 
:- 
  
1.    Point 2 – Regulation 2(5)(i) & (ii) 
Point referred: 
“In Regulation-2 (5)(i) in respect of male subscriber, it was mentioned that the 
subscriber has to intimate in writing to Accounts Officer, whereas in Regulation-
2(5)(ii) in respect of female subscriber, it was mentioned that the subscriber has 
to intimate in writing to the Head of the Department.  Whether the Government 
have any objection in prescribing a uniform procedure for both male and female 
employees?” 
  
Ministry’s observations 
      It is to submit that in the case of male subscriber, the nature of disqualifications has 
been mentioned as (1) his wife has been judiciously separated from him or (2) has 
ceased under the  
  

customary law of community to which she belongs to be entitled to maintenance, she 
shall henceforth be no longer a member of the subscriber’s family in matters to which 
these Regulations relate, unless the subscriber subsequently intimates in writing to the 
Accounts Officer that she shall continue to be so regarded.  Whereas in the case of 
female subscriber, no such disqualifications have been mentioned in the 
proviso.  However, in the case of female subscriber, it was mentioned that she has to 
give notice in writing to the Head of the Department expressing her desire to exclude 
her husband.  In this proviso, the disqualifications mentioned in the proviso, in respect 
of male subscriber has not been referred to and a power to cancel the said notice has 
also been given to the female subscriber.  However, to be on par with the Central 
Government Rules, steps will be taken to substitute the term ‘Head of Department’ with 
the term “Accounts Officer” in respect of female subscribers. 
  
Committee’s Observations  
      The Committee noted that the Ministry has agreed to have the words “Head of 
Department” substituted by the words “Accounts Officer” in respect of female 
employees for the sake of uniformity. 
  
Ministry’s comments (3.4.2002) 
      The Port Trust have proposed to amend the Regulations incorporating the words 
“Head of Department” substituting the words “Accounts Officer”.  However, the Port 
Trust are being asked to send consolidated proposal of the amendment taking into 
consideration all the points raised by the Committee on Subordinate Legislation. 
  
Port’s comments 
      The Port Trust agreed to amend the Regulations incorporating the words “Head of 
Department” substituting the words “Accounts Officer” 
  
Ministry’s comments (7.8.2002) 
      The amendment has been approved by the Government and the same is being 
published in the Gazette. 
  
2.    Point 3 – Regulation 2(5) 
Point referred 

“In respect of Regulation –2(5) note, the question is about the words “who lives 
with an employee” and whether this phrase include children who are away from 
employee for the purpose of studies but or otherwise depending on the 
employees?” 
  
Ministry’s comments (9.11.2001) 
      It is to submit that the note under Regulation – 2(5) is the replica of note under Rule 
2 (c)(ii) wherein the same phrase has been used.  In this connection, it is to submit that 
when the children of the employee are away for the purpose of studies, they cannot 
cease to be the children of the said employee, unless otherwise prohibited by law, 
because the children leave the association of the parents temporarily for a specified 
period.  So such Children cannot be excluded from the term child in Regulation-2 (5) 
note.  
  
Committee’s observations 
      The Committee noted that the Ministry appreciated the Committee’s viewpoint.  It 
desired the Ministry to examine whether position could be clarified in the Regulations. 
  
Ministry’s comments (3.4.2002) 
The Matter has already been taken up with the Vishakapatnam Port Trust vide this 
Ministry’s letter of even number dated the 26th November, 2001 for taking appropriate 
action.  They have been reminded of the same on the 28th February 2002. 
  
Port’s comments 
      The Port submitted to the Committee that the children of an employee couldn’t 
cease to be his children just because they are away for the purpose of studies.  Such 
children cannot be excluded from the term “Child” in Regulations 2(5) Note. 
  
Ministry’s comments (7.8.2002) 
The port is being asked to consider proposing a clarificatory note in the said Regulation 
in order to make the position clear. 
  
3.    Point 5 – Regulation 4(1) 
Point referred 

“With regard to Regulation-4(1), the existing Regulations indicate as if 
subscription of PF is only applicable to the employees, who have rendered 
continuous service of one year or more on the date of commencement of these 
Regulations.  The point for consideration is whether the employees joined after 
commencement of Regulations are covered under these Regulations or not?” 
  
Ministry’s comments (9.11.2001) 
      It is to submit that in Regulation 4(1), the commencement of recovery of PF 
subscription in respect of employees, who have rendered continuous service of one year 
or more, has been mentioned.  This Regulation also covers in respect of temporary 
employees who have not completed one year of service as on the date of commencement 
of these Regulations are also covered, by allowing recovery of subscription after 
completion of one year service, even though the date of completion of one year service 
has fallen after the commencement of these Regulations.  So, even in respect of 
employees who were appointed after the date of commencement of these Regulations 
will also be covered for recovery of PF subscriptions under these 
Regulations.  However, steps are being taken to clarify the position in the Regulation 
with respect to employees joining after issue of these Regulations. 
  
Committee’s observations  
      The Committee was satisfied that the Vishakapatnam Port Trust agreed to clarify 
the position in respect of employees joining the Port Trust after the issue of the 
Regulations in the Regulation itself. 
 
      Ministry’s comments (3.4.2002) 
      The Port Trust has already been asked to take action for amending the regulations 
as per suggestions of the Committee. 
  
Port’s comments 
      The Port has clarified that even in respect of employees, who were appointed after 
the commencement of these regulations, will also be required to subscribe to the 
Fund.  Accordingly, the Port is actively considering the question of amendment to the 
clause. 
  
Ministry’s comments (7.8.2002) 

      The Port Trust is being asked to send the necessary amendment proposal. 
  
4.    Point 9 – Regulation 14(1) (b) (ii) 
Point referred: 
      “With regard to Regulation – 14(1)(b)(ii), the point for consideration is what is the 
justification for prescribing the condition of not less than 3 years in this Regulation for 
granting advance for GPF, when there are technical courses which are expensive and 
with duration of less than 3 years?” 
  
Ministry’s comments (9.11.2001) 
      It is to submit that Rule 12 (1)(b)(ii) of the GPF (Central Services) Rules, 1960, the 
period was mentioned as 3 years and as such the same provision was incorporated in 
Regulation 14(1)(b) (ii) also of Vishakapatnam Port Trust Employees 
(GPF   Regulations), 1993.  Since the Port Regulations are mainly based on Central 
Government Rules, if the period of 3 years is amended in Rule 12(1)(b)(ii) of the GPF 
Rules of the Central Government similar amendment will also be made in Regulation – 
14 (1) (b)(ii) of the GPF Regulations. 
Committee’s observations  
      The Committee observed that there was no bar on the Port Trust to wait for the 
amendment in the GPF rules pertaining to Central Government.  They can amend their 
own regulation for the benefit of their employees.  The Committee informed that the 
representative of the Mormugao and the Madras Port Trust had already agreed to this 
suggestion of the Committee.  The Committee desired that the Ministry of Shipping 
should re-examine this point. 
  
Ministry’s comments (3.4.2002) 
      The Port Trust has already been asked to amend the regulation. 
  
Port’s comments (7.8.2002) 
The Port has framed their regulations on par with the CCS (GPF) Rules and since Port 
regulations are mainly based on the CCS Rules, if the period of 3 years is amended in 
Rule 12(1)(b)(ii) of the CCS (GPF) Rules, similar amendment would also be made in the 
Regulations. 
  
Ministry’s comments (7.8.2002) 

      The Ministry also feels that it is not advisable to make any deviation in the Port 
Trust GPF Regulations from the CCS Rule. 
  
3.      The Committee was not satisfied with the Ministry’s stand on Regulation 14(1)(b)(ii) 
and asked the Ministry on the 4th February, 2003 to review their stand in the light of 
the fact that similar amendment had already been accepted by them in the parallel 
regulation of the Madras Port Trust and the Mormugao Port Trust as contained in 
its 125th Report presented on the 22nd December, 1999. 
  
4.      The Ministry vide their communications dated the 17th January, 20th February & 
28th July, 2003 forwarded notifications G.S.R. 614 dated the 2nd September, 2002, 
G.S.R. 64(E) dated the 27th January, 2003 and G.S.R. 247(E) dated the 15th July, 
2003 amending the Vishakapatnam Port Trust Employees (GPF) Regulations, 1993 
as suggested by the Committee.  
  
5.   The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have notified the 
amendments in pursuance of its suggestions as follows:- 
      a)    Regulation 2(5)(ii) by substituting the words “Head of the Department” by the 
words “Accounts Officer” for the sake of uniformity in case of both the male 
and female employees in case of the subscriber wishing to exclude his/hern 
spouse from family.  
      b)    Regulation 2(5) by amending the definition of the word “child” so as to include 
within its meaning the children who are away from the employee for the 
purpose of studies but were otherwise dependent upon the employee. 
      c)    Regulation 4(1) by specifying the position in the regulation itself with regard to 
subscription to the fund by the employees joining the Port Trust. 
      d)    Regulation 14(1)(b)(ii) by amending the provision so as to include Medical, 
Engineering or other technical or specialized courses undertaken from the 
recognized institutions for the purpose of withdrawal of GPF and removing the 
condition that the course should be of minimum 3 years’ duration. 

Annexure 
  
ANSWERS OF VISAKHAPATNAM PORT TRUST IN RESPECT OF THE 
QUESTIONNAIRE ON VISAKHAPATNAM PORT EMPLOYEES (GPF) 
REGULATIONS, 1993 
  
  
Q.1)     Whether the Visakhapatnam Port Employees (G.P.F.) Regulations, 1993 have 
been laid on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament, if so, the details in this regard? 
  
Ans:     Yes. The Visakhapatnam Port Trust Employees (GPF) Regulations, 1993 was 
laid on the of Lok Sabha on 18-3-94 and Rajya Sabha on 16-3-94 respectively. 
  
Q.2)     In Regulation- 2 (5) (i) in respect of male subscriber, it was mentioned that the 
subscriber has to intimate in writing to Accounts Officer, whereas in Regulation-2 (5) 
(ii) in respect of female subscriber, it was mentioned that the subscriber has to intimate 
in writing to the Head of the Department. Whether the Government has any objection 
in prescribing a uniform procedure for both male and female employees? 
  
Ans:     It is to submit that in the case of male subscriber, the nature of disqualifications 
has been mentioned as 1) his wife has been judiciously separated from him or 2) has 
ceased under the customary law of community to which she belongs to be entitled to 
maintenance, she shall henceforth be no longer a member of the subscriber's family in 
matters to which these Regulations relate, unless the subscriber subsequently intimates 
in writing to the Accounts Officer that she shall continue to be so regarded. Whereas in 
the case of female subscriber, no such disqualifications have been mentioned in the 
proviso. However, in the case of female subscriber, it was mentioned that she has to give 
notice in writing to the Head of the Department expressing her desire to exclude her 
husband. In this proviso, the disqualifications mentioned in the proviso, in respect of 
male subscriber has not been referred to and a power to cancel the said notice has also 
been given to the female subscriber. However, to be on par with the Central 
Government Rules, steps will be taken to substitute the term 'Heal of Department' with 
the term "Accounts Officer" in respect of female subscribers. 
  

Q.3)     In respect of Regulation-2 (5) note, the question is about the words "who lives 
with an employee" and whether this phrase include children who are away from 
employee for the purpose of studies but or otherwise depending on the employees? 
  
Ans:     It is to submit that the note under Regulation-2 (5) is the replica of note under 
Rule-2 (c) (ii) wherein the same phrase has been used. In this connection, it is to submit 
when the children of the employee are away for the purpose of studies, they cannot 
ceased to be the children of the said employee, unless otherwise prohibited by law, 
because the children leaves the association of the parents temporarily for a specified 
period. So such children cannot be excluded from the term child in Regulation-2 (5) 
note. 
  
Q.4)     With regard to Regulation-2 (7) defining the word "leave" a reference to the 
Fundamental Rules or other Rules or orders of the Central Government has been made 
and the justification for the said reference has now been sought for? 
  
Ans:     It is to submit that in Rule-2 (1) (e) of GPF (Central Services) Rules, 1960, in the 
definitions of "leave", it was mentioned as any variety of leave recognized by the 
Fundamental Rules or the Civil Services Regulations or the revised Leave Rules, 1993. 
As such, while framing the Regulations also, the words Fundamental Rules or other 
Rules or orders of the Central Government has been mentioned. Further, it is to submit 
that FR-18, it was mentioned that unless the President, in view of the exceptional 
circumstances of the case otherwise determines, no Government servant shall be 
granted leave of any kind for continuous period exceeding 5 years.  Further, FR-26 (b) 
(ii) indicates all leave except extraordinary leave taken otherwise than on medical 
certificate and the period of deputation out of India shall count for increment in the 
time scale applicable to a post in which a Government servant ws officiating at the time 
he proceeded on leave or deputation out of India and would have continued to officiate 
but for his proceeding on leave or deputation out of India. Provided that the President 
may in any case in which he is satisfied that the extraordinary leave was taken for any 
cause beyond the Government servant's control or for prosecuting higher scientific and 
technical studies, direct that extraordinary leave shall be counted for increments under 
clause (i) or (ii). In view of the aforesaid provisions relating to leave, the same has been 
referred to in Regulation-2 (7). 
  

Q.5)     With regard to Regulation-4 (1), the existing Regulations indicates as if 
subscription of PF is only applicable to the employees, who have rendered continuous 
service of one year or more on the date of commencement of these Regulations. The 
point for consideration is whether the employees joined after commencement of 
Regulations are covered under these Regulations or not? 
  
Ans:     It is to submited that in Regulation-4 (1), the commencement of recovery of PF 
subscription in respect of employees, who have rendered continuous service of one year 
or more, has been mentioned. This Regulation also covers in respect of temporary 
employees who have not completed one year of service as on the date of commencement 
of these Regulations are also covered, by allowing recovery of subscription after 
completion of one year service, even though the date of completion of one year service 
has fallen after the commencement of these Regulations. So, even in respect of 
employees who were appointed after the date of commencement of these Regulations 
will also be covered for recovery of PF subscription under these Regulations. However, 
steps are being taken to clarify the position in the Regulation with respect to employees 
joining after issue of this Regulation. 
  
Q.6)     Regulation 4 (2) 
  
i)                    What are the other categories besides the permanent and temporary 
employees that have been subscribing to the GPF? What are the reasons for 
allowing them to subscribe? 
  
ii)                   What is the condition for payment of subscription to retiring employees. 
Whether they have to subscribe till the month of their retirement? 
  
Ans:     With regard to item (i), it is to submit that the term employee has been defined 
in Regulation-2 (4) as employee of the Board. Regulation-4 (1) deals with permanent 
employees and temporary employees. However, in respect of employees who are on 
deputation or transfer from other departments to the Port Trust service, during their 
service with the Port Trust, the PF is required to be recovered and remitted to the 
respective organizations immediately. 
  
      With regard to item (ii), it is to submit that the recovery of PF from the employees 
will only be continued up to the date of their retirement only and from the date of 
retirement the question of recovery of PF does not arise. 
  
Q.7)     With regard to Regulation-12, in proviso, a provision relating to allowing of 
interest at 4% was mentioned. The point for consideration is, why the subscriber should 
not get the prevailing interest rate? 
  

Ans:     It is to submit that in proviso to Rule-11 of GPF (Central Services) Rules, 1960, 
the rate of interest was also mentioned at 4% and as such in Regulation-12 also, it was 
mentioned as 4%. Since the Port Regulations are mainly based on Central Government 
Rules, if the rate of interest mentioned in proviso to Rule-11 has been enhanced, similar 
enhancement will also be made in proviso to Regulation-12 of the GPF Regulations. 
  
Q.8)     With regard to Regulation-13 (2), the aspect of transferring of the Provident 
Fund to the account of the subscriber with the new employer was considered and in this 
Regulation, the term used is any “other employer’. The point for consideration is, who 
is the “other employer” contemplated in the Regulation? 
  
Ans:     It is to submit that in the GPF Regulations, Regulations-24, & 25 deals with 
transfer of employee from one port to another port and transfer to Board service of a 
person from the service under a body corporate owned or controlled by Government. 
Similarly, an employee of the Port Trust can also be on deputation or on transfer 
initially to any other Government service or a Public Sector Undertaking or an 
Autonomous Body and subsequently absorbed in that organization, then the PF 
standing to the credit of the said employee will be transferred to that other employer 
viz. Public Sector Undertaking or an Autonomous Body. 
  
Q.9)     With regard to Regulation-14 (1) (b) (ii), the point for consideration is what is 
the justification for prescribing the condition of not less than 3 years in this Regulation 
for granting advance for GPF, when there are technical courses which are expensive 
and with duration of less than 3 years? 
  
Ans:     It is to submit that Rule-12 (1) (b) (ii) of GPF (Central Services) Rules, 1960, the 
period was mentioned as 3 years and as such the same provision was incorporated in 
Regulation-14 (1) (b) (ii) also of VPE (GPF Regulations), 1993. Since the Port 
Regulations are mainly based on Central Government Rules, if the period of 3 years is 
amended in Rule-12 (1) (b) (ii) of GPF Rules of the Central Government similar 
amendment will also be made in Regulation-14 (1) (b) (ii) of the GPF Regulations. 
  
Q.10)   With regard to Regulation-18 (1) 3rd proviso, the point for consideration is about 
the usage of words ‘aforesaid scheme”. 
  
Ans:     It is to submit that in Rule-16 (1) 2nd proviso, it was mentioned that ‘in the case 
of a subscriber who has availed himself of an advance under the scheme of the Ministry 
of Works & Housing for the grant of advances of House Building purposes”. In this 
Port Trust, the Housing Building Advance of the Central Government rules are being 
followed and as such the said rules have been referred to in 3rd proviso to Regulation-18 
(1) and as such the term ‘aforesaid scheme” has also been referred to in this proviso, as 
the same has been used in the 2nd proviso to Rule-16 (1) of GPF Rules of the Central 
Government. 
  
Q.11)   With regard to Regulation-18 (2), in this sub-regulation it was mentioned that in 
default of such payment, it shall be ordered by the sanctioning authority to be recovered 
from his emoluments either in lumpsum or in such number of monthly installments as 
may be determined by the sanctioning authority. The point for consideration is whether 
it is possible to prescribe the number of installments in the Regulations? 
  
Ans;     It is to submit that the number of installments to be determined for recovery of 
the amount in case of default depends upon the period of left over service of the 

concerned employee and as such a fixed period cannot be prescribed. Therefore, it is felt 
that the sanctioning authority depending upon the left over service can fix such number 
of installments for recovery of the amount in case of default. 
  
Q.12)   With regard to Regulation-30, the point for consideration is about justification 
of applying the provisions of Central Government Rules and Orders in certain matters 
when the Port Trust has been given power to frame its own rules and why it should 
depend on the rules of the Central Government? 
  
Ans:     It is to submit that as already mentioned in Answers to Question Nos. 7 & 9, it 
has been mentioned that Port Trust Regulations are based on Central Government 
Rules. As and when, Central Government Rules are amended, steps are being taken to 
amend the Port Regulations in terms of Sec.28 read with Sec.124 of MPT Act, 1963 and 
in that process much time is being taken for approval and publication of the same in the 
Gazette, so a provision has been made to apply the Government of India instructions 
issued under the respective rules of the Central Government and also the Rules of the 
Central Government which are not inconsistent with the Regulations framed by the 
Board to avoid any delay.     
 
IV 
Rules framed under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999. 
  
            The following rules framed under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 
were examined and a questionnaire on each rule was forwarded to the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on January 3, 2001 for their comments: - 
  
(i)                  The Foreign Exchange Management (Encashment of Drafts, Cheques, 
Instrument & Payment of Interest) Rules, 2000. 
  
(ii)                The Foreign Exchange Management-(Current Account Transactions) 
Rules, 2000. 
  
(iii)               The Foreign Exchange Management-(Adjudication, Proceedings and 
Appeal) Rules, 2000. 
  
(iv)              The Foreign Exchange Management (Compounding Proceedings) Rules, 
2000. 
  
2.         The points raised in the questionnaire and the comments of the Ministry dated 
the 30th April, 2001 thereon are placed at Annexures-I, II, III and IV, respectively.   
  

3.         The Committee considered the subject matter at its meeting held on the 23rd 
April, 2002.  The Committee noted the explanation furnished by the Ministry of Finance 
on several points raised in the questionnaires.  The Committee noted that the Ministry 
had accepted to the Committee’s suggestions on a number of  points as reproduced 
below:- 
  
(A)    Foreign Exchange Management (Encashment of Draft, Cheque Instrument & 
Payment of Interest) Rules, 2000 :- 
  
            Rule 4 – Encashment of draft, cheque or other instrument 
  
“ The Reserve Bank of India or an authorised person shall take steps without 
delay for encashing the draft, cheque or other instrument and, on such 
encashment, shall credit the proceeds realized (less any commission and expenses 
incurred for such encashment) to a separate account in the name of the 
Directorate of Enforcement”. 
  
Point raised : 
  
As per Rule 4, the Reserve Bank of India or an authorized person is required to 
take step “without delay” for encashing the draft cheques, etc.  Whether Government 
have any objection in prescribing a definite time period for the purpose so as to make 
the provisions of Rule 4 specific?  
  
      Ministry’s Reply 
  
            RBI would be requested to issue suitable instructions to Banks, where generally 
the drafts / cheques are presented for encashment by the investigating Agencies. 
  
(B)       Foreign Exchange Management (Current Account Transaction) Rules, 2000 :- 
  
            Schedules I & II 
  
            Point raised : 
  

            There is no uniformity in the Hindi and English versions of Schedules I & II.  In 
the Hindi version, there is an introductory line in both the schedules, which is not there 
in the English version.  The discrepancy needs to be rectified. 
  
            Ministry’s Reply : 
  
            The discrepancy is being rectified. 
  
(C )   Foreign Exchange Management (Adjudication Proceedings and Appeal) Rules, 
2000 
  
(1).       Rule 4 (9):  
  
“Every order made under sub-rule (8) of the rule 4 shall specify the provisions of 
the Act or of the rules, regulations, notifications, direction or orders or any 
condition subject to which an authorization is issued by the Reserve Bank of India 
in respect of which contravention has taken place and shall contain brief reasons 
for such decisions”. 
Point raised: 
  
What is the justification for prescribing that the order of the Adjudicating 
Authority shall contain “brief” reasons for such decisions? 
  
            It is felt that the order should state the reasons fairly well.  Whether Government 
has any objection in removing the word “brief”?  Similarly, the word “briefly” 
appearing in Rule 7 regarding contents of the order in appeal also needs to be deleted; 
what are Governments comments in this behalf? 
  
            Ministry’s reply : 
  
            The word “brief” would be deleted. 
  
(2)    Rule 6(4) :  
  

“Where on the date fixed, or any other day to which the hearing of the appeal 
may be adjourned, the applicant or the presenting officer fail to appear when the 
appeal is called for hearing, the Special Director (Appeals) may decide the appeal on 
the merits of the case”. 
  
Point raised : 
  
               The Rules do not provide for any time limit for disposal of an appeal and 
passing of order thereon.  Whether Government have any objection in specifying a time 
limit of say 3 to 6 months for disposal of the appeal in the Rules 
  
            Ministry’s Reply : 
  
            The Appellate Tribunal under Section 19(5) of the Act has since provided time 
limit for disposal of appeal.   However, we have no objection to provide the same time 
limit (180 days) for the disposal of appeals by the Special Director (Appeals) in the 
Rules. 
  
4.         As regards the Foreign Exchange Management (Compounding Proceedings) 
Rules, 2000, the Committee decided to have further clarifications on certain points and 
a reference was accordingly made to the Ministry on the 15th May, 2002.  The 
Ministry’s comments were received on the 20th December 2002, which were considered 
by the Committee on the 7th May, 2003.  The further clarifications sought from the 
Ministry, the Ministry’s comments as well as the Committee’s observations thereon are 
as follows.  
  
(1)               Mechanism to reduce the scope for arbitrary discretion by Enforcement 
Directorate. 
  
Committee’s further query (15.05.2002): 
What is the mechanism to reduce scope for arbitrary discretion by Enforcements?  
Ministry’s reply (20.12.2002) : 
  

               There is inbuilt mechanism in the Rules to reduce scope for arbitrary 
discretion by officers of the Enforcement Directorate.  However, scope for arbitrary 
discretion can be further controlled by issuing administrative instructions/ guidelines in 
this regard. 
               Application of law requires that the discretionary powers have to be used in 
just, fair and reasonable manner and this is expected on the part of compounding 
Authorities while following the provisions of FEMA and Rules framed thereunder.  It 
could also be ensured by issuing administrative circulars /guidelines or by reviewing 
orders of the Compounding Authority under the supervisions of the Director of 
Enforcement. 
Committee’s  observations (07.05.2003): 
               The Committee noted the Ministry’s reply.  
(2)           Classification in respect of the term `Superintendence and Control’? 
Committee’s further query (15.05.2002): 
The term ‘Superintendence and Control’ be clarified since in quasi-judicial 
matters such superintendence could be purely administrative. 
               Ministry’s reply (20.12.2002) : 
                
               The term ‘Superintendence and Control’ by the Director of Enforcement is 
provided under Rule 5 (3) itself.  It is further relevant to mention here that under 
Foreign Exchange Management Act, the adjudicating authority are having higher 
powers to adjudicate FEMA cases and such powers have been reduced considerably for 
officers of that rank while compounding FEMA cases that is to minimize 
arbitrariness.  The following tabular statement would make the position clear: 
                
Adjudication powers   Compounding powers 
  
(i)Deputy Director is empowered to 
adjudicate cases upto an amount of 
Rs. 75 lakhs. 
  
    
Deputy Director is empowered to 
compound contraventions upto Rs. 5 
lakhs. 

(ii)Additional Director is empowered 
to adjudicate cases of an amount 
between Rs. 75 lakhs to 1 crore 
  
  Additional Director is empowered to 
compound contraventions of an amount 
between Rs. 5 lakhs to 10 lakh. 
(iii)Special Director is empowered to 
adjudicate cases of an amount of 
more than one crore. 
  
  Special Director is empowered to 
compound contraventions of an amount 
between Rs. 10 lakh to 50 lakhs. 
  
In FEMA, contraventions of an amount between Rs. 50 lakhs to one crore and 
contraventions of an amount between 1 crore or more shall be compounded by a bench 
consisting of Special Director with Deputy Legal Adviser and Director with Special 
Director respectively.  These safeguards have been provided under Rule 5 of the 
Foreign Exchange Compounding Proceedings Rules, 2000 itself to reduce arbitrariness 
and to have just and fair orders.  The Director of Enforcement by an administrative 
order may assign cases to the compounding authorities from time to time in order to 
check abuse of power and to ensure uniformity of approach for this purpose, he may 
exercise power vested in him under Rule 5 (3) of the said Rules, 
  
            Committee’s observations (07.05.2002): 
             
            The Committee found the Ministry’s reply satisfactory. 
  
(3) Feasibility to adopt summary settlement procedure 
  
Committee’s further query (15.05.2002): 
  
Is there any feasibility to adopt summary settlement procedures in respect of 
matters covered by the Rules? 
  
            Ministry’s reply  (20.05.2002) : 
  
There is no need to adopt summary settlement procedure in view of our 
comments offered hereinbefore under paras 1 and 2. 
  

            Committee’s observations (07.05.2002): 
  
            The Committee noted the Ministry’s reply. 
  
            The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Finance has accepted the 
Committee’s suggestions as follows: - 
  
1)         On Rule 4 of FEM (Encashment of Draft, Cheque Instrument & Payment of 
Interest) Rules, 2000 to prescribe a definite time frame for encashing the draft, 
cheque, etc. and as a follow up, would be requesting the RBI to issue suitable 
instructions to the Banks in this behalf. 
  
2)         To take necessary action to do away with the inconsistency in Schedules I & II 
of FEM (Current Account Transaction) Rules, 2000, by inserting an 
introductory portion in the English version also. 
  
3)         (a) To delete the word “brief” in Rule 4(9) of the FEM (Adjudication 
Proceedings and Appeal) Rules, 2000. The Committee had objected to the 
provision where by the decision of the Adjudicating Authority was prescribed 
to contain “brief reasons for the decisions”.    
  
(b) To prescribe a time limit of 180 days in Rule 6 (4) of the FEM (Adjudication 
Proceedings and Appeal) Rules, 2000 for disposal of appeals.  The rules at 
present do not prescribe any time period for disposal for appeals, which was 
objected to by the Committee.  
  
The Committee hopes that the Ministry's would notify amendments in the 
respective rules as above expeditiously.

                                                                      Annexure-I 
  
Questionnaire from Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha On Foreign 
Exchange Management (Encashment of Draft, Cheque Instrument & Payment of 
Interest) Rules, 2000 
  
Sl. No. Questionnaire Reply 
1. Rule 2:  The word “Draft” has not been 
defined either in Rules or, in the Act. 
Whether Government have any 
objection in defining the word “Draft” 
as they have defined the word 
“Cheque” in the rules? 
“Draft” means instrument as 
defined and applicable in 
Banking Regulation under 
Negotiable Instrument Act, 
1881. However, we have no 
objection in defining “draft” in 
the rules as well. 
2. Rule 3: The words “such Officers” used 
in Rule 3 is not clear. Whether this term 
as appearing in the Rule refer to Officer 
mentioned in Section 37 (1) of the 
Foreign Exchange Management Act; if 
so, whether Government would make 
the provisions of Rule 3 clear by 
specifying the officer of which there is a 
reference in Rule 3. 
This Rule provides for 
encashment of draft, cheque or 
other instrument during the 
course of investigation under 
Section 37 of the Act. As per 
Section 37, Officer of and above 
the rank of Assistant Directors 
of Enforcement are empowered 
to investigate cases under 
FEMA. As such the words 
“such officer” appearing in this 
Rule, refer to officer 
investigating the case. 
Sometimes, the officers of 
equivalent rank from other 
agencies, like Customs, Central 
Excise, DRI etc. as notified by 
the Government under Section 
38 of the Act, may also take up 
investigation under FEMA. 
Therefore, the words “such 

Officer” referred to in this Rule 
is with reference to 
investigation, under Section 37 
of the Act, as has been 
mentioned in the Rule itself. 
Hence, it can be left as such, as 
there does not appear to be any 
ambiguity.  
3. Rule 4: As per Rule 4, the Reserve Bank 
of India or an authorised person is 
required to take step “without delay” 
for encashing the draft cheques etc. 
  
Whether Government have any 
objection in prescribing a definite time 
period for the purpose so as to make the 
provisions of Rule 4 specific. 
RBI would be requested to issue 
suitable instructions to Banks, 
where generally the drafts / 
cheques are presented for 
encashment by the investigating 
Agencies. 
4. Rule 6: As per Rule 6, the Central 
Government shall indemnity the 
Reserve Bank of India or an authorised 
person against any liability which they 
may incur in connection with 
encashment of draft / cheque, etc. 
  
What are the types of liabilities that are 
contemplated to be indemnified by the 
Central Government? Whether 
Government have any objection in 
defining the type of liabilities in the 
Rules. 
The Rule says that the Central 
Government shall indemnity 
the RBI or any authorised 
person against any liability 
which the RBI or an authorised 
person may incur by reason of 
or in connection with the 
encashment of drafts. 
Ordinarily, liability means 
encashment charges collected 
by the Bank from the 
Investigating Agencies.  
  

Annexure- II 
  
Questionnaire from Committee on Subordinate Legislation Rajya Sabha On Foreign 
Exchange Management (Current Account Transaction) Rules, 2000 
  
Sl. No. Questionnaire Reply 
1. Rule 2: (Please see Rule 3): What is the 
justification for prohibiting drawal of foreign 
exchange by any person for the purpose of (i) 
a travel to Nepal and / or Bhutan; or (ii) a 
transaction with a person, resident in Nepal 
or Bhutan. 
  
What is the meaning of the term “resident 
in” Nepal or Bhutan? Whether the intention 
is to deny drawal of foreign exchange to 
persons residing in Nepal or Bhutan or 
whether they should be “resident of” Nepal 
or Bhutan. The position needs to be clarified. 
This provision is in Rule 3 
and not in Rule 2. India 
has a bilateral trade treaty 
with Nepal and also with 
Bhutan under which all 
current account 
transactions are settled in 
the domestic currency, i.e. 
India rupee. Therefore, no 
foreign exchange is 
required for these 
transactions. 
  
The Rule pertains to 
“resident in” Nepal and 
Bhutan. 
2. Schedule-I :  As per Cl ause 2 of Schedule I, 
drawal of foreign exchange for the purpose of 
remittance of income for racing / riding, etc. 
or in other hobbies has been prohibited. The 
words “in other hobbies” appearing in clause 
2 are not specific. Whether Government have 
any obj ection in making the provisions 
specific? 
The object is to restrict 
remittance of income by 
pursuing any hobby. It may 
not be possible to be more 
specific as “hobby” refers 
to a category and it may not 
be possible to list all 
possible hobbies that are 
likely to generate income, 
in one form or the other. 
3. Schedule-I :  As per clause 3 of Schedule I, 
drawal of foreign exchange for the purpose of 
remittance or purchase of lottery tickets, 
The intention is to cover 
remittances relating to all 
types of gambling activities 

banned / prescribed magazines, football 
pools, sweepstakes, etc. have been prohibited.   
  
It is felt that various activities enumerated in 
Clause 3 of Schedule I do not constitute a 
uniform or integrated category. It is not clear 
as to what type of activities are likely to be 
covered under it. Whether Government have 
any ob jection in specifying the common 
element among these activities in clause 3 so 
that Government’s intention about the type of 
activities is clear? 
and for banned / 
prescribed category of 
literature. 
  
It may not be possible to list 
all kind of gambling 
activities. 
4. Schedule-II : As per Clause 4 of Schedule -II, 
prior approval of the Central Government is 
needed for drawal of foreign exchange only in 
case of payment of import  by Government 
Department or a PSU is on c.i.f. basis. 
  
What is the justification for restricting it to 
import on c.i.f. basis only. 
This is in pursuance of 
Government Policy 
regarding import contracts 
to be finalised on FOB 
/FAS basis and those for 
exports on CPF /CIF basis 
in respect of Government 
owned controlled cargoes 
on behalf of Central 
Government Departments / 
State Governments / Public 
Sector Undertaking. The 
intention is to utilise Indian 
vessels to the maximum 
and saving foreign 
exchange and 
strengthening of national 
merchant flat. Prior 
permission of the 
Government would ensure 
chartering of foreign 
vessels at most competitive 

rates, resulting in saving of 
foreign exchange. 
5. Schedule-II: As per Clause- 11 of Schedule-II, 
prior approval of the Central Government is 
needed for drawal of foreign exchange in 
cases of remittance for membership of P & I 
club. 
  
What is the meaning of P & I club and why 
the rule does not carry the full form of P & I 
club? 
Full form of P & I club is 
“Protection and Indemnity 
Club”. This organisation 
provides various kinds of 
protection facilities to 
shipowners. In cases where 
Indian ships are involved in 
collision with foreign ships, 
P & I club provides 
guarantee f or payment 
towards claims made by 
the foreign shipowners. 
  
Since “P&I Club” is a 
common word in shipping 
parlance, it was not 
mentioned in its expanded 
form. 
6. Schedule-III: In Clauses 3, 4 and 7 in 
Schedule III, remittances beyond a particular 
amount per annum can be there only with the 
prior approval of the Reserve Bank of India. 
  
What is the mechanism available with the 
Reserve Bank of India to keep a record of the 
remittances for the purpose of ensuring that 
the limits are not exceeded? 
In terms of sub-section (5) 
section 10 of Foreign 
Exchange Management 
Act, 1999 (FEMA) before 
undertaking any 
transaction in foreign 
exchange authorised 
dealers are required to 
obtain such declaration 
and such information that 
will reasonably satisfy 
them that the tra nsaction 
being undertaken does not 
involve any contravention 
of the Act or Rules or 

Regulations etc. made 
thereunder. 
  
Further, FEMA is not a 
criminal law like FERA 
and there is no 
presumption of culpable 
mental state. Any 
contravention 
subsequently detec ted will 
be dealt with as per the 
provisions of the Act. 
7. Schedules I & II :  There is no uniformity in 
the Hindi and English versions of Schedules I 
and II. In the Hindi version, there is an 
introductory line in both the schedules which 
is not there in the English version. The 
discrepancy needs to be rectified. 
The discrepancy is being 
rectified. 
  
Annexure-III 
Questionnaire from Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha on Foreign 
Exchange Management (Adjudication Proceedings and Appea) Rules, 2000 
  
Sl. No. Questionnaire Reply of Ministry of Finance, 
DEA 
1. Rule 4: As per Rule 4, the 
Adjudicating Authority initiates 
action by issue of a notice in case any 
contravention is committed. What is 
the procedure through which the 
contraventions are brought to the 
notice of the Adjudicating Authority 
and whether there is any objection in 
incorporating the same in the Rules?  
The procedures to be followed by 
the Adjudicating Authority are 
given in these Rules. The 
contraventions under FEMA are 
elaborately given in the Act itself. 
The Adjudicating Authority 
appointed under Section 16 of the 
Act, takes cognizance of the 
contravention on the complaint in 
writing made by an officer 

authorised by a general or special 
order by the Central 
Government, as provided under 
Section 16 (3) of the Act. Hence 
there is no need to repeat the 
same thing under these Rules, as 
these Rules are meant for 
Adjudicating Authorities to follow 
certain procedures while 
adjudicating cases under FEMA.  
2. Rule 4 (5): What is justification for 
not applying the provisions of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 for the 
purpose of adjudicating evidence 
before the Adjudicating Authority? 
Adjudicating proceedings under 
FEMA are quasi judicial and not 
criminal in nature FEMA itself 
provides procedure for 
conducting adjudicating 
proceedings. Hence there is no 
need for applying the provisions 
of Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 
3. Rule 4 (6): While in respect of persons 
specified in Rule 4 (3), the 
proceedings will continue even on 
their failure to appear, the mode of 
enforcing attendance of witnesses has 
not been specified with the 
Adjudicating Officer having powers 
of a Civil Court under the CPC? 
While Rule 4 (3) empowers 
Adjudicating Authority to issue 
notice to the person, who appears 
to have contravened the 
provisions of the Act, Rule 4 (6) 
empowers the said Adjudicating 
Authority to issue summons and 
enforce attendance of any person 
acquainted with the facts and 
circumstances of the case to give 
evidence or to produce any 
document, which in the opinion of 
the Adjudicating Authority may 
be useful for or relevant to the 
subject matter of enquiry.  Thus, 
there is a difference between the 
two actions. Notices under Rule 4 

(3) is for the notice who has 
contravened the provisions of the 
Act and the summons as provided 
under Rule 4 (6) is for "Any 
person”, who is acquainted with 
facts and circumstances of the 
case. Hence, there is no ambiguity 
in the case. Hence the is no 
ambiguity in these provisions.  
4. Rule 4(9) : What is the justification 
for prescribing that the order of the 
Adjudicating Authority shall contain 
brief reasons for such decisions. 
  
          It is felt that the order should 
state the reason fairly well. Whether 
Government have any objection in 
removing the word “brief”? 
Similarly, the word “briefly” 
appearing in Rule 7 regarding 
contents of the order in appeal also 
needs to be deleted; what are 
Governments comments in this 
behalf? 
  
The word “brief” would be 
deleted. 
5. Rule 6 (4): It has been stated that in 
case the applicant or the presenting 
Officer fails to appear when the 
appeal is called for hearing, the 
special Director (Appeals) may decide 
it on the merits of the case. As per the 
normal procedure, if the appellant 
fails to appear, the appeal is supposed 
to be dismissed and if the Presenting 
Officer fails to appear, it should be 
In the Departmental adjudication 
proceedings, the cases are decided 
only on merits, after affording an 
opportunity of hearing to both the 
sides in order to meet the ends of 
natural justice. When one party 
fails to appear before the 
Appellate Authority, the case has 
to be decided only on merits and 
not otherwise. 

disposed of ex-party. What is the 
justification in deviation from the 
normal procedure in this case? 
  
        The normal procedure 
mentioned in the question may be 
applicable strictly in Court case 
and not before Quasi Judicial 
authorities under the Act. 
6. Rule 6 (4): The Rules do not provide 
for any time limit for disposal or an 
appeal and passing of order thereon. 
Whether Government have any 
objection in specifying a time limit of 
say 3 to 6 months for disposal of the 
appeal in the Rules.  
Time limit has since been 
provided for disposal of appeal by 
the Appellate Tribunal under 
Section 19 (5) of the Act. 
  
However, we have no objection to 
provide the same time limit (180 
days) for the disposal of appeals 
by the Special Director (Appeals) 
in the Rules. 
  
Annexure-IV 
  
Questionnaire from Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha On Foreign 
Exchange Management (Compounding Proceedings) Rules, 2000 
  
Sl. No. Questionnaire Reply 
1. The term “Compounding” has not 
been defined either in the rules or in 
the Act. 
  
Whether Ministry has any objection 
in defining this term in the rules? 
  
No. Such definition exists in the 
Companies Act, 1956 where the 
provision for Compounding has 
been provided. 
2. Rule 4 (2) and 5 (2): The rules provide 
that in second or subsequent 
contravention committed after the 
expiry of a period of three years from 
the date of contravention which was 
This provision is broadly based 
on the existing provision 
concerned in sub-section (2) of 
section 621 A of the Companies 
Act, 1956. 

previously compounded, shall be 
deemed to be a first contravention 
and provisions of rule 4 (1) and 5 (1) 
shall not apply to such 
contraventions.  
  
What is the justification for 
encouraging compounding of 
contraventions in cases where persons 
have committed them in the past? 
Will this not encourage 
contraventions? What is the basis for 
prescribing a three years gap for the 
purpose? 
  
Since offences under FEMA are 
only civil offences, which attract 
financial penalties, there is no 
harm if comparatively less serious 
offences are compounded by 
asking the offender to pay a 
certain amount. Compounding is 
a summary procedure, which can 
be used effectively for saving the 
time of adjudicators, investigating 
officer and citizens.  
3. Whether any compounding penalty is 
imposed in case where compounding 
proceedings take place, if so, what is 
the procedure for determination and 
imposition of compounding penalty? 
There is no procedure for 
determination and imposition of 
compounding penalty in the Act, 
or in the Rules. Unlike normal 
adjudication proceedings as 
provided under the Act, where 
there is a chance for the party to 
deny the charges and the case has 
to be decided based on the 
evidence available, here, in 
compounding, the party admits 
the guilt straightway and comes 
forward to get his offence / 
contravention compounded. 
Hence it may not be possible to fix 
any procedure for determination 
and imposition of compounding 
penalty. Since compounding is in 
the nature of a comprise, penalty 
would generally speaking, be less 
than in adjudication proceedings 

where guilt is proved as a result 
of evidence. 
 
V 
The National Dairy Development Board (Enforcement of 
Claims) Regulations, 2000 
  
            The National Dairy Development Board (Enforcement of Claims) Regulations, 
2000 framed under the National Dairy Development Board Act, 1987 were 
examined   and a questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying) for their 
comments/clarification on the 30th August, 2001. The points referred to the Ministry 
and their comments/ clarifications thereon received on the 31st December 2002 are as 
under: - 
  
1.   Point referred: 
The regulations under reference have been framed after a long gap of about 13 
years from the enactment of the National Dairy Development Board Act, 1987.  What 
are the reasons for delay; how the areas dealt with in the regulations were being 
regulated in the absence of the regulations. 
  
            Ministry’s Comments 
            The Government of India had released funds to the erstwhile Indian Dairy 
Corporation (IDC)/National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) to finance Operation 
Flood Phase 1,II and III.  The major activity of the IDC/NDDB under Operation Flood 
was financed by international agencies that provided commodities for monetisation as 
well as grants and loans.  The phases of Operation Flood I and II were implemented by 
the erstwhile Indian Dairy Corporation and Operation Flood III was implemented by 
the NDDB.  Under these programmes, the erstwhile IDC/NDDB had sanctioned loans to 
various cooperative institutions against the security of the concerned State Government 
Guarantees.  In the event of default by any of the borrowing cooperative institutions in 
the repayment of the loans, the   NDDB can invoke the Government Guarantee issued 
by the concerned State Government.  In case the State Government failed to honour its 
commitment, the NDDB could directly approach the concerned High Court by way of 
writ petition directing the concerned State Government to honour its obligation.  The 
NDDB had so far invoked the Guarantee issued by the Assam Government under the 

Operation Flood programmes.  As the Assam Government failed to honour its 
guaranteed obligation, the NDDB had approached the Gawhati High Court by way of 
writ petition and the Hon’ble High Court directed the Assam Government to honour its 
obligations to the NDDB.  Apart from this there was no occasion for NDDB to enforce 
its claims. 
            In the post-operation Flood scenario i.e. after the closure of funding by the 
Government of India in 1996, the NDDB has been sanctioning loans to the Cooperative 
Institutions across the country for dairy development out of its own funds under its new 
lending terms.  The NDDB has been obtaining security by way of 
hypothecation/mortgage of assets to be created out of the NDDB’s funding.  Under this 
mechanism, in the event of a default by the borrowing cooperative institutions, the 
earlier expeditious remedy of approaching the High Court by invoking the Government 
Guarantee is not available.  The recourse will have to be for the attachment and the sale 
of the assets of such cooperative Institutions by instituting civil suits which are generally 
delay prone.  In order to obviate such difficulties only, the instant Regulations have 
been framed to give effect to the provisions contained in Section 31 of the National 
Dairy Development Board Act, 1987.  The substantive remedy created under Section 31 
of the said Act is in the nature of “special procedures” which will prevail over other 
general legislation.  This is also evident by the overriding effect envisaged by Section 47 
of the said Act. 
            Similar special procedures for enforcement of the claims of financial 
institutions   is    available under Section   31 and   32   of   the   State   Financial 
Corporation Act, 1951.  Also on similar lines is section 40 of the Industrial 
Reconstruction Bank of India Act, 1984.  It is settled position of law that such “special 
privileges” for enforcement of claims is legally valid and in public interest.  (K. 
Surendranathan V. Kerala Financial Corporation Ltd.  AIR 1988 Kerala 330). The 
Parliament having thus created similar substantive provisions under sub-section (1) of 
Section 31 of the NDDB Act, it had deemed fit to empower NDDB through sub-section 
(2) thereof to frame regulations so as to give effect to the sub-section (1). After the 
advent of the “new lending terms” by the NDDB, it was realized that the special 
provisions envisaged by Section 31 of the Act needs to be invoked by framing 
appropriate regulations therefore so as to avoid the recourse to the filing of regular 
suits.  The Regulations only seek to achieve the objects set forth in Section 30 & 31 of 
the said Act and to avail of the summary remedy as provided therein. 

            In view of the above, until 1996-97, there was no need for NDDB to make such 
Regulations.  However, after the introduction of the new terms by the NDDB as regards 
loans for development of the cooperatives, it has become necessary to frame appropriate 
Regulations to give effect to the provisions contained in section 30 and 31 of the NDDB 
Act.  Under the new funding system, there are greater chances of defaults being 
committed by some of the borrowers.  Once, it became clear that Regulations of this 
nature are required; NDDB resorted to the framing of these Regulations. 
  
2.       Point referred: 
          Regulation 2(1)(b)  
           Definition  
      In these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires – 
“borrower” means a person against whom there is owing a debt in favour of the 
National Dairy Development Board;             
The definition of the word “borrower” in Regulation 2 (1) (b) does not make 
things clearer.  Should it not apply to persons who have been advanced money by the 
NDDB for a purpose and who have executed an agreement for its return and who have 
not returned the money in terms of the agreement? 
       
            Ministry’s Comments 
            The term “borrower” has been defined under clause 2(1) (b) of the Regulations 
conscious of its connotation to mean “a person” who owes a debt in favour of NDDB.  It 
may be clear from Section 3(42) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 that the term 
“person” shall include juristic or artificial entities like company or association or body 
of individuals, whether incorporated or not.  Thus viewed, the cooperative institutions 
being a person, the term “borrower” could denote any cooperative institutions, which 
owe a debt to NDDB.  Therefore. the existing provisions may be retained as such. 
  
3.         Point referred: 
Regulation 2(1)(d)  
Definitions  
“COURT” MEANS- 
  
(i)                  In any town or city, where there is a City Civil Court having 
ordinary Original Civil Jurisdiction, by that Court; 

  
(ii)                In town or city, where there is no such City Civil Court, by the High 
Court; 
  
(iii)               Elsewhere, also by any District Judge or by any Judge of the 
principal Court of Civil Jurisdiction”. 
  
The word `Court’ has not been defined properly in regulations 2 (1) (d). Sub-
clause (ii) appears unnecessary, as there would be a civil court having jurisdiction in all 
cases.  There appears to be some defect in the definition as the word ‘by’ appearing at 
different places is unnecessary.  Whether the Ministry would correct the same? 
  
            Ministry’s Comments 
            In view of the observations of Committee on Subordinate Legislation and 
Ministry of Law it has been proposed to modify the definition of the term “Court” as 
under: 
            “Court” means the principal civil court of original jurisdiction in a district 
(which includes the High Court in exercise of its original civil jurisdiction), having 
jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject matter of the claims if the same 
have been the subject matter of a suit, but does not include any civil court of a grade 
inferior to such principal civil court, or any court of small causes. 
            Note: This definition has been virtually adopted from a recent parliamentary 
enactment, namely, the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. 
  
4.         Point referred: 
Regulation 4(1)(a)  
Procedure to be followed on Application for certain reliefs: 
  
“(1) Where an application has been made seeking one or more reliefs mentioned 
in sub-regulation (1) of regulation 3, the Court shall, along with issue of notic e to 
the defaulter under regulation 5,- 
  
(a) in the case of an Application seeking relief under clause (a) thereof, pass an 
interim Order, attaching the security furnished to the National Dairy Development 

Board, and so much of any other property of the defaulter as would, on being sold, 
realise an amount equivalent in value to the outstanding liability of the person to the 
Board, together with the costs of the proceedings” 
  
(i)                               Under section 31(1)(a) of the NDDB Act, 1987 any officer of the 
Board may apply to the court for an order for the sale of the property pledged 
mortgaged hypothecated or assigned to NDDB as security for the loan or 
advance.  There is no mention of any interim order in the Act.  Therefore, how 
rule 4(1) (a) mentions about passing of an interim order.  Should this power not 
be provided in the Act itself? 
  
(ii)                             Rule 4(1)(a) has the effect of giving directions to the court to pass an 
interim order attaching the security and also order the costs of the 
proceedings.  There is no mention of such provisions in the Act.  Therefore how 
under a rule such a provision can be made; Whether the Ministry would 
explain? 
  
            Ministry’s Comments 
               In view of the observations of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya 
Sabha, it is proposed to modify the regulation in such a way so as to leave it to the 
discretion of the Court to pass appropriate orders to ensure the ultimate recovery of the 
security amount. 
5.         Point referred: 
           Regulations 4(4) 
Procedure to be followed on Application for certain reliefs: 
  
 “Every application made under sub regulation (1) shall, save as provided herein, 
be   treated on par    with an    Application  for    execution   of   a   
valid decree of Court in favour of the National Dairy Development Board and 
against the defaulter, and the provisions of the Code shall mutates mutandis 
apply.” 
  
            What is the justification of treating the application (for interim relief) made 
under these regulations at par with an application for execution of valid decree of 

court?  How such provisions have been made in the regulations in the absence of 
corresponding provisions in the Act.  Would it not be more appropriate to provide for 
such things in the Principal legislations; what are the comments of the Ministry? 
  
            Ministry’s Comments 
            In view of the observations of Committee, it is proposed to delete the same from 
the Regulations. 
  
6.         Point referred: 
Regulations 9 & 10 
             
In the above regulations there is mention of sub-regulation (1) of regulation 
7.  But there is no sub-regulation (1) in regulation 7.  Whether the Ministry would 
rectify the position. 
   
            Ministry’s Comments 
            The mistake pointed out by the Committee will be rectified. 
  
            The Committee considered the matter in its meeting held on the 7th May 
2003.  The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry have agreed to take necessary 
action based upon its suggestions in relation to (i) modification of definition of the word 
‘Court’ in Regulation 2(1)(d) which was not proper in the opinion of the Committee; (ii) 
procedure to be followed on application for certain relief’s by leaving it to the discretion 
of court to pass appropriate orders by modifying Regulation 4(1) (a) and by deleting 
Regulation 4(4); and (iii) rectification of mistakes referred to in Regulations 7(1), 9 & 
10. 
            The Committee hopes that the Ministry would carry out the above amendments 
expeditiously. 
 

VI 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
I 
The Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 
  
The Committee at its meeting held on the 20 th May, 2003 considered the matter 
and noted the above comments of the Ministry on point no. 8 and 11. The Committee 
notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have since carried out and notified the following 
amendments in the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 as per its suggestions vide notification 
G.S.R. 21 (E) dated the 11 th January, 2002, publishing the Mineral Concession 
(Amendment) Rules, 2002: 
  
(i) Schedule II 
[Rule 9(2)(a)] 
By reasonably revising the application fee for prospecting 
licenses- (i) to rupees two hundred and fifty for first 
square kilometer or part thereof; and (ii) rupees fifty for 
each additional square kilometer as suggested by the 
Committee; 
  
(ii) Rule 14(1)(i) By substituting the words 'being not less than fifty paise 
and not more than five rupees' with the words 'being not 
less than rupee one and not more than rupees ten' thereby 
suitably revising the prescribed fee payable by the 
licensee; 
  
(iii) Rule 20(1) By substituting the words 'a sum of five hundred rupees' 
with the words 'a sum of two thousand and five hundred 
rupees' thereby suitably revising the security deposit 
payable by an applicant for prospecting license;  
(iv) Rule 22(1)&3(i) by substituting the words 'a non refundable fee of five 
hundred rupees' with the words 'a non refundable fee of 
two thousand and five hundred rupees' thereby suitably 
revising the fee payable for renewal of mining lease; 
  
(v) Rule 37(2) & 45 By omitting clause (ii) of rule 45 where reference to rule 
37(2) was inadvertent; and 

  
(vi) Rule 44(i) By substituting the words 'being not less than fifty paise 
and not more than five rupees' with the words 'being not 
less than one rupee and not more than ten rupees' thereby 
suitably revising the prospecting fee payable by the 
licensee. 
             
II  
The Cochin Port Trust Employees (CCA) Regulations, 1964 
  
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have agreed to the 
Committee’s suggestions and carried out the amendments as under: - 
(i)   In Regulation 3(3) by substituting the words “whose decision thereon shall be 
final”  by the word “for decision”. The Committee had objected to the vesting of 
power to take final decision with the Central Government; 
  
(ii) Deleting Regulation 4 being superfluous; 
  
(iii) In Regulation 9(3) deleting the words  “whether on a criminal charge or 
otherwise” being superfluous; 
  
(iv) In Regulation 10(ii) by providing a minimum period of 6 months and the 
maximum period of 3 years for withholding of increments or promotion and by 
inserting sub-regulation (iii) regarding reduction to lower stage as suggested by 
the Committee; 
  
(v) In Regulation 10(iv) by restricting the reduction to a lower grade or post for a 
specified period and by inserting a new sub-regulation 10(iv)(a) providing for 
guidelines for reducing the time scale by lowering only by a single stage and not 
more than one stage; 
  
(vi) In Regulation 12(2) by substituting the words “within such time as may be 
specified by the disciplinary Authority” by the words. “within a period of 20 
days” in order to make the provisions more specific; and  
  

(vii) In Regulation 12(14) by inserting the words “within a period of 30 days” after 
the word “communicated” in order to fix a time limit for communicating 
orders of the disciplinary authority. 
  
III 
The Vishakhapatnam Port Employees (GPF) Regulations, 1993 
  
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry has notified the 
amendments in pursuance of its suggestions as follows: - 
      a)    Regulation 2(5)(ii) by substituting the words “Head of the Department” by the 
words “Accounts Officer” for the sake of uniformity in case of both the male 
and female employees in case of the subscriber wishing to exclude his/her spouse 
from family. 
  
      b)    Regulation 2(5) by amending the definition of the word “child” so as to include 
within its meaning the children who are away from the employee for the 
purpose of studies but were otherwise dependent upon the employee. 
  
      c)    Regulation 4(1) by specifying the position in the regulation itself with regard to 
subscription to the fund by the employees joining the Port Trust. 
  
      d)    Regulation 14(1)(b)(ii) by amending the provision so as to include Medical, 
Engineering or other technical or specialized courses undertaken from the 
recognized institutions for the purpose of withdrawal of GPF and removing the 
condition that the course should be of minimum 3 years’ duration. 
IV 
Rules framed under the Foreign Exchange Management  
Act, 1999 
  
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Finance has accepted the 
Committee’s suggestions as follows: - 
  
1)      On Rule 4 of FEM (Encashment of Draft, Cheque Instrument & Payment of 
Interest) Rules, 2000 to prescribe a definite time frame for encashing the draft, 

cheque, etc. and as a follow up, would be requesting the RBI to issue suitable 
instructions to the Banks in this behalf. 
  
2)      To take necessary action to do away with the inconsistency in Schedules I & II of 
FEM (Current Account Transaction) Rules, 2000, by inserting an introductory 
portion in the English version also. 
  
3)      (a) To delete the word “brief” in Rule 4(9) of the FEM (Adjudication 
Proceedings and Appeal) Rules, 2000. The Committee had objected to the 
provision where by the decision of the Adjudicating Authority was prescribed to 
contain “brief reasons for the decisions”.    
  
(b) To prescribe a time limit of 180 days in Rule 6 (4) of the FEM (Adjudication 
Proceedings and Appeal) Rules, 2000 for disposal of appeals.  The rules at 
present do not prescribe any time period for disposal for appeals, which was 
objected to by the Committee. 
  
            The Committee hopes that the Ministry would notify amendments in the 
respective rules as above expeditiously. 
  
V  
The National Dairy Development Board (Enforcement of Claims)  
Regulations, 2000 
  
The Committee considered the matter in its meeting held on the 7th May 2003.  The 
Committee is happy to note that the Ministry have agreed to take necessary action 
based upon its suggestions in relation to (i) modification of definition of the word 
‘Court’ in Regulation 2(1)(d) which was not proper in the opinion of the Committee; (ii) 
procedure to be followed on application for certain relief’s by leaving it to the discretion 
of court to pass appropriate orders by modifying Regulation 4(1) (a) and by deleting 
Regulation 4(4); and (iii) rectification of mistakes referred to in Regulations 7(1),  9 & 
10. 
The Committee hopes that the Ministry would carry out the above amendments 
expeditiously. 

 
VII 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday the 18th December, 2003 in Room 
No. 126-C (Chairman’s Room), Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.         Shri A. Vijayaraghavan,            __        Chairman 
2.         Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
3.         Shri A.R. Kidwai 
4.         Shri B.P. Singhal 
5.            Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
6.            Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
7.            Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
8.            Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
SECRETARIAT 
1.         Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary 
2.         Shri P. Narayanan, Committee Officer 
  
            The Committee considered its draft 150th and 151st Reports and after some 
discussion, these reports were adopted. The Committee decided to present the Reports 
to the House on Monday, the 22nd December 2003. In this regard, the Committee 
authorized its Chairman and, in his absence, Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi and Shri B.P. 
Singhal, Members to present the Reports. 
2.         The Committee, thereafter, decided to meet again on the 31st December 2003. 
3.         The meeting adjourned at 3.30 p.m. 
 
  