 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
(Presented on 22nd October, 2008) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
October, 2008/Kartika,1930  (Saka) 
 

C O N T E N T S 
      
        PAGES 
 
 
 
* To be enclosed later 
 
 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
(ii) 
3. REPORT 
 
 
 I. The Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989. 
 
1-59 
II. The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
(Slaughter House) Rules, 2001-Implementation 
of 138 th Report of the Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
60-62 
III. The Export-Import Bank of India (Employees) 
Pension Regulations, 2000 
 
63-79 
IV. UCO Bank/UBI Bank Pension Regulations, 
1979 
 
80-94 
4. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
95-104 
 
5. MINUTES* 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
 LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   28TH MAY, 2008) 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla  Chairperson 
2. Prof. P. J. Kurien     
3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak    
4. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal    
5. Ms. Mabel Rebello  
6. Shri Vikram Verma     
7. Shri Raghudandan Sharma    
8. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
9. Shri Ali Ansari Anwar    
10. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy      
11. Shri Abani Roy 
12 Shri Tiruchi Siva 
13. Shri Biswajit Daimary   
14. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
15. Shri Bimal Jalan    
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K.Singh, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
3. Smt. Subhashree Panigrahi  Deputy Director 
4. Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Assistant Director 
5. Shri  R.P. Shukla, Committee Officer 
 
     
 
 (i) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present 
this Hundred and Seventy-Fifth Report of the Committee. 
 
1.2       The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 
_______________________________  
 
1.3 The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various 
Rules/Regulations and issues, relating to them along with the comments received from 
the Government.  The observations and recommendations of the Committee are 
contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.  
 
 
 
DR. (SHRIMATI) NAJMA A. HEPTULLA                                                              
                                                                                                               Chairperson 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
                                                                                                              Rajya Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI 
22nd October, 2008 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report Item 
On 

The Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989. 
 
The Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, framed under the Motor Vehicles 
Act, 1988, were examined and a questionnaire was forwarded to the Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways (Department of Road Transport & 
Highway) on the 30th January, 2001 for their comments/clarifications.  The Ministry 
furnished their comments/clarifications on the 3rd April, 2001.  The points referred to 
the Ministry and the comments/ clarifications received thereon are placed at 
Annexure-I.  Comments/suggestions were also invited from a few automobile 
associations on the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 for a comprehensive 
examination of the Rules.  Suggestions were received from the Automobile 
Association of Upper India and the Automobile Association of Southern India which 
were forwarded to the Department of  Road Transport and Highways for 
comments/clarifications on the 20th February, 2002.  The Ministry on the 13th March, 
2002 furnished their comments/clarifications on the issues raised by the Automobiles 
Associations, which are placed at Annexure-II. 
 
2. The Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways (Department of Road 
Transport & Highways) vide their notification No. G.S.R. 221(E) dated the 28 th 
March, 2001 published the Central Motor Vehicles (1 st Amendment) Rules, 2001 
amending the Central Motor Veh icles Rules, 1989.  Along with other amendments, 
the Ministry amended Rules 1(3), 4,5,7,9, 50(1), 75(2) and 89 as per the Committee’s 
suggestions. 
 
3. The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on the 23 rd April, 
2002 and expressed some apprehension about the compatibility of the  
Central Motor Vehicles Rules with the recent judgment of the Supreme Court  
regarding the age of the vehicles and the use of the types of fuel.   The Committee felt 
that if the use of commercial vehicles more than 8 y ears old upto 15 years was 
prohibited in Delhi, whether the Act/Rules provide for such a prohibition in other 
cities also, as vehicular pollution was as much a problem in other cites as in Delhi. 
The Committee, accordingly, desired that a detailed note be obtained from the 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways on the Supreme Court’s verdict regarding 

restrictions on the age of vehicles and the type of fuel to be used in Delhi or other 
places and to what extent the Act as well as the rules in hand had been 
correspondingly updated.  Accordingly, a reference was sent to the Ministry on the 
15th May, 2002.  The Ministry furnished a note on the Supreme Court’s assertion on 
age of vehicles and type of fuel on the 21st May, 2002 (Annexure-III).  
   
4. Further clarifications were sought from the Ministry on 4 th July, 2002.  The 
points referred to the Ministry and the comments/ clarifications received thereon are 
reproduced below: - 
 
I Point Referred 
 The Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 prescribe 9 years for a tourist permit 
in case of motor cabs (8 years where the motor vehicle is other than a motor cab) and 
12 years in respect of goods carriage, other than multi -axle vehicle (15 years in case 
of a multi -axle vehicle) for a National Permit goods vehicle. The Minist ry was 
requested to explain whether there is any limit for passenger buses (stage –carriage) 
and private vehicles prescribed in the Rules; is there any restriction on registration 
or continued plying in Delhi in respect of passenger buses and private vehicles, which 
have crossed a certain age; if so, under what Rule and also to explain the position 
pertaining to other metros? 
 
Ministry’s Comments 
Under Motor Vehicles Act, 1998 and Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, no 
age limit for passenger buses (stage -carriage) and private vehicles has been 
prescribed.  The only restriction mentioned under Rules 88 of Central Motor Vehicles 
Rules, 1989 prescribes a restriction of 12 years for issue of National permit in respect 
of non-multiaxle transport vehicles and 15 y ears in respect of multi -axle transport 
vehicles.  Similarly, under Rule 82 in respect of Tourist Permit, the restrictions are 9 
years for motor cab and 8 years in case of motor vehicles other than motor cab.  As 
intimated vide this Ministry’s  O.M. of eve n number dated 21 st May, 2002, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court vide its Order dated the 28th July, 1998 has not fixed the age 
of the vehicle, but has put certain restrictions on registration/ plying of commercial 
vehicles older than 8 years. 
 

II Point Referred 
 
The Committee noted from the reply of the Ministry that the age of the vehicles 
is not as important as its fitness and enquired if that were the view, then why do the 
rules not reflect this by providing for the prescription (from time to time in detail), of 
the fitness standards for each type of vehicle and each class of fuel instead of merely 
prescribing the age. 
 
Ministry’s Comments 
The Ministry replied vide O.M. dated 21st May, 2002 that under Rule 62 of the 
CMVR, the certificate of fitness in respect of new transport vehicle shall be valid for 
a period of two years.  Thereafter, the certificate would need to be renewed every 
year.  In case of tourist vehicles, this has to be renewed every three years.  Vide 
Notification No. GSR 221 (E) dated 28.3.2001, u nder rule 62 this Ministry has 
prescribed comprehensive tests for fitness which will have to be carried out. 
 
III Point Referred 
The Ministry was asked under what rule are the comprehensive tests to be 
carried by the Inspecting Officer.   
 
Ministry’s Comments 
The Ministry v ide Notification No. GSR 221 (E) dated 28.3.2001, under rule 
62 has prescribed comprehensive tests for fitness which will have to be carried out. 
 
IV Point Referred 
The Supreme Court in its direction has stated that no 8 years old buses shall 
ply in Delhi, except the ones using CNG or other clean fuels. On the instance of the 
Supreme Court’s  direction in respect of Delhi only,  the Ministry should envisage 
framing of appropriate rules to provide a statutory backing to deal, on all India basis, 
with the concerns of the Supreme Court. 
 
Ministry’s Comments 
The Ministry replied that pollution levels are monitored by Central Pollution 
Control Board/Ministry of Environment.  So far as this Ministry is concerned, use of 

clean fuel has already been permitted under Section 52 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988. Emission norms are also being progressively tightened.  The Bharat Stage -II 
norms have been extended to all categories of vehicles in October, 2001 in the four 
mega-cities of Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai.  These norms are proposed to 
be extended further to the cities of Bangalore, Hyderabad and Ahmedabad by the 
year 2003.  The extension of Bharat Stage -II norms throughout the country is 
envisaged from 1st April, 2005. 
 
V Point Referred 
The Ministry in their note has referred to other fuels,  In this connection- 
(a) How are the emission standards being linked to Pollution Under Control 
Certificates in respect of CNG and LPG; and 
 
(b) In addition to other fuels, cleaner fuels, including higher quality (ultra low 
Sulphur) HSD have been advocated by the Ministry itself.  What steps has the 
Ministry taken (through rules) to link these fuel norms to fitness, vehicle emission 
and PUC  Certificates and maximum age of vehicles permissible? 
 
Ministry’s Comments 
Ministry has notified the specifications relating to use of both CNG and LPG as 
an auto fuel. The safety norms as also preventive maintenance norms in respect of 
both CNG and LPG have been prescribed for the kit manufacturer as also for the 
customers/operators.  In other words, emission norms not only for the CNG and LPG 
but also for conventional fuels like petrol and diesel have been prescribed and are 
being progressively tightened and notified.  The extension of  Bharat Stage -II norms 
in a phased manner to various cities in the country also involves corresponding 
availability of better quality fuel e.g. for the Bharat Stage -II norms in case of both 
Petrol and Diesel, quantum of Sulphur has to be brought down to 0.05% apart from 
improvement in other fuel qualities.  Thus, further tightening of emission norms is 
linked not only with improved technology of motor vehicles but also with availability 
of better quality of fuel.  The improvemen t in fuel quality falls under the purview of 

Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.  The question of maximum age of vehicles has 
been clarified vide point I above already. 
 
5. The Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & 
Highways (Department of Road Transport & Highway) on the subject on the 25 th 
September, 2003.  During the course of the oral evidence, the Secretary admitted that 
though the enforcement of the Motor Vehicles Rules rested with the State 
Governments but this did not  absolve the Central Government of its role.  The 
Committee suggested amendment of Rule 24 regarding driving schools and 
establishments; Rule 25 regarding duration of a licence and renewal there of; Rule 28 
regarding power of licensing authority to suspend or revoke license of driving schools; 
Rule 30(2) regarding procedure for appeal; Rule 35 regarding grant or renewal of 
trade certificate; and Rule 46 regarding procedure for appeal and was informed that 
these required amendment of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 which was being 
processed in consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice.  The amendments 
have since been effected in September 2005 as per the Committee’s suggestions.   
 
6. The Committee again considered the matter at its meeting held on the 25 th 
February, 2004 and noted with satisfaction that the Ministry has accepted a number 
of its suggestions as mentioned in the questionnaire on the Central Motor Vehicle 
Rules, 1989.  The Committee, however, desired to have specific comments of the 
Ministry on the issue of (i) prescribing minimum essential educational qualifications 
for obtaining a driving licence and (ii) requirement of a driving licence for driving a 
tractor. The Ministry vide their communication dated the 26 th April, 2004 furnished 
detailed note on both issue, which are reproduced below: - 
 
I Regarding prescribing some minimum essential educational qualifications (say Vth or VIIIth 
Standard) for issuing any driving licence  
 
Ministry’s comments 
Rule 9 of the Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 198 9 (CMVR) prescribes educational 
qualifications for drivers of goods carriages carrying dangerous and hazardous 
goods.  The CMVR, 1989 however, does not prescribe educational qualification 
for any other category of driving licences.  The rationale behind th is is that 

normally the drivers in the country belong to economically weaker sections and 
rural areas and, therefore, do not have adequate access to educational facilities.  
Prescribing a minimum educational qualification may, therefore, lead to denial of 
job opportunity to a large section of people.  It has, however, been recommended 
by various quarters that in the interest of road safety, drivers in general and 
drivers of transport vehicles in particular, should possess the minimum academic 
qualification, necessary to understand different types of road signs and signals 
and also understand the provisions of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and Central 
Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 pertaining to safety aspects.  Besides, education would 
also help the drivers to unders tand the technical aspects of the new generation 
motor vehicles.  Accordingly, this Ministry is actively considering an amendment 
to Section 9(4) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 to make minimum educational 
qualification up to VIIIth Standard from a recogni zed institution mandatory for 
getting a driving licence to drive a transport vehicle. 
 
II Regarding requirement of a driving licence for driving vehicles like tractor which is basically 
meant for operation in the fields, but is, in fact, being used for transportation of both goods and persons 
in rural areas.  
 
Ministry’s comments 
It is true that agricultural tractors are basically meant for working in agricultural 
fields.  As long as the agricultural tractor is confined to the agricultural field, it 
does no t require a registration certificate/permit and the person driving the 
tractor in the agricultural field need not possess a driving licence.  However, it is 
true that tractors do run on public roads and that they are also used for 
transportation of men and material.  When the tractor comes on to a public road 
and is used for transportation of men and material, it would fall in the category 
of a transport vehicle.  It, therefore, needs a valid permit and all other documents 
prescribed under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.  The person driving such a tractor 
also must possess a valid driving licence to drive a transport vehicle.  Besides, the 
tractor must also pass the annual fitness test prescribed under the Motor Vehicles 
Act, 1988 in respect of transport vehic les.  It is the responsibility of State 
Government to check the above aspects related to plying of tractors on road. This 
Ministry has reminded all States/Union territories time and again in the matter. 

 
7. The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on the 19th October, 
2004 and noted with satisfaction that the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and 
Highways (Department of Road Transport & Highway) have since implemented some 
of the Committee’s suggestions vide the Central Motor Vehicles (1 st Amendment) 
Rules, 2001 published vide GSR No. 221 (E) dated 28th March, 2001. 
The Committee noted that the Ministry was actively considering amendment 
to Section 9(4) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 to make minimum educational 
qualification upto VIII standard from a recognized institution mandatory for getting 
a driving licence to drive a transport vehicle. The Committee appreciated that 
requirements of valid permits and other documents have been prescribed under the 
Motor Vehicles Act for driving tractors when used as a transport vehicle. At the same 
time, the Committee desired that the Ministry should take into account that the 
majority of persons applying for licence to drive a transport vehicle/ tractor come 
from the economically weaker sections of the society and that this may well be their 
primary means of occupation and livelihood.  
The Committee desired the Ministry to ensure compliance to the rules/ 
regulations for implementation but at the same time suitably and appropriately make 
amendments in the Motor Vehicles Act so that persons applying for a driving licence 
for driving a transport vehicle/tractor were not adversely affected.  
 
8. The matter was reviewed and it was decided to hear the representatives of the 
Transport  and Environment Departments of the Government of NCT of Delhi, the 
Delhi Police (Traffic) alongwith the Secretary, Road Transport to deliberate inter -
alia on the following aspects of the rules, which seemed to have remained unaddressed 
so far: 
(i) Violation of the Motor Vehicles Rules in the form of use of private vehicles in 
a big way as commercial vehicles as their use had become quite pervasive in the 
country and they appeared to be a major source of harassment and corruption.  
 
(ii) While the Motor Vehicles Act, 198 8 and the Rules in hand aimed  
towards fit and efficient vehicles on the road and their orderly movement, in real life, 
ill-maintained vehicles on roads were a common feature even in metropolitan cities.  

They were not only a traffic hazard but also a cause of major accidents.  Also some of 
the vehicles were mechanically not upto the mark and were instrumental in increasing 
pollution thereby putting a question mark on the norms for fitness - they not being 
very strict or their implementation being lax. The Committee desired to examine the 
scope for better coordination between the State Transport Department which takes 
care of driving license and monitoring the fitness of the vehicles, etc., the State Police 
Department which takes care of regulation of traffic and challaning of defaulters and 
the State Environment Department which is concerned with the monitoring of 
pollution level of vehicles.   
 
9. Accordingly, the Committee heard the oral evidence of the Departments of 
Transport, Environment and Police of th e Government of NCT of Delhi along with 
the Central Ministry of Road Transport & Highways on the 10th July, 2006.  Broadly 
the following issues came before the Committee during the oral evidence:  
(i) Explosive increase in the number of vehicles since the 1950’s had brought to 
the forefront concerns about road safety, control of emission pollutants, induction of 
information technology in regulatory mechanism etc. which needed to be addressed. 
 
(ii) The amendment prescribing the proposed minimum educational qualification 
for driving a transport vehicle was now being incorporated and was in the process of 
vetting by the Law Ministry.  The Ministry proposes to make VIII standard pass as 
minimum educational qualification for driving transport vehicles both in rur al and 
urban areas keeping in view the not so good economic background of the majority of 
applicants and existing unemployment problem in the country.  
 
(iii) Regarding the need for driving licence for tractors when on the road, fitment 
of reflectors and r ear lights on vehicles, prohibition of fancy number plates and the 
need for incorporating the identity of the inspecting officials on the fitness certificate 
of the vehicles, the Department had written to the States highlighting these issues.  
 

(iv) So far as misuse of private vehicles as commercial vehicles, the Committee 
was informed that the operation of commercial vehicles was more difficult than 
transport vehicles due to three factors- (a) requirement of a valid permit for plying 
of a commercial vehicle; (b) yearly requirement of fitness certificate for commercial 
vehicles as compared to once in 15 years for transport vehicles; and (c) heavy 
taxation on commercial vehicles compared to transport vehicles.  However, 
suggestion for dispensing with such taxes and permits was under consideration with 
the State Governments.   
 
(v) As regards need for better coordination between the 3 Departments, the 
Committee acknowledged that coordination between the Transport Department and 
the police was now possible with the exchange of information between the two with 
the induction of information technology in the department and though the 
Department of Environment was not directly concerned with emission enforcement 
legislation, the Transport Department had come up with emission norms in 
consultation with the Environment Department. 
 
(vi) The Committee noted that two systems being followed by the Police (Traffic 
Department) for ensuring road safety and penalizing traffic violators i.e.-(a) On-the-
spot prosecution where challans were issued to the offenders on the spot by an officer 
of the rank of ASI; and (b) Notice system where the details of the  vehicle like 
registration number, make  of the vehicle, colour of vehicle etc. were noted by the 
Constable and Head Constable  and notice was issued later at the residence of the 
vehicle owner after identification/ verification of the violating vehicle from stored 
data in the computer.  A number of modern gadgets were in use to challan offenders 
like lazer guns, surveillance camer as, red light jumping and speed check cameras, 
alcohol meters etc.  The Committee appreciated that at present there were 700 
signalized junctions thereby facilitating challaning of traffic violators; and that, a 
Road Safety Cell headed by an ACP was in exi stence which apart from other things 
was responsible for imparting road safety education to organized sectors and juggi -

jhoparies through lectures, films, videos, distributing literature etc.  The only 
problem was shortage of staff deputed for the purpose. 
 
(vii) A concern was expressed by the Department of Transport of the Government 
of the NCT of Delhi on the need to address genuine problems, which included fines 
not having a deterrent effect on traffic violators, limited enforcement staff and 
technology issues, to name a few.  The main reasons for the misuse of private vehicles 
as commercial vehicles were attributed to (a) lesser tariff and ease of use of private 
vehicles as compared to commercial vehicles, (b) limited enforcement staff due to non 
creation of posts; and (c) enforcement of traffic rules in ‘drives’ due to shortage of 
staff.   
 
(viii) Other problematic areas which came before the Committee included (a) 
pollution checking centers which needed upgradation; (b) regular pollution check of 
vehicles and requirement of valid PUC certificate; (c) need for de-registration and 
re-registration of vehicles; and (d) over loading which has its effect on pollution 
emission, wear and tear of roads and is a threat to road safety.    
(ix) Other issues of general importance on which the Committee desired to be 
informed were forwarded to the Ministry of Road Transport in the form of a  
supplementary questionnaire.  The Ministry’s comments on the same are placed at 
Annexure IV.   
 
10. The Committee takes note of the various amendments to the Rules carried out 
by the Ministry of Shipping, Road, Transport & Highways (Department of Road, 
Transport & Highways).  Its observations regarding some of these amendments are 
indicated hereunder; 
(i) Rule 1(3)  Rectifying the typographical error by deleting the words and 
figures ‘sub-rule 3 of rule 103’; 
 
(ii) Rule 4  Omitting  item No. 5 “ Electricity or telephone bill”  and item 
no. 7 “Pay slip issued by any office of the Central Government 

or State Government or  a local body” from the list of documents 
which can be treated as evidence for correctness of address and 
age for the purpose of issue of licence.   The Committee had 
suggested that identity card issued by the Central or State 
Government can be included in the list of items that can be 
considered as evidence as to the correctness of the address and 
age of the applicant. Instead, the Ministry have deleted 
“Electricity and telephone bills as well  as pay slips of the 
Central/State Government in respect of their employees, in Rule 
4 as admissible evidence for proof of address and/or age.  The 
Committee notes that age and the address of the applicant for a 
driving licence are vital piece of information and therefore 
adequate care nee ds to be taken while making admissible 
evidence in support thereof.  Accordingly, items in rule 4 should 
be reviewed regularly to keep pace with the changing times but, 
additions/deletions therein should be done with abundant 
caution so that the provisions are not misused. 
 
(iii) Rule 5  Prescribing that an application for issue of learner’s licence or 
a driving licence or for making additions of another class or 
description of a motor vehicle to a driving licence or for renewal 
of driving licence to drive other than transport vehicle, must be 
accompanied by a self declaration as to the physical fitness  in 
Form 1 and an application for a licence to drive a transport 
vehicle must be accompanied by a medical certificate in Form 1-
A to be issued by a registered medi cal practitioner.  The 
Committee notes with satisfaction that by this amendment the 
provisions of rule 5 have been brought in conformity with 
Section 8 (3) of the Motor Vehicles Act whereby medical 
certificate is required only in case of transport vehicles; 
 

(iv) Rule 7  Providing appropriate space in Form 1 -A for affixing of 
photograph in the Medical Certificate which was not there in 
the pre revised provisions; 
 
(v) Rule 9  Substituting the words and figures “specified in the VII schedule 
of the constitution” with the words and figures “specified in the 
VIII schedule of the constitution” thereby rectifying the 
typographical error in Rule 9; 
 
(vi) Rule 50(1)   Substituting the existing Rule 50(1) by a new one giving 
specifications of the registration number plate in relation to the 
language, script as well as the kind of letters and numerals to be 
used therein which were not there in the pre-revised provisions;  
 
(vii) Rule 75(2)  Substituting the words “State Government shall” with the 
words “State Government shall, if s o desired by the Central Government” so as 
to provide that the State Register of Motor Vehicles should mandatorily be sent 
by the State Governments to the Central Government whenever “desired by the 
Central Government”.  The Committee had questioned the periodicity of sending 
the State Register of Motor Vehicles maintained by each State to the Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport & Highways. The Committee, however, feels that the 
Central Ministry should have up-to-date data/records/information with regard to 
the Motor Vehicles in the States so that they have all relevant inputs and are able 
to formulate better and accurate policies, closer to the ground realities/needs in 
the field of transportation and motor vehicles. The Committee, in this context, 
recommends that there should be a mechanism whereby the Ministry has access 
to relevant information/statistics at the State level on a regular basis. The 
Committee feel that computerization of relevant information at the State Level 
can be of great help in this r egard and the Central Ministry may take steps to 
ensure that the State Transport Departments computerize their records 
forthwith.  
 

(viii) Rule 89  The Committee notes with satisfaction that rule 89 has been 
omitted and accordingly, the inconsistency in the rule as pointed 
out by it has gone. 
 
11. The Committee’s recommendations and observations arising out of the examination of the Central Motor Vehicles 
Rules, 1989 are enumerated below: 
(i) Educational qualification required  for issue of a driving license (Rule 9) 
 The Committee takes note of the fact that the existing provisions of the Motor Vehicle Rules 1989 do not prescribe 
any educational qualifications for procuring a driving license. Rule 9, however, prescribes an educational qualification of a pass 
in tenth standard for obtaining a license for driving a goods carriage carrying goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human 
life. The Committee is of the considered view that with the passage of time it has become imminent that drivers of motor vehicles 
should possess some formal education so that they are able to read and understand various sign boards, directions etc. while 
driving. This is all the more essential in case of metro and big cities in the country where new and complex flyovers and relatively 
different traffic regulation are in force which may not be possible for an illiterate driver to understand or comprehend. The  
Committee does appreciate that prescribing a minimum education qualification can adversely effect the livelihood of a sizeable 
section of people who are engaged in the business of driving but, equally important is the safety and security of the people around 
on the roads which is endangered due to the ignorance on account of illiteracy. The Committee feels that the safety of the road 
users outweighs and therefore recommends that the Government should consider to prescribe henceforth some minimum 
educational qualification say, 5th or 8th standard pass, for all types of licenses including those for driving commercial vehicles. 
 
 As regards the requirement of a driving license for tractors when used as a transport vehicle, the Committee is happy 
to note that Government have taken up this matter with the State Governments. The Committee further appreciates that the 
Motor Vehicles Act prescribes a valid permit and other documents for use of a tractor as a transport vehicle. The Committee 
impresses upon the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways to review the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act as 
well as the  rules of 1989 framed thereunder so as to ensure that tractors, when used as a transport vehicle, whether for 
transporting goods or people, which is commonly done in the rural areas, does not remain unregulated and do not become a 
traffic hazard on the roa ds. The Committee accordingly recommends that Government may prescribe the requirement of a 
driving license subject to certain conditions keeping in view the rural background of the persons in case use of tractors outside 
the fields is to be allowed in order to maintain the safety and security of the road users. 
 
(ii) High Security Number Plates 
 The Committee is happy to note that Government are in the process of implementing high security registration plates 
for vehicles. The Committee recommends that the  Government should take up this project on priority and ensure that this is 
implemented within a definite timeframe. The Committee hopes that the implementation of this project would not only reduce 
instances of theft of vehicles but would also help in meeting the requirement of the law relating to the number plates i.e. the size 
and shape of the letters etc. 
 
(iii) Tinted Glasses 
 
 The Committee appreciates that tinted glasses on vehicles many a times become a hurdle for the security agencies in 
the prevention of crime and apprehension of criminals. But, the Committee would like the Ministry to keep in view the extremely 
hot conditions that prevail in most parts of the country during the summer period. The Committee feels that the requirements 
of security can be met in case light films are put on the vehicle which may not obstruct the visibility beyond the desired level. 
The Committee accordingly recommends that the Ministry of Surface Transport may work out on this issue with the security 
agencies for determining what percentage of visibility in a film would meet their requirement and the norms so determined can 
be notified for the information and compliance by the vehicle owners. The Committee would also appreciate if the manufacturers 
of such films are mandatorily required to indicate the percentage of visibility of the film on their rolls so that anybody who has 
put a film on his vehicle is confident that he is not violating the law. The Ministry may recommend similar action to the sta tes 
also who may take action depending upon the climatic conditions and security requirements of their State. The Committee would 
also expect a definite policy of Government on this so that there is no uncertainty in the minds of the vehicle owners. 
 
(iv)  Use of Private Vehicles as Commercial 
 The Committee takes note of the various factors which prevent a vehicle owner to operate commercially on the basis 
of a valid permit namely, heavy taxation on commercial vehicles as compared to transport vehicles while entering from one state 
to another and even otherwise, procuring of fitness certificate for a commercial vehicle on a yearly basis as compared to a 1 5 
year period for a transport vehicle, procuring of a permit for using a vehicle on commercial basis, etc. This vast differen ce 
between the requirements to be fulfilled in case of getting a vehicle registered for commercial or transport purpose and the 
financial implications involved in running a vehicle with a commercial permit is perhaps the main reason which prompts 
anybody to use his /her transport vehicle commercially. The Committee is unhappy to find such a state of affairs going on 
unendingly. The Committee is unhappy to find such a state of affairs going on unendingly. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry of SRT should consider this matter seriously as it not only involves revenues for the Government but also the safety 

and security of the commuters when vehicles operate unauthorizidely in the city or on the highways. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should interact with the State Government on this issue in order to find out how such violations 
could be eliminated i.e. by rationalizing the financial implications so that the tendencies of violation are reduced. The Committee 
is conscious of the fact that violations in this area are a source of corruption with the implementing agencies and therefore, there 
is all the more a reason that a solution is found out and the sources of corruption are plugged once and for all. 
 
(v)  Better Regulation of Traffic and Enforcement of Traffic Laws 
 The Committee notes that the various traffic regulations under the Motor Vehicles Act are being enforced by the 
traffic police division of the State. Keeping in view the very heavy traffic that is seen on the roads in the big metropolitan cities 
(which is much more than the capacity of the roads) there is a need to make conscious efforts to see that the traffic moves i n a 
regulated manner taking care of both the vehicle drivers a well as the enforcement agencies. The Committee is of the considered 
view that simply increasing the penalties cannot be a solution for instilling discipline among the vehicle drivers. In this context 
the Committee feels that the transport department of the State and the enforcement agencies i.e. the traffic police, can take some 
steps which may lead to disciplining the vehicle drivers on the roads voluntarily. For examples, both the state transport 
department and the traffic police can jointly or individually consider educating the vehicle driv ers on the traffic rules and 
regulations in a bigger way. This can be done by having some short programmes prepared and shown through the TV network 
as well as on the websites of the two departments. Secondly, the Committee feels that the traffic police in a city like Delhi should 
not give up its regulatory function of assisting and guiding the vehicle drivers at crossings and intersections which definit ely is 
helpful and satisfying for the vehicle drivers. The Committee would also recommend that steps should be taken to device some 
specific training and refresher programmes for the traffic cops so that they can discharge their functions more accurately, 
responsibly and faithfully and eventually are able to win the confidence of the motor drivers. 
 
(vi)  Pollution under Control Certificate  
 The Committee is happy to note that a lot of attention is being paid particularly in big cities and metros to contain 
the menace of air pollution resulting from vehicles on road. There was an actual need for stern steps to check the high pollution 
levels caused due to emissions from vehicles in metropolitan cities where the vehicle population is too large. In order to keep the 
emission levels from the vehicles under check, the steps taken by Government with regard to br inging in higher in -built 
technology in the vehicle and upgrading the quality of the fuel are laudable. But, the system of making all vehicles undergo a 
pollution check on a on -going basis calls for a review. In the first place, Government has not made any  distinction between a 
commercial and a private vehicle for this purpose and anybody would agree that the commercial vehicles are put to use much 
more extensively as compared to private vehicles and therefore, the chances of distortion of emissions are mor e in case of 
commercial vehicles as compared to the private vehicles. Secondly, the Motor Vehicles Act prescribes a validity period of 6 
months for a PUC certificate i.e. a vehicle should undergo pollution check at least once in 6 months. But, some of the states like 
Delhi have prescribed a validity period of 3 months for a PUC certificate. Therefore, in a city like Delhi all vehicles are required 
to undergo a pollution check once in 3 months. It is doubtful whether the State of Delhi has enough paraphernalia/ infrastructure 
for the work of this magnitude and as a result, several vehicles continue without a PUC. Thirdly, the new vehicles with upgraded 
technology being used as private vehicles hardly go beyond the prescribed emission norms. Even the new vehicles are required 
to get a fresh PUC certificate after three months of taking delivery. Keeping in view all these factors, the Committee recommends 
that the Government should review the existing dispensation so that people are not compelled to queue up for obtaining PUC 
certificate so frequently when their vehicles are well designed to adhere well to the prescribed emission norms. The Committee 
incidentally finds that in a city like Delhi, the job of issuing PUC certificates has been entrusted to private ind ividuals who are 
located mostly at the filling stations. In this context the Committee recommends that an authorization can be given to the 
authorized service stations also for different brands of vehicles so that the vehicles undergo a pollution check alo ng with each 
service. This would ensure an automatic pollution check of all vehicles at least once or twice a year without any extra effort on 
the part of the vehicle owners. 
 
(vii)  Certificate of Fitness     
 The Committee notes that the Motor Vehicles A ct, 1988, and the Central 
Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, do not prescribe any age limit for passenger buses and 
private vehicles. The only restriction is in terms of years for issue of National Permit 
for different types of vehicles. Similarly, the Supreme Co urt has not fixed the age of 
the vehicles but has put certain restrictions on registration/plying of commercial 
vehicles older than 8 years. Also, a certificate of fitness is issued in respect of new 
transport vehicles to be valid for 2 years and to be ren ewed every three years. The 
Committee feels that the States lack in infrastructure for carrying out necessary 
periodic checks on the transport vehicles, whose number is too large. The Committee, 
however, is of the view that there is a need for stricter pro visions so that the vehicles 

on road are better maintained and in good working condition, which would also 
enhance safety on road and reduce the number of accidents. Government may 
consider improving the infrastructure so that the checks on the vehicles are thorough 
and effective and eventually with improved infrastructure, private vehicles are also 
brought into this regime at least in the metro cities to being with. 
 
 The Committee hopes that the Ministry shall carry out necessary amendments 
expeditiously under intimation to it.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report Item  
on 
 The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Slaughter House) Rules, 2001 – 
Implementation of 164th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya 
Sabha. 
 
 
The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals ( Slaughter House) Rules, 2001 framed 
under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 were examined and the 
Committee in its 164th Report, which was presented to the House on the 11 th August, 
2006 recommended as follows:-  
 
“The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have accepted its 
suggestions on point no. 6 on Rule 9(1) regarding inspection of slaughter house to (i) 
prescribe a minimum frequency of inspection of slaughter houses so as to make such 
inspection uniform and regular; and (ii) to specify the minimum level/status  of the 

inspecting officers. On the rest of the points, the Committee accepts the Ministry’s 
comments. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Environment & Forests would 
carry out the amendments to the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Slaughter House) 
Rules, 2001, expeditiously, under intimation to it.” 
 
2. The Committee forwarded the relevant extracts from the 164 th Report to the 
Ministry of Environment & Forests on the 8 th September, 2006 for necessary action.  
Reply from the Ministry was not received even after repeated reminders. It was only 
after one year and half that the Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 3 rd April, 2008 
furnished the Action Taken Note. The points raised by the Committee, the Ministry’s 
comments, the Committee’s observations on the points as contained in the report and 
the Ministry’s Action Taken Note are reproduced below: 
 
Point raised 
Rule 9(1) Inspection of slaughter house 
 
 “The Animal Welfare Board of India  or any person or Animal Welfare 
Organization authorized by it may inspect any slaughter house without notice to its 
owner or the person in charge of it at any time during the working hours to ensure 
that the provisions of these rules are being complied with” 
 
(i) What is the frequency of such inspections? Should the rules not prescribe 
a minimum frequency of such inspections in every slaughter house so that 
the inspections are uniform and regular? 
(ii) The words ‘any person’ appear to be vague. Whether Government h ave 
any objection in specifying the minimum level/status of such officer? 
 
Ministry comments 
(i) The Government of India is agreeable to prescribe a minimum frequency 
of such inspections after working it out with the Animal Welfare board of 
India (AWBI), who are responsible for such inspections. 
(ii) The Government of India has no objection in specifying the minimum 
level/status of the inspecting officers in consultation with AWBI. 

 
Committee’s observation as contained in its 164th Report 
 
 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have accepted its 
suggestions on point no. 6 on Rule 9(1) regarding inspection of slaughter house so as 
to make such inspection uniform and regular; and (ii) to specify the minimum 
level/status of the inspecting officers.  
 
 
Ministry’s Action Taken Note: 
 
 The Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 3 rd April, 2008 stated that the 
recommendations made by the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha 
in its 164 th Report have been considered in consultation with the Animal We lfare 
Board of India, Chennai and Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries and accordingly, the Ministry of Environment & Forests agrees to substitute 
the existing provision under Rule 9(i) of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
(Slaughter House) Rules, 2001 by the following: 
 
 “The Animal Welfare Board of India or a State Animal Welfare Board or any 
person who is a qualified veterinarian and is authorized by the Animal Welfare Board 
of India, may inspect any slaughter house, without notice t o its owner or the person 
in charge of it any time during the working hours to ensure that the provisions of 
these Rules are being complied with. Such inspections will be conducted at least once 
in six months”. 
 
3. The Committee is happy to note that the M inistry has carried out the 
amendments as suggested by the Committee on Rule 9(1) of the Prevention of Cruelty 
to Animals (Slaughter House) Rules, 2001 as contained in its 164th Report and decided 
not to pursue the matter further. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Export-Import Bank of India (Employees’) Pension 
Regulations, 2000. 
 
 
The Export-Import Bank of India (Employees’) Pension Regulations, 2000 
framed under the Export -Import Bank of India Act, 1981 were examined and a 
questionnaire on the subject matter was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance for 
their comments/clarifications on the 4th July, 2001. 
 
2.  In response, the Ministry on 4 th December, 2002 endorsed a letter to 
this Secretariat informing that with regard to point 4 of the questionnaire (Regulation 
17 regarding counting of period spent on leave) a tentative view had been taken that 
“in the case of extra -ordinary leave, loss of pay upto the extent of 12 months may 
count towards the qualifying serv ice on medical grounds .”  The Ministry had called 
for comments from the EXIM Bank of India. 
 
3.  The Ministry vide their communication dated the 10 th March, 2003 
informed that comments of the Indian Bank Association (IBA) have been sought on 
point No.4  (on regulation 17 regarding counting of period spent on leave) and point 
No. 5 (on regulation 18 regarding broken period of service).  The Ministry, 
accordingly, requested for extension of time upto 30th April, 2003 for submitting their 
comments. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Ministry vide their communication dated the 7 th May, 2003 
informed as under:- 

 
“Some of the points have been referred to Department of Pension and 
Pensioners’ Welfare.  Since it may take some more time, it is requested that the 
Committee-I may grant us extension of time up to 30 -6-2003 for submission of our 
comments in the matter.” 
 
5.  The Committee took up the matter with the representatives of the 
EXIM Bank and the Ministry of Finance (Banking Di vision) at Mumbai on 5 th July, 
2003.    Relevant extracts from the study note on the above discussion are enclosed .  
(Annexure-I). 
 
6.  The Ministry of Finance vide their communication dated the 8 th 
September, 2003 requested for extension of time upto the 30th October, 2003 for 
furnishing their comments on the matter in the light of the above discussion.  Further 
extension of time upto the 31 st January, 2004 was sought as the matter was being 
examined in consultation with the Indian Banking Association (IBA ) and EXIM 
Bank.  Later on, vide their communication dated the 19th January, 2004 the Ministry 
informed that the views of IBA have since been received and that EXIM Bank has 
been requested to examine these views and send the proposal to the Ministry along 
with draft amendment to be carried out in their pension regulations.  Since the 
examination may take some more time, the Ministry requested for extension of time 
upto the 30th April, 2004 for furnishing a report on the matter. 
 
7.  Consequently this Secret ariat vide its communication dated the 27 th 
April, 2004 requested the Ministry of Finance to furnish Action Taken Note on 
Regulations 2(g), 17, 18, 33 and 35 which were agreed to during the discussions at 
Mumbai. 
 
8.  In the meantime, the Ministry vide their communication dated the 27th 
April, 2004 informed that the EXIM Bank has furnished the draft of the amendments 
to be carried out in their pension regulations. Since the examination of the proposed 
amendments may take some more time, the Ministry requested for extension of time 
upto the 31st July, 2004 for furnishing a report. 
 
9.  The Ministry again vide their communication dated the 1 st November, 
2004 informed that the clarifications from IBA have since been received and the 
matter is under process.  As  the process is expected to take some time the Ministry 
requested for extension of time upto the 31 st January, 2005 in the matter which was 
duly granted. 
 
10. The Committee again took up the matter with the representatives of the EXIM 
Bank and the Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) at Mumbai on the 8th February, 
2005.  Relevant extracts from the study note on the above discussion are enclosed    
(Annexure II). 
 
11. The Ministry vide their OM dated 25 th April, 2005 informed that the revised 
information received from the EXIM Bank requires certain clarifications, and sought 
extension of time upto 30th July, 2005 for furnishing the Action Taken Report.  Again, 
vide their OM dated 23rd January, 2006 they informed that amendments in the EXIM 
Bank Pension Regu lations, as per recommendations of the Committee is under  

consideration with the Ministry of Law and Justice.  As the process is expected to take 
some time further extension of time upto 31st March, 2006 was sought which was duly 
granted. 
 
12. Finally, th e Ministry vide their OM dated the 21 st July 2006 furnished the 
Action Taken Report on the observations/recommendations of the Committee 
(Annexure III). 
 
13. The point referred to the Ministry, their comments/clarifications, Committees’ 
observations and the action taken thereon are reproduced below :- 
 
 
1. Point raised – Regulation 2(g): Definition of ‘child’ 
 
“Child means a child of the Employee, who, if a son, is under twenty-five years of age 
and if a daughter, is unmarried and is under twenty-five years of age and the 
expression “children” shall be constructed accordingly”. 
 
The word ‘child’ does not include legally adopted ‘child’ as has been 
provided in the definition of the word ‘family’ in regulation 2(n).  Whether the 
Ministry would include the same in the regulation? 
 
 
 
 
Ministry’s/Exim Bank’s Comments 
 
The Export -Import Bank of India Employees’ Pension Regulations, 2000 
have been prepared on the basis of Pension Regulations applicable to public sector 
commercial banks.  Regulations 2(g) and 2(n) are same as those in the case of public 
sector commercial banks. 
 
However, the suggestion is accepted and we agree that the definition of 
‘child’ under Regulation 2(g) may be the same as that in respect of Regulation 2(n). 
 
Committee’s Observations 
 
The Ministry accepted the Committee’s suggestion for amending the 
provision so as to include legally adopted child in the definition of “Child” as under: 
  
“Child means a child of the employee, who, if a son, is under twenty five 
years of age and if a daughter, is unmarried and is under twenty five years of age, 
including such son or daughter adopted legally and the expression ‘children’ shall be 
construed, accordingly.”  
 
Action Taken by the Exim Bank 

 
The Bank has already notified amendments in R egulations 2(g) & 2(n ) (c) in 
line with the recommendations made by the Committee. 
 
2.   Point raised- Regulation 3-Option to become member 
 
Under the above regulation the time period of ‘one hundred and twenty days’ to 
become member of the fund is quite high.  What is the justification therefore. Whether the 
Ministry have any objection in reducing the period to 90 days? 
 
Ministry’s/Exim Bank’s Comments 
 
The period of 120 days is the same as in  the case of Pension Regulations, i.e. 
September 20, 2000, is already over and since the interested employees have already 
exercised their options, this issue has become redundant. 
 
Committee’s Observations 
 
The Committee was informed that since the period of 120 days from the date 
of notification i.e. September 20, 2000 was already over the issue had become 
redundant.  The Committee decided to drop the point. 
 
3.  Point raised – Regulation 15-“Commencement of Qualifying Service 
 
  Subject to the provisions contained in this regulation, qualifying service of 
any employee shall commence from the date he takes charge of the post of which he 
is first appointed on a permanent basis: Provided, however, that in the case of an 
employee who has been absorbed in the Bank’s Service from the Industrial 
Development Bank or any other public sector institution or public sector bank 
approved by the Chairman and Managing Director, the qualifying service of such 
employee shall commence from the date on which he joined the ser vices of the 
Development Bank or such other public sector, as the case may be, on a permanent 
basis. 
 
Provided further that at the time of absorption the amount of Provident 
Fund (both employer’s and employee’s) and interest thereon received from previous 
employer was deposited with the Provident Fund Trust of the Exim Bank.” 
 
Whether for the purpose of qualifying service under this regulation period 
of appointment in an officiating or, temporary capacity followed by permanent 
appointment is also taken into account.  If not, what are the reasons therefore? 
 
Ministry’s/Exim Bank’s Comments 
 
The words ‘officiating or temporary’ are not mentioned, while defining 
employees under Export -Import Bank Officers’ Service Regulations, 1982. In fact, 
officers employed ‘ temporarily’ are specially excluded under Export -Import Bank 
Officers’ Service Regulations, 1982.  For the purpose of Export-Import Bank of India 
Provident Fund Regulations, employees in the service of the Bank, even it they are on 
probation, are eligible for provident Fund contribution. 

 
Accordingly, it is suggested that the Regulation 15, as it exists, may be 
retained. 
 
Committee’s Observations 
 
The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
 
 
4. Point raised – Regulation 17- Counting of period spent on leave 
 
 
 “All leave during service in the bank for which leave salary is payable shall 
count as qualifying service. Provided that extraordinary leave on loss of pay shall not 
count as qualifying service except when the sanctioni ng authority has directed that 
such leave not exceeding twelve months during the entire service may count as service 
for all purposes including pension”. 
 
The proviso gives wide discretion to sanctioning authority in respect of 
counting the period of extra ordinary leave on loss of pay of nor more than twelve 
months as qualifying service for all purposes.  What is the justification for this 
discretion; whether the sanctioning authority records reasons for doing so; whether 
there are any norms in this regard, if so, the details? 
 
Ministry’s/Exim Bank’s Comments 
 
This regulation is similar to that applicable in the case of public sector 
commercial banks.  In the case of Exim Bank, extraordinary leave on loss of pay is 
sanctioned only by Chairman and Managing Di rector and not by any sanctioning 
authority.  Hence, we suggest that the existing provision may be retained. 
 
Committee’s Observations 
 
The Committee was apprised that extraordinary leave without pay granted 
on medical ground is considered for the purpose of counting of qualifying service.  
The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
 
The matter was again reconsidered and it has now been decided that the 
period of Extraordinary Leave for the purpose of qualifying service on grounds such 
as sickness, higher studies and such other grounds as may be approved by the board.  
The Exim Bank has been advised to carry out the necessary amendments in the 
Pension Regulation, 2000. 
 
Action Taken by the Exim Bank 
 
 The Bank has already notified the amendment in Regulation 17 in line 
with recommendations made by the Committee. 
 
5. Point raised – Regulation 18- Broken period of service 
 

 
“If the period of service of an employee includes broken period of service less 
than one year, then if such broken period is more than six months, it shall be treated 
as one year and if such broken period is six months or less it shall be ignored. Provided 
that provisions of this regulation shall not be applied for determining the minimum 
service required to make an employee eligible for pension”. 
 
What is the justification behind the provisions of Regulation 18 and what 
are the reasons for deviating from the provisions of CCS (Pension) Rules applicable 
to be Central Government employees? 
 
Ministry’s/Exim Bank’s Comments 
 
The provision is similar to that applicable in the cases of employees of public 
sector commercial banks.  Hence, it is recommend that the provision may be retained 
as it exists. 
 
Committee’s Observation 
 
The Committee was not satisfied with the Ministry’ s comments as the 
provision was similar to that applicable in case of employees of the public sector 
banks.  The Committee desired the Ministry to modify the provision as per the CCS 
(Pension) Rules. 
 
The EXIM Bank accepted the Committee’s suggestion for a mending the 
provision on the lines of CCS(Pension)Rules as under: 
 
‘If the period of service of an employee includes broken period of service less 
than one year, then for the purpose of arriving at qualifying service such broken 
period of service shall be treated as follows: 
 
(a) fraction of the year equal to 3 months and above but less than or equal to 6 
months, as completed half-year; or 
 
(b) fraction of the year more than 6 months but less than 12 months, as 
completed one year. 
 
Provided that provisions of this regulation shall not be applied for 
determining the minimum service required to made an employee eligible for pension. 
 
Action Taken By Exim Bank 
 
The provision of Exim Bank under Pension Regulations are in line with that 
of Public Secto r Banks.  Since, the recommendations made by the Committee is on 
the lines of CCS(Pension) Rules, the same have not been found possible to agree. 
 
 
6. Points raised – Regulation 33- Payment of pension/family pension 
 

 “Payment of Pension or family pension in respect of employees who retired or died 
between 1st January, 1986 and the notified date. 
 
1) Employees who have retired from the service of the Bank between the 1 st day 
of January, 1986 and the notified date shall be eligible for pension with effect 
from the notified date only”. 
 
2) The family of a deceased employee governed by the provisions contained in 
sub-regulation (4) of regulation 3 shall be eligible for family pension with 
effect from the notified date.” 
 
Under the provision of the above regulati on, the pension/family pension 
would be paid with effect from the notified date i.e. September 20, 2000 only; what is 
justification therefore; whether Government have any objection in extending the 
above benefits with effect from the actual date of retirement/death. 
 
Ministry’s/Exim Bank Comments 
 
Government of India has approved Exim Bank’s proposal for making 
pension payable from November 1, 1993 in the case of employees who retired prior to 
that date and from the date of retirement in the case of those w ho retired after that 
date, as in the case of public sector commercial banks. 
 
Committee’s Observation 
 
The Committee was informed that the Government of India had approved 
Exim bank’s proposal for making pension payable from November 1, 1993 in case of 
employees who retired prior to that date and from the date of retirement in case of 
those who retired after that day. The Committee was also informed that the relevant 
provision has already been amended as approved by the Ministry. 
 
 
 
 
Action Taken By Exim Bank 
 
The Bank has already notified the amendments in EXIM Bank Pension 
Regulation for making pension payable from November, 1,1993 in case of employees 
who retired prior to that date and from the date of retirement in case of those who 
retired after that day. 
 
7. Point raised – Regulation 35- Minimum Pension 
 
“The minimum amount of pension shall be rupees seven hundred and 
twenty per month”. 
 
The minimum amount of pension of Rs. 720/ - per month appears to be on 
lower side.  Whether the Ministry would consider to revise it? 
 
Ministry’s/Exim Bank’s Comments 

 
The provision is similar to that applicable to public sector commercial 
banks.  We, however, understand from the Indian Banks’ Association that the 
minimum amount of pension has been revised consequent u pon the revision in 
salaries and allowances payable to employees of public sector commercial banks with 
effect from April 1, 1998 
 
We propose to take steps to modify this provision accordingly. 
 
Committee’s Observations 
 
The management of the Bank accepted the committee’s suggestions to suitably amend 
the provision for raising the minimum amount of pension as under: 
 
(a) Rupees three hundred and seventy five per month in respect of an employee where 
the employee had retired before 1st day of July, 1993 
 
(b) Rupees seven hundred and twenty per month in respect of an employee where the 
employee retired on or after the 1st day of July, 1993; 
 
(c) Rupees one thousand and fifteen per month in respect of an employee where the 
employee retired on or after the 1st day of April, 1998. 
 
 
Action Taken by Exim Bank 
 
The Bank has already notified the amendments in Regulation 35 in line with 
the recommendation made by the Committee which are as follows: 
 
(a) Rupees three hundred and seventy five per month in respect of an employee who 
had retired before the 1st day of November, 1993; and  
 
(b) Rupees seven hundred and twenty per month in respect of an employee who  
retired on or after the 1st day of  November, 1993. 
 
 
 
 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance 
(Banking Division) have taken necessary follow up action on its suggestions as follows 
:- 
 
 
(i) In Regulation 2 (g), by amending it so as to include legally adopted child in 
the definition of child so as to make the provision more liber al with regard 
to giving pensionery benefit to a legally adopted child  also. 
  
(ii) In Regulation 17, by notifying the amendments therein for counting the 
period of leave not exceeding twelve months granted on grounds such as 
sickness, higher studies and such other grounds as may be approved by the 

Board during the entire period of service for all purposes including pension 
in order to make the provision more specific about the reasons for granting 
such leave and  setting up the norms of sanctioning such leave. 
 
(iii) In Regulation 33, by notifying the amendments therein for making pension 
payable from November, 1, 1993 in case of employees who retired prior to 
that date and from the date of retirement in case of those who retired after 
that day so as to extend the pensionery benefit to the employees. 
 
(iv) In Regulation 35, by notifying the amendment therein for raising the 
minimum amount of pension in lines with the recommendations made by the 
Committee thereby extending the financial benefit  to the employees of the 
Bank. 
 
  So far as Regulation 3 is concerned, the Committee decides not to 
pursue the matter as the interested employees have since  exercised their option and 
the issue has become redundant.  The Committee also accepts the Ministry’s view 
point on regulation 15  & 18 and decides not to press for changes in them any more. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report item on 
 
UCO Bank/United Bank of India (Employees) Pension Regulations, 1995 
 
 
 
   UCO Bank/United Bank of India (Employees) Pension Regulations,  1995, framed under the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 were examined and a 
questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance on the 8 th October, 2004, for 
their comments/ clarifications. Meanwhile,  the Committee took up the subject matter for discussion 
with the Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) at Kolkata on the 26th October, 2004. Relevant extracts 
from the study note on the above discussion were forwarded on the 31 st March, 2005 to the Minis try 
for their Action Taken Note. The Ministry vide their communication dated the 3 rd August, 2005 

forwarded the Action Taken Note on the observations/recommendations of the Committee on the 
Pension Regulations relating to United Commercial Bank and United Bank of India. 
 
2. The points referred to the Ministry, their comments/clarifications and their ATN thereon are 
reproduced below:- 
1. Point Referred (8/10/2004) 
Whether the UCO Bank (Employee’s Pension) Regulations, 1995 and the UBI 
(Employee’s Pension) Regulations have since been laid on the table of both houses of 
Parliament, if so, the details in this regards. 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
Pension Regulations were laid down in both the Houses of Parliament on 22.12.1995. 
 
2. Point Referred (8/10/2004)  
The UCO Bank as well as the UBI has been set up under the Banking Companies Act 
of 1970, but a scheme for the pension of bank employees has been brought about as 
laid in the year 1995. What is the justification for bringing about the pension scheme 
for the bank employees after so many years of the banks’ existence and what pension 
scheme, if any, was prevalent before the coming into force of the Employees’ Pension 
Regulations, 1995. 
 
 
 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
Before introduction of Pension Scheme, employees in the two Banks were 
having two retirement benefits. viz. Contributory Provident Fund (CPF) and 
Gratuity.  In pursuance of a settlement under the Industrial Disputes Act signed with 
the workmen unions and joint no te signed with the Officers’ Associations on 
29.10.1993 by the Indian Banks Association, representing the bank’s managements, a 
pension scheme was introduced in the banks in lieu of CPF and the employees were 

given option either to take pension in lieu of CPF or continue with the then existing 
scheme of CPF. 
 
3.    Point Referred (8/10/2004) 
Whether the Ministry of Finance is aware of the Employees’ Pension Scheme, 1995 
brought about by the Ministry of Labour? If so, how does the pension scheme for 
the bank employees as contained in the Pensions Regulations, 1995 compare with 
the Employees Pension Scheme of the Ministry of Labour? 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
Yes, Sir, the Pension Scheme introduced in the banks is more favourable than the 
Employees Pension Scheme, 1995 brought out by Ministry of Labour. 
 
4. Point Referred:-Regulation 2 (g): (8/10/2004)  
 “Regulation 2 (g) contains the definition of the term ‘child’. The definition of 
this term does not include adopted child/children whereas there is a mentio n of 
adopted son or daughter in the definition of term ‘family’ as contained in regulation 
2 (o).” 
 What is the justification for not including adopted children within the meaning 
of the term ‘child’? 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
Text of Regulation 2(g ) and 2(o) are similar to those contained in Rule 3(1) (c) and 
54(14)(b)(ii) of the CCS Pension Rules. 
While Regulation 2(g) describes “Child” in general, Section 2(o) gives description of 
constitution of “family”. The members of family as defined in Regulation 2(o) are eligible for 
family pension as per their priorities. 
 
 
Committee’s Observation (31/03/2005) 
The Committee was not convinced with the explanation given by both the banks with 
regard to the inconsistency in Regulation 2(g) and 2(o) in the matter of definition of the term 
“child”. The explanation to the effect that Regulation 2(g) described child in general was 

found unacceptable and the Committee desired the Ministry to have a re -look into the 
matter. 
Action Taken Note (3/08/2005) 
The definition of ‘child’ as given in Regulation 2(g) under the Employees Pension 
Regulations 1995 of the Banks is the same as that of CCS Pension Rules, 1972. 
The Government is of the view to continue with the existing provisions. 
 
5. Point Referred:-Regulation 2 (o): (8/10/2004)  
 “Regulation 2(o) defines the term ‘family’. As per these provisions, a widowed/divorced daughter, who has not attained the 
age of 25 years, is included in the definition of the term ‘family’.” 
What is the justification for putting age restriction in the case of widowed/divorced 
daughter who may generally be above this age limit?  Whether Government have 
any objection in removing this age restriction and instead putting a rider that such 
widowed/divorced daughters must be dependant on the bank employees? 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
The text of regulation 2 (o) is in conformity with the provisions contained in 
CCS Pension Rules (Dept, if P. & P.W..,O.M.No.F.45/86/97 -P.& P.W...(A), Part -I, 
dated the 27th October,1997). Pension is payable to the eligible family members as per 
their priorities.  Once a member becomes ineligible for pension either due to over age 
or otherwise, other member in the priority becomes eligible for pension. Lifting of age 
restriction in the case of widow/divorced daughter may create discrimination among 
unmarried daughter/son and widowed/divorced daughter. 
Committee’s Observation (31/03/2005) 
The Committee did not accept the explanation furnished by the two banks on the 
question of putting age restriction of 25 years on widow/divorced daughter for being treated 
as a member of family.  The Committee felt it improper that a son may be treated as a 
member of family upto the age of 25 years even when he is married, but a girl ceases to be 
covered within the definition of term “family” in case she gets married even though she may 
be less than 25 years of age.  The Committee reiterated that point raised by it and desired 
the Ministry to have a re -look at the definition of the term” family so as to ensure that i t is 
in conformity with the definition of this term in pension schemes of the bodies/organization 
of Central Government. 
Action Taken Note (3/08/2005) 
IBA was consulted in the matter. IBA has stated that the provisions contained in the 
Bank (Employees’) Pension Regulations 1995 are alike to CCS Pension Rules,1972 in 
respect of widowed/divorced daughter. No change is, therefore, considered necessary. 

As per the recommendations of the Committee, it has been decided to substitute the 
existing provisions in regulation 2(o) (c) as under:- 
“son or unmarried daughter or widowed/divorced daughter including such son or 
daughter adopted legally till he/she attains the age of 25 years or upto his/her 
marriage/re-marriage, whichever is earlier.” 
 
6. Point Referred:-Regulation 2 (o) (d): (8/10/2004)  
 “As per regulation 2(o) (d), family in relation to an employee means parents 
who were wholly dependent on the employee when he/she was alive, provided the 
deceased employee had left behind neither a widow/widower nor a child.” 
 What is the justification for putting the condition that the deceased employee 
had not left behind his/her spouse or a child for the purpose of including the parents 
within the definition of ‘family’? 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
The regulation is in line with the provisions contained in CCS Pension Rules 
(Dept, if P. & P.W..,O.M.No.F.45/86/97 -P.& P.W..(A), Part -I, dated the 27 th 
October,1997). It may further be added that as per pension regulations, the first 
priority is to be given t o widow for grant of pensionary benefits. In the absence of 
spouse, such pension is to be extended to the children.  Thus parents would become 
eligible for pension only when deceased person has not left behind spouse/child. 
 
 
 
7. Point Referred:-Regulation 3: (8/10/2004)  
 Regulation 3 relates to the applicability of the regulations. Whether any 
category of employees, ex-employees or the family of deceased employee have been 
deprived of the benefit of these regulations, if so, the details in this regard as well as 
the justification therefore? 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
Employees who retired prior to 01.10.1986 are not covered under this Regulation.  In 
addition, such of the employees or the family members of deceased employees who 
had not given option for pension within the stipulated period laid down in the 

regulations are not eligible for pensionary benefits.  However, they continue to retain 
the benefits under the contributory provident fund. 
Committee’s Observation (31/03/2005) 
The Committee noted t hat the bank employees who retired before 1.1.86 were 
ineligible to be covered under the scheme.  The Committee desired to have an idea as 
to the number of bank employees who had missed the opportunity to join the scheme 
when it was open and were desirous to join now.  It was pointed out by the Committee 
that some financial institutions had given options to their employees upto five times.  
The Committee desired Government to consider if the bank employee who had 
missed, could be given an option again at this stage. 
The Committee noted that the Pension Regulations cast an obligation upon the bank 
for ensuring sufficient funds so that the payments due to the beneficiaries are disbursed. The 
Committee desired to know whether under the existing disposition, the employees who were 
members of the scheme, were at an advantageous position, financially, as compared to their 
colleagues who were not members and if so, in what manner and to what existent.  The 
Committee reiterated its proposal that Government may consider if the left over employees 
could be given another option to join the scheme at this state. 
Action Taken Note (3/08/2005) 
IBA in the matter clarified that the employees who had exercised the option 
for pension are definitely in an advantageous position a s bank’s contributions 
towards Pension Fund costs much more than CPF.  Having regard to the cost of 
pension to banks and un -bridged gap in the Pension Funds of banks, IBA on behalf 
of Management of Banks, is not in favour to accept demand of another option  of the 
Unions/Associations.  It was also recorded in 7th Bipartite Settlement. 
 
8. Point Referred:-Regulation 5 (3) : (8/10/2004)  
As per regulation 5(3), the bank is a contributor to the fund and a duty has been cast 
upon the bank to ensure that ‘suffici ent funds’ are placed in it to enable the trustees to 
make due payment to the beneficiaries. 
The term ‘sufficient funds’ appearing above seem to be vague. Secondly, should there 
not be some restrictions with regard to the contributions coming from the bank .  
Whether this type of arrangements exist in case of pension schemes devised by other 
financial institutions like LIC/private banks, etc? 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
In view of the fact that Pension Scheme introduced in banks is a defined benefit 
scheme, banks are required to make additional annual contribution to the Pension 
Fund based on actuarial valuation of the fund at the end of each fiscal year. Placing 

restriction on such annual contributions could result in shortfall in the fund which 
may lead to the pension fund failing to meet its obligations under the scheme. 
The Pension scheme is in operation in LIC of India and old generation private sector 
banks are similar to the scheme obtaining in public sector banks (other than SBI). 
 
9. Point Referred:-Regulation 8 (1): (8/10/2004)  
 As per regulation 8(1), the board of trustees shall comprise not less than 3 and 
not more than 9 members. There is a wide variation between the minimum and the 
maximum number of members. What is the justifica tion for keeping a minimum 
membership of the Board of Trustees so low? 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
The Pension Funds are approved by the Commissioner of Income -Tax Rule 84(1) of 
Income-Tax Rules, 1962 stipulates that the trust under which the superann uation 
fund is established shall have at least 2 trustees. 
In UCO Bank, as per Board’s decision, there are 6 trustees and in United Bank of 
India, there are 7 trustees of which one each is representing workmen employees and 
officer’s employees. 
 
10. Point Referred:-Regulation 8: (8/10/2004)  
 Regulation 8, which mentions about constitution of the Board of Trustees, does 
not specify its term.  Has any term been prescribed for the Board of Trustees, if so, 
the details? 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
The pen sion funds are Income Tax approved superannuating funds. Part XIII of 
Income-Tax Rules, 1962 which deals with approval of superannuation funds does not 
stipulate any specific fixed terms for the Board of superannuating funds to function. 
Committee’s Observation (31/03/2005) 
The Committee was informed that in both the banks the appointment of trustees was 
for a continuing period. The IT Rules, 1962, which dealt with the approval of 
superannuation funds, also did not specify any fixed tenure for the Board of Trustees 
of such superannuation funds to function. The Committee, however, desired the 
Ministry to have a re -look into the matter i.e. why can there not be a term for the 
Board of Trustees? 
Action Taken Note (3/08/2005) 

IBA expressed the view that the banks should have no objection if the Government 
stipulates a fixed tenure for the Board of Trustees of Superannuating Fund. 
The Government agrees with the recommendation of the Committee and it is 
proposed to amend Regulation 8 of the Pension Regulation, 1995  to provide a fixed 
tenure of 3 years for the Board of Trustees to be eligible for reappointment, but may 
not be nominated for more than two tenures. 
 
11. Point Referred:-Regulation 9): (8/10/2004)  
  Regulation 9 lays down that the trustee shall comply with all such directions 
as may be given by the bank for the proper functioning of the fund.  These provisions 
of the regulations seem to vest absolute powers in the bank and may sometimes lead 
to wrongful interference in the discharge of their functions by the Board of Trustees.  
What is the justification for vesting this type of authority in the bank and secondly, 
whether Government have any objection in prescribing in the regulations that such 
directions from the bank must be in writing? 
 
 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
The pension fund established by a bank is for the sole purpose of payment of pension 
or family pension to the employee or his family in accordance with the Bank 
Employees Pension Regulations (BEPR), 1995.  The power to amend/modify BEPR, 
1995 vests with the Board of the bank.  Such amendments are carried out with the 
prior approval of the Central Government and concurrence of the RBI.  As and when 
such amendm ents/modifications are carried out to the BEPR, 1995 impacting 
payment of pension benefits to a retiree, the bank gives appropriate directions to the 
trustees of the pension fund. Directions to the trustees from a bank are in writing. 
Committee’s Observation (31/03/2005) 
Both the banks informed the Committee that all instructions given to the trustees 
were in writing and therefore there was no scope for any misuse of provisions of 
Regulation.  
        The Committee desired that wherever there was a provisio n in the Regulations 
contemplating directions from the banks to the trustees, the provisions must specify 
the purpose/objective of the directions also, so as to minimize the scope for arbitrary 
discretion by the banks.  
Action Taken Note (3/08/2005) 

The Go vernment agrees with the recommendation of the Committee and 
proposes to amend Regulation 9 of the Bank (Employees’) Pension Regulations, 1995. 
 
12. Point Referred:-Regulation 10: (8/10/2004)  
 As per regulation 10, a period of 180 days has been allowed fr om the close of 
each financial year to the trust for preparing its financial statement. 
 The period of 180 days seem to be on the higher side.  Whether it is not possible 
to shorten this period to a reasonable level.  
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
In terms of the extant provisions of Companies Act, 1956 read with Section 10 
of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/80, 
nationalized banks are required to publish their balance-sheets within a period of 180 
days from the closure of the financial year ending 31 st March of that year.  The 
provision of sub regulation 2 of Regulation 10 of BEPR, 1995 synchronisms with the 
above said provisions of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970/80.  The provision is considered reasonable. 
Committee’s Observation (31/03/2005) 
The Committee noted that the period of 180 days was prescribed in the Act.  The 
Committee, however, felt that Government may consider if this period could be 
reduced without any adverse implications. 
Action Taken Note (3/08/2005) 
Government agrees to the recommendation of the Committee, to amend 
Regulation 10 and to fix a period of two months from the date of publication of 
balance sheet of the Bank for closure of the books of accounts of the Pension Fund. 
 
13. Point Referred:-Regulation 20: (8/10/2004)  
 As per regulation 20, the service rendered by an employee in any other bank 
on permanent basis shall qualify for the purpose of pension. 
 What is the meaning of the term ‘permanent basis’, whether initial 
appointment in any nationalized bank is not on a temporary basis and, is so, should 
such temporary service rendered by an employee in a bank not qualify for the 
purpose of pension in case such an employee joins another bank at the same or higher 
level? 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 

Regulation 16 stipulates that service on probation against the post in the bank, if   
followed by confirmation in the same or any other post shall qualify for pension.  Thus 
past service in the erstwhile bank during the probation period if followed by 
confirmation shall be counted as qualifying service. 
Committee’s Observation (31/03/2005) 
The Committee noted that the explanation furnished by the representatives that 
service rendered by a bank employee in some other branch where the scheme is 
applicable should be counted for the purpose of pension.  The Committee, whoever, 
desired the regulations to clearly specify that period of probation followed by 
confirmation, shall be treated as “permanent service”.  
Action Taken Note (3/08/2005) 
The recommendation proposed by the Committee was taken up with the IBA. IBA is 
of the view that it has been clearly stated in Regulation 16 of the Bank (Employees’) 
Pension Regulation, 1995 that the service on probation against a post in the banks, if 
followed by confirmation in the same or any other post, qualifies.  The Government 
is of the view that the existing provision serves the purpose. 
 
14. Point Referred:-Regulation 22 (2) (b): (8/10/2004)  
 As per regulation 22(2)(b), forfeitures of past service shall not take place in 
case where the suspension is ‘immediately’ followed by reinstatement. 
 The term ‘immediately’ appearing here is liable to the interpreted differently 
on different occasions.  Whether Government has any objection in prescribing some 
definite period here so as to remove the ambiguity? 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
Indian Bank Association has reported that the word “immediately’ appearing in 
Regulation 22 (2) (b) is use d in the context of an employee who reports for duties on 
his reinstatement in service following revocation of suspension.  Prescribing any 
period in this regard is not considered necessary, as the competent authority revoking 
the suspension will be issuing appropriate orders in each case. 
Committee’s Observation (31/03/2005) 
The Committee was not convinced with the use of the word ‘immediate” in regulation 
22(2)(b).  The Committee was also not convinced with the explanation furnished by 
UCO Bank that if suspension was not followed by consequences like dismissal, reward 
or imposition of penalty, then forfeiture of past service shall not take place.  The term 
“immediate” was redundant in that case.  The Committee desired Government to 
review the provisions of Rule 22 (2)(b) so as to make them specific by substituting the 
word “immediately” by more appropriate word/phrase. 
Action Taken Note (3/08/2005) 

The word “immediately” is necessary so that it may not result in continuation of the 
service in which the empl oyee was out of service on account of dismissal or removal 
of the employee and therefore no amendment in the Rule is considered, necessary. 
 
15. Point Referred:-Regulation 23 (b): (8/10/2004)  
 As per Regulation 23(b), an employee deputed on foreign servic e to United 
Nations can avail of retirement benefits admissible under the rules of a foreign 
employer and not count such service as qualifying service under these regulations.  
But, according to the proviso, in such in such a case, the retirement benefit s hall be 
payable to him in Indian rupee from such date and in such manner as the bank may 
by order specify. 
 There appear to be contradiction in regulation 23 as on the one hand, it entitles 
the employee to have retirement benefit admissible under the rules  of the foreign  
employer and on the other hand, the banks have been authorized to dictate the 
manner of payment of the retirement benefits.  What are the comments of the 
Ministry in this  regards? 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
The Proviso below regulation 23(b) is in line with the proviso below Rule 31 of CCS 
(Pension Rules) which deals with period of deputation to United Nations and other 
organizations.  The objective of this regulation is that  an employee deputed to United 
Nations or any other organiz ations shall get pensionary benefits for the service 
rendered in bank in Indian rupees.  
Committee’s Observation (31/03/2005) 
The Committee noted the explanation furnished by the representatives of UCO Bank 
regarding entitlement to retirement benefits for the period where an employee had 
been on foreign service to the United Nations.  The Committee noted that similar 
provisions were available in CCS(Pension) Rules, 1972 also.  
Action Taken Note (3/08/2005) 
The explanation, given by the representatives of the Banks, in the meeting was 
accepted by the Committee. 
 
16. Point Referred:-Regulation 26: (8/10/2004)  
 Regulation 26 refers to addition to qualifying service in special circumstances 
and it has been provided therein that an employee shall be eligible to add to his service 
qualifying for superannuation pension the actual period not exceeding 1/4 th of the 
length of his service or the actual period by which his age at the time of recruitment 

exceeded the upper age limit specified by the bank for direct recruitment or a period 
of 5 years whichever is less in certain circumstances. 
 Such additions to qualifying service are not available to Government 
employees. What is the justification for allowing such addition s to qualifying service 
in the case of bank employees? 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
Benefits as in Regulation 26 are available to Central Government servants as well, as 
per Rule 30 of CCS (Pension) Rules. 
Committee’s Observation (31/03/2005)  
The Committee noted the explanation furnished by both the banks that Rules 29(5) 
did not mean any extra benefit beyond the age of 33 years as in the case of CCS (Pension) 
Rules, 1972. 
Action Taken Note (3/08/2005) 
The explanation, given by the representatives of the Banks, in the meeting was 
accepted by the Committee. 
 
17. Point Referred:-Regulation 28: (8/10/2004)  
 Regulation 28 deals with grant of pension to bank employees on attaining the 
age of superannuation. 
 What is the minimum service required to be rendered before a bank employee 
is entitled to have superannuation pension; whether Government was supposed to 
bring about a scheme so as to allow bank employees to go for superannuation pension 
in case they opt to retire before attaining the age of superannuati on, if so, the details 
in this regard? 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
The minimum service requirement for a member of the pension fund to 
become eligible for pension is 10 years vide Regulation 14. Following Voluntary 
Retirement Scheme introduced in the year 2000 in nationalized banks, in order to 
make an employee who opted to retire before attaining the age of superannuation 
entitled for pension, Regulation 28 of BEPR, 1995 was amended and a proviso 
effective from 01.11.2000 was inserted in terms of whic h an employee who opts to 

retire from services of the bank before attaining the age of superannuation in terms 
of any scheme that may be framed for such purpose by the Board with the approval 
of the Government, but after rendering service for a minimum period 15 years would 
be entitled for pro -rata pension for the service rendered.  The minimum service 
required for being eligible to get pension on voluntary retirement in terms of 
Regulation 29 is, however, 20 years of qualifying service. 
 
 
18. Point Referred:- Regulation 29(5): (8/10/2004)  
 As per regulation 29(5), the qualifying service of any employee retiring 
voluntarily shall be increased by a period not exceeding 5 years subject to conditions 
that the total qualifying service rendered by s uch employee shall not in any case 
exceed 33 years. 
 In case of Central Government employees, such an addition to qualifying 
service is allowed subject, however to the condition that the qualifying service after 
such addition shall not be more that what it  would have been had the Government 
servant superannuated in the normal course.  Whether such a condition is not 
applicable in the case of bank employees? 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004)  
Sub-regulation (5) of Regulation 29 of BEPR, 1995 reads as follows:  “The qualifying 
service of an employee retiring voluntarily under this regulation shall be increased by 
a period not exceeding five years, subject to the condition that the total qualifying 
service rendered by such employee shall not in any case exceed thirty three years and 
it does not take him beyond the date of superannuation”. Thus the provision is in 
conformity with the CCS (Pension) Rules. 
 
19. Point Referred:-Chapter 6: (8/10/2004)  
Chapter 6 of the regulations deals with the rate of pension.  In wh at manner, 
the rates of pension and family pension admissible to bank employees or their legal 
heirs under the regulations compare with the rates of pension or family pension as 
admissible to the Central Government employees. 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004) 
While rates of the basic pension under both the CCS (Pension) Rules and BEPR, 1995 
are same, the rate at which family pension is payable under these schemes differs.  
Whereas, family pension to the family of the deceased Government servant is 
calculated and paid at a uniform rate of 30% of Basic Pay in all cases, under BEPR, 

1995, family pension is paid on slab basis based on the Basic Pay last drawn by the 
deceased bank employees/retiree. 
Unlike under the CCS (Pension Rules) there is no provision for up dation of basic 
pension in the BEPR, 1995. However, all the pensioners get dearness relief linked with 
Consumer Price Index. 
20. Point Referred:- Regulation 41: (8/10/2004)  
 As per regulation 41, an employee is entitled to commute a fraction not 
exceeding 1/3rd of his pension.  In case of Central Government employees, this limit 
has been fixed at 40%. 
 What is the justification for this deviation, whether there is any proposal to 
bring the bank employees at par with the Central Government employees? 
Ministry’s Comments (26/10/2004)  
The pays, perks and other service conditions of bank employees are not comparable 
with the Central Government employees.  IBA has reported that having a regard to 
the cost implications, there is no proposal to bring bank employe es at par with the 
Central Government employees. 
 
3. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance (Banking 
Division) have accepted some of its recommendations and has taken necessary action 
upon them as under: 
•   Reg  2 (o):    By rephrasing the regulation 2 (o) as “son or unmarried daughter or 
widowed/divorced daughter including such son or daughter adopted legally till he/she 
attains the age of 25 years or upto his/her marriage/re -marriage, whichever is 
earlier”, thereby making its provisions clear and unambiguous.  
•   Reg  8:       By agreeing to amend  the regulation 8 so as to provide a fixed 
tenure of 3 years for the Board of Trustees to be eligible for reappointment, but may 
not be nominated for more than two tenures, thereby prescribing a term for the Board 
of Trustees. 
•   Reg 9:       By agreeing to amend the regulation 9 by specifying the purpose/ 
objective of the directions from the banks to the trustees, in order to minimize the 
scope for excessive or discretion by the banks. 
             •   Reg  10:    By agreeing to arbitrarily  fixing a period of two months from 
the date of publication of balance sheet of the Bank for closure of the books of 
accounts of the Pension Fund, thereby reducing the p rescribed 180 days to two 
months  for preparing the banks financial statement. 
  

The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should carry on the 
amendments in the  Regulations as above expeditiously. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
I 
 
 The Committee takes note of the various amendments to the Rules carried out 
by the Ministry of Shipping, Road, Transport & Highways (Department of Road, 
Transport & Highways).  Its observations regarding some of these amend ments are 
indicated hereunder; 
(vii) Rule 1(3)  Rectifying the typographical error by deleting the words and 
figures ‘sub-rule 3 of rule 103’; 

 
(viii) Rule 4  Omitting  item No. 5 “ Electricity or telephone bill”  and item 
no. 7 “Pay slip issued by any office of the Ce ntral Government 
or State Government or  a local body” from the list of documents 
which can be treated as evidence for correctness of address and 
age for the purpose of issue of licence.   The Committee had 
suggested that identity card issued by the Central  or State 
Government can be included in the list of items that can be 
considered as evidence as to the correctness of the address and 
age of the applicant. Instead, the Ministry have deleted 
“Electricity and telephone bills as well  as pay slips of the 
Central/State Government in respect of their employees, in Rule 
4 as admissible evidence for proof of address and/or age.  The 
Committee notes that age and the address of the applicant for a 
driving licence are vital piece of information and therefore 
adequate care needs to be taken while making admissible 
evidence in support thereof.  Accordingly, items in rule 4 should 
be reviewed regularly to keep pace with the changing times but, 
additions/deletions therein should be done with abundant 
caution so that the provisions are not misused. 
 
(ix) Rule 5  Prescribing that an application for issue of learner’s licence or 
a driving licence or for making additions of another class or 
description of a motor vehicle to a driving licence or for renewal 
of driving licence to drive other than transport vehicle, must be 
accompanied by a self declaration as to the physical fitness  in 
Form 1 and an application for a licence to drive a transport 
vehicle must be accompanied by a medical certificate in Form 1-
A to be issued by a registered medical practitioner.  The 
Committee notes with satisfaction that by this amendment the 
provisions of rule 5 have been brought in conformity with 
Section 8 (3) of the Motor Vehicles Act whereby medical 
certificate is required only in case of transport vehicles; 

 
(x) Rule 7  Providing appropriate space in Form 1 -A for affixing of 
photograph in the Medical Certificate which was not there in 
the pre revised provisions; 
 
(xi) Rule 9  Substituting the words and figures “specified in the VII schedule 
of the constitution” with the words and figures “specified in the 
VIII schedule of the constitution” thereby rectifying the 
typographical error in Rule 9; 
 
(xii) Rule 50(1)   Substituting the existing Rule 50(1) by a new one giving 
specifications of the registration number plate in relation to the 
language, script as well as the kind of letters and numerals to be 
used therein which were not there in the pre-revised provisions;  
 
(vii) Rule 75(2)  Substituting the words “State Government shall” with the 
words “State Government shall, if so desired by the Central Government” so as 
to provide that the State Register of Motor Vehicles should mandatorily be sent 
by the State Governments to the Central Government whenever “desired by the 
Central Government”.  The Committee had questioned the periodicity of sending 
the State Register of Motor Vehicles maintained by each State to the Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport & Highways. The Committee, however, feels that the 
Central Ministry should have up-to-date data/records/information with regard to 
the Motor Vehicles in the States so that they have all relevant inputs and are able 
to formulate better and accurate policies, closer to the ground realities/needs in 
the field of transportation and motor vehicles. The Committee, in this c ontext, 
recommends that there should be a mechanism whereby the Ministry has access 
to relevant information/statistics at the State level on a regular basis. The 
Committee feel that computerization of relevant information at the State Level 
can be of great  help in this regard and the Central Ministry may take steps to 
ensure that the State Transport Departments computerize their records 
forthwith.  
 

(ix) Rule 89  The Committee notes with satisfaction that rule 89 has been 
omitted and accordingly, the inconsistency in the rule as pointed 
out by it has gone. 
 
 The Committee’s recommendations and observations arising out of the 
examination of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 are enumerated below: 
 
(i) Educational qualification required  for issue of a driving license (Rule 9) 
 The Committee takes note of the fact that the existing provisions of the Motor 
Vehicle Rules 1989 do not prescribe any educational qualifications for procuring a 
driving license. Rule 9, however, pr escribes an educational qualification of a pass in 
tenth standard for obtaining a license for driving a goods carriage carrying goods of 
dangerous or hazardous nature to human life. The Committee is of the considered 
view that with the passage of time it h as become imminent that drivers of motor 
vehicles should possess some formal education so that they are able to read and 
understand various sign boards, directions etc. while driving. This is all the more 
essential in case of metro and big cities in the country where new and complex flyovers 
and relatively different traffic regulation are in force which may not be possible for 
an illiterate driver to understand or comprehend. The Committee does appreciate 
that prescribing a minimum education qualification c an adversely effect the 
livelihood of a sizeable section of people who are engaged in the business of driving 
but, equally important is the safety and security of the people around on the roads 
which is endangered due to the ignorance on account of illiter acy. The Committee 
feels that the safety of the road users outweighs and therefore recommends that the 
Government should consider to prescribe henceforth some minimum educational 
qualification say, 5th or 8th standard pass, for all types of licenses includ ing those for 
driving commercial vehicles. 
 
 As regards the requirement of a driving license for tractors when used as a 
transport vehicle, the Committee is happy to note that Government have taken up 
this matter with the State Governments. The Committee further appreciates that the 
Motor Vehicles Act prescribes a valid permit and other documents for use of a tractor 

as a transport vehicle. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry of Shipping, Road 
Transport and Highways to review the provisions of the Mot or Vehicles Act as well 
as the rules of 1989 framed thereunder so as to ensure that tractors, when used as a 
transport vehicle, whether for transporting goods or people, which is commonly done 
in the rural areas, does not remain unregulated and do not beco me a traffic hazard 
on the roads. The Committee accordingly recommends that Government may 
prescribe the requirement of a driving license subject to certain conditions keeping in 
view the rural background of the persons in case use of tractors outside the fields is 
to be allowed in order to maintain the safety and security of the road users. 
 
(ii) High Security Number Plates 
 The Committee is happy to note that Government are in the process of 
implementing high security registration plates for vehicles. The  Committee 
recommends that the Government should take up this project on priority and ensure 
that this is implemented within a definite timeframe. The Committee hopes that the 
implementation of this project would not only reduce instances of theft of vehicles but 
would also help in meeting the requirement of the law relating to the number plates 
i.e. the size and shape of the letters etc. 
 
(iii) Tinted Glasses 
 
 The Committee appreciates that tinted glasses on vehicles many a times 
become a hurdle for the security agencies in the prevention of crime and apprehension 
of criminals. But, the Committee would like the Ministry to keep in view the extremely 
hot conditions that prevail in most parts of the country during the summer period. 
The Committee feels that the requirements of security can be met in case light films 
are put on the vehicle which may not obstruct the visibility beyond the desired level. 
The Committee accordingly recommends that the Ministry of Surface Transport may 
work out on this issue with the security agencies for determining what percentage of 
visibility in a film would meet their requirement and the norms so determined can be 
notified for the information and compliance by the vehicle owners. The Committee 

would also appreciate if the manufacturers of such films are mandatorily required to 
indicate the percentage of visibility of the film on their rolls so that anybody who has 
put a film on his vehicle is confident that he is not violating the law. The Ministry may 
recommend similar action to the states also who may take action depending upon the 
climatic conditions and security requirements of their State. The Committee would 
also expect a definite policy of Government on this so that there is no uncertainty in 
the minds of the vehicle owners. 
 
(iv)  Use of Private Vehicles as Commercial 
 The Committee takes note of the various factors which prevent a vehicle owner 
to operate commercially on the basis of a valid permit namely, heavy taxation on 
commercial vehicles as compared to transport vehicles while entering from one state 
to another and even otherwise, procuring of fitness certificate for a commercial 
vehicle on a yearly basis as compared to a 15 year period for a transport vehicle, 
procuring of a permit for using a vehicle on commercial basis, etc. This vast difference 
between the requirements to be fulfilled in case of getting a vehicle registered for 
commercial or transport purpose and the financial implications involved in running 
a vehicle with a commercial permit is perhaps the main reason which prompts 
anybody to use his /her transport vehicle commercially. The Committee is unhappy 
to find such a state of affairs going on unendingly. The Committee is unhappy to find 
such a state of affairs going on unendingly. The Committee recommend s that the 
Ministry of SRT should consider this matter seriously as it not only involves revenues 
for the Government but also the safety and security of the commuters when vehicles 
operate unauthorizidely in the city or on the highways. Accordingly, the Co mmittee 
recommends that the Ministry should interact with the State Government on this 
issue in order to find out how such violations could be eliminated i.e. by rationalizing 
the financial implications so that the tendencies of violation are reduced. The 
Committee is conscious of the fact that violations in this area are a source of 
corruption with the implementing agencies and therefore, there is all the more a 
reason that a solution is found out and the sources of corruption are plugged once and 
for all. 
 

(v)  Better Regulation of Traffic and Enforcement of Traffic Laws 
 The Committee notes that the various traffic regulations under the Motor 
Vehicles Act are being enforced by the traffic police division of the State. Keeping in 
view the very heavy traffic that is seen on the roads in the big metropolitan cities 
(which is much more than the capacity of the roads) there is a need to make conscious 
efforts to see that the traffic moves in a regulated manner taking care of both the 
vehicle drivers a well as the enforcement agencies. The Committee is of the considered 
view that simply increasing the penalties cannot be a solution for instilling discipline 
among the vehicle drivers. In this context the Committee feels that the transport 
department of the State and the enforcement agencies i.e. the traffic police, can take 
some steps which may lead to disciplining the vehicle drivers on the roads voluntarily. 
For examples, both the state transport department and the traffic police can jointly 
or individually  consider educating the vehicle drivers on the traffic rules and 
regulations in a bigger way. This can be done by having some short programmes 
prepared and shown through the TV network as well as on the websites of the two 
departments. Secondly, the Committee feels that the traffic police in a city like Delhi 
should not give up its regulatory function of assisting and guiding the vehicle drivers 
at crossings and intersections which definitely is helpful and satisfying for the vehicle 
drivers. The Committee would also recommend that steps should be taken to device 
some specific training and refresher programmes for the traffic cops so that they can 
discharge their functions more accurately, responsibly and faithfully and eventually 
are able to win the confidence of the motor drivers. 
 
(vi)  Pollution under Control Certificate  
 The Committee is happy to note that a lot of attention is being paid 
particularly in big cities and metros to contain the menace of air pollution resulting 
from vehicles on road. There was an actual need for stern steps to check the high 
pollution levels caused due to emissions from vehicles in metropolitan cities where the 
vehicle population is too large. In order to keep the emission levels from the vehicles 
under check, the steps take n by Government with regard to bringing in higher in -
built technology in the vehicle and upgrading the quality of the fuel are laudable. But, 
the system of making all vehicles undergo a pollution check on a on -going basis calls 

for a review. In the first p lace, Government has not made any distinction between a 
commercial and a private vehicle for this purpose and anybody would agree that the 
commercial vehicles are put to use much more extensively as compared to private 
vehicles and therefore, the chances o f distortion of emissions are more in case of 
commercial vehicles as compared to the private vehicles. Secondly, the Motor 
Vehicles Act prescribes a validity period of 6 months for a PUC certificate i.e. a 
vehicle should undergo pollution check at least on ce in 6 months. But, some of the 
states like Delhi have prescribed a validity period of 3 months for a PUC certificate. 
Therefore, in a city like Delhi all vehicles are required to undergo a pollution check 
once in 3 months. It is doubtful whether the State of Delhi has enough paraphernalia/ 
infrastructure for the work of this magnitude and as a result, several vehicles continue 
without a PUC. Thirdly, the new vehicles with upgraded technology being used as 
private vehicles hardly go beyond the prescribed e mission norms. Even the new 
vehicles are required to get a fresh PUC certificate after three months of taking 
delivery. Keeping in view all these factors, the Committee recommends that the 
Government should review the existing dispensation so that people are not compelled 
to queue up for obtaining PUC certificate so frequently when their vehicles are well 
designed to adhere well to the prescribed emission norms. The Committee 
incidentally finds that in a city like Delhi, the job of issuing PUC certificates has been 
entrusted to private individuals who are located mostly at the filling stations. In this 
context the Committee recommends that an authorization can be given to the 
authorized service stations also for different brands of vehicles so that the vehic les 
undergo a pollution check along with each service. This would ensure an automatic 
pollution check of all vehicles at least once or twice a year without any extra effort on 
the part of the vehicle owners. 
(vii)  Certificate of Fitness     
 The Committee  notes that the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, and the Central 
Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, do not prescribe any age limit for passenger buses and 
private vehicles. The only restriction is in terms of years for issue of National Permit 
for different types of vehicles. Similarly, the Supreme Court has not fixed the age of 
the vehicles but has put certain restrictions on registration/plying of commercial 
vehicles older than 8 years. Also, a certificate of fitness is issued in respect of new 
transport vehicles to be  valid for 2 years and to be renewed every three years. The 

Committee feels that the States lack in infrastructure for carrying out necessary 
periodic checks on the transport vehicles, whose number is too large. The Committee, 
however, is of the view that there is a need for stricter provisions so that the vehicles 
on road are better maintained and in good working condition, which would also 
enhance safety on road and reduce the number of accidents. Government may 
consider improving the infrastructure so that the checks on the vehicles are thorough 
and effective and eventually with improved infrastructure, private vehicles are also 
brought into this regime at least in the metro cities to being with. 
 
 The Committee hopes that the Ministry shall carry out necessary amendments 
expeditiously under intimation to it.   
 
II 
 The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has carried out the 
amendments as suggested by the Committee on Rule 9(1) of the Prevention of Cruelty 
to Animals (Slaughter House) Rules, 2001 as contained in its 164th Report and decided 
not to pursue the matter further. 
 
III 
 
 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance (Banking 
Division) have taken necessary follow up action on its suggestions as follows :- 
 
 
(v) In Regulation 2 (g), by amending it so as to include legally adopted child in 
the definition of child so as to make the provision more liberal with regard to 
giving pensionery benefit to a legally adopted child  also. 
  
(vi) In Regulation 17, by notifying the amendments therein for counting the 
period of leave not exceeding twelve months granted on grounds such as 
sickness, higher studies and such other grounds as may be approved by the 
Board during the entire period of service for all purposes including pension in 

order to make the provision more specific about the reasons for granting such 
leave and  setting up the norms of sanctioning such leave. 
 
(vii) In Regulation 33, by notifying the amendments therein for making 
pension payable from November, 1, 1993 in case of employees who retired 
prior to that date and from the date of retirement in case of those who retired 
after that day so as to extend the pensionery benefit to the employees. 
 
(viii) In Regulation 35, by notifying the amendment th erein for raising the 
minimum amount of pension in lines with the recommendations made by the 
Committee thereby extending the financial benefit  to the employees of the 
Bank. 
 
 So far as Regulation 3 is concerned, the Committee decides not to pursue the 
matter as the interested employees have since  exercised their option and the issue has 
become redundant.  The Committee also accepts the Ministry’s view point on 
regulation 15  & 18 and decides not to press for changes in them any more. 
 
 With regard to Reg ulation 18,  the Ministry/Exim Bank has not taken any 
action stating that since the recommendations made by the Committee is on the lines 
of CCS (Pension) Rules and  this provision of Exim Bank under Pension Regulations 
are in line with that of Public Sector Banks and hence it has not been found possible 
to agree to the suggestions made by the Committee.  The Committee, however, was 
satisfied with the Ministry’s reply and it was decided to keep the provision as it is. 
 
IV 
 
 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance (Banking 
Division) have accepted some of its recommendations and has taken necessary action 
upon them as under: 
 
 •   Reg  2 (o):     By rephrasing the regulation 2 (o) as “son or unmarried 
daughter or widowed/divorced daug hter including such son or daughter 

adopted legally till he/she attains the age of 25 years or upto his/her 
marriage/re-marriage, whichever is earlier”, thereby making its provisions 
clear and unambiguous.  
•   Reg  8:       By agreeing to amend  the regul ation 8 so as to provide a fixed 
tenure of 3 years for the Board of Trustees to be eligible for reappointment, 
but may not be nominated for more than two tenures, thereby prescribing a 
term for the Board of Trustees. 
•   Reg 9:       By agreeing to amend the regulation 9 by specifying the purpose/ 
objective of the directions from the banks to the trustees, in order to minimize 
the scope for excessive or discretion by the banks. 
•   Reg  10:    By agreeing to arbitrarily  fixing a period of two months from the 
date of publication of balance sheet of the Bank for closure of the books of 
accounts of the Pension Fund, thereby reducing the prescribed 180 days to two 
months  for preparing the banks financial statement. 
  
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should carry on the 
amendments in the  Regulations as above expeditiously. 
 
 
 
 
 
 