COSL 
  
 
 
                        PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
                COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND SECOND REPORT 
 
                                              (Presented on  14 
th  December, 2012) 
 
 
 
 
                                
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
                            December, 2012/ Pausha, 1934   (Saka) 
202 


C O N T E N T S 
      
        PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION 
 OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
(ii) 
3. REPORT 
I. Railway Passengers (Manner of 
Investigation of Untoward Incidents) 
Rules, 2003. 
 
II. Customs (Compounding of Offences) 
Rules, 2005. 
 
 
 
 
4. MINUTES  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RA JYA SABHA 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   29 th  SEPTEMBER, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
1. Smt. Maya Singh   Chairperson 
2. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
3. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
4. Shri P. Kannan 
5. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
6. Shri Narendra Kashyap 
7. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
8. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
9. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
10. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi  
11. Shri Shantaram Naik 
12. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
13. *Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
14. *Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
15. *Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra 
 
   
 
S
ECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri N.K.Singh , Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
3.   Shri R.S. Rawat, Deputy Director  
4. Shri  R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director  
5.   Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director  
 
* Nominated  w.e.f.  9 th  May, 2012  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (i) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordina te Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on i ts behalf, this Two Hundred and 
Second  Report of the Committee.  
 
2.  The Committee examined the matters that came up  while scrutinizing (i) Railway 
Passengers (Manner of Investigation of Untoward Inc idents) Rules, 2003 and (ii) 
Customs (Compounding of Offences) Rules, 2005 and i ssues relating to them along with 
the comments received from the concerned Governments. 
 
3.   The observations and recommendations of the Co mmittee are contained in the 
Report.  
 
4.  The Committee considered and adopted the draft Re port in its meeting held on the 
12 
th  December, 2012  
 
.  
 
 
MAYA SINGH 
                                                                                                               Chairperson 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
                                                                                                              Rajya Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI  
December 14, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

I 
 
Report on the Railway Passengers (Manner of Investigation of Untoward 
Incidents) Rules, 2003  
 
The Railway Passengers (Manner of Investigation of Untoward Incidents) Rules, 
2003 (Annexure-I)  were framed under the Railways Act, 1989. In 1994,  through an 
amendment in Railways Act, 1989, Section 124-A was inserted providing for 
compensation on account of ‘untoward incidents’. Th is led to manifold increase in the 
number of claims on account of death/injury due to ‘untoward incidents’. To ensure that 
untoward incidents are thoroughly investigated and evidence collected and preserved, the 
“Railway Passengers (Manner of Investigation of Unt oward Incidents) Rules, 2003 were 
framed which came into force on the 8 th  August, 2003. The Rules prescribe the manner of 
investigation; duties of railway servants, Railway Protection Force (RPF) and the State 
Police with a view to substantively help in establi shing the correct position and also for 
collecting evidence.  
 
2. The said Rules were taken up for examination by the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation, Rajya Sabha and a questionnaire on the  subject was forwarded to the 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for comments/c larifications on the 13 
th  April, 
2005. The Ministry furnished comments/clarification s on the 26 th  October, 2005 
(Annexure-II) . The important points/issues raised by the Committ ee and the 
comments/clarifications furnished by the Ministry a re elaborated in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
3.  The Committee noted that the Railways Act was e nacted in the year 1989, 
whereas the Rules were framed only in 2003. The Com mittee wanted from the Ministry 
justification for such a considerable delay in fram ing of the Rules and in what manner 
this area was regulated in the absence of the said Rules. The Ministry replied that 
insertion of Section 124-A in 1994 in fact, had led  to a marked increase in the number of 
claims for death/injury as a result of ‘untoward in cidents’. Though a number of claims 
were false, the decrees were awarded overwhelmingly  in favour of the applicants, 
because in the absence of proper investigation, the  Railways were not able to 

examine/defend the cases properly. To ensure that t he untoward incidents are thoroughly 
investigated and evidence collected and preserved, Rules have been framed under the 
Railways Act and notified in year 2003 for investig ation prescribing duties of railway 
servants, RPF personnel and the State Police. This is expected to substantively help in 
establishing the correct position and also for coll ecting evidence.  The Committee notes 
that there was an inordinate delay in the framing o f the Rules after the Act was 
amended in 1994 and observes that the Ministry fram ed the Rules only after 
encountering problems in the investigation and sett lement of claims in cases of 
‘untoward incidents’. The Committee feels that this inordinate delay could well have 
been avoided by framing the Rules within the normal  period of six months from the 
coming into force of the Amendment Act.   
 
4. Rule 2(1)(n)  defines technical survey, and states, “Technical Survey’ means 
survey carried out by a team of railway officials n ominated by the Station Superintendent 
or any other official being in charge of railway st ation”. The Committee pointed out that 
the rules, strictly speaking, do not define the ter m ‘technical survey’ nor do they lay 
down any parameters.  The Committee enquired whethe r the Government has any 
objection in prescribing the parameters and also po inted out that the Rule does not 
specify what rank/designation of railway personnel shall comprise the team which will 
carry out the technical survey of the untoward inci dent; and whether it is possible to 
specify such personnel by their rank/designation sp ecially because the technical survey 
involves a lot of expertise and responsibility. The  Committee further pointed out that in 
view of the definition of “Station Superintendent’  provided in Rule 2(i)(1) whether the 
words “or any other official being incharge of Railway St ation”  are not superfluous and 
whether the Ministry have any objection in deleting  these words.  In reply, the Ministry 
proposed that Rule 6 (iv) mentioning the term ‘tech nical survey’ may be deleted as 
it appears to be similar to Rule 6 (iii) and stated  that  action has been initiated to 
amend the same by notification in the Gazette.  The Ministry further stated that in 
view of proposed deletion, the question of specifyi ng rank/designation of railway 
personnel for technical survey and deleting the wor ds “or any other official being 
incharge of Railway Station ” in Rule 2(i)(l) does not arise. 

 
5. Rule 2(i)(o)  defines “Untoward incident” as, “Untoward incident” means an 
incident defined under clause I of section 123 of t he Act” .  The Committee pointed out 
that Clause I of Section 123 referred to in this Ru le does not exist in the Railways Act, 
1989 and enquired whether the Ministry would make t he necessary rectification. The 
Ministry replied that necessary rectification was d one vide  the Railways 
(Amendment) Act, 1994 dated the 26 
th  April, 1994. 
 
6. Rule 3: Report about untoward incident  states; “Any railway servant, 
including guard and driver of the train, on coming to know of the occurrence of an 
untoward incident, shall report the incident immedi ately to the nearest Station 
Superintendent” . The Committee wanted to know the medium available  to the railway 
servant for reporting the incident and asked whethe r it is not possible to prescribe some 
time period for reporting the incident after coming  to know about it. The Committee also 
asked as to why there is no mention about Form-I in Rule 3 if the report has to be made in 
Form-I. The Ministry replied that the guard/driver of the train communicates through 
memo immediately after reaching the station. The fi rst priority after accident is to protect 
the train and give first aid to the injured. As suc h, it is not possible to prescribe any fixed 
time frame for reporting the untoward incident. However, the incident is to be reported as 
early as possible. The Ministry further clarified t hat report of the incident in Form-I is to 
be made only by the guard/driver/Train Ticket Examiner who are “on duty”  in train. Rule 
3 is a general instruction for other railway servan ts who, on coming to know of the 
untoward incident, should bring the same to the not ice of the nearest Station 
Superintendent. Hence Form-I has not been mentioned in Rule 3. 
 
7.  Rule 5: Duties of Supervisor  “On receipt of a report in Form-I, the Supervisor 
shall forward the report of an untoward occurrence to the divisional Railway Manager”. 
Pointing out that there is no time period prescribe d in the Rule within which the 
supervisor shall forward the report of an untoward occurrence to the Divisional Railway 
Manager, the Committee suggested that some time per iod should be prescribed in the 
Rule itself to obviate any instance of delay. The Ministry replied that a period of three 

days may be specified for the purpose. This involve s amendment in Gazette 
Notification, for which action is being initiated.  
 
8. As per Rule 6(ii) , the Station Master, on receipt of information abo ut occurrence 
of an untoward incident is supposed to arrange for medical assistance to the injured 
passengers. The Committee enquired about the means available with the Station 
Superintendent for arranging the required medical a ssistance. The Ministry replied that 
the Station Master of the Station will arrange firs t aid to the passengers and thereafter 
make arrangements to shift them to nearest Government Hospital as early as possible. 
 
9. In Rule 6(iii) , the Committee enquired whether the Government hav e any 
objection in substituting the words “in-charge of the Force”  by the term “Divisional 
Security Commissioner” , keeping in view the provision of Rule 2(1)(f). The Ministry 
stated that they have no objection and accepted tha t the words “in charge of the 
Force”  may be replaced by the word “Divisional Security Commissioner/Senior 
Divisional Security Commissioner”.  
 
10.  As per Rule 6(iv) , on receipt of information of an untoward incident , the Station 
Superintendent is supposed to carry out technical s urvey of the incident himself or 
through his representative. The Committee enquired whether the Station Superintendent 
is competent to carry out such technical surveys. The Ministry replied that the issue 
does not arise in view of proposed deletion of Rule  6 (iv) and the definition in Rule 
2(1)(n).  
 
11.  Rule 7  relates to conduct of inspection and submission of  report by the Force. As 
per Rule 7 (2) , the officer of the Force, on completion of invest igation shall submit a 
report to the authorities specified under Rule 10(2 ). The Committee enquired whether 
Government has any objection in prescribing some ti me period for conduct of such 
investigations so that the matter does not get dela yed unreasonably. The Ministry 
accepted the Committee’s suggestion and proposed th at the period for conduct of 
such investigation may be prescribed as 60 days. The Ministry also stated that there 

are only 1754 Inspectors in Railway Protection Forc e all over India, therefore in Rule 7 
(1), Inspector should be read as Assistant Sub-Insp ector and above as defined in Sub-
Section (2) of Section 179 of Railways Act, 1989 so  that more than 10,000 ‘authorised 
officers’  are available to conduct speedy investigation in such cases.  
 
12. As per Rule 8 , on receipt of a report the police is supposed to initiate 
investigation and prepare inquest report or inquiry  in accordance with the procedure as 
laid down in the Criminal Procedure Code 1973. The Committee enquired about the 
procedure prescribed in this behalf in the Criminal  Procedure Code and whether the 
requirement of the Rules is suitably met by followi ng this procedure or it would be more 
effective to prescribe a specific procedure in the Rules itself. The Ministry replied that 
the procedure in this behalf is prescribed in Secti on 173 and 174 of the Criminal 
Procedure Code, 1973 and it is considered sufficient for the requirement of the Rules. 
 
13. As per Rule 10(1) , the police on completion of investigation is requ ired to 
forward the report to the Magistrate. The Committee  enquired whether Government has 
any objection in making it obligatory on the part o f police to supply copies of the inquest 
report, post-mortem report and jama talashi report to the officer of the Force, as required 
under Rule 7(1)(i). The Ministry agreed that it should be mandatory on the part of 
Police/GRP to supply copies of the inquest report, post-mortem report and jama 
talashi to the ‘authorised officer’ of the Force.  The Ministry however stated that it will 
be better if “N.O.C” of Ministry of Home Affairs is  obtained before hand, lest State 
Governments object later on. 
 
14. Rule 11  relates to action on part of the Divisional Railwa y Manager. As per sub-
rules (1) and (4), the Divisional Railway Manager i s supposed to examine the report 
‘immediately.”  The Committee enquired whether Government has any objection in 
prescribing some time period within which action on  the report should be taken by the 
Divisional Manager. The Ministry replied that a time period of fifteen days may be 
specified for the purpose and action has been initi ated to amend the Rule by 
notification in the Gazette.  

 
15. The Committee discussed the matter with the rep resentatives of the South Central 
Railways along with the representatives of the Mini stry of Railways (Railway Board) at 
Hyderabad on the 7 
th  November, 2005. Study note on the said discussion was sent to the 
Ministry for action taken on the 2 nd  May, 2006 ( Annexure-III ). After a couple of interim 
replies, the Ministry finally furnished the Action Taken Note on the subject on the 21 st  
April, 2009 stating that the amendments in the rule s, as suggested by the Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha have been inco rporated in the rules by framing the 
Railway Passengers (Manner of Investigation of Unto ward Incidents) Amendment Rules, 
2007 (Annexure-IV) . Subsequently, the Committee also held discussion with the 
representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railwa y Board) at Dharamshala on the 26 th  
June, 2012 and study note on the said discussion is placed at Annexure-V.  
 
16. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry ha s accepted the 
suggestions of the Committee by incorporating them in the Railway Passengers 
(Manner of Investigation of Untoward Incidents) Amendment Rules, 2007 as under: 
 
(i)       By deleting Rule 2 (n) defining the term “technical survey”;  
(ii)        In Rule 6(iii), by substituting the words “i n-charge” with the words 
“Divisional Security Commissioner”; 
(iii)       In Rule 7(2), by prescribing a time lim it of 60 days for completion of 
investigation; 
(iv)       By inserting new sub-rule (3) in Rule 10 pres cribing that Divisional 
Security Manager shall submit the report to Divisio nal Railway Manager 
within 15 days of receipt of report by investigation; 
(v)      In Rules 11, by prescribing 15 days for examin ation of report by 
Divisional Regional Manager; and 
(vi)      By substituting Rule 13 and prescribing 15 day s for the investigation 
report along with acceptance of Divisional Railways  Manager to be sent 
to the claims office of the Zonal Railway where the incident has occurred. 
 

17. On the remaining issues raised by the Committee, th e Committee notes with 
satisfaction the explanation furnished by the Ministry. 
 
 
 
II 
 
 
The Customs (Compounding of Offences) Rules, 2005 
 
The Customs (Compounding of Offences) Rules, 2005 (Annexure-I)  were 
framed in exercise of the powers conferred by claus e (h) of the sub-section (2) of section 
156, read with sub-section (3) of section 137 of th e Customs Act, 1962 .  The rules 
specify compounding amount for offences sought to be compounded either before or after 
institution of prosecution.  The main objective of compounding of offences is to waive 
prosecution or to settle a pending prosecution case  on payment of prescribed 
compounding amount by an accused person.  This is i ndependent of any other 
Department proceedings such as adjudication, appeal  etc., for recovery of duty liabilities 
from the accused person.  Such a mechanism was not available to the accused earlier and 
every offence against a person had to be tried for prosecution by the Department subject 
to instructions in this regard.  
 
2. The Rules were taken up for detailed examination  by the Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha and a question naire on the subject was forwarded 
to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) for comments/ clarifications on the 
16 
th  November, 2006.  The Ministry furnished their comm ents/ clarifications on the 
issues raised in the questionnaire (Annexure-II).   The points raised by the Committee 
and the comments/ clarifications of the Ministry th ereon are reproduced in the following 
paragraphs: 
 
I The Committee noted that the Customs Act was enac ted in 1962 while the 
Customs (Compounding of Offences) Rules, 2005 were laid on the Table of the Rajya 
Sabha in 2006.  The Committee wanted to know the re asons for such a long gap between 

the enactment of the Act and the coming into force of the Rules.  Also, the mechanism in 
vogue in the absence of  these Rules for implementa tion of the said Act.  In reply, the 
Ministry informed that there were two aspects to th e bringing into effect the 
Compounding Scheme which are as under: 
 Legal Provisions bringing into effect the Compound ing Scheme :  The 
Customs Act, 1962 was amended in order to insert a new sub-section (3) to section 137 
of the Customs Act, 1962 vide 
clause 71 of the Finance Act, 2004 which was enacte d on 
10.09.2004. This new Section provided for compoundi ng of offences under Customs Act 
on payment of compounding  
amount by the accused.  The compounding amount is t o be determined in terms of the 
rules prescribed in this regard.  The Customs (Comp ounding of Offences) Rules, 2005 
were notified on 30.12.2005 after detailed examination.  
 The main objective of compounding of offences is t o waive prosecution or to 
settle a pending prosecution case on payment of pre scribed compounding amount by an 
accused person.  This is independent of any other D epartment proceedings such as 
adjudication, appeal etc., for recovery of duty lia bilities from the accused person.  Such a 
mechanism was not available to the accused earlier and every offence against a person 
had to be tried for prosecution by the Department s ubject to instructions in this regard.  
Even in cases where the Department had slightly wea k stand, the process of launching 
prosecution had to be gone through even though the accused may finally be let off and 
the prosecution may not succeed.  Where as in cases  where the Department’s stand was 
strong prosecution used to be successful.   
 The compounding of offences enables the Department  to concentrate its efforts on 
pursuing only important cases of prosecution and those cases where the Department has a 
very good chance of success.  On the other hand, ev en where the Department case was 
not strong, person accused is encouraged to settle the prosecution cases through 
compounding mechanism thereby reducing protracted l itigation, by not launching 
prosecution in non-deserving cases or settle pending prosecution cases.   
 The Customs Act, 1962 is a basic statute which emp owers the Government for 
levy, collection, exemption of Customs duty and enf orcement of the provisions of the 
Act.  This Act was enacted in the year 1962 after r epealing the Sea Customs Act, 1878, 

the Inland Bonded Warehouse Act, 1896 and the Land Customs Act, 1924 besides 
repealing Section 16 of the Aircrafts Act, 1934.  O ver the years, various machinery 
provisions have been introduced in the Act to resol ve disputes and reduce litigation.  
Adjudication of disputes were initially done by the  Collector of Customs and Deputy/ 
Assistant Collector of Customs depending upon the v alue of the goods.  Appeals in such 
matters would lie with the Central Board of Excises  & Customs (CBEC) and Appellate 
Collector of Customs respectively.  Central Governm ent also have powers to review 
orders in certain specified cases.  Subsequently, C ustoms, Excise and Service Tax 
Appellate Tribunal (CESTAT) was also constituted.   
 Settlement Commission: Section 127A to 127N of Chapter XIV-A of the 
Customs Act, 1962, provide for settlement of cases through the Customs and Central 
Excise Settlement Commission.  This mechanism interalia  provides for immunity from 
prosecution of any offence under the Customs Act subject to payment of sum specified in 
the order of settlement by the said Commission. 
 The   Settlement Commission is designed to provide  a channel whereby indirect 
tax disputes can be settled expeditiously and in a spirit of conciliation rather than 
prolonged litigation.  However, this Scheme covers only cases where any proceedings for 
levy, assessment and collection of customs duty are  pending before a Customs Officer.  
Further, the Commissioner consists of a principal b ench at Delhi and one additional 
bench each at Kolkata, Chennai and Mumbai.     
 The new section 137 (3) of the Customs Act, 1962, provides compounding facility 
to be exercised by Chief Commissioners of Customs t hereby further enhancing the scope 
for reduction of disputes in indirect tax.   
  
II Regarding Committee’s query whether Ministry hav e any objection in specifying 
a time frame within which an application under Rule 3  is to be disposed off by the 
Compounding Authority, the Ministry informed that t he Compounding Authority has to 
consider the application under Rule 3 of the Compou nding Rules based on the report of 
the “Reporting Authority”.  The Reporting Authority  is required to send such a report 
within a period of one month or within such extende d period as may be allowed by the 

Compounding Authority from the date of receipt of c ommunication from the 
Compounding Authority.   
The Compounding Authority can, after taking into ac count the contents of the 
said application, either allow the application indi cating the compounding amount and 
grant immunity from prosecution or reject such an a pplication.  Further, the applicant is 
also given an opportunity of personal hearing to ex plain his case before the 
Compounding Authority.   
 The Compounding Authority can decide the applicati on only on the basis of facts 
submitted in the report of the “Reporting Authority ” and duly follow the principals of 
natural justice.  As this quasi judicial proceeding takes time, no sp ecific time frame 
has been provided for dealing the application by th e Compounding Authority.   
However, CBEC has issued executive guidelines in 20 05 in terms of which the 
Compounding Authorities are expected to dispose off  all the applications within six 
months.    
  
III Rule 2(e)  defines ‘reporting authority’ as ‘the Commissioner of Customs, having 
jurisdiction over the place where the offence under  the Act has been or alleged to have 
been committed or any other officer as may be autho rized in this regard by the Chief 
Commissioner of Customs having jurisdiction over the place where such offence has been 
alleged to have been committed’. As per this sub-rule, the Chief Commissioner of 
Customs having jurisdiction over the place where any offence has been or alleged to have 
been taken place can authorize ‘any other officer’ to be the reporting authority.  The 
Committee, accordingly, asked whether Ministry have  any objection in stating in the 
Rules itself minimum level / rank for such an offic er so that the delegation under the 
Rules is not unqualified.  In reply the Ministry st ated that an offence may be detected 
either by jurisdictional Customs formation or preve ntive agencies like Directorate 
General of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) which have al l India jurisdiction.  The rank of the 
reporting officer has been specifically mentioned a s jurisdictional Commissioner of 
Customs. However, in the event of cases being detec ted by preventive agency like DRI, 
the reporting officer shall be of the level of Addi tional Director General of DRI, who is 
the equivalent in level/ rank of the Commissioner o f Customs.  However, it is also 

provided that the report may also be obtained from any other officer, authorized by the 
Jurisdictional Chief Commissioner as they might hav e investigated the case.  The various 
Intelligence/ Investigation Units like Special Inte lligence and Investigation Branch, 
Central Intelligence Unit, Dock Intelligence Unit, Airport Intelligence Unit are headed by 
Joint Commissioner level officers .  The Ministry, accordingly, submitted  that “Joint 
Commissioner (or an equivalent level officer such a s Joint Director, DRI/DGCEI)” 
may be prescribed as the minimum level/ rank in respect of Rule 2(e). 
  
IV An applicant has to make an application for comp ounding his offences in the form 
and manner as prescribed in Rule 3 , and the same is admitted by the Compounding 
Authority.  The Committee asked whether entertainme nt of such an application results in 
immunity from prosecution and whether grave offence s are also immune from 
prosecution by the Compounding Authority.  The Comm ittee also wanted to know the 
type of offences that can be compounded and whether  offences committed with criminal 
intent are also open to compounding; if so, whether  this would not encourage people to 
commit offences.  Also, what is the basis of this w hole concept of providing for 
compounding in cases of violation of provisions of the Customs Act and how 
Government stands to benefit by such a dispensation .  In reply the Ministry stated that 
entertainment of an application filed under Rule 3 does not mean immunity from 
prosecution.  Immunity is provided to the applicant  when compounding authority 
passes an order in this regard under Rule 4(3).  
 An applicant would not be allowed compounding, if he has committed or has also 
been accused of committing an offence under (a) Nar cotics Drugs and Psychotropic 
Substances Act, 1985, (b) Chemical Weapons Convention Act, 2000, (c) Arms Act, 1959, 
(d) Indian Penal Code, 1860 and, (e) Wild Life (Pro tection) Act, 1972 along with offence 
under Customs Act, 1962.  
 Similarly, any person involved in cases of smuggli ng of goods is not allowed 
compounding facility if it falls under (a) Special Chemicals, Organisms, Materials, 
Equipments & Technologies (SCOMET) as specified in Appendiox-3 to Schedule 2 of 
ITC (HS), (b) Prohibited items for import or export  as specified in the ITC (HS) 
Classifications of Export and Import items issued u nder section 3 of the Foreign Trade 

(Development and Regulation) Act, 1992, (c) Any oth er goods or a document, which is 
likely to affect friendly relations with any foreig n state or is derogatory to national 
prestige.   
Hence, any application from a person who has committed a c riminal or 
serious offence of the above nature shall not be co nsidered for compounding.  
Accordingly, the Ministry submitted, it would not e ncourage persons to commit 
these offences on the pretext that the same can be compounded.    
The Ministry further informed that CBEC have issued  guidelines vide  Circular 
No. 54/2005-Cus dated 30.11.2005.  For the purpose of compounding, the offences have 
been classified as (i) technical offences; and (ii)  substantive or non-technical offences.  
‘Technical offences’ are those offences that can be  compounded more than once and 
would be accorded a more liberal treatment.  These have been covered under Sections 
132, 133 and 134 of the Customs Act, 1962.  ‘Substa ntive or non-technical offences’ are 
offences where it has been decided not to allow com pounding for the second time.  
Compounding for substantive offences would be allow ed only once and have been 
covered under section 135 and 135A of the Customs Act, 1962.   
The purpose of compounding of offences against paym ent of compounding 
amount under Customs Act is to prevent litigation a nd encourage early settlement of 
disputes.  Compounding of offences enable the Depar tment to concentrate its efforts on 
pursuing only important cases of prosecution and those cases where the Department has a 
very good chance of success.  On the other hand, pe rson accused is encouraged to settle 
the prosecution cases through compounding mechanism  thereby reducing protracted 
litigation by not launching prosecution in non-dese rving cases or settle pending 
prosecution cases. 
Further, section 137(3) of the Customs Act, 1962 provides that any offence under 
chapter XVI  may, either before or after the institution of pro secution be compounded by 
the Chief Commissioner of Customs.  Accordingly, all offences specified under Section 
132 to 135  of Customs Act, can be compounded.  In respect of section 136 , it is stated 
that since the offence is committed by Customs Offi cer and that the compounding is 
normally a matter between the State and a Citizen, not the State and its employee, the 
same has not been covered under compounding scheme.   

As regards offence committed with criminal intent , it is stated that no 
contemplation has been made in the Rules specially denying compounding for such 
offences as the power to make rules do not provide for the same.  However, while 
implementing the Compounding Scheme, Government hav e exercised caution so that 
certain specified offences listed in para 3 (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of Circular No. 54/2005 , 
are not compounded and such applications, if receiv ed, are rejected in all cases.  These 
involve grave offences of serious nature and offenc es involving criminal intent covered 
under the Indian Penal Code.  An offence with crimi nal intent would fall in the category 
of exclusion under para 3 (i) to (iv) and hence wou ld not be eligible for compounding.  
Further, the compounding amount has also been fixed keeping the gravity of offence 
in mind and is quite substantial to act as a financ ial deterrent against substantive 
offences.  Hence, it is submitted that the Compounding Scheme would not encourage 
person to commit offences.  
 
V The Committee wanted to know the circumstances co ntemplated under Rule 4(6)  
when Court may reject grant of immunity from prosec ution.  When the immunity has 
been granted by Government on the application of th e party, who is likely to move the 
Court to challenge immunity against prosecution.  S econdly, why power to review the 
compounding amount has not been kept with the Compo unding Authority.  The Ministry 
informed that the Chief Commissioners have been emp owered to compound offences 
before or after institution of prosecution by the D epartment.  In respect of existing cases 
pending in the Court, the Compounding Authority may  examine the application in 
accordance with the guidelines issued vide 
 Circular No. 54/2005-Cus dated 30.11.2005 
and pass an appropriate order of compounding.  Ther eafter, Department requests the 
Court to dispose of the prosecution petition, in vi ew of compounding of case.  If the 
Court accepts the order of compounding of offence a nd disposes off the case, then the 
order of the compounding authority becomes final.  However, in cases where the Court 
rejects the request of the Department for grant of immunity from prosecution by 
compounding of offences, then the compounding autho rity shall be refunded to the 
applicant.   

The provisions relating to determination of compoun ding amount in Rule 5 
provides least discretion to compounding authority.   This obviates the need for 
‘review’ of compounding of cases.   
 
VI The Committee sought to know the basis on which compounding amount has 
been determined and prescribed in Rule 5 .  The Ministry informed that the manner of 
prescribing compounding amount has been broadly in line with the guidelines issued by 
Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT).  These guidel ines provide that technical offences 
can be compounded more than once and compounding fe e in each case is to be increased 
by 100% of normal fee i.e. for the second technical  offence, it would be 200% of the 
normal compounding fee and so on.     
The offences under sections 132, 133 and 134 of the  Customs Act, 1962, which 
are not directly related to payment of customs duty , are treated as ‘technical offences’ 
and compounding amount has been prescribed as Rupee s fifty thousand for the first 
offence and to be increased by hundred percent of t his amount for each subsequent 
offence.   
The Ministry further submitted that the offences under Section 135 & 135A of the 
Customs Act are substantive offences and compoundin g amount has been prescribed at a 
much higher scale subject to limited discretion wit h the Compounding Authority to 
prescribe ‘compounding amount’ upto 20 % of the mar ket value of the goods or Rs. 10 
lakhs, whichever is higher, based on the gravity of  the offence and role of the individual 
applicant.   
 
VII Under Rule 6 , the Compounding Authority is empowered to grant i mmunity from 
prosecution under the Act.  In this regard, the Com mittee inquired whether the 
compounding Authority could recommend prosecution also and in that case what shall be 
the fate of the party’s application for compounding or the compounding fees deposited by 
the party.  Also, whether the Compounding Authority  is bound to compound the offence 
in case the party is ready and willing to deposit t he compounding fees prescribed under 
Rule 5.  The Ministry replied that as per Rule 4(3)  of the Customs (Compounding of 
Offences) Rules, 2005, the Compounding Authority, a fter taking into account the 

contents of the said application may, by order, eit her allow the application indicating the 
compounding amount and grant immunity from prosecut ion or reject such an application.  
The outcome of the rejection of the application is ‘prosecution’.  The applicant would 
not be required to deposit compounding fee in case of rejection of his application.   
Regarding the Committee’s second query, the Ministr y informed that as per Rule 4(7), 
the applicant cannot claim, as of right, that his o ffence shall be compounded.  CBEC has 
also issued guidelines by way of a circular in 2005  to be followed by the ‘Compounding 
Authority’.  Thus, the Compounding Authority is not bound to compound the offence 
in case the party is ready and willing to deposit the compounding fee.   
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the Rules for  discussion with the 
representatives of the Customs Commissionerate, Kol kata and the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue) at Kolkata on the 6 
th  June, 2007.  Relevant extracts from the 
study note (Annexure-III) on the above discussion was forwarded to the Minis try of 
Finance (Department of Revenue) for necessary actio n on the 7 th  December, 2007.  The 
comments/ observations of the Committee and the act ion taken by the Ministry thereon 
are reproduced below:   
 
I The Committee wanted to know whether the decision  of compounding could be 
reviewed.  If so, what are the provisions.  The Com mittee, in particular, wanted to know 
about the review mechanism if the Compounding Autho rity compounds a case having a 
criminal intent.  The Ministry informed the Committ ee that there is no provision to 
review the compounding order passed by the Chief Co mmissioner.  However, 
compounding decision may be subject to judicial rev iew.  The compounding of offences 
scheme has been introduced to reduce protracted lit igations.  It is also aimed at reducing 
the time and effort taken by the departmental offic ers to pursue the prosecution cases.  
The compounding of offences enables the department to concentrate its efforts on 
pursuing only important cases of persecution, and c ases where the department has a 
strong chance of success.  Therefore , it is felt that providing the review mechanism 
will further give scope for litigation and thus def eat the very purpose of 
compounding scheme .   Further,  the authority for compounding of offences is vested 

in the zonal Chief Commissioners who are the senior  most executive officers 
working in the field formations and who are of the rank of Additional Secretary to 
the Government of India.   
 
II In the circular issued on compounding scheme, ce rtain offences have been 
excluded.  The Committee, accordingly, wanted to kn ow whether these could be 
excluded in the Rules itself.  In particular, the C ommittee wanted to know why the 
exclusion to cases with criminal intent should not be in-built in the Rules.  The Ministry 
informed that the legal provision for compounding o f offences is incorporated in sub-
section (3) of section 137 of the Customs Act, 1962  under which the Rules have been 
framed.  This section empowers the Central Governme nt only to make rules to provide 
for the amount to be paid or for compounding.  Ther efore, other aspects relating to 
compounding have been included in the circular and not in the Rules.  Further, the 
circular is binding on the field formations/ Chief Commissioners.  Therefore, there 
appears to be no need to amend the said Rules in this regard.    
 
III On any problems which the field formations may have come across while 
administering the compounding scheme, and if so, th e suggestions to overcome such 
problems, the Committee was informed that the field  formations have pointed out that in 
many cases the compounding fee works out to be very  high in comparison to the actual 
amount of duty evaded.  This has resulted in modera te response to the compounding 
provisions.  The issue of revising the compounding fee is under examination by the 
Board.   
 
IV On the issue of the rank/ level of the assessing  authorities, appellate authorities 
and compounding authorities under the Customs Act, 1962, Central Board of Excise and 
Customs (CBEC) informed that under the provisions o f the Customs Act, 1962, the 
assessing officer signifies the officers who assess  the goods in terms of its classification, 
valuation and duty liability.  The officers of the rank of Deputy Commissioner, Assistant 
Commissioner, Appraiser and Superintendent are the assessing officers. Commissioners 
(Appeals) are appellate authorities for orders pass ed by officers up to the rank of 

additional Commissioners.  The Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal is 
the Appellate Authority for orders passed by Commis sioners and Commissioners 
(Appeals).  Chief Commissioners have been appointed  as Compounding Authorities. 
There was no provision for compounding of offences prior to its introduction in the 
Customs & Central Excise Acts by the Finance  Act, 2004 which was enacted on 
10.09.2004.  
 
V Regarding the authority which files the complaint s in the case of prosecution in 
the Court of Law and whether CBEC would suggest the  assessing officer or the 
jurisdictional officer for filing a complaint in th e Court, based on their experience, the 
Committee was informed that the sanction for launch ing prosecution is given by the 
concerned Commissioner of Customs after taking appr oval from the Chief 
Commissioner.  The actual filing of the prosecution complaint is u sually done by an 
officer authorized by the Commissioner.  This practice appears to be appropriate.   
 
VI The Committee was further informed that the comp ounding of offences rules in 
Customs was issued prior to the amendments made in the Cr. P.C.  However, the 
compounding scheme also has the same spirit of encouraging out-of-court settlement 
and reducing litigations.   
 
VII The field formations (under the Kolkata zone co mprising of the Kolkata Port 
(both Kolkata Dock Complex and Haldia Dock Complex), the Air Cargo Complex, Netaji 
Subhas Chandra Bose International airport, Andaman & Nicobar islands and the  Export 
Processing Zone at Falta) suggested the following suggestions:- 
(i )  To prescribe compulsory pre-deposit to be made by a n applicant at the time of 
filing compounding application.  This may be refund ed in case of rejection of 
application.  This may discourage the non-serious p ersons from filing the 
compounding applications.   
 
(ii)  The minimum compounding amount limit of Rs. 1 0 lakhs should be lowered 
to encourage compounding of low value cases.    

 
VIII The Committee also asked about steps taken to popularize the scheme. The 
Committee was informed that the provision of the sc heme is available in public domain 
and also at the website of the CBEC department.  Wi de publicity can be given to the 
compounding scheme and its benefits to popularize the scheme.   
  
IX  Further, the Committee wanted to know why a Chief C ommissioner of Customs 
was provided in the Rules while there was provision  for a Settlement Commission under 
the Customs Act, 1962.  To this the representatives  of the Ministry replied that the 
Settlement Commission had not been functioning effe ctively.  Cases before Settlement 
Commission can come up only before adjudication whe reas a case can come up before 
Chief Commissioner even after adjudication.  Compounding Authority can take up a case 
even while it is pending in the Court and awaiting disposal.  Chief Commissioner is a 
quasi-judicial authority.  The Settlement Commissio n is designed to provide a channel 
whereby indirect disputes can be settled expeditiously and in a spirit of conciliation rather 
than prolonged litigation.  However, this scheme co vers only cases where any 
proceedings for levy, assessment and collection of Customs/ Central Excise Duty are 
pending before a Customs/ Central Excise Officer.   
 
4. The Committee observes that one of the reasons for poor response to the 
Compounding Scheme is that the compounding amount i s on the higher side.   The 
Committee notes that the rules were framed with an intention on the part of 
Government to minimize litigation.  The results how ever, are far from encouraging 
as the objectives set for the rules have not been a chieved due to lack of response.  
The Committee desired that the Ministry/ Department  should go into the details of 
it and try to ameliorate the situation.  
 The Committee noted the under mentioned reasons for failure of the Rules: 
(i) Compounding amount is on the higher side as Rs 50,0 00/- or Rs. 
Ten lakhs at the optimum level will be difficult to  pay by the small 
violators.  In case of small violators, penalty can be waived off.  

(ii) Cases are not pursued seriously by law council or C ompounding 
Authority. 
(iii) There is no time for settlement.  This is in contra vention of the 
principle of natural justice.  In the absence of a fixed time frame 
for arriving at a decision in compounding cases, af fected parties 
shy away from the scheme.   
The Committee suggested that the Department of cust oms should 
relook into the reasons for failure of the scheme a nd make it viable and attractive 
for those for whom it has been framed/ designed.  I n reply, the Ministry informed 
that after re-examining the provisions of the said Rules, it was felt by the 
Department that the compounding amount should be re duced to make the scheme 
more popular.   
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry ha ve accepted the 
Committee’s suggestions by amending  the Rules vide  notification No. G.S.R. 786(E) 
dated 12.11.2008 publishing the Customs (Compoundin g of Offences) Amendment 
Rules, 2008 (Annexure-IV)  along with corrigendum ( Annexure-V) to the 
amendment Rules.   With this amendment the compounding amount for offe nces 
committed under section 135(1)(a), section 135(1)(c ) and section 135(1)(d) of the 
Customs Act, 1962 has been reduced from “Upto 20% o f the market value of goods 
or Rs. 10 lakhs, whichever is higher” to “Upto 10% of the market value of goods, 
subject to a minimum of Rs. 1 lakh”.  Similarly, fo r offences committed under 
section 135(1)(b) and section 135A of the Act, the compounding amount has been 
reduced from  “Upto 20% of the market value of goods or Rs. 10 lakhs, whichever is 
higher”  to Upto 5% of the market value of goods, subject to  a minimum of Rs. 1 
lakh”.  It is felt that these provisions would make  the compounding of offences 
scheme more popular.   
 
5. The Committee also observed that cases are not p ursued seriously by Law 
Counsel or Compounding Authority and that there is no time limit for settlement.  
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Mini stry vide 
Circular No. 20/2008-
Cus dated 02.12.2008, have directed the field forma tions to dispose off the 

applications for compounding of offences within a p eriod of 3 months from the date 
of receipt of such application.  In addition, it ha s also been directed that in straight 
cases, where the importer/ exporter is caught red h anded, prosecution may be 
launched immediately after seizure of the goods.  I n other cases, the process of 
deciding about launching of prosecution or otherwis e shall be completed within a 
month of adjudication of the case.  Further, the Co mmittee is happy that cases of 
prosecution shall be pursued seriously with the res pective Government Counsels 
and the Courts.  
 
6. On rest of the points the Committee noted the reply of the Ministry. 

Annexure - III 
STUDY NOTE 
Discussion with the representatives of the Custom Commissionerate, Kolkata 
and the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) on (i) the Customs 
(Compounding of Offences) Rules, 2005 and (ii) the Central Excise 
(Compounding of Offences) Rules, 2005 
 
During the visit to Kolkata, the Committee on Subor dinate Legislation, Rajya 
Sabha held discussion  at 10.00 a.m. on 06.06.2007 with the Customs/ Central Excise 
Commissioners at Kolkata and the Ministry of Financ e (Department of Revenue) on  (i) 
the Customs (Compounding of Offences) Rules, 2005 a nd (ii) the Central Excise 
(Compounding of Offences) Rules, 2005.  The followi ng members and officers were 
present:- 
I          MEMBERS 
1. Shri Abani Roy         -    In the Chair 
2. Shri P.J. Kurien 
3. Shri M. V. Mysura Reddy 
4. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
5. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
6. Shri Ali Anwar 
7. Shri Harendra Singh Mallik 
8. Shri Surender Lath 
 
II        SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Mahesh Tiwari    -    Under Secretary 
2. Shri R. P. Shukla        -    Committee Officer 
 
III    REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MNISTRY OF FINANCE (D EPARTMENT 
OF REVENUE) (CUSTOMS AND CENTRAL EXCISE)  
CUSTOMS 
1. Shri P.N. Sarangi, Chief Commissioner, Customs, Kolkata 

2. Shri M.M. Parthiban, Director (Customs), CBEC, New Delhi 
3. Dr. Gautam Ray, Commissioner of Customs (Airport & Administration), 
Kolkata 
4. Shri B.B. Aggarwal, Commissioner of Customs (Port), Kolkata 
5. Shri Chander Bhan, Commissioner of Customs (Preventive), kolkata 
 
CENTRAL EXCISE 
1. Shri A.S.R. Nair, Chief Commissioner, Central Excise, Kolkata Zone 
2. Shri A. K. Pawar, Commissioner, Central Excise, Kol-I 
3. Shri D.B. Dasgupta, Commissioner, Central Excise, Kol-III 
4. Shri K.K. Kabirpanthi, Commissioner, Central Excise, Kol-IV 
5. Smt. K. Satpathy, Commissioner, Central Excise, Kol-V 
6. Shri S. B. Mishra, Commissioner, Central Excise, Kol-VII 
7. Shri C.M. Mehra, Commissioner, Central Excise, Haldia 
 
At the advent, the representatives of the Ministry of Revenue welcomed the 
Committee.  Thereafter, the Committee asked about t he design of framing the rules.  The 
representatives of the Ministry replied that the ru les were introduced by Government to 
waive prosecution or settle the long-pending litiga tion on payment of prescribed 
compounding amount and to avoid lengthy process of legal hassles and litigation.  Many 
people showed interest in waiving off penalties by the Government as such mechanism 
was not available to the accused earlier and every offence against a person had to be tried 
for prosecution by the Department.  
The Committee desired to know why a Chief Commissio ner of Customs/ Central 
Excise was provided in the rules while there was a provision for a Settlement 
Commission under the Customs Act, 1962.  To this th e representative of the Ministry 
replied that the Settlement Commission had not been  functioning efficiently.  Cases 
before Settlement Commission can come up only befor e adjudication whereas a case can 
come up before the Chief Commissioner even after adjudication.  Compounding authority 
can take up case even while it is pending in the Co urt and awaiting disposal.  Chief 
Commissioner is a quasi-judicial authority.  The Se ttlement Commission is designed to 

provide a channel whereby indirect tax disputes can  be settled expeditiously and in a 
spirit of conciliation rather prolonged litigation.   However, this scheme covers only cases 
where any proceedings of levy, assessment and colle ction of Customs/ Central Excise 
duty are pending before a Customs/ Excise Officer.  Further, the Commission consists of 
a principal bench at Delhi and one additional bench  each at Kolkata, Chennai and 
Mumbai. 
The   Committee enquired haw many cases had been fi led with the Chief 
Commissioner.  The Committee also asked about cases  of criminal nature before the 
Chief Commissioner.  
The representative of the Ministry informed that th ere were 9 cases before the 
Chief Commissioner out of which 3 cases were of cri minal nature which have since been 
rejected.  The Committee asked for the reasons of r ejection.  The representative of the 
Ministry apprised that in some cases, minimum amount had not been deposited which led 
to rejection of cases.  
The Committee desired to know about the time period  between identifying a case 
and deciding to go for prosecution. 
The Committee was informed that Compounding Authori ty has to consider the 
application under rule 3 of the Compounding Rules b ased on the report of the ‘reporting 
authority.’  The reporting Authority is required to send such  report within a period of one 
month or within such extended period as may be allo wed by the compounding authority, 
from the date of receipt of communication from the compounding authority.  
The Compounding authority after taking into account  the contents of the said 
application, either allow the application indicatin g the compounding amount and grant 
him immunity from prosecution or reject such applic ation.  Further, the applicant is also 
given an opportunity of personal hearing to explain  his case before the Compounding 
Authority. 
The Compounding Authority can decide the applicatio n only on the basis of facts 
submitted in the report of the ‘reporting authority ’ and dully follow the principles of 
natural justice.  As this quasi-judicial proceeding  takes time, no specific time frame has 
been provided for deciding the application by Compounding Authority. 

However, the Central Board of Excise & Customs has already issued executive 
guidelines vide  its Circular No. 54/2005-Cus dated 30.12.2005 in t erms of which the 
Compounding Authorities are expected to dispose off  al the applications within six 
months.   
The Committee expressed the view that a definite ti me should be provided in 
the Rules and the Ministry can examine the feasibil ity of incorporating a six 
month’s time limit within the Rules.  However, the process of compounding is a 
quasi-judicial process and certain legally prescrib ed procedure has to be followed.  
It is therefore, possible that in some cases it may  not be feasible to adhere to the six 
months time limit.  However, guidelines should be i ssued for early disposal of such 
applications.   
The Committee noted that the rules were framed with  an intent on the part of 
Government to minimize litigation.  The results, ho wever, are far from encouraging as 
the objectives set for the rules have not been achi eved due to lack of response.  The 
Committee desires that the Ministry/ Department should go into the details of it and try to 
ameliorate the situation.  
The Committee further noted the under mentioned reasons for failure of the rules: 
(i) Compounding amount is on the higher side as Rs 50,000/- or Rs. Ten 
lakhs at the optimum level will be difficult to pay  by the small violators.  
In case of small violators, penalty can be waived off.  
(ii) Cases are not pursued seriously by law council  or Compounding 
Authority. 
(iii) There is no time for settlement.  This is in contravention of the principle of 
natural justice.  In the absence of a fixed time fr ame for arriving at a 
decision in compounding cases, affected parties shy  away from the 
scheme.   
  The Committee suggested that the Department of Cu stoms/ Central 
Excise should relook into the reasons for failure of the scheme and make it 
viable and attractive for those for whom it has been framed/ designed.   
 
 The meeting thereafter adjourned at 11.00.A.M.  

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
 
XXIV 
 Twenty Fourth Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 3.00 pm on Wednesday, the 12 th  December, 2012 in Room 
No.126-C (Committee Chairperson’s Room), Parliament House, New Delhi.   
Present 
1. Smt.Maya Singh    Chairperson 
Members 
2. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
3. Dr.K.P.Ramalingam 
4. Dr.Bharatkumar Raut 
5. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
6. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
7. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
8. Shri D.Bandyopadhyay 
9. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
3. Shri R.S.Rawat, Deputy Director 
4. Shri R.P.Shukla, Assistant Director 
5. Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director 
 
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the Membe rs of the Committee to the 
meeting.  The following draft reports were taken up for consideration and adoption by the 
Committee: 
• The draft 201 
st  Report on Statutory Orders Laid on the Table of th e Rajya  
Sabha during its 226th  Session 
• The draft 202 nd  Report on the Railway Passengers (Manner of 
Investigation of Untoward Incidents) Rules, 2003 an d the Customs 
(Compounding of Offences) Rules, 2005 
• The draft 203 rd  Report on the Tea (Distribution and Export) Control Order, 
2005 

3. The Committee took up for consideration its draf t 201 st  Report on Statutory 
Orders Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha during the 226th  Session. The Members noticed 
inordinate delays in the framing of rules/regulatio ns after Acts are enforced.  The 
Ministries are not adhering to the time limit of si x months in this regard and also not 
taking Committee's approval in cases of delays beyo nd six months, as recommended by 
the Committee.  Besides, the Committee also found t hat despite repeated observations 
and recommendations by the Committee in its various  Reports, Ministries/Departments 
continue to lay their notifications, etc. on the Table of the House after considerable delays 
spanning from months to years.  Around 33% delayed notifications are laid with no delay 
statement explaining the reason for delay.  And eve n when such statements are attached, 
unacceptable excuses like delays in arranging print ed copies are being given.  The 
Committee felt that the Ministries/Departments are not taking its observations and 
recommendations seriously and have a casual attitud e towards framing and laying of 
these rules/regulations - an important duty towards  Parliament.  No senior officers, it 
appears, are monitoring this exercise in the Minist ries.  The Committee's concern 
centered mainly around the serious implications of delayed framing and laying of 
notification containing rules/regulations/orders, e tc.  The Committee is constrained to 
infer that Ministries/Departments may be doing so d eliberately with a view to evading 
Parliament's scrutiny of the rules/regulations that  are delegated by it to be framed by the 
Government.  Since such rules/regulations come into  force even before they are laid 
before Parliament, any delay in laying before Parli ament, in fact, prevents Members to 
exercise their right to get them modified/annulled by moving a Motion.  And this is what 
exactly happening today.  Another disturbing proble m was delayed response to the 
Committee's communications from the Ministries, and  not acknowledging its letters, etc. 
in time.  So many cases of scrutiny of rules/regulations are pending before the Committee 
mainly due to pending responses from them for many years.  They go on seeking 
extension on one pretext or the other.  This has be come a norm than exception.  It highly 
restricts the normal flow of Committee's work and then parliamentary scrutiny.  
4. In such a situation, the Committee felt not to r emain a mute spectator; but to 
protect its right to be informed, scrutiny and surv eillance.  The Committee discussed 
possible courses of action on this issue.  Since it  amounted actually bypassing Parliament 

and disobeying its authority, it is a serious breach of privileges not only of the Committee 
but also of the House and its members, which can be invoked in this case.  To begin with, 
however, it was decided that its Chairperson should  write to all the Ministers in this 
regard.  As per its earlier decision, the Committee  has already summoned Secretaries of 
some Ministries to explain about this state of affa irs and would be calling others for this 
purpose.  The Committee also decided to apprise the  Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha 
about the same. 
5. The Committee, thereafter, adopted the 201 
st  Report. 
6. The Committee then considered the draft 202 nd  Report  on the Railway 
Passengers (Manner of Investigation of Untoward Inc idents) Rules, 2003 and the 
Customs (Compounding of Offences) Rules, 2005 and the draft 203 rd  Report on the Tea 
(Distribution and Export) Control Order, 2005. Afte r some deliberations, the Committee 
adopted the 202 nd  and 203 rd  Reports.   
 
7. The Committee decided to present these Reports t o the House on the 14
th  
December, 2012.  Accordingly, it authorized its Cha irperson and in his absence Dr. K.P. 
Ramalingam and Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda, Members of the Committee, to present the 
Reports to the House. 
 
8.  ***   ***   ***   *** 
 
9. ***   ***   ***   ***     
 
10. ***   ***   ***   *** 
 
11.     The meeting adjourned at 4.00 p.m. 
 
***  Matter not related to the subject 
 