 PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
HUNDRED AND FIFTY SEVENTH REPORT  
  
(PRESENTED ON 20th APRIL, 2005) 
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
April, 2005/ Chaitra-Vaisakha, 1927  (Saka) 
C O N T E N T S 
                         
1.Composition of the Committee 
2.INTRODUCTION 
3.REPORT 
I.THE REGIONAL RURAL  BANKS (APPOINTMENT 
AND PROMOTION OF OFF ICERS AND OTHER 
EMPLOYEES) RULES, 1998  
 II.The Punjab National Bank General Regulations, 2000 
III.THE FOREIGN TRAD E (REGULATION) RULES , 
1993 AND THE EXPORT-IMPORT  POLICY, 1997-2002  
IV.THE EXPORT OF LIV E FISH (QUALIT Y 
CONTROL, INSPECTION AND MONITORING) 
RULES, 2002 
V.THE COST ACCOUNTIN G RECORDS 
(ELECTRICITY INDUSTRY) RULES, 2001 
VI.The Life Insurance Corporation of India (Agents)  
Regulations, 1972 –  Implementation of 127 th Report 
of  the Committee 
4.SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS  
5.MINUTES 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(constituted on the 7th August, 2004) 
       
      1.   Shri A. Vijayaraghavan 
       2.     Shri Nabam Rebia 
       3.     Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
       4.     Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur 
       5.     Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy 
       6.     Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
       7.     Prof. R.B.S. Varma 
       8.     Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
       9.     Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
       10.   Shri N. Jothi 
       11.   Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 

       12.   Shri Harendra Singh Malik' 
       13.   Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
       14.   Shri N.K. Premchandran 
15.   Shri R.S. Gavai 
     
SECRETARIAT 
  
1.      Shri  N. C. Joshi,  Additional Secretary 
2.      Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary 
3.      Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary 
4.      Ms. S.Pankajavalli, Committee Officer 
INTRODUCTION 
      I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha, having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present 
this Hundred and Fifty Seventh Report of the Committee. 
. 
1.2  The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeti ng held on 12 th 
April, 2005. 
1.3  The matters   examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various 
Rules/Regulations and issues related therewith, along with the comments of the 
Governments received thereon.   The observations and recommendations  which, 
in the opinion of the Committee, should be brought to the notice of the House, are 
contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.  
New Delhi 
12th April, 2005 
  
  
A. VIJAYARAGHAVAN  
Chairman 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
 RAJYA SABHA 
  
Draft Report  
on 
I 
The Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and other 
Employees) Rules, 1998. 
  
            The Committee took up for examination the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment 
and Promotion of Officers and other Employees) Rules, 1998 framed under the Regional 
Rural Banks Act, 1976. Certain points were referred to the Ministry of Finance (Banking 
Division) on the 25 th November, 1999 for comments. The Ministry furnished their 
comments on each of the points raised in the questionnaire on the 2nd February, 2000.   
2.         The Committee discussed the subject matter with the representatives of the 
Mewar Anchalik Gramin Bank, the Bank of Rajashtan, the Dungarpur Banswara 
Kshatriya Gramin Bank and their sponsor, the Bank of Baroda, and NABARD on the 7th 
February, 2000 at Udaipur and the Nagaur Anchalik Gramin Bank and its sponsor, the 
UCO Bank and NABARD on the 10th February, 2000 at Jaipur along with the 
representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Banking Divisio n). The Committee further 

held discussions with the representatives of the Visakha Gramin Bank and the State Bank 
of India on the 9 th November, 2001 at Visakhapatnam. The Committee held another 
meeting with the representatives of Thane Gramin Bank, the Ban k of Maharashtra and 
NABARD  on the 8 th November, 2002 at Mumbai and with the Cuttak Gramya Bank, 
Puri Gramya Bank and their sponsors, the UCO Bank and the Indian Overseas Bank on 
the 11th November, 2002 at Bhubaneshwar along with the representatives of the Ministry 
of Finance.  The Committee again discussed the subject with the representatives of the 
Pandyan Gramin Bank, the Indian overseas Bank, the Adhiyaman Grama Bank, the 
Vallalar Grama Bank and the Indian Bank along with the representatives of the Ministry 
of Finance on the 28 th January, 2003 at Chennai. The points raised, the Ministry’s 
comments and the Committee’s observations during the course of its deliberations on the 
subject are as under:- 
1.Point raised 
Whether the Regional Rural Banks (Appoint ment and Promotion of Officers and other 
Employees) Rules, 1998 have been laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha, if so, the details 
in this regard indicating the date of laying thereof? 
Ministry’s reply 
The Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of  Officers and other 
Employees) Rules, 1998 were laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on the 23rd February, 
1999. 
Committee’s Observation 
  
The Committee noted the reply furnished by the Ministry regarding laying of rules on 
the Table of both the Houses of Parliament. 
2.Point raised 
The Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and other 
Employees) Rules, 1998 are in supersession of the earlier rules framed on the subject in 
1988.  What were the compulsion/reasons that these were required to be replaced within 
a short span of 10 years? 
Ministry’s reply 
Consequent upon the sacceptance of the National Industrial Tribunal Award and 
recommendations of Equation Committee, the entire staffing pattern of the RRBs had 
undergone change and certain posts in all cadres i.e., officers and other employees were 
abolished, as a result of which there was a need to replace the Rules. 
Committee’s Observation 

The Committee noted the reply furnished by the Ministry regarding framing of the rules 
in supersession in a short span. 
3.Point raised 
Rule 4: - Creation of Posts 
“The Board of Directors of each Regional Rural Bank may, in consultation with its 
sponsor Bank create such number of posts as are specified in the First Schedule to these 
rules from time to time.” 
The words “such number of posts” appearing in the above rule do not convey the 
correct meaning as schedule I does not specify the “number of posts” that can be 
created.  What schedule I states is the description of various posts and their 
classification; whether the Government have any objection in amending the provision of 
Rule 4? 
Ministry’s reply 
The Government have no objection to the amendment of rule 4 and a Notification in 
this regard would be issued in consultation with the Ministry of Law. 
Committee’s Observation 
The Committee noted that the Ministry have notified an amendment in Rule 4 thereby 
rectifying the discrepancy as pointed out by the Committee. 
4.Point raised 
Rule 5: - Vacancies 
“The Board may, in consultation with its Sponsor Bank, determine the number of 
vacancies in each category of posts to be filled keeping in view, the guidelines issued by 
Central Government from time to time”. 
(i)            What are the present Guidelines of the Central Government in this regard? 
(ii)           Whether Board of Rural Banks have ever reviewed the guidelines issued by the 
Central Government for determining the number of vacancies in each category of the 
posts? 
Ministry’s reply 
The Central Government has issued the norms and  guidelines for creation and filling of 
the vacancies in various cadres and appointments and promotion to the newly created 
posts from time to time.   Recently, the Government of India has constituted a Working 

Group to review the staffing norm in RRBs.   The Working Group is likely to submit its 
report shortly. 
Committee’s Observation 
The Committee felt that RRBs could be give some autonomy for recruitment of staff. The 
Committee noted that the recruitment was temporarily banned in order to re -adjust the 
surplus staff and that the surplus staff could be redeployed from one bank to another. 
The Committee further noted that RRBs could also hire people on contract basis, if 
required. 
5.Point raised 
Rule 10 (1)  : -  Recruitment to the posts of messenger, messenger-cum-sweeper, driver, 
driver-cum-messenger and security guard– 
“The posts of messenger, messenger -cum-sweeper, driver, driver -cum-messenger and 
security guard shall be filled in by the Committee of the Regional Rural Banks after 
making a reference  to the Employment Exchange, Sainik Board or other agencies 
catering to the welfare of schedule castes/scheduled tribes, physically handicapped 
persons or other categories of persons as are recognized by the Central Government or 
the State Government having jurisdiction over the Regional Rural Bank filling the posts” 
What are the other agencies to which reference is made for filling up of vacancies?   In 
what manner the recommendations of Employment Exchange or other agencies are given 
effect to; whether the  candidates recommended by Employment Exchange and other 
agencies are given equal weightage? 
Ministry’s reply 
The reserved vacancies in the Group ‘C’ are required to be filled up in the RRBs as 
per the procedure indicated in Chapter 7 of the Brochure on reservation for SC/ST – (8th 
edition) which are as under:- 
i)              All the vacancies should be notified to the local/regional Employment 
Exchange. 
ii)                  When a local Employment Exchange is unable to nominate any suitable 
candidate, it will refer vacancies to the Central Employment Exchange. 
iii)                If sufficient number of SC/ST candidates are not available through 
Employment Exchange the vacancies should be advertised in local newspapers. 

iv)           Simultaneously, with the advertisement, the vacancies should be brought to the 
notice of the SC/ST organisations listed in appendix 11 to the said 
Brochure.  While doing so, it should be made clear to such organisations that 
their function is limited to advising the SC/ST candidates about the recruitment 
proposed and that it will not be for them to recommend or press the names of 
any individuals.  The candidates should apply to the appointing authority either 
direct or through the Employment Exchange as the case may be. 
As against the above instructions, Rule 10 indicates that the reference is required to be 
made to the Other Agencies also in addition to the Employment Exchange and the Jila 
Sainik Board.  Further, the second proviso to the said rule also states that no candidate 
other than those sponsored by the Employment Exchange, Sainik Board or Other 
Agencies shall be called for interview.  However, it can be observed from the above that 
the Other Agencies are merely informed, when the required number of candidates are 
not available through Employment Exchange/Sainik Board and these agencies do not 
have powers to sponsor the names of the candidates.   In view of the above, Rule 10 is 
slightly at variance with the above guidelines in the Brochure.   Accordingly, the 
Government will consider amending rule 10 in consultation with the Ministry of Law. 
Committee’s Observation 
The Committee desired that the procedure as laid down in Rule 10(1) needs to be 
realigned so as to resolve the ambiguities as pointed out by it.  The Committee impressed 
upon the need to modify the provisions of Rule 10(1). 
6.Point raised 
Rule 11 (2)  : -“The Committee shall function for such period as may be determined by 
the Board”. 
The Committee constituted for the purpose of selecting candidates shall function for such 
time as may be determined by the Board.   Whether it is possible to prescribe some time 
limit for such Committee so that its constitution is reviewed periodically? 
Ministry’s reply 
As per the Rules, the Committee members are invariably officers of the sponsor bank and 
NABARD who are liable for transfer as per the practice of their parent organization.  The 
tenure of the Chairman is normally three years while it is two years in case of other 
directors.  In view of this, the Committee m embers are automatically rotated and hence 
there appears to be no need for periodical review. 

Committee’s Observation 
The Committee noted the viewpoint of the Bank of Baroda and the UCO bank that no 
specific term for the Committee was required to be prescribed in the rules. 
7.Point raised 
Rule 10 (1) proviso 
“Provided that preference shall be given to candidate belonging to Schedule Caste and 
Scheduled Tribe in accordance with the instructions or guidelines issued by the C entral 
Government” 
Whether under the proviso any preference is also given to the candidates of OBC 
category, if so, whether the Ministry have any objection in incorporating the same in the 
rule itself? 
Ministry’s reply 
The Government have no objection to incorporate OBCs in the proviso to rule 10 (1). 
Committee’s Observation 
The Committee noted that the Ministry had no objection in including the OBC candidate 
also, along with the SC/ST candidates, for being given preference under proviso to Rule 
10(1). 
8. Point raised 
Schedule-III 
Schedule III which regulates the appointment to different grades in the officer and non 
officer categories gives the composition of the Committee for considering the promotion 
and as per the composition of the Committee for different posts, a Director nominated by 
the “National Bank” has been made a Member of the Committee. 
The word “National Bank” has not been defined in the Rule.  Whether Ministry have any 
objection in defining this term? 
Ministry’s reply 
Rule 2 (g) of the Regiona l Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and 
other Employees) Rules, 1998 provides that all other words and expressions used in these 
rules and not defined in the Act shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in 
the Act.  As Section 2 (ca) of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 defines “National Bank” 

as the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development established under section 
3 of the NABARD Act, there is no need for separate definition. 
Committee’s Observation 
The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry regarding definition of National Bank. 
9.Point raised 
Schedule-III 
Against the eligibility column for various posts covered in the schedule, a minimum 
period of service has been prescribed which the officer should have rendered before he is 
eligible to be considered for promotion to the next higher scale.  In the same breath, there 
is a proviso for relaxation in the qualifying service for a period up to 2 years, in case 
eligible officers are not available. 
Normally, the Rule lays down the eligibility criteria only and in case any relaxation is 
called for, the powers are exercised under a general clause in the Rule providing the 
Competent Authority with the powers to relax in certain cases.  The pattern followed in 
the Third Schedule i.e. providing for relaxation in the qualifying service in case of each 
of the post separately is a deviation from the normal procedure more particularly because 
the power to relax in the Rules is exercisable only in extreme cases of hardship and for 
removal of disability, if any.   On the other hand, in the present case, the power to relax 
the condition of length of service has been made to form a part of the eligibility criteria 
thereby giving an impression that the eligibility condition can be relaxed in a routine 
manner in case eligible persons are not available. 
What is the justification for adopting a changed pattern in the rules in hand and whether 
Government have any objection in recasting the provisions in the changed pattern? 
Ministry’s reply 
The Rule specifically lays down a criterion, which stipulates that relaxation is to be made 
only if eligible officers are not available.  This relaxation can be made only with the prior 
approval of the National Bank who will ensure that this is not done in a routine manner. 
Committee’s Observation 
The Committee noted the clarification given by the Ministry during the course of 
discussions that relaxation are not made in a routine manner. The Committee , however, 
felt that the circumstances for allowing relaxation should be really deserving and that it 

should be on a case to case basis and that the reasons for the same should be required to 
be recorded.  The Ministry agreed to the Committee’s suggestions. 
10.Point raised 
Schedule-III 
In the Rules pertaining to the post of scale III officer, scale II officer, scale I officer and 
clerk-cum-cashier, it has been provided that if none of the members of the Committee 
belongs to SC or ST, the Board “may” nominate a person belonging to these communities 
as an additional member. 
It is felt that presence of a Member from these communities in the Committee is essential 
more particularly when any official from these categories is to be considered by the 
Committee.  Whether Government have any   objection in substituting the word “may” 
by the word “shall”? 
Ministry’s reply 
The word “may” used in the relevant rule has the connotation of “shall”.  The Committee 
constituted under this rule invariably comprises  of members belonging to 
SC/STs.                                                          
Committee’s Observation 
The Committee noted during the course of the deliberation that the representatives of the 
Ministry of Finance were agreeable to replace the wo rd “may” with the word “shall” in 
provisions relating to nomination of  SC/ST as an additional member of the Board. 
11.Point raised 
Schedule-III 
In case of the various posts covered in the Schedule against the column regarding 
reckoning of minimum eligibil ity, it has been stated that the number of years of service 
for promotion shall be reckoned as on 1 st April of the year in which the vacancy is 
expected to arise or has actually arisen.   This means that an official shall be considered 
to be in position from the date from which the vacancy exists and not from the actual date 
from which he is holding that post. 
What is the justification for introducing this concept of an official being treated as 
deemed to be in position?   Further, the concept of treating the  person in position from 
the date the vacancy is expected to arise appears to be very vague. Even if this concept is 
admitted, the words should have been “the vacancy expected to have arisen” and not “the 

vacancy is expected to arise”.   Further, there coul d be a long gap between the date 
ofarising of the vacancy and the actual date on which the official takes charge of the post, 
which might have a direct effect on the experience of the official being considered for 
promotion. 
Whether Government have any objection in straightening this provision and treating the 
appointment from 1st April of the year in which the official has actually taken charge of 
the post for the purpose of computing his existence in the present post? 
Ministry’s reply 
The 1st April of the year (in which the vacancy is expected to arise or has actually arisen) 
has been stipulated only to decide minimum length of service required to become eligible 
for the promotions.   As the panel for the year is prepared taking into account the 
vacancies likely to occur in a year, the words ‘vacancy expected to arise’ has also been 
used.  This clause has no relation to the date on which the official takes charge.  The actual 
date of promotion will be as decided by the Board under Rule 6 of the Rules and not  1st 
April.  As per this Rule, no official is to be treated as deemed to be in office when he is 
not actually holding the same.  In fact, in certain cases if an official has been promoted to 
the post in the month of April or thereafter, he shall not get cr edit of incomplete part of 
the year. 
Committee’s Observation 
The Committee noted the reply furnished by the Ministry. 
12.Point raised 
Schedule-III 
For appointment to the posts in the Schedule, the method of promotion has been stated 
to be on the basis of seniority-cum-merit. 
What are the main features of this procedure for promotion;.   Whether it is permissible 
to change the seniority of officials as it exists in the feeder grade while recommending 
their names for promotion to the next higher grade which is inherent in the “selection” 
procedure.  Whether Government have any objection in prescribing “selection” as a 
method of promotion at least for the purpose of promotion in scale III, scale II and scale 
I so as to promote merit in the organization? 
Ministry’s reply 
“Seniority-cum-merit” shall mean seniority and found fit for promotion.  It is not possible 
to change the seniority of officials as it exists in the feeder grade.   Thus, seniority-cum-

merit implies promotions based on sen iority subject to minimum necessary merit 
requisite for the promotion.   The Government feels that there should be a uniform 
criterion for promotion to all scales and that the present system may continue. 
Committee’s Observation 
The Committee came across divergent views on the point of promotion on the basis of 
seniority-cum-merit.  The Bank of Rajasthan was of the view that promotion should not 
be purely on the basis of seniority only and merit should also be given at least 50% 
weightage.  The Dungarpur Banswara Gramin Bank was of the view that in lower scales, 
weightage may be given to seniority but in higher scale merit should prevail.  The Gramin 
Bank was of the view that promotion should be made on the basis of both   seniority and 
merit.  The Committee reiterated the need for balance between seniority and merit to 
keep the Regional Rural Banks competitive with the other commercial banks. 
13.Point raised 
Schedule-III 
In case of recruitment/promotion to the grade of clerk cum cashier, against the column 
indicating the number of candidates to be considered for promotion, it has been stated 
that the number of candidates to be considered for the written test from Group ‘C’ and 
Group ‘B’ cadre shall “normally” be restricted to 4 times the number of vacancy 
available for promotion. 
The word “normally” appears to give a wide discretion to the Competent Authority and 
the condition prescribed in the Rule can be falsified any time.  Whether Government have 
any objection in indicating the circumstances under which th e restriction as prescribed 
in the Rule could be waived rather than giving blanket powers by use of the word 
“normally”? 
Ministry’s reply 
It is felt that the Competent Authority should have some flexibility so that in 
exceptional circumstances the relaxation can be made.  However, such a relaxation is 
not likely to be made in a routine manner. 
Committee’s Observation 
The Committee noted the reply furnished by the Ministry. 
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance (Banki ng 
Division) have agreed to the Committee’s suggestions and carried out the following 

amendments in the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and 
other Employees) Rules 1998 :- 
(i)                  In Rule 4 by substituting the words “such number of posts” with the words “such 
posts” thereby rectifying the discrepancy as pointed out by the Committee as Rule 
4 contained a reference to the First Schedule which contained only nomenclature 
of the posts and not their number. 
(ii)                In Rule 10(1) by substituting the existing provision of sub -rule (1) as follows so 
as to realign the provisions in the light of the provisions in the Government of 
India brochure on reservation for SC/ST; 
“The posts of messenger, messenger-cum-sweeper (full time or part time), driver, 
driver-cum-messenger and security guard shall be filled in by the Committee of 
the Regional Rural Banks after making a reference to the Employment Exchange, 
Sainik Boards and to the agencies, if any, catering to the welfa re of physically 
handicapped persons.  Further, the vacancies for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes shall also be brought to the notice of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes Organisation listed in appendix 11 referred to in para 7.1 (iii) of the 
Brochure on Reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in services 
(8th Edition) as amended from time to time catering to the Welfare of Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes as are recognized by the Central Government or the 
State Government havin g jurisdiction over the Regional Rural Banks filling the 
posts.  When doing so, it should be made clear to such organizations that their 
function is limited to advising the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidates 
about the recruitmentproposed and that i t will not be for them to recommend or 
press the names of any individuals.  The candidates should apply to the appointing 
authority either direct or through the Employment Exchanges as the case may be” 
(III)            In rule 10(1) proviso by incorporatin g the words “Other Backward Classes” so 
as to include OBCs also along with SCs/STs for the purpose of giving preference. 
(iv)              In Schedule III in the provisions relating to the nomination of an additional 
member of the Board in case of selection for SCs/STs by substituting the word 
“may” with the word “shall” so as to make the nomination of the members from 
the reserved category mandatory. 
             The Committee further notes that the Ministry have issued instructions to the 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development to issue necessary instructions to 
the Regional Rural Banks and sponsor banks in pursuance of the Committee’s 
recommendation that the qualifying service for the purpose of promotions should not be 

relaxed in a routine manner and that it should be decided on a case –to-case basis and the 
reasons for doing so must be recorded.   The Committee, however, recommends that the 
Ministry of Finance should consider incorporating these instructions suitably in schedule 
III also so that the position is set right once for all.   As regards Rule 5 pertaining to 
vacancies, the Committee is of the view that the RRB’s could be given some autonomy for 
recruitment of staff.   As regards Schedule III governing the method of prom otion, the 
Committee reiterated the need for balance between seniority and merit to keep the RRB’s 
competitive with other commercial Banks. 
  II 
The Punjab National Bank General Regulations, 2000 
  
        The Punjab National Bank General Regulations, 2000 framed under the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 were examined and a 
questionnaire was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) on the 6 th 
February, 2001.  The Ministry furnished their comments on each of the points raised in 
the questionnaire vide their OM dated the 5 th July, 2001.  The Committee discussed the 
subject matter with the representatives of the Indian Overseas Bank and the Indian Bank 
on the 12th July, 2001 at Chennai, the Syndicate Bank and the Vijaya Bank on the 21 st 
June, 2002 at Bangalore, and the Oriental Bank of Commerce on the 4th December, 2002 
at New Delhi, along with the representatives of the Ministry of Finance.   The points 
raised, the Ministry’s reply and the views of the Nationalized Banks that emerged during 
the course of discussion are as under: - 
1.Point raised 
            ThePunjab National Bank General Regulations, 2000 have been framed under an 
Act of 1970.   What are the re asons for such a long delay in framing of these 
regulations.  In what manner these areas were regulated before the General Regulations, 
2000, were framed? 
Ministry’s reply 
            In exercise of the powers conferred by section 19(1) of the Banking Comp anies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 and 1980, the Boards of all the 
Nationalized Banks have made, after consultation with the Reserve Bank of India and the 
previous sanction of the Central Government, the (bank’s name) General Regula tions, 
(year).  The need for such regulations on uniform basis for all banks was felt essential 
only after the above Acts were amended in 1994 to enable the Central Government to 
reduce its stake to fifty one per cent of paid -capital of these banks and to enable these 
banks to increase its capital by public issue of shares.  These regulations could be finalized 
in 1998 and forwarded to banks in August 1998 for adoption on a uniform basis by all 
these banks.  However, till adoption, all the matters provided in these regulations were 
taken care of by virtue of sub-section (3) of Section 19 of the above Acts.  In terms of this 

sub-section (3), until any regulation is made by the Boards of these banks, the articles of 
association of the existing banks ( i.e., acq uired/transferred old banks) and every 
regulation, rule, bye-laws or order made by the existing banks shall be deemed to be the 
regulations made under Section 19(1) and shall have the effect accordingly.  Hence, there 
was no void in these matters at any ti me; Regulations, 1998 have brought uniformity in 
these matters among all Nationalized Banks.  The Punjab National Bank has not yet come 
up with their public issue.   General Regulations, are, therefore, practically not used by 
the Punjab National Bank.  There appears to be no delay in this regard. 
Committee’s observations 
      The Committee observed that there was certainly a delay on the part of the Ministry 
of Finance in framing the regulations in the year 1998 when the relevant provisions of the 
Acts were amended in the year 1994.   The plea of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Finance that much time was involved in consultations with the Reserve Bank of India, 
etc. was not acceptable to the Committee.  The Committee desired that some mechanism 
may be evolved to save time on consultation so that such delays could be avoided in future. 
2.  Regulation 2 (e) 
“Committee” means a Committee as constituted by the Board; 
Point raised 
The word Committee has been defined as a Committee constituted by the 
Board.  Nowhere else in the regulations the composition of the Committee has been 
provided.   As the Committee has been empowered with many important functions in 
place of Board, it would be appropriate if the composition of the committee is provided 
in the regulation itself; what are the comments of the Ministry? 
Ministry’s reply 
            As the Committee consists of the members of the Board only, there is no need to 
provide for the composition of the Committee in the regulations itself.   Moreover, the 
number and the nominations of particular members on the Committee depend on the 
powers and duties enjoined on the Committee by the Board.   Hence, it is appropriate to 
keep this matter at the discretion of the Board.  This is also the position in the State Bank 
of India. [Section 30 of the SBI Act, 1955 and Regulation 2(b) of the SBI General 
Regulations, 1955]. 
            The Vijaya Bank held the same view as that of the Ministry of Finance that there 
was no need to provide the composition of the Committee in the regulations. 
Committee’s observations 

            The Committee was not satisfied with the Ministry’s reply.   It observed that the 
definition of the term “Committee” may be elabo rated.  The Committee held the view 
that the composition of Committees which were for longer duration or having financial 
powers should be provided for in the statute itself. 
3.Regulation 13 (ii): Share certificates 
Every share certificate shall be issued under the common seal of the bank in 
pursuance of a resolution of the Board and shall be signed by two directors and some 
other officer appointed by the Board for the purpose. 
Provided that the signature of the directors may be printed, engraved, 
lithographed or impressed by such other mechanical process as the Board may direct. 
Point raised 
(a)                The words “some other officer” are vague.   Whether it is possible to 
specify the officers with their rank or designation? 
(b)               Whether these regulations need any change to take into account the 
enabling provisions of the Information Technology Act, 2000? 
Ministry’s reply 
(i)         Even regulation 11(2) of the SBI General Regulation, 1955 provides signing of 
share certificate by two persons duly authorized by the bank.   This position cannot be 
said to be vague as the bank is required to appoint/authorize any officer for the 
purpose.  This apart, specifying rank/designation of the officer will impose unnecessary 
constraint on banks  and affect their operational flexibility.   This apart, even the 
Companies Act, 1956 [Section 112(3)(b)] provides for a certification of transfer of shares 
by a person authorized by the company. 
(ii)        The present provisions relate to the ‘proper’ cer tificate.  The Information 
Technology Act, 2000 provides for legal recognition of electronic records and digital 
signature in respect of transactions effected through electronic media.  Hence, it will, suo 
motu, take care of evidential aspects of transacti ons in respect of shares through 
electronic media.   Otherwise, the transactions in respect of shares in demat form are 
separately governed by the Depositories Act, 1996.  Hence, these regulations do not need 
any change.  No bank has also experienced any difficulty in this regard.  
The Indian Overseas Bank agreed to consider the suggestion of the Committee. 

            The Syndicate Bank expressed the opinion that the trading of bank shares and 
future issue of shares having been made compulsory for all inves tors in dematised form, 
the issue of shares certificate in physical form may not be there. 
            The Vijaya Bank  informed that their shares were under compulsory demat 
trading and that, within a short period, all share certificates would be dematised .  The 
Vijaya Bank further suggested amending the regulations on the lines of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 after the Companies Act, 1956 was amended. 
Committee’s observations 
The Committee desired that the provisions of regulation 13(ii) should be suitably 
reviewed and, in any case, the words “some other officer” appearing in regulation 13(ii) 
should be substituted by words like “officer authorized in this behalf”  so as to make the 
provision  specific.  The Committee also noted the suggestions of V ijaya Bank to amend 
the regulation on the lines of the Information Technology Act, 2000. 
4.Regulations 15 (ii) & 16 
15 (ii) Renewal of share certificates - If any share certificate is alleged to be lost or 
destroyed, the Board or the Committee designated by it on such indemnity with or 
without surety as the Board or the Committee thinks fit, and on publication in two 
newspapers and on payment to the bank of its costs, charges and expens es, a duplicate 
certificate in lieu thereof may be given to the person entitled to such lost or destroyed 
certificate. 
16 Consolidation and sub -division of shares -On a written application made by the 
shareholder(s), the Board or the Committee designated by  it may consolidate or sub -
divide the shares submitted to it for consolidation/sub -division as the case may be and 
issue a new certificate(s), in lieu thereof on payment to the bank of its costs, charges and 
expenses of and incidental to the matter. 
Point raised 
(i)                  What is the justification for vesting discretion in the matter of calling for 
surety for issue of duplicate certificate? 
(ii)                Whether it is not possible to prescribe a fee chargeable for issue of duplicate 
certificate/new certificate along with the mode of payment for the purpose of 
uniformity? 
Ministry’s reply 
(i)                  Normally, an indemnity bond provided by the shareholder is considered 
sufficient for issue of duplicate share certificate.   However, having regard to 

the number of share and high value of a share reported to be lost, or bank is 
not satisfied as to the bonafides of lost report, it is necessary to have additional 
safeguard in the form of surety. SBI General Regulation, 1955 [Reg. 13(2)] also 
provides the same. 
(ii)                As the cost, charges and expenses in this matter do not remain constant, and 
are not the same for all such transactions, it is not advisable to prescribe fee in 
the regulation itself.  SBI General Regulation, 1955 [Reg. 13(2)] also provides 
the same. 
            The Syndicate Bank justified the vesting of discretion in the matter of asking for 
surety for issuing of duplicate certificate.  It also expressed the opinion that there should 
be uniformity in the costs, charges and   expenses in the matter and issue of duplicate 
certificate by various banks in similar type of transactions. 
The Vijaya Bank was also in favour of vesting discreti on  in the matter of calling 
for surety for issue of duplicate certificate. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee while noting the position as stated by the Ministry observed that 
there should, as far as possible, be uniformity in the costs, c harges and expenses in the 
matter and issue of duplicate certificate by various banks in similar types of transactions. 
5.Regulation 17 (iii): Transfer of shares 
Upon receipt by the bank of an instrument of transfer along with a share 
certificate with a request to register the transfer, the Board or the Committee designated 
by the Board shall forward the said instrument of transfer along with share certificate to 
the Registrar and /or Share Transfer Agents for the purposes of verification that the 
technical requirements are complied within their entirety.   The Registrar and/ or Share 
Transfer Agent shall return the instrument of transfer along with the share certificate, if 
any, to the Transferee for resubmission unless: 
(a)                     The instrument of transfer is presented to the Bank, duly stamped and properly 
executed for registration and is accompanied by the certificate of the shares to which it 
relates and such other evidence as the Board may require to show the title of the transfer 
to make such transfer. 
(b)                     The Registrar is satisfied that the transferee is qualified to be registered as a 
shareholder of the bank in respect of the shares covered by the instrument of transfer. 
Point raised 

            What are the technical requirements that are required to be complied with under 
this regulation?  Whether it is possible to enumerate the same in the regulation itself? 
Ministry’s reply 
            We do agree with the Committee that it is very difficult to visualize a shareholder 
to understand the technical requirement within their entirety.   Perhaps, it may mean 
requirements laid down in regulation 17(1) regarding form, stamp, date, execution, 
etc.  Defects in these is also the reason for   return of the transf er instrument to the 
transferor for resubmission.   Similarly, the regulation does not provide when the 
transferee is said to be not qualified to be registered as a shareholder.   It may not be 
possible or even desirable to give an exhaustive list of the tec hnical requirements to be 
complied with for purposes of verifications of transfer instrument for effecting 
transfer.  Apart from stamp, attestation, etc., there may be other requirements such as 
verifying whether there is any stop, etc.  lodged in respect thereof. 
              The Indian Overseas Bank agreed to consider the Committee’s suggestion. 
              The Syndicate Bank expressed the view that the technical requirements in the 
matter of transfer of shares could be enumerated in the regulations itself. 
            The Vijaya Bank  held the   view that it may not be possible to spell out   the 
technical requirements in the matter of transfer of shares. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee desired the Ministry of Finance to reconsider this point. 
6.Regulation 17 (iv) 
               The Board  or the Committee designated by the Board shall, unless it declines to 
register the transfer under regulation 19 hereinafter, cause the transfer to be registered. 
Point raised 
              How much time is generally taken to register the transfer if all the requirements 
are complete.  Is it not possible to prescribe a time limit in this behalf in the regulations 
itself? 
Ministry’s reply 
            We agree that there should be a time limit for registration of transfer of shares.  In 
terms of regulation 19(ii)(b), the refusal of transfer is required to be intimated to the 
transferor within 60 days of the receipt of the Transfer Form.   This takes care of the 
concern expressed by the Committee.   Similar are the provisions in the Companies Act, 
1956 [Section 111(refusal by a company and 108E(Refusal by a Govt.)].  Further, in terms 
of Section 113, ibid, every company shall within two months after the application for the 

registration of the transf er of any shares, deliver the certificates of all shares so 
transferred.   Incidentally, the Reserve Bank of India have also asked the State Bank of 
India, in the interest of natural justice, to provide for the time limit for communication 
of approval/rejection as also for enabling the aggrieved shareholder to appeal against the 
rejection of the transfer.   Hence, we may consider providing time limit for issuance of 
share certificates on the lines of Section 113 of the Companies Act, 1956. 
            The Indian Overseas Bank agreed to amend the regulation as per the suggestions 
of the Committee. 
The Syndicate Bank stated that there had been no occasion where share transfer 
had not been effected within one month. 
            The Vijaya Bank was not in favour of prescribing any time limit for registering 
the transfer of shares as according to them, after some time, most of the transfers would 
be under demat and hence the transfers would be instantaneous. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted that the Ministry have agreed to review the position in the 
matter of prescribing a time limit for registering the transfer of shares in the light of the 
provisions of the Companies Act, 1956. 
7.Regulation 19 (i)  (a): Board’s right to refuse registration of transfer of shares- 
(i)                       The Board may refuse transfer of any shares in the name of the transferee on 
any one or more of the following grounds, and on no other grounds:- 
(a)                     the transfer of shares  is in contravention of the provisions of the Act or 
regulations made thereunder or any other law or that any other requirement under the 
law relating to registration of such transfer has not been complied with: 
Point raised 
Whether under this regulation is it possible to give the transferor some reasonable 
time say of one or two weeks  to rectify the mistake, if any, to comply with the requirement 
under the law relating to registration of such transfer? 
Ministry’s reply 
It is not necessary to provide for t ime in the regulations.   It  is open for the 
transferor to apply again for the transfer of shares after complying with the 
requirements. 
             The Indian Overseas Bank agreed to consider the suggestion of the Committee. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted the explanations furnished by the Ministry.  

8.Regulation 19 (i) (b)  
(i)                       The Board may refuse transfer of any shares in the name of the transferee on 
any one or more of the following grounds, and on no other grounds: - 
(b)           The transfer of shares, in the opinion of the Board, is prejudicial to the interest 
of the Bank or to public interest; 
Point raised 
            The regulation gives a wide discretion to the Board to refuse registration of 
transfer; what are the reasons for giving such a wide discretion; should the regulation not 
require recording of the reasons in writing before taking such a decision under this 
provision? 
Ministry’s reply 
In terms of regulation 19(ii)(b), the Board is required to form its opinion as to 
whether such registration sought to be refused on any of the grounds mentioned in sub -
Section (i), ibid.  Hence, this requirement envisages recording of the reasons in 
writing.  This may be in the form of minutes of the meeting.   In terms of Section 111 of 
the Companies Act, 1956, a company is required to send notice of refusal giving reasons 
for such refusals.  We may consider providing for similar provisions as in the Companies 
Act providing for recording of reasons for refusal in writing. 
            The Indian Overseas Bank agreed to amend the regulation as per the Committee’s 
suggestions. 
            The Syndicate Bank  expressed the view that the regulation may provide for 
recording of reasons in writing while taking action under regulation 19. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted the reply of the banks and also that of the Ministry of 
Finance that they were ag reeable to review the position on the point of recording of 
reasons in writing while taking action under regulation 19. 
9.Regulation 19 (ii) 
(ii)       The Board shall, after the instrument of transfer of shares of the bank is lodged 
with it for the purpos e of registration of such transfer, form its opinion as to whether 
such registration ought or ought not to be refused on any of the grounds referred to in 
sub-regulation (i) :- 
 (a)       If it has formed the opinion that such registration ought not to be so refused, effect 
such registration; and 

(b)        If it has formed the opinion that such registration ought be refused on any of the 
grounds mentioned in sub-regulation (i), intimate the Transferor and the Transferee by 
notice in writing within 60 days from the receipt of the Transfer Form 
Point raised 
            In case within 60 days of receipt of Transfer Form refusal is not intimated, will 
the transfer be deemed to  have been accepted;  If so should it not be so specified? 
Ministry’s reply 
It is not necessary to provide specifically for intimation of registration of transfer 
since it is mandatory to form opinion and communicate rejection within 60 days of the 
receipt of Transfer Form thereby meaning that the transfer is effected if there is no 
communication as to refusal.   Moreover, no provision is made or implied for extending 
this 60 days to decide the acceptance/rejection of transfer.   However, as suggested at Sr. 
No. 7 above, we may consider setting time limit for issuance of share certificate from the 
date of receipt of transfer application. 
            The Indian Overseas Bank agreed to consider the suggestion of the Committee. 
The Syndicate Bank was in favour of the Securities and Exchange Board of India 
type of penal provisions in case there had been delay in effecting transfer of shares beyond 
prescribed period. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee desired the Ministry to consider incorporation of the Securities 
and Exchange Board of India type penal provisions in case delay takes  place in effecting 
transfer of shares. 
10.Regulation 21: Shareholder ceasing to be qualified for registration 
- It shall be the duty of any person registered as a shareholder, whether solely or 
jointly with another or others forthwith upon ceasing to be q ualified to be so registered 
in respect of any share to give intimation thereof to the Boardof Directors in this regard. 
Point raised 
            What are the said circumstances?  Should they not be specified?  What if another 
person raises such a claim in respect of a shareholder.  How will regulation or any other 
regulation be applied by the Board to adjudicate the matter? 
Ministry’s reply 
            The shares are freely transferable and the only restriction thereon is as 
imposed/provided for under proviso to Section 3(2D) of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and  Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980   

The Indian Overseas Bank agreed to consider the suggestions of the Committee. 
            The Syndicate Bank had no objection in specifying the circumstances under which 
shareholders shall cease to be qualified for registration in the regulations itself. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee endorsed the opinion of the Indian Overseas Bank and the 
Syndicate Bank.  
11.Regulation 25: Extension of time for payment of call 
             The Board may, from time to time and at its discretion, extend the time fixed  for 
the payment of any call to all or any of the shareholders having regard to distance of their 
residence or s ome other sufficient cause, but no shareholder shall be entitled to such 
extension as a matter of right. 
Point raised 
      The words “some other sufficient cause” are vague.   Whether it is possible to specify 
them; what is the justification for vesting su ch wide discretion with the Board in the 
matter? 
Ministry’s reply 
      Given the exigencies, nature and complexities of the banking business and growing 
competition, it may not always be possible to foresee all the circumstances that would 
justify extension of time for payment of call. Such type of exception is widely accepted in 
the legal parlance. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted the explanations furnished by the Banks and the Ministry 
of Finance. 
12.Regulation 28: When interest on call or instalment payable 
            If the sum payable in respect of any call or instalment is not paid on or before the 
day appointed for payment thereof, the holder for the time being or allottee of the share 
in respect of which a call shall have be en made, or the instalment shall be due, shall pay 
interest on such sum at such rate as the Board may fix from time to time, from the day 
appointed for the payment thereof to the time of actual payment, but the Board may, at 
its discretion waive payment of such interest wholly or in part. 
Point raised 
(i)      Whether it is possible to prescribe the rate of interest in the regulation itself? 
(ii)  On what grounds the Board can waive the interest.   Should the Board not record 
reasons for doing so? 

Ministry’s reply 
The regulation is similar to that provided in the Industrial Development Board of 
India Regulations.  In the deregulated banking scenario, it is not proper to prescribe rate 
of interest.  It is expected to be competitive rate of interest depending on the net worth of 
the bank in the market.  Similarly, the grounds for waiving will be decided by the bank’s 
board, which are invariably recorded. 
            The Syndicate Bank had no objection in indicating the rate of interest on cal l or 
instalment payable in the regulation itself. 
Committee’s observations 
The Committee noted the Ministry’s explanation that, in the deregulated scenario, 
it may not be proper to indicate the rate of interest on call or instalment payable in the 
regulations itself.  The Committee also noted that the reasons for waiver of interest find 
place in the minutes of the Board Meeting. 
13.Regulation 30: Notice on non-payment of call or instalment 
             If any shareholder fails to pay the whole or any part o f any call or instalment or 
any money due in respect of any shares either by way of principal or interest on or before 
the day appointed for the payment of the same, the Bank may, at any, time thereafter, 
during such time as the call or instalment or any p art thereof or other moneys remain 
unpaid or a judgment or decree in respect thereof remains unsatisfied in whole or in part, 
serve a notice on such shareholder or on the person (if any) entitled to the share by 
transmission, requiring him to pay such call  or instalment or such part thereof or other 
moneys as remain unpaid together with any interest that may have accrued and all 
expenses (Legal or otherwise) that may have been paid or incurred by the Bank by a 
reason of such non-payment. 
Point raised 
            Whether the Bank have any objection in specifying in the regulation the time 
interval between the first notice and second notice and the number of notices on non -
payment of a call or instalment issued to the shareholder before issuing the notice of 
forfeiture? 
Ministry’s reply 
It appears from the regulation that issue of only one notice is 
contemplated.  Although second notice is not contemplated even under the Companies 
Act (Table A Regulation 29 and 30), this may only be provided on similar lines i.e., 
forfeiture to be effected by resolution if payment is not made on date specified in the 
notice. 

Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted the explanation furnished by the representatives of the 
Ministry that the regulations envisaged only one notice and, therefore, there was no 
question of any time interval between the first and the second notice as pointed out in the 
questionnaire.  The Committee, however, expressed its concern that the system should be 
such that the shareholders are served with the notice duly and promptly before action for 
forfeiture is initiated. 
14.Regulation 35: Powers to annul forfeiture 
                The Board may, at any time, before any share so forfeited under Regulation 32 
shall have been sold, re allotted or otherwise disposed of, annul the forfeiture thereof 
upon such conditions as it may think fit. 
Point raised 
On what conditions the Board can annul the forfeiture of the share;  whether any 
reasons are required to be recorded for doing so? 
Ministry’s reply 
The regulation is similar to that provided in the IDBI Regulations.   For the same 
reason, as indicated at Sr. no. 11, no specific provision could be made.   Reasons are 
expected to be recorded by the Board in the form of minutes of the meeting. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted that the reasons for annulling the forfeiture of shares find 
place in the Minutes of the Board Meeting. 
15.Regulation 36: Shareholder liable to pay money owing at the t ime of forfeiture and 
interest 
               Any shareholder whose shares have been forfeited shall, notwithstanding the 
forfeiture, be liable to pay shall and forthwith pay to the Bank all calls, instalments, 
interest, expenses and other moneys owing upo n or in respect of such shares at the time 
of forfeiture with interest thereon from the time of forfeiture until payment at such rate 
as may be specified by the Board and the Board may enforce the payment of the whole 
or a portion thereof. 
Point raised 
            What is the justification for holding the shareholder liable to pay all calls, 
instalments, interest, etc, in addition to forfeiture of his share? 

Ministry’s reply 
Till the shareholder parts with shares held by him, the liability flowing  therefrom 
has to be borne by him.  Hence, he has to be liable for shares till the date of forfeiture.  The 
regulation, accordingly, provides for the shareholder’s liability in respect of call, etc.   as 
at the time of forfeiture and not thereafter.   Further, the liability of shareholder for the 
period after date of forfeiture till date of payment  is in respect of interest only. 
  
The Syndicate Bank  agreed for suitable modification in the provisions of this 
regulation. 
  
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted the reply of the Syndicate Bank and pointed out that it may 
not be proper to charge from the shareholder for all calls, instalments, interest, etc.   in 
case his shares were being forfeited.  The Committee desired the Ministry to re-examine 
the position. 
16.Regulation 42 (ii): Enforcing Lien by Sale of Shares 
             To give effect to any such sale, the Board may authorize some officer to transfer 
the shares sold to the purchaser thereof. 
Point raised 
            Whether it is possible to qualify the words “some officer” by his rank? 
Ministry’s reply 
Even regulation 11(2) of the SBI General Regulation, 1955 provides signing of 
share certificate by two persons duly authorized by the Bank.   This position cannot be 
said to be vague as the bank is required to appoint/authorize any officer for the 
purpose.  This apart, specifying rank/designation of the officer will impose unnecessary 
constraint on banks and affect where operational flexibility.   Further, even the 
Companies Act, 1956 [Section 112(3)(b)] provides for a certification of transfer of shares 
by a person authorized by the company. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee desired the Ministry to re -examine whether the words “some 
officer” may be replaced by the words li ke “an authorized officer” so as to make the 
provision specific. 
17.Regulation 44: Certificate of forfeiture 

               A certificate in writing under the hands of any director, or any other officer of 
the bank duly authorized in this behalf, that the call in respect of a share was made and 
that the forfeiture of the share was made by a resolution of the Board to that effect, shall 
be conclusive evidence of the fact stated therein as against all persons entitled to such 
shares. 
Point raised 
            Should the rank of the person competent to certify the forfeiture in the absence of 
any Director may not be specified for the sake of clarity in the regulation? 
Ministry’s reply 
            Even regulation 11(2) of the SBI General Regulation, 1955 provides  signing of 
share certificate by two persons duly authorized by the bank.   This position cannot be 
said to be vague as the bank is required to appoint/authorize any officer for the 
purpose.  This apart, specifying rank/designation of the officer will impos e unnecessary 
constraint on banks and affect their operational flexibility.  Further, even the Companies 
Act, 1956 [Section 112(3)(b)] provides for a certification of transfer of shares by a person 
authorized by the company. 
            The Syndicate Bank had no objection in specifying the level of the officer say not 
less than the rank of Assistant General Manager who may certify the   forfeiture in the 
absence of Director of the Board. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted the reply of the Syndicate Bank and desired the Ministry to 
re-examine, if any such thing as suggested by the Syndicate Bank could be provided in 
the regulations. 
1          18.Regulation 46 (ii): Service of a notice or document to shareholders 
             Where a docu ment or a notice is sent by post, the service of such document of 
notice shall be deemed to be effected by properly addressing, prepaying and posting a 
letter containing the document of notice. 
             Provided that where a shareholder has intimated t o the Bank in advance that 
documents should be sent  to him under a certificate of posting or by registered post, with 
or without acknowledgement due and has deposited with the bank a sum sufficient to 
defray the expenses of doing so, service of the document or notice shall not be deemed to 
be effected unless it is sent in the manner intimated by the shareholder.  And such service 
shall be deemed to have been effected in the case of a notice of a meeting at  the expiration 

of forty eight hours after the let ter containing the same is posted, and in any other case, 
at the time at which the letter would have been delivered in the ordinary course of post. 
Point raised 
            With the widespread use of electronic mail whether there is any objection in 
providing for this method of serving notice to the shareholders in the regulation in line 
with the provisions of the Information Technology Act. 
Ministry’s reply 
            It  is too early for the banking system in India to serve notice by E. Mail.   Other 
aspect of the suggestion is the practical one i.e., system at the other end may not be 
working/may have been withdrawn/may not download in time.  The law relating to these 
issues is still not developed. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee was of  the view that the service of notices or documents to 
shareholders could be through e -mail if the shareholder consented    to this mode of 
communication.  In Committee’s opinion, to begin with, banks may have to continue with 
both the electronic and manual mode of communication.  The Committee also desired the 
Ministry to consider use of courier for service of notices/documents to the shareholders. 
19.Regulation 56 (i): Notice convening an Annual General Meeting 
              (i) A notice convening an annual general meeting of the shareholders signed by 
the Chairman and Managing Director or Executive Director or any authorized official 
of the bank shall be published at least twenty one clear days before the meeting in not 
less than two daily newspapers having wide circulation in India. 
Point raised 
            Whether there is any objection in prescribing the minimum level/rank of the 
authorized official in the regulation? 
  
Ministry’s reply 
            Regulation 11(2) of the SBI General Regulation, 1955 provides signing of share 
certificate by two persons duly authorized by the bank.   This position cannot be said to 
be vague as the bank is required to appoint/authorize any officer for the purpose.   This 
apart, specifying rank/designation of the   officer will impose  unnecessary constraint on 
banks and affect their operational flexibility.  This apart, even the Companies Act, 1956 
[Section 112(3)(b)] provides for a certification of transfer of shares by a person authorized 
by the company. This provision is in line with SBI regulations. 
            The Indian Overseas Bank agreed to consider the suggestion of the Committee. 

The Syndicate Bank  stated that it had no objection in stating the minimum 
level/rank of the officer for the purpose of issuing a notice convening an Annual General 
Meeting of the shareholders. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee desired the Ministry to re -examine if the minimum level of the 
officer for the purpose of convening the Annual General Meeting of the shareholders is 
prescribed in the regulations. 
20.Regulation 57 (iv); The time, date and place of the Extraordinary General Meeting 
shall be decided by the Board 
            Provided that the Extraordinary General Meeting convened on the requisition by 
the Central Government or other shareholder shall be convened not later than 45 days of 
the receipt of the requisition. 
Point raised 
             What is the justification for convening an  Extraordinary General Meeting not 
later than 45 days of the receipt of the requisition for the purpose whereas the minimum 
time limit for calling Annual General Meeting is 21 days? 
Ministry’s reply 
            As per the proviso to Section 10 A of the Ban king Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/80, the outer limit for calling an AGM is 6 weeks 
from the date of forwarding the balance sheet and profit and loss account to the Central 
Government/RBI.  The period of 21 days relate to the time limit for publishing notice of 
date of AGM in the newspapers.   Further, the AGM and Extra Ordinary General 
Meeting cannot be compared in this matter; while the former is fixed and certain, the 
later is not so.  Even otherwise, the outer time limit of 45 days from the date of requisition 
for calling EOGM is comparatively same as that of the Annual General 
Meeting.  Further, in terms of regulation 57(vi), the EOGM shall be called in the same 
manner, as nearly as possible as that in which other Genera l meetings are called for by 
the Board.  Hence, except for outer limit of 45 days for calling EOGM, other matters are 
the same as that of General meeting.  Similar are provisions in the Companies Act, 1956 
[Section 169 (6)] 
Committee’s observations 
The Committee noted the position. 
21.Regulation 57 (v) 

            If the Chairman and Managing Director or in his absence the Executive Director, 
as the case may be, does not convene a meeting as required by a sub-regulation (i)  within 
the period stipulated in the proviso to sub -regulation (iv), the meeting may be called by 
the requsitionists themselves within three months from the date of the requisition: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-regulation shall be deemed to prevent a meeting 
duly convened before the expiry of the period of three months aforesaid, from being 
adjourned to some day after the expiry of that period. 
Point raised 
            What is the justification of having such a provision in the regulations?   Should 
there not be an obligation on the pa rt of the Chairman and Managing Director or in his 
absence the Executive Director that he must call the meeting. 
Ministry’s reply 
            This is an enabling provision based on Section 169(6) of the Companies Act, 
1956.  The regulations make it obligatory for CMD or in his absence ED or in his absence 
any of the Directors to convene the EGM in three circumstances, i.e. if so directed by the 
Board, or on requisition from the Central Government, or from shareholders holding 
shares carrying not less than 10 per cent total voting rights.  When the meeting called for 
by the Central Government or Shareholders is not convened within the period 
prescribed, then the requsitionists may themselves convene the meeting.   This appears to 
be in the nature of a safeguard in the event of the obligation not being discharged in time. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted the position. 
22.Regulation 58: Quorum of General Meeting 
            (i) No business shall be transacted at any meeting of the shareholders unless a 
quorum of at least five shareholders entitled  to vote at such meeting in person are present 
at the commencement of such business.         
(ii) If within half an hour after the tim e appointed for the holding of a meeting a 
quorum is not present in the case of a meeting called by a requisition of shareholders 
other than the Central Government, the meeting shall stand dissolved. 
Point raised 
            The Quorum of at least five shareholders appears to be too less.   What are the 
reasons for this.  Should it not be in terms of percentage of the total shareholders? 
Ministry’s reply 
            Similar are the provision in regulation 24 of the SBI General Regulation, 1955 and 
Section 174 of the Companies Act, 1956.   However, in view of the increase in number of 

shareholders, the SBI has proposed to revise the ceiling to 10 shareholders (including 
RBI).  At present, there is no such need for nationalized bank. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee felt that five shareholders was too less for the purpose of quorum 
in the meeting of the shareholders.   It sought to know the numbers of   shareholders 
generally present in such meetings and desired that the  regulations should prescribe for 
a more realistic quorum.  The Committee, at the same time, however, felt that the quorum 
may not be increased unrealistically which might prove to be a hurdle in the conduct of 
such meetings.  The Committee desired the Ministry to re-examine this point and increase 
the number suitably. 
23.Regulation 61: Voting at general meetings 
(i)                  At any general meeting, a resolution put to the vote of the meeting shall, unless a 
poll is demanded, be decided on a show of hands. 
(ii)        Save as otherwise provided in the Act every matter submitted to a general meeting 
shall be decided by a majority of votes. 
(iii)       Unless a poll is demanded under sub-regulation (i), a declaration by the Chairman 
of the meeting that  a resolution on show of hands has or has not been carried either 
unanimously or by a particular majority and an entry to that effect in the books 
containing the minutes of the proceedings, shall be conclusive evidence of the fact, without 
proof of the num ber or proportion of the votes cast in favour of, or against, such 
resolution. 
(iv)       Before or on the declaration of the result of the voting on any resolution on a show 
of hands, a poll may be ordered to be taken by the Chairman of the meeting of his  own 
motion, and shall be ordered to be taken by him on a demand made in that behalf by any 
shareholder or shareholders present in person or by proxy and holding shares in the Bank 
which confer a power to vote on the resolution not being less than one fift h of the total 
voting power in respect of the resolution. 
(v)               The demand for   a poll may be withdrawn at any time by the person or 
persons  who made the demand. 
(vi)             A poll demanded on a question of adjournment or election of chairman of the 
meeting shall be taken forthwith. 
(vii)           A poll demanded on any other question shall be taken at such time not being later 
than forty eight hours from the time when the demand was made, as the chairman of the 
meeting may direct. 

(viii)         The decision of the chairman of the meeting as to the qualification of any person 
to vote, and also in the case of poll, as to the number of votes any person is competent to 
exercise shall be final. 
  
Point raised 
            The regulation does not prescribe the voting procedure once the poll is demanded 
in the meeting.  Whether it can be prescribed in the regulation? 
Ministry’s reply 
            The Regulation are based on Sections 177 to 180 of the Comp anies Act, 
1956.  However, we may consider providing for appointment of scrutineers at poll and 
manner of taking poll and result thereof as provided in Sections 184 and 185, ibid. 
            The Syndicate Bank agreed for prescribing the voting procedure i n the general 
meetings. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee desired  the Ministry to re-examine the extent to which the voting 
procedure could be incorporated in the regulations. 
24.Regulation 62:  Minutes of General Meeting 
(i)                  The bank shall cause the minutes of all proceedings to be maintained in the books 
kept for the purpose. 
(ii)        Any such minutes, if purporting to be signed by the Chairman of the meeting at 
which the proceedings were held, or by the Chairman of the next succeeding meeting, 
shall be evidence of the proceedings. 
Point raised 
            Whether any shareholder has the right to inspect the minute book or is entitled 
to make copies of minutes, has not been specified? 
Ministry’s reply 
            This is in line with regulation 28 of the SBI General regulation, 1955.   Since the 
regulation does not prohibit inspection of minutes by shareholder, shareholder can have 
it.  Moreover, as the minutes are required to be confirmed at the next General Meeting, 
shareholder is supposed to have knowledge of it. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee noted that the right to inspect the minute book and to make copies 
therefrom was available under the C ompanies Act, 1956.   The Committee desired the 

Ministry to re -examine if similar provisions could be added in the regulations in hand 
also. 
25.Regulation 63(i): Directors to be elected at general meeting 
            A Director under clause (i) of sub-section (3) of Section 9 of the Act shall be elected 
by the shareholders on the register, other than the Central Government, from amongst 
themselves in the general meeting of the Bank. 
Point raised 
            The regulation does not specify the term of office of a Director who is elected by 
the shareholders in the General Body Meeting.   Would it not be appropriate if the term 
of office of a Director is specified in regulation itself? 
Ministry’s reply 
            The Notific ation dated 3.4.1995 has amended sub -clause (4) of Clause 9 of the 
Nationalized Banks (Management and Miscellaneous) Scheme 1970/1980 to provide for 
the tenure of three years for the elected Directors. 
Committee’s observations 
            The Committee not ed that the Nationalized Banks (Management and 
Miscellaneous) Scheme, 1970/80 provide for a tenure of 3 years for elected Directors. 
2.         The Ministry vide their communication dated the 10 th December, 2002 informed 
that the suggestions made by the Committee during discussions with the representatives 
of the Nationalized Banks have been examined by the Indian Banks Association and the 
Reserve Bank of India and theGovernment are considering the views of RBI and IBA for 
amendment to General Regulations of the Nationalized Banks. 
3.         The Ministry of Finance further, informed the Committee vide another 
communication dated the 9th April, 2003, as under:-  
            “That the recommendations made by the Committee with regard to amendment 
to General Regulations of Banks have been considered in consultation with the Reserve 
Bank of India and a proposal has been submitted to the Ministry of Law for their 
consideration for amending the following General Regulations:- 
            Regulation  Nos. 2(e), 13 (ii), 13 (v), 17 (iii), 17 (iv), 19 (i), 19 (ii), 21, 44, 46, 56, 62. 
            The RBI has also examined other regulations in consultation with IBA.  They have 
suggested changes in the following regulations also:- 
            Regulation Nos. 2A(i), (ii), 5A(i), & (ii), 7 (ii), 8 (ii), 11(ii), 12, 15, 32, 44, 47, 61 & 
65 and for deletion of regulation nos. 48 to 55.”        
4.         The Ministry of Finance vide another communication dated the 11 th September, 
2003 further informed the Committee that the amendments in the General Regulations 

of the Nationalized Banks have been finalized in consultations with the Ministry of Law 
and a draft notification has been prepared.    The Ministry further informed the 
Committee that the Nationalized Banks have been ad vised to amend their General 
Regulations as per the draft notification.   In pursuance of the Ministry’s direction the 
Punjab National Bank, the Syndicate Bank, the Vijaya Bank, the Indian Overseas Bank, 
the Oriental Bank of Commerce and the Indian Bank hav e amended their General 
Regulations. 
5.            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance have agreed 
to the Committee’s suggestions and carried out the amendments as under: - 
(i)            In Regulation 2(e) by inserting regulation 2.A(i) providing for the Constitution 
of the Committee. 
(ii)          In Regulation 13(ii) by substituting the words “some other officer appointed by 
the Board” with the words “some other officer not below the rank of scale II 
or the Company Secretary.” 
(iii)               In Regulation 17(iii) and (iv) by inserting an Explanation laying down the 
“Technical requirements” for transfer of shares and clause (v) providing for a 
time limit of 60 days for registering the transfer of shares. 
(iv)              In Regulation 19(ii) (b) by substituting clause (b) with the following clause 
thereby we aligning the provisions on the lines of SEBI:- 
“If it has formed the opinion that such registration ought to be refused on any 
of the grounds mentioned in sub -regulation (i) intimate the same to the 
Transferor and the Transferee by notice in writing giving reasons for such 
refusal within 60 days from the receipt of the transfer form or within such 
period as may be laid down in the Listing Agreement with the concerned Stock 
Exchange.”  
(v)                In Regulation 21 by inserting an explanation thereby laying down the 
circumstances under which a shareholder may be disqualified for registration: 
- 

“Explanation- For the purposes of this regulation, a shareholder may cease to 
be qualified for registration- 
(a)    If he is a guardian of minor, on the minor attaining the majority; 
(b)   If he is holding shares as a Karta, on his ceasing to be a Karta. 
(vi)              In Regulation 44 by substituting the words “any other officer of the Bank” 
with the words “Company Secretary or any other officer of the Bank not below 
the rank of Scale-II so as to make this provision specific. 
(vii)             In Regulation 46 (ii) proviso  by substituting the words “by registered post, 
with or without acknowledgement due with the words” by registered post, with 
or without acknowledgement due or by courier service or in an electronic 
mode” and by inserting the words “or electronic media, as the case may be” 
after the words “ordinary course of post” so as to add new and efficient modes 
of serving notices to shareholder. 
(viii)           In Regulation 56 (i) by substituting the words “any authorized official” with 
the words “any officer not below the rank of Scale VII or Company Secretary” 
so as to make the provision specific. 
(ix)              In Regulation 61 by inserting regulations 61A providing for the Scrutineers 
at Poll and 61B providing for the Manner of taking poll and result thereof on  
the lines of the provisions in the Companies Act, 1956. 
(x)                In Regulation 62 by inserting clause (iv) providing for the shareholder to 
inspect the minute book and to copy the minute. 
6.   The Committee further recommends that the remaining nationalized banks may 
also carry out similar amendments in their regulations, expeditiously. 
The Committee, however, reiterates its observations on regulation 15(ii) and 16 
regarding bringing in uniformity in the costs, charges and expenses in the matter 
of issue of duplicate certificate by various banks in similar type of transactions; 

regulation 30 regarding specifying the time interval between the first notice and 
the second notice as it feels that the system should be such that the shareholders 
are ser ved with the notice duly and promptly before action for forfeiture is 
initiated; regulation 36 regarding absence of justification for holding the 
shareholder liable to pay for all calls, instalments, interest, etc., as it may not be 
proper to charge from t he shareholder for all calls, instalments, interest, etc. in 
case his shares were being forfeited; regulation 42 (ii) regarding qualifying the 
words “some officer” by his rank to make the provision specific; and regulation 
58 (i) regarding increasing the q uorum in the light of the total strength of 
shareholders so as to make it more realistic.   The Committee hopes that the 
Ministry of Finance would reconsider these points and intimate to it the outcome. 
III 
The Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules, 1993 and Export-Import Policy, 1997-2002. 
  
The Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules 1993 and the Export -Import Policy 1997-
2002 framed under the Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act, 1992 were 
examined and a questionnaire on each was forwarded to the Ministry of Commerce & 
Industry for their comments / clarifications in December 1999. Later on, it was decided 
to drop the examination of the Exim Policy, 1997 -2002.  The points referred to the 
Ministry in relation to the Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules, 1993 and the 
comments/clarifications received thereon are placed at Annexure-I. 
2.         The Committee took up for discussion the subject matter with the representatives 
of (i) the Directorate General of Foreign Trade, Visakhapatnam Export Processing Zone 
and the Department of Commerce at Visakhapatnam on the   5th January, 2000 (ii)   the 
Calcutta Export Processing Zone and the Ca lcutta Export Promotion Councils at 
Calcutta on the 21 st January, 2000;  and (iii)  the Mumbai Export Processing Zone and 
the Mumbai Export Promotion Councils at Mumbai on the 16 th February, 2000  along 
with the representatives of the  Department of Commerce. Study notes on the discussions 
at Visakhapatnam,   Calcutta and Mumbai   are placed at Annexures  II,  III and IV , 
respectively. 

3.         The Committee at its meeting held on the 20 th June, 2000 considered the subject 
matter in the light of the deliberations done so far, and decided to invite views/suggestions 
from various Export Promotion Councils, Export Processing Zones and Trade 
Houses.  Response was received from 17 organizations.   A perusal of the suggestions 
received from the various organization s  revealed  that a number of the suggestions 
pertained to  amendment in the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992.   
4.         The Committee at its meeting held on the 20 th May, 2003 considered the matter 
and noted that the Ministry of Com merce & Industry had agreed to the Committee’s 
suggestions for (i) deletion of the word "substantially" in Rule 7 (1) (b); and (ii) for 
replacing the word "temper" with the word "forge" in Rule 7 (h).      The Committee 
decided to have the comments of the M inistry on the suggestions received from various 
organizations which had a bearing on the rules.  
5.         Accordingly, a gist of the suggestions received from various Organizations / Trade 
Houses was forwarded to the Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Dep artment of 
Commerce) for their comments / clarifications on the 1 st September, 2003. In response, 
the Ministry furnished their comments on the 26th September, 2003. The points raised by 
various Organizations / Trade Houses and the views / comments of the Ministry thereon 
are reproduced below:- 
Indian Institute of Foreign Trade 
B-21, Institutional Area, South of IT 
New Delhi 
1.         Point raised      
The Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act, 1992, the Foreign Trade 
(Regulation) Rules, 1993 and the Foreign Trade (Exemption from application of Rules in 
certain cases) Order, 1993 govern the export and import of goods. "A Chapter on Export 
of Services" has been incorporated in the trade policy.   However, the Act, Regulation 
Rules and the Order are almost silent about the export of services.  A reference in the Act 
and the Regulation Rules in this regard may be called for. 
Ministry’s Comments 
Action has been initiated. 
2.         Point raised  
The Schedule of fee incorporated in the Regulation Rules, 1993 vide  its para 5(1) 
specifies the fee to be remitted along with the application for grant of licence.   The DGFT 
charges fee at the rate of Rs. 5/ - per thousand for grant of Duty Entitlement Pass Book 

(DEPB), which does not find place in the Schedule.  In order to make charging of such a 
fee legal, it may be appropriate to incorporate the same in the said Schedule. 
Ministry’s Comments 
Action has been initiated. 
3.         Point raised  
Paras 4 to 7 of the Regulation Rules, 1993 need to undergo changes in the light of 
impending developments in the trade policy in the coming years.   More and more 
restricted items of import are being moved to the free list.  Special Import Licence (SIL) 
has been dispensed with since April 1, 2000. 
Ministry’s Comments 
Necessary action has been initiated for making amendments in Sections   4, 5 (1), 
5(3), & 6. For Section 2 (b) decision is yet to be taken. Though no specific suggestion has 
been given by the Indian Institute of  
Foreign Trade (IIFT) on amendment of Section 7, nece ssary action has been 
initiated for amendment of Section 7 (1) (d) to include Services & Technology. 
4.         Point raised  
Para 7 (n) makes a mention of 'Cash Compensatory Support' and 'Cash 
Assistance' which are no more in operation.  The para may be amended accordingly. 
Ministry’s Comments 
The clause needs to be continued in view of old investigation cases or where such 
fraud cases have been detected till these are settled. 
The Synthetic and Rayon Textiles Export Promotion Council 
Resjam Bhawan, 
 78, Veer Narima Road,  
Mumbai. 
  
5.         Point raised  
In all advanced countries, it is mandatory for the Government to announce draft 
subordinate legislation three months in advance with a view to receiving 
modifications/suggestions to improve.  This procedure not only brings out transparency 
in the governance but also helps in building up confidence in the Government. 
            If the Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act, 1992 is suitably amended 
to include the proposal made above, it will n ot only fetch the benefits stated above but 

will also stabilize exports, which is so essential for growth plans chalked out by the 
Government.       
Ministry’s Comments 
During policy formulation, views / comments from Trade Associations, Chambers 
of Commer ce, Export Organizations, eminent economists, institution, all concerned 
departments, private bodies, etc are taken into account. Open Houses and Exporters’ 
Meetings are organized to get one to one feedback. Further, the provisions of the policy 
are subject to amendment as and when required. 
NOIDA Export Processing Zone 
Surajpur Dadri Road, 
Distt. Ghaziabad, 
Noida. 
6.         Point raised  
At present, there is no effective mechanism for realization of penalties imposed by 
the adjudicating authorities under the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1992.  An effective mechanism may, therefore, be devised for realization of penalties 
under the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992. 
  
Ministry’s Comments  
Necessary action has been initiated. 
  
.           The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Commerce & Industry 
have agreed to amend the Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules, 1993 (i) by deleting the word 
'substantially' in Rule 7 (1) (b); and (ii) by replacing the word 't emper' with the word 
'forge' in Rule 7 (h).   
  
The Committee also appreciates that the Ministry have agreed and initiated action 
based upon the suggestions received from various organizations   (i) for incorporating a 
chapter on the 'Export of Services' in the Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) 
Act, 1992 and the Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules, 1993 in view of their incorporation 
in the trade policy; (ii) for incorporating the scheme of fee in the  Regulation Rules, 
1993;  (iii) for suitably modifying the provisions of Rules 4; 5 (1) (3); 6 and 7 (1) (d) of the 
Regulation Rules, 1993 so as to include services & technology in the light of developments 

in the trade policy; and (iv) for devising an eff ective mechanism for realization of 
penalties under the Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act, 1992 and the 
Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules, 1993. 
  
The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Commerce & Industry would carry out 
the amendments in the Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act, 1992 and the 
Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules, 1993 expeditiously under intimation to it. 
IV 
The Export of Live Fish (Quality Control, Inspection and Monitoring) Rules, 2002. 
  
The Export of Live Fish (Quality Control, Inspection and Monitoring) Rules, 2002 
framed under the Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963 were examined by 
the Committee and certain points requiring comments / clarifications were forwarded to 
the Ministry of Commerce & Industry ( Department of Commerce) on the 21 st January, 
2003. 
  
2.         The Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) furnished 
their comments / clarifications on each of the points raised therein on the 25 th March, 
2003 which are reproduced below: - 
1)Point referred  
The Act under which these rules have been framed was enacted in the year 1963. In what 
manner, the areas covered by these rules were being regulated before the enactment of 
the said Rules? 
Ministry's reply 
It may be mentioned that as provided in section 17 (1) of the Export (Quality Control and 
Inspection) Act, 1963, the main rules entitled the "Export (Quality Control and 
Inspection) Rules, 1964" were notified during the year 1964. 
  
Further, Fresh, Frozen and Processe d Fish and Fisheries is already covered under the 
Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963 vide order and notification nos. 729 
(E) and 730 (E), both dated 21.08.1995. To ensure that our exports of live fish meet the 
requirements of the importing country and are not rejected on arrival at the importing 
ports, the Central Government had notified live fish under the Export (Quality Control 

and Inspection) Act, 1963 vide Order and Notification no. 477 (E) and 478 (E) both dated 
1st May, 2002 which specified the manner of export certification of live fish. 
Prior to the notification dated the 1 st May, 2002, there was no regulatory quality, 
inspection and monitoring control for export of live fish. 
2)Point referred  
Rule 9 
"Having satisfied itself that the establishments meet the requirements with regard to the 
nature of the activities they carry out, the Agency on an application by the establishment 
made to it, shall accord approval to such establishments". 
Can any time limit not b e prescribed in this rule for grant / refusal of approval by the 
Agency so that matters are not dragged unnecessarily? 
Ministry's reply  
Such time limits are not being provided in the notification. However, to avoid any delay 
in according approval, Export Inspection Council (EIC) issues executive instructions to 
Export Inspection Agencies (EIAs), wherein, such time limits are prescribed. 
The executive instructions of live fish are under preparation and will be issued shortly. 
However, the executive instructions issued in regard to Fresh, Frozen and Processed Fish 
and Fishery Products, wherein time limit has been prescribed which are: 
  
"The Convenor of Inter -Departmental Panel (IDP) shall ensure that assessment of 
applicant establishments / factory vessels is carried out within 30 days of receipt of their 
application completed in all respect". 
3)Point referred 
   Rule 10 
"The Agency may take the assistance of representatives from Marine Products Export 
Development Authority (MPEDA) and Seafood Exporters Association of India (SEAI) in 
the matter of approval of establishments". 
What is the type and the manner in which the agency may take the assistance from 
MPEDA and SEAI in the matter of approval of establishment? 
Ministry's reply 
For approval of units, an Inter-Departmental Panel (IDP) or team visits the units to assess 
whether they have the capabilities to meet the requirements laid down in the notification 
in terms of facility sanitation (premises), structure and lay out, pest control (prevention, 
extermination, use of chemicals), maintenance, cleaning and sanitisation, personnel 
hygiene, rest rooms, water management, ice, chemicals, lighting and ventilation, waste 

disposal including effluent treatment, employee’s practices and Good Manufacturing 
Practices (GM P). Representatives of Marine Products Export Development Authority 
(MPEDA) and Seafood Exporters Association of India (SEAI) are part of the Panel for 
the assessment of the establishment. 
4)Point referred  
 Rule 14 – Certification 
"On request from the processor or exporter, the Agency shall issue Health or Veterinary 
certificate after satisfying itself that the live fishes are handled in approved 
establishments having valid approval number and after satisfying the relevant 
requirements". 
14.1     The Agency shall issue certificates on request from exporter or processor after 
satisfying itself that requirements of the relevant standards are met. 
Is it not possible to mention the maximum time period for issue of Health / Veterinary 
Certificate; whether Ministry have any objection in doing so; what is the difference 
between the provisions of rule 14 and 14.1; are they not the same, content-wise? 
Ministry's reply 
  
The maximum time period would be mentioned in executive instructions throug h which 
action of Export Inspection Agencies are monitored. Further, implementation of such 
instructions is audited through periodic corporate audits by the EIC of all agencies. 
Rule 14 refers to issuance of health certificate based on the requirements of the basic 
notification, whereas, sometimes, importing country requires additional parameters to be 
certified other than the ones prescribed in health / veterinary certificate as given in rule 
14. In order to accommodate the same, rule 14.1 has been prescribed. 
5)Point referred  
Rule 15 – Fees 
"(i) A fee of two thousand rupees shall be paid by the establishment along with application 
for approval as per clause 9.  
(ii) In the case of approval and monitoring system inspection fee at the rate of 0.2% of 
the fee on board value subject to a minimum of five hundred rupees per consignment 
shall be paid by the exporter to the Agency". 
(a) The fee of two thousand rupees appears to be on the higher side; the Ministry may 
please justify? 
(b) Is the fee prescribed under rule 15 (ii), not on the higher side; what are the Ministry's 
comments in this behalf? 

Ministry's reply 
(a) A fee of Rs. 2000/- involves the processing charges of application including scrutiny of 
the documents as well as against cost incurred towar ds assessment. An Inter -
Departmental Panel consisting of at least three members carries out the assessments. 
Since EIAs have to be self -supporting, any fee charge has to cover cost of its operation 
including manpower charges. Therefore, the fee laid down is considered very reasonable. 
(b) No Please, this fee is based on the notified fee structure under section 17 of the Act, 
and, therefore, cannot be changed for this item. 
6)   Point referred  
      Rule 16 (i) 
"Any exporter aggrieved by the refusal of the Agency to issue certificate of approval 
under clause 9, may within ten days of receipt of the communication for such a refusal 
may prefer an appeal to the appellate panel consisting of not less than three but not more 
than seven persons appointed for the purpose by the Central Government". 
This rule is silent as regards cases, which will be received after the expiry of ten days 
period. Further, the time period of ten days seem to be insufficient; what are the 
comments of the Ministry in this regard; further, would it not be appropriate to prescribe 
a maximum time period for disposal of appeal? 
Ministry's reply 
Since live fish is a perishable commodity and therefore, it may be effective to redress the 
appeal as early as possible hence the period of ten days given is considered to be sufficient. 
Appeal, received after the expiry of ten days may be considered on the merit of the case. 
Further, in fish and fishery product notification, which is being implemented for the last 
few years the same period has been pro vided and there has not been any inconvenience 
to the exporters. 
However, with regard to disposal of the appeal, inclusion of a time limit will be examined. 
7)   Point referred        
What are the compulsions under which quality control, inspection and monitoring of 
export of live fish has been introduced by Government and what are the cities / places 
where these rules are being complied with; further, whether all processors are supposed 
to comply with these rules, if so, what is the mechanism in place to ensure submitting to 
the Agency by all processors? 
Ministry' reply 
A request was received from Marine Products Export Development Authority (MPEDA) 
to notify live fish under the purview of the Export (Quality Control & Inspection)  Act 

1963. As stated by MPEDA, the request was based upon the demand from the processors 
and exporters. These rules are complied within the country where there are production 
of live fish and export in India. These places are mostly in the coastal area. All processors 
are required to comply with the provision of the Government of India order and 
notification both dated the 1 st May, 2002. The implementation mechanism has been 
regularly monitored by EIAs and their sub- offices in order to ensure implementation of 
the notified rules by the processors. Further, it is also being regularly monitored by EIC 
to ensure proper implementation of the rules by EIAs and the processors. 
As per Order No. SO 477 (E) dated the 1 st May, 2002 on the Export of Live Fish, a 
provision under Section 6 (4) of the Export (Quality Control & Inspection) Act 1963, has 
been given as follows to prohibit the export of live fish: 
  
"Prohibits the export of live fish including molluscs and crustaceans meant for human 
consumption by a unit unl ess it conforms to the standard specifications applicable to it 
and is accompanied by certificate stating that such unit is approved and monitored by 
the Agency". 
This is being ensured by the customs authorities prior to shipments. 
3.         The Committee considered the matter in its meeting held on the 31 st December, 
2003. The Committee noted the Ministry's comments on most of the points. The 
Committee is happy to note that the Ministry have agreed to its suggestion on rule 16 (i) 
for prescribing a maximu m time period for disposal of an appeal and have notified the 
same by adding sub rule (iii) in rule 16 to this effect. 
  
4.         The Committee, however, reiterates its earlier stand on point no. 2 (Rule 9) and 
point no. 4 (Rule 14) that a time limit may  be prescribed in the rules itself for grant / 
refusal of approval under rule 9 or for issue of certificate under rule 14.  The Committee 
hopes that the Ministry would carry out / notify the these amendments, expeditiously. 
V 
TheCost Accounting Records (Electricity Industry) Rules, 2001. 
  
            The Cost Accounting Records (Electricity Industry) Rules, 2001 framed under the 
Companies Act, 1956 were examined and a questionnaire on the subject was forwarded 
to the Ministry of Compa ny Affairs on the 10 th January, 2003 for furnishing their 
comments. The Ministry vide their communication dated the 16 th February, 2003 
furnished their comments. 

            The Committee considered the subject matter at its meeting held on the 15th June, 
2004. The Committee noted the comments furnished by the Ministry on various points 
raised in the questionnaire except on point no. 1 wherein it desired to have further 
clarifications.  Accordingly, the Ministry had furnished the same in their reply dated the 
15th September, 2004. The points raised, Ministry's comments and Committee's 
recommendations are as follows:- 
1.)Point Raised 
            The Cost Accounting Records (Electricity Industry) Rules, 2001 have been framed 
in exercise of powers conferred by sections 642 (1) and 209 (1) (d) of the Companies Act, 
1956. Clause (d) of sub section (1) of section 209 of the Companies Act, which relates to 
keeping of proper books of accounts by a Company was added in the Act with effect from 
the 15 th October, 1965. When did Government include the Electricity Industry for the 
purposes of keeping proper books of accounts in terms of section 209 of the Act? 
Ministry's Comments (18.02.03) 
            The Government, in terms of section 209 (1) (d) of the Act , notified the Cost 
Accounting Records (Electricity Industry) Rules, 2001 on the 21 st December, 2001 vide 
GSR 913 (E) requiring the Electricity Industry to keep proper books of accounts with 
effect from the financial year commencing on or after the publication of these rules. 
Further query by the Committee (31.08.04) 
            Whether Government have any objections in specifying the date with effect from 
which the Electricity Industry was included for the purpose of keeping proper books of 
accounts in terms of Section 209 of the Act.  
Ministry's Comments (15.09.04) 
            The Cost Accounting Records (Electricity Industry) Rules, 2001, by virtue of Sub- 
Rule 2 of Rule 1 have become applicable w.e.f. the 21st December, 2001. According to Sub- 
Rule (1) of Rule 3, every Company in the Electricity Industry to which these rules apply, 
shall keep proper books of accounts under section 209 (1) (d) of the Companies Act, 1956 
from the financial year commencing on or after the 21st December, 2001. 
2.) Point Raised 
      Rule 4- Penalty 
"If a company contravenes the provisions of rule 3, the company and every officer thereof 
who is in default, including the persons referred to in sub-rule (4) of rule 3 shall, subject 
to provisions of section 209 of the Companies Ac t, 1956 (1 of 1956), be punishable with 
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and where the contravention is a 

continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every 
day, after the first day during which such contravention continues." 
            The rules have been framed in pursuance to section 209 of the Companies Act, 
1956. Section 209 (5) prescribes for a penalty of imprisonment up to 6 months and / or 
with fine up to Rs. 1000/ - in case of failure to secure compli ance of provisions of section 
209 by a company. The provisions of rule 4 are subject to the provisions of section 209 of 
the Act. On what basis, the Government are supplementing the penal provisions through 
subordinate legislation; should these appropriately not form part of the principal Act? 
Ministry's Comments 
            The Cost Accounting Records (Electricity Industry) Rules, 2001 have been framed 
in exercise of powers conferred by section 642 (1) read with section 209 (1) (d) of the 
Companies Act, 1956. As per section 642 (2) of the said Act, "any rule made under sub 
section (1) may provide that a contravention thereof shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees and where the contravention is a continuing one, with 
a further fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day, after the first day 
during which such contravention continues." 
            As the empowering section for making these rules is section 642 (1) of the said Act, 
the penalty has been provided as laid down under this section. Such penal provisions exist 
uniformly in all the rules prescribed under section 209 (1) (d) of the said Act. Before 
notifying these rules, same were duly vetted by the Legislative Department also. 
3.)Point Raised 
            A perusal of the provisions of the schedule as well as proforma A -F which have 
been appended to the rules give an understanding that any company engaged in 
generation, transmission or bulk supply and distribution and retail supply of electricity 
is required to keep a record of a large volume of information with very minute details. 
Further, the provisions of the schedule, at a number of places prescribe for maintenance 
of "proper records" in many of the areas like materials, salaries and allowances, service 
department expenses, utilities, workshop or repair and maintenance or tool rooms, fixed 
assets and depreciation and other overhead expenses, etc. 
            What is the objective sought to be achieved by prescribing various companies in 
the electricity ind ustry to keep such detailed records in respect of their activities; 
secondly, the term "proper records" appearing at different places in the schedule is also 
capable of varied interpretation. Whether the Ministry have any objection in substituting 
the term "proper records" by some other specific expression? 
Ministry's Comments 

  
Authentic cost data base is not only essential for the industries to improve upon 
their performance and face competitive environment, but also is extensively utilized by 
various Gov ernment agencies, revenue authorities, regulatory bodies and other 
institutions for meeting their respective objectives. Likely benefits to the companies from 
such rules have also been indicated under various para of the rules. 
  
            The term "proper records" means records maintained as per normally accepted 
accounting principles and practices. The Ministry has no objection in substituting the 
term "proper records" by some other specific expression. 
            4.)Point Raised 
  
            To what extend, the requirement of these rules are being complied with by the 
various companies falling within its purview and what feedback, if any, has been received 
by the Government with regard to the practicability of the strict compliance  of the 
provisions of these rules? 
Ministry's Comments 
            Feedback on compliance of the provisions of these rules would be available after 
some time as the industry is required to keep cost records from the financial year 
commencing on or after the 21st December, 2001 in terms of Rule 3 supra. 
            The Committee notes the explanations furnished by the Ministry of Company 
Affairs on the various points that were referred to them for comments/clarifications. The 
Committee is happy to note that the Ministry have agreed to substitute the words "proper 
records" by some other specific expression in pursuance to the query vide point no. 3. 
The Committee hopes the Government would carry out the amendment, expeditiously.  
VI 
The Life Insurance Corporation of India (Agents) Regulations, 1972 –   
Implementation of 127th Report of  the Committee 
  
             
            The Committee examined the Life Insurance Corporation of India (Agents) 
Regulations, 1972 framed under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 in the light of 
a representation received from Captain H.B. Shingada, a Mumbai based LIC agent, 
regarding violation of the said Regulations.  The matter was reported to the House by the 
Committee on the 14 th March, 2000 in its 127 th Report which wa s forwarded to the 

Ministry of Finance (Insurance Division) on the 21 st March, 2000 for action taken note 
thereon on the recommendations of the Committee. 
2.         The Ministry of Finance (Insurance Division) furnished their action taken note on 
the 12th June, 2000.   The Committee’s recommendations and the action taken thereon by 
the Ministry are as under :- 
Committee’s Recommendation  (127th Report) 
            The Committee hopes that the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
would be set up and the model agents regulations would be finalized within a period of 6 
months as stated by the Ministry. 
Ministry’s  Action Taken Note (12.6.2000)  
            The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) has been 
constituted with effect from  the 19th April, 2000  and from the same date the provisions 
of the Act have been enforced.  The IRDA has reported that they are finalizing the model 
agents regulations and the same would be notified within a period of 6 months i.e. before 
October this year. 
Committee’s Recommendation  (127th Report) 
Ministry’s  Action Taken Note (12.6.2000) The Committee hopes that the model agents 
regulations which are presently under finalization would take adequate care to ensure 
that the agency force in pla ce is professionalized and due consideration is given to their 
demands like extension of benefits of pension, mediclaim schemes, etc.   The Committee 
feels that a skilled and motivated team of agents would go a long way in promoting the 
business of LIC, par ticularly, when a stiff competition is foreseen in the coming days 
consequent upon the decision of the Government for opening up of the insurance sector 
globally. The Committee also expects Government to deal suitably with the issue of 
payment of commissio n to the agents under various scheme including the Pension and 
Group Superannuation Scheme in the proposed model agents regulations. 

            The IRDA has informed that they would be prescribing minimum educational 
qualification, period of training and technical qualifications to ensure that the agency 
force would be professionalized.   However, the terms and conditions which would be 
applicable to agents like pension, mediclaim scheme, etc.   has been left by the Authority 
to be negotiated by the agents with the insurers to whom they are attached. 
            So far as LIC is concerned, they have informed that pension benefits cannot be 
given to agents as they are not salaried employees of the Corporation.   They are entitled 
for commission and renewal comm ission  which does not have any limit.    The existing 
structure of payment of commission of LIC is adequate.   LIC have introduced a 
mediclaim scheme for the Chairman Club Member agents on contributory basis.   Under 
the scheme, 50% of the premium will be b orne by the agents and the remaining by the 
Corporation. 
             
3.         The Committee notes with satisfaction that in pursuance of its recommendations, 
the Ministry of Finance (Insurance Division) have constituted the Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Authority with effect from the 19 th April, 2000 and have also notified 
the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Licensing of Insurance Agents) 
Regulations, 2000 vide F.No. IRDA/Reg/7/2000 dated the 19th July, 2000. 
  
4.         As regards the Committee’s recommendations regarding payment of commission 
to the agents under various schemes as well as provisions for pension and group 
superannuation in the proposed model agents regula tions, it notes the explanation 
furnished by the Ministry. 
VII 
Summary of Recommendations 
  
I 

The Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and other 
Employees) Rules, 1998. 
The Committee felt that RRBs could be given some autonomy for recruitment of 
staff.  The Committee suggested that the surplus staff may be re-deployed in other banks. 
  
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry  have agreed to the Committee’s 
suggestions and carried out the following amendments in the Regional Rural Banks 
(Appointment and Promotion of Officers and other Employees) Rules 1998 :- 
(i)         In Rule 4 by substituting the words “such number of posts” with the words “such 
posts” thereby rectifying the discrepancy as pointed out by the Committee as Rule 
4 contained a reference to the First Schedule which contained only nomenclature 
of the posts and not their number. 
(ii)        In rule 10(1) by substituting the existing provision of sub-rule (1) as follows so as 
to realign the provision in the light of the provision in the Government of India 
brochure on reservation for SC/ST: 
“The posts of messenger, messenger-cum-sweeper (full time or part time), driver, 
driver-cum-messenger and securi ty guard shall be filled in by the Committee of 
the Regional Rural Banks after making a reference to the Employment Exchange, 
Sainik Boards and to the agencies, if any, catering to the welfare of Physically 
Handicapped persons.   Further, the vacancies for Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes shall also be brought to the notice of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes Organisation listed in appendix 11 referred to in para 7.1 (iii) of 
the Brochure on Reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in 
services (8 th Edition) as amended from time to time catering to the Welfare of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as are recognized by the Central 
Government or the State Government having jurisdiction over the Regional Rural 
Banks filling the posts.   When doing so, it should be made clear to such 
organizations that their function is limited to advising the Scheduled 
Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidates about the recruitment proposed and that it will 
not be for them to recommend or press the names of any ind ividuals.  The 
candidates should apply to the appointing authority either direct or through the 
Employment Exchanges as the case may be”. 
(iii)       In rule 10(1) proviso by incorporating the words “Other Backward Classes” so as 
to include OBCs also along with SCs/STs for the purpose of giving preference. 
(iv)       In Schedule III in provision relating to the nomination of an additional member 
of the Board in case of selection for SCs/STs by substituting the word “may” with 

the word “shall” so as to make the nomination of the members from the reserved 
categories mandatory. 
The Committee further notes that the Ministry have issued instructions to the National 
Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development to issue necessary instructions to the 
Regional Rural Ba nks and sponsor banks in pursuance of the Committee’s 
recommendation that the qualifying service for the purpose of promotions should not be 
relaxed in a routine manner and that it should be decided on a case-to-case basis and the 
reasons for doing so must  be recorded.  The Committee, however, recommends that the 
Ministry of Finance should consider incorporating these instructions suitably in schedule 
III also so that the position is set right once for all.   As regards Rule 5 pertaining to 
vacancies, the Committee is of the view that the RRB’s could be given some autonomy for 
recruitment of staff.   As regards Schedule III governing the method of promotion, the 
Committee reiterated the need for balance between seniority and merit to keep the RRB’s 
competitive with other commercial Banks. 
II 
The Punjab National Bank General Regulations, 2000. 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance have agreed to the 
Committee’s suggestions and carried out the amendments as under: - 
(i)            In Regulation 2(e) by inserting regulation 2.A(i) providing for the Constitution 
of the Committee. 
(ii)          In Regulation 13(ii) by substituting the words “some other officer appointed by 
the Board” with the words “some other officer not below the ran k of scale-II 
or the Company Secretary.” 
(iii)               In Regulation 17(iii) and (iv) by inserting an Explanation laying down the 
“Technical requirements” for transfer of shares and clause (v) by providing 
for a time limit of 60 days for registering the transfer of shares. 
(iv)              In Regulation 19(ii) (b) by substituting clause (b) with the following clause 
thereby realigning the provisions on the lines of SEBI:- 
“If it has formed the opinion that such registration ought to be refused on any 
of the grounds mentioned in sub -regulation (i) intimate the same to the 

Transferor and the Transferee by notice in writing giving reasons for such 
refusal within 60 days from the receipt of the transfer form or within such 
period as may be laid down in the Listing Agreement with the concerned Stock 
Exchange.”  
(v)                In Regulation 21 by inserting an explanation thereby laying down the 
circumstances under which a shareholder may be disqualified for registration: 
- 
“Explanation- For the purposes of this regulation, a shareholder may cease to 
be qualified for registration- 
a.       If he is a guardian of minor, on the minor attaining the majority; 
b.      If he is holding shares as a Karta, on his ceasing to be a Karta. 
(vi)              In Regulation 44 by substituting the words “any other officer of the Bank” 
with the words “Company Secretary or any other officer of the Bank not below 
the rank of Scale-II” so as to make the provisions specific. 
(vii)             In Regulation 46 (ii) proviso by su bstituting the words “by registered post, 
with or without acknowledgement due” with the words “by registered post, 
with or without acknowledgement due or by courier service or in an electronic 
mode” and by inserting the words “or electronic media, as the c ase may be” 
after the words “ordinary course of post” so as to add new and efficient modes 
of serving notices to shareholders. 
(viii)           In Regulation 56 (i) by substituting the words “any authorized official” with 
the words “any officer not below the rank of Scale-VII or Company Secretary” 
so as to make the provisions specific. 
(ix)              In Regulation 61 by inserting regulations 61A providing for the Scrutineers 
at Poll and 61B providing for the Manner of taking poll and result th ereof on 
the lines of the provisions in the Companies Act, 1956. 

(x)                In Regulation 62 by inserting clause (iv) providing for the shareholder to 
inspect the minute book and to copy the minute. 
The Committee further recommends that the remaini ng nationalized banks may also 
carry out similar amendments in their regulations, expeditiously. 
The Committee, however, reiterates its observations on regulation 15(ii) and 16 regarding 
bringing in uniformity in the costs, charges and expenses in the matt er of issue of 
duplicate certificate by various banks in similar type of transactions; regulation 30 
regarding specifying the time interval between the first notice and the second notice as it 
feels that the system should be such that the shareholders are served with the notice duly 
and promptly before action for forfeiture is initiated; regulation 36 regarding absence of 
justification for holding the shareholder liable to pay for all calls, instalments, interest, 
etc. as it may not be proper to charge from  the shareholder for all calls, instalments, 
interest, etc. in case his shares were being forfeited; regulation 42 (ii) regarding qualifying 
the words “some officer” by his rank to make the provisions specific; and regulation 58 
(i) regarding increasing the quorum in the light of the total strength of shareholders so as 
to make it more realistic.   The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Finance would 
consider these points and intimate to it the outcome. 
III 
The Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules, 1993 and Export – Import Policy, 1987-2002. 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Commerce & Industry have 
agreed to amend the Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules, 1993 (i) by deleting of the word 
'substantially' in Rule 7 (1) (b) ; and (ii)   by replacing the word 'temper' with the word 
'forge' in  Rule 7 (h).   
The Committee is also happy to note and appreciates that the Ministry have agreed and 
initiated action on the suggestions received from various organizations   (i) for 
incorporating a chapter on the 'Export of Services' in the Foreign Trade (Development 
& Regulation) Act, 1992 and the Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules, 1993 in view of their 
incorporation in the trade policy; (ii) for   incorporating  the scheme of fee in the 
Regulation Rules, 1993;  (iii) for suitably modifying the provisions of Rules 4; 5 (1) (3); 6 
and 7 (1) (d) of the Regulation Rules, 1993 so as to include services & technology in the 
light of developments in the trade policy; and (iv) for devising an effective mechanism for 

realization of penalties under the Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act, 1992 
and the Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules, 1993. 
The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Commerce & Industry would carry out the 
amendments in the Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act, 1992 and the Foreign 
Trade (Regulation)  Rules, 1993 expeditiously under intimation to it. 
IV 
The Export of Live Fish (Quality Control, Inspection and Monitoring) Rules, 2002 
The Committee considered the matter in its meeting held on the 31st December, 2003. The 
Committee noted the Ministry's comments on most of the points. The Committee is happy 
to note that the Ministry have agreed to its suggestion on rule 16 (i) for prescribing a 
maximum time period for disposal of an appeal and have notified the same by adding sub 
rule (iii) in rule 16 to this effect. 
The Committee reiterates its earlier stand on point no. 2 (Rule 9) and point no. 4 (Rule 
14) that a time limit may be prescribed in the rules itself for grant / refusal of approval 
under rule 9 and for issue of certificate under rule 14; the Committee hopes that the 
Ministry would carry out / notify the above amendments expeditiously. 
V 
The Cost Accounting Records (Electricity Industry) Rules, 2001 
The Committee notes the explanations furnished by the Ministry of Company Affairs on 
the various points that were referred to them for comments/clarifications. The Committee 
is happy to note that the Ministry have agreed to substitute the words "proper records" 
by some other specific ex pressions in pursuance to the query vide point no.3. The 
Committee hopes the Government would carry out the amendment, expeditiously.  
VI 
The Life Insurance Corporation of India (Agents) Regulations, 1972 – Implementation 
of 127th Report of the Committee. 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that in pursuance of its recommendations, the 
Ministry of Finance (Insurance Division) have constituted the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority with effect from the 19 th April, 2000 and have also notified th e 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Licensing of Insurance Agents) 
Regulations, 2000 vide F.No. IRDA/Reg/7/2000  dated the 19th July, 2000. 
  
As regards the Committee’s recommendations regarding payment of commission to the 
agents under various schemes as well as provisions for pension and group superannuation 

in the proposed model agents regulations, it notes the explanation furnished by the 
Ministry. 
`Questionnaire on the Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules, 1993 and the reply of the 
Ministry thereon. 
QUESTION 
1. Whether the Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules, 1993 have been laid on the Table of 
the Rajya Sabha, if so, the details thereof? 
ANSWER 
The Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules, 1993 were laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha 
during its Budget Session in 1994. 
QUESTION 
2. Rule 2(b) 
Definitions: - 
In these rules unless the context otherwise requires, 
(b) “charitable purpose” includes relief of the poor, education, medical relief, and the 
advancement of any other object of general public utility; 
  
What are the other objectives of general public utility that have been contemplated in the 
clause.  Whether the Ministry would like to define or explain the term in the rule itself? 
ANSWER 
  
The term charitable purpose has been derived from Section 2 of the Charitable 
Endowment Act, 1980.  According to various case law on the subject, there are four heads 
which can fall under the word ‘charitable’, namely, (1) Religion (2) Poverty (3) Education 
(4) Other purposes beneficial to the community.  But at the same time it is not every object 
which comes within one or other of these categories is charitable although an ob ject to 
rank as charitable must either fit into one or more of the first three categories or if not 
must be of general public utility.   Charitable purpose includes relief of the poor, 
education, medical relief and any other object of general public utility  but does not 
include a purpose which relates exclusively to religious teachings or worship.  It excludes 
benevolent or philanthropic activity.   Research and propaganda which merely tend to 
increase public knowledge is not “education”, when the element of teaching is not 
combined with them. 
QUESTION 
3. Rule 4 

Application for grant of licence – 
            A person may make an application for the grant of a licence to import or export 
goods in accordance with the provisions of the Policy or an Order made under section 3. 
            There is no time period mentioned for the disposal of application for grant of 
licence.  Whether the Ministry would provide a provision in the rule for time bound 
disposal of application for licence? 
ANSWER 
Paragraphs 15.10 of the  Handbook of Procedures, Vol.1, 1997 -2002, issued under para 
4.11 of the Export Import Policy for the same period, (which, as already stated, is a 
statutory document) provides for time period for issue of various category of licences. 
QUESTION 
4. Rule 5(1) 
Fee- 
(1) Every application for a licence to import shall be accompanied by the fee specified in 
the Schedule. 
The clause (1) of rule 5 provides that every application for a licence to import shall be 
accompanied by the fee specified in the schedule.  What about the fee for license to export 
whether there is no fee for licence for export? 
ANSWER 
There is no fee for licence for export. 
  