179        C O S L  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-NINTH REPORT 
(Presented on 20th February, 2009) 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
February, 2009/Phalguna, 1930 (Saka) 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE............................................ (i) 
2. I NTRODUCTION..................................................................... (iii) 
3. R EPORT:  
 I. Senior Citizens Savings Scheme, 2004 ........................... 1-7 
 II. The Animal Birth Control (Dogs) Rules, 2001 ................. 8-19  
 III. The Coir Board (Registr ation and Licen sing) Rules, 
1958–Implementation of 136th Report of the 
 
  Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya 
Sabha.........     
20-25 
4. S UMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS ........................................... 26-28 
5. M INUTES............................................................................ 29-30 
6. A NNEXURES ........................................................................ 31-116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE 28TH MAY, 2008) 
 
 1. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla    ------ Chairperson 
 2. Prof. P. J. Kurien 
 3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 4. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 5. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
 6. Shri Vikram Verma 
 7. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
 8. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
 9. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
 10. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
 11. Shri Abani Roy
  
 12. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 13. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
 14. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
 15. Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
S
ECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
 3. Smt. Shubhashree Panigrahi, Deputy Director 
 4. Shri R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director 
 5. Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Research Officer 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
1. I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present 
this One Hundred and Seventy-Ninth Report of the Committee. 
1.2 The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on 
the 18th February, 2009. 
1.3  The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various 
Rules/Regulations and issues, relating to them along with the comments received 
from the Government. The observations and recommendations of the Committee 
are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report. 
 
 
DR. (SHRIMATI) NAJMA  A. HEPTULLA 
Chairperson, 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
Rajya Sabha. 
NEW DELHI ; 
18th February, 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
I 
THE SENIOR CITIZENS SAVINGS SCHEME, 2004 
  The Senior Citizens Savings Scheme, 2004 framed under the Government 
Savings Banks Act, 1873 was introduced by the Government of India with effect 
from 2nd August, 2004. Citizens of 60 years of age and above as well as citizens 
who have retired on superannuation or otherwise have attained the age of 55 years 
(but less than 60 years) are also eligible to invest their retirement benefits, subject 
to the maximum deposit ceiling provided that the account is opened within one 
month of the retirement. 
2.  The Scheme is operated through a large network of designated post offices 
and branches of public/private sector banks throughout the country. The deposit 
carries interest at the rate of the 9% per annum and interest earned under the 
Scheme is taxable in the hands of the depositor. However, deductions under 
Section 80C of the Income-Tax Act, 1961, is available on deposits up to Rs. 1 
lakh made under the Scheme with effect from 1st April, 2007. 
3.   Due to the importance of the Scheme for the senior citizens, the scheme was 
examined by the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha and a 
questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Economic Affairs) on the 23rd July, 2008. The Ministry furnished 
their replies on the 29th July, 2008. The points raised by the Committee and the 
comments/clarifications furnished by the Ministry are enumerated in following 
paragraphs. 
4.   The Committee enquired from th e Ministry whethe r any income-tax 
rebate/exemption was admissible under this Scheme. The Ministry replied that 
interest payments under the Scheme had not been exempted from the income tax. 
With effect from the 1st April, 2007, the deposits up to Rs.1 lakh under the 

Scheme are deductible under section 80 C of the Income-Tax Act, 1961. It was 
also informed that transactions under all small savings schemes were booked 
under various heads of  account in National Small Savings Fund (NSSF). 
Therefore the heads of accounts had not been specified in the SCSS Rules. 
5.  The Committee pointed out that as per the Senior Citizens Savings Scheme 
Rules, 2004(SCSS), no tax will be required to be deducted at source under section 
194 A of the Income-tax Act on interest credited or paid or likely to be credited or 
paid on any deposit, where such interest does not exceed ten thousand rupees 
during the financial year and asked whether it would not hamper the earning on 
savings of the Senior Citizens as they have no other source of income. The 
Ministry replied that as per sub-clause (c) of clause (i) of sub-section (3) of 
section 194-A of the Income-Tax Act, 1961(the Act), no tax was required to be 
deducted at source on payment of interest on deposits made with Post Offices or 
Banks under the SCSS, if the amount of interest so credited or paid during the 
financial year is up to Rs. 10,000/-. The Act provided facility to senior citizens to 
claim certain receipts without deduction of tax or deduction of tax at lower rate. 
Under sub-section (1C) of section 197 A, a senior citizen claiming certain receipts 
without deduction of tax can file a declaration in Form No. 15H to the person 
paying such income. Further, under section 197, an application can be made to the 
Assessing Officer in Form No. 13 for no deduction of tax or deduction of tax at a 
lower rate. 
6.   The Committee inquired whether deposits under the SCSS scheme were to 
be made only from funds received as retirement benefits. The Ministry replied that 
the aforesaid restriction was not applicable to depositors who have attained the 
age of 60 years and above, subject to th e condition that the deposits were within 
the prescribed maximum ceiling. Citizens who retire on superannuation or 
otherwise attain the age of 55 years (but less than 60 years) were eligible to invest 
only their retirement benefits, subjects, to the maximum deposit ceiling. 

7.  The Committee pointed out that the Rules say that the account under SCSS 
is opened by such individuals within on e month of the date of receipt of the 
retirement benefits and enquired the method of calculating the “one month” period 
after receipt of retirement benefits, when benefits were mostly received in piece 
meal on different dates. The Ministry replied that the facility of opening multiple 
accounts was already available under th e scheme. The retired persons were 
allowed to open more than one account on receipt of the retirement benefits in 
piece meal, provided the relevant account was opened within one month of receipt 
of the particular retirement benefit. 
8.  The Committee inquired about the age of spouse in case of a joint account 
under Rule 3(3). The Ministry replied that there is no age bar/limit for the joint 
holder, i.e., spouse. 
9.   Regarding Rule 6, the Committee pointed out that multiple nominations 
with shares create other problems. The Committee asked if the depositor 
nominates two persons jointly to receive the amount and if one of the nominees 
predecease–and the depositor also dies without making any changes in the 
nomination–how then does the bank deal with the deposit and whether the bank 
will pay the surviving nominees their shares and treat the deceased nominee’s 
share as assets of the depositor’s legal he irs and asked the Ministry to clarify. The 
Ministry clarified that such  cases are to be dealt with in accordance with Indian 
Succession Act, 1925. 
10.  The Committee inquired whether any fees are to be charged for nomination 
and/or changed/cancellation of nomination and the Ministry replied that no fee is 
chargeable in such cases. 
11.   The Committee inquired whether a person holding the Power of Attorney 
can sign for the nominee in the nomination form. The Ministry replied that in the 
nomination Form C, signature/thumb impression of the nominee has been 

prescribed. The rules of the scheme do not provide for signing by a person holding 
the Power of Attorney for the nominee. 
12.   The Committee pointed out that unde r Rule 6 (4), account can be opened 
jointly with spouse and can also be continued by spouse after death of the 
depositor. But it is not clear whether the age of the spouse should also be 60 years 
or above. For example, assume the husba nd’s age is 61 years and spouse’s age is 
54 years at the time of opening of account.  After one year, the husband dies when 
the age of spouse is 55 years. The Comm ittee wanted clarification on whether the 
account can be continued if the spouse wants to continue after the death of 
husband. The Ministry replied that in accordance with First Proviso to rule 8(3) of 
the Scheme, the spouse may continue the account on the same terms and 
conditions as specified under the rules. 
13.   The Committee inquired what happens to the accounts if both the spouses 
are maintaining individual accounts and not any joint account and one of them 
expires and the Ministry replied that such account shall not be continued and 
would be closed. 
14.   The Committee inquired whether the f acility of automatic electronic transfer 
of interest to a savings account at a post office/bank other than the deposit office 
is available. The Ministry replied that as  per instructions issu ed by DG Posts, the 
quarterly interest due in the account can be credited in the account of the depositor 
standing in a bank through electronic cl earing service in selected Post Offices. 
Facility of RTGS transfer of interest is also available in select branches of State 
Bank of India. 
15.  The Committee asked if the interest can be paid on completion of a quarter 
from/based on the date of deposit instead of clubbing the interest on payments to 
the last day of the quarter of the calendar year. The Ministry replied that as per the 
existing provisions of the Scheme, in the first instance, interest is payable from the 

date of deposit to the end of the quarter following such deposit and thereafter 
payable on quarterly basis. 
16.  The Committee asked whether new savings account is required to be opened 
for getting the interest credited periodically. The Ministry replied that there is no 
need of opening a new savings account for getting the interest credited 
periodically in the account. The depositors may get their interest credited to their 
existing savings account(s) at the deposit office where the account is opened under 
the Scheme. 
17.   The Committee asked whether multiple withdrawal is permitted as per the 
requirement of the depositor. The Ministry replied that whether interest on SCSS 
account is credited into the savings accounts  of the depositor in terms of rule 7(4) 
of the Scheme, multiple withdrawals from such savings accounts are permissible. 
18.  The Committee asked the Ministry’s comments on whether successors/heirs 
of deceased depositor should also be made eligible to deposit the terminal benefits 
under the scheme under Rule 8(3). The Ministry replied that as per Rule 8(3) of 
the Scheme, in case of death of a depositor before maturity, the account shall be 
closed and deposit refunded along with interest to the nominee or legal heirs. The 
successors/legal heirs may open their own ac counts in the Scheme, in case they 
are eligible. 
19.  The Committee pointed that premature penalty under Rule 9 does not match 
with the purpose of the Scheme. If the person needs any funds for any 
contingency, say emergent hospitalization, then the advantage of the Scheme 
becomes its disadvantage. The Ministry replied that the Scheme provides interest 
@ 9% p.a., which is the highest amongst the small savings scheme. Also, with 
effect from the 1st April, 2007, the depo sits under the scheme are included for 
benefit of deduction under section 80C of IT Act, 1961. No withdrawal is 
ordinarily allowed in the Scheme before expiry of 5 years period. However, 
provision for pre-mature closure of account s, after expiry of one year has been 

made so that investors, if required, could withdraw their deposits and in such 
cases the prescribed penalty is levied. 
20.  The Committee asked whether Post Dated Cheques/Warrants may be issued 
towards repayment of the principal on maturity. The Ministry replied that as per 
rule 8(1) of the Scheme, on expiry of fi ve years from the date of opening of the 
account, the deposits are payable on pr oduction of pass book accompanied by 
application in Form E. 
21.   The Committee inquired about the role of State Governments in the 
implementation of the Scheme and whether State Governments are eligible to the 
share of net collections under the Scheme. The Ministry replied that State 
Governments take various measures from time to time to promote and popularize 
various small savings schemes, including SCSS, through print and electronic 
media, holding seminars etc. The net collections under various small savings 
schemes are invested in the Central/State Government securities in accordance 
with National Small Savings Fund (Custody & Investment) Rules, 2001. Since 
2002-03, 100% of the net collections were being invested in the State Government 
securities. However, with effect from the 1st April, 2007, the net collections are to 
be shared between States and the Centre in the ratio of 80:20, with the option to 
the State Governments to take up to 100% of their net collections. 
22.   The Committee pointed out that Rule 11 provides that the account can be 
transferred to other post offices in case of change of residence but it is not clear 
whether the same can be done for reason s other than change in residence. The 
Ministry clarified that transfer of acc ount under the Scheme from one deposit 
office to another in accordance with rule 11, does not necessarily require change 
of residence. 
23.  The Committee asked whether apart from Post Offices, banks are also 
handling this Scheme and if so, asked the Ministry to furnish the names of banks 
handling SCSS, 2004. The Ministry replied that banks are handling the scheme 

and furnished that the following banks are handling the scheme: State Bank of 
India, State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur, State Bank of Travancore, State Bank of 
Saurashtra, State Bank of Hyderabad, State Bank of Indore, State Bank of Patiala, 
State Bank of Mysore, Canara Bank, Central Bank of India, Allahabad Bank, 
Syndicate Bank, Bank of Baroda, Union Bank of India, Indian Overseas Bank, 
Punjab National Bank, Bank of India, United Commercial Bank (UCO Bank), 
United Bank of India, Bank of Maharashtra, Indian Bank, Coroporation Bank, 
Dena Bank, ICICI Bank, IDBI, HDFC Bank and UTI Bank. 
24.   The Committee notes the fact that when the Scheme was launched, the rate 
of interest provided under the Scheme was higher than the prevailing rate of 
interest in the market. Nowadays rates of interest on fixed deposits of commercial 
banks are more than 10% per annum for senior citizens. As a result the Scheme 
has become less attractive. 
25.  The Committee, during its interaction with various public sector banks, is 
apprised of the fact that the Scheme did not take off due to its low rate of interest 
as compared to the prevailing market rates of interest on fixed deposits of 
commercial banks. 
26.  The Committee observes that St ate Governments are not taking 
adequate interest in promoting the Se nior Citizens Savings Scheme. The 
Committee feels that the Scheme which wa s introduced in the year 2004 with 
a view to help the people who have at tained the age of 55 years and above 
with annual rate of interest of 9 p ercent, has failed to fulfil its basic 
objectives. This has happened mainly due  to the fact that more profitable 
schemes are also available with the sa me banks that are supposed to operate 
it. The rate of interest under the sche me is lower in comparison to even 
ordinary deposits made in  the Bank. The Committee also takes note of other 
lacunae, viz, deductions are made on the benefits under Section 80C of 
Income Tax Act, 1961, a nd no withdrawal is ordi narily allowed in the 
Scheme, before the expiry of five years period. 

  The Committee therefore recommends that  the rate of interest on the 
Senior Citizens Savings Scheme, 2004 may be revised and tax incentives such 
as exemption.. of interest from income tax may also be added to make it more 
attractive. The whole Scheme the Committee feels, needs to be revisited. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

II 
THE ANIMAL BIRTH CONTROL (DOGS) RULES, 2001 
  The Animal Birth Control (Dogs) Rules, 2001, were notified on the 24th 
December, 2001, under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960. The main 
objective of the rules is to control the population of stray dogs by sterilization and 
to reduce the incidence of rabies by immunization. Under this, funds are provided 
to the Animal Welfare Organizations/Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
(SPCAs) working in municipalities / rural areas by Animal Welfare Board of 
India, through financial grants received From Ministry of Environment and 
Forests for sterilization and immunization of dogs. 
2.  India continues to be one of the most highly endemic areas in the world in 
respect of rabies, which can be linked to a large number of stray dogs. Controlled 
stray dog would result in reduced number of dog bites which would further mean 
a reduced incidence of rabies in human. The rules aim at humane, efficient and 
cost-effective control of stray dog population. 
3.  Due to the importance of the Rules, it was examined by the Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha and a questionnaire on the subject was 
forwarded to the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the 20th November, 
2003. The Ministry furnished their comments/clarifications on the 24th May, 
2004. The points raised by the Committ ee and the comments of the Ministry are 
reproduced below: 
(1)  Point raised 
 The Animal Birth Control (Dogs) Rules, 2001, deal with an area of 
great public importance which affects common man’s life to a fairly large 
extent. The Rules place a number of obligations on the local authority, 
which also contemplate a Committee consisting of representatives of local 
authority and others for the purpose of achieving the objectives of the Rules. 

It is felt that the obligations of the representatives of the local authority or 
the Committee that has been set up under the Rules are not widely known to 
the public. Is it not possible to add in the rules certain provisions so that the 
activity of the local Authority or the Committee in this area comes to public 
notice and undergo their scrutiny as well? 
Ministry’s comments 
 There can be no objection for inclusion of provisions relating to 
making the activity of the Committee of the local authority to bring to the 
public notice by announcement/advertisement. 
(2)  Point raised  
 One of the functions of the Committ ee is to provide guidelines for pet 
dog owners. It is seen that pet owners generally take their pet for easing in 
the morning hours in the locality itself which is big source of nuisance. 
Sometimes, these pets are also taken to public places like parks, etc. for the 
purpose. Whether there are any rules/guidelines in this behalf for the pet 
owners and how do these compare with rules guidelines in other countries. 
Ministry’s comments 
 At present, there are no such, rules/guidelines in other countries, it 
may be stated that the conditions in ot her countries are not similar to India. 
However, in many countries, it is mandatory for the dog owners to “pick 
up” after the animal and dispose off the fecal matter in the nearest dust bin. 
This rule may be implemented by the local authority. 
(3)  Point raised 
 The Rules have been framed under a legislation of 1960. In what 
manner the various aspects being dealt with in these rules were being 
regulated prior to framing these rules? 

Ministry’s comments 
 The Animal Welfare Board of India had been implementing the 
Scheme “neutering/sterilization of dogs” through the Animal Welfare 
Organisations in a limited way during last 30-35 years. This programme was 
implemented more vigorously after 1990s and gradually spread to other 
towns. The Board has formulated guidelines for the ABC Programme. 
(4)  Point raised 
 Whether there is any restriction on the number of pet dogs to be kept 
by any individual/family. Is there any need for fixing such a number? 
Ministry’s comments 
 At present, there is no such restriction of the number of pet dogs to be 
kept by any individual/family. The lic ence fee for animals may be left to 
local authorities. 
(5)  Point raised 
 What responsibility/accountability the Government imposes on the pet 
dog owners so that their neighbours and people in the locality do not face 
nuisance for any kind. ? 
Ministry’s comments 
 It may be stated that although there is no direct provision regarding 
responsibility on the pet dog owners, for nuisance to the people in the 
locality, the owner is liable for prosecution if being the owner he allows his 
dog to go at large in the street and thereby causes nuisance to the public. 
Statutory provisions in this regard are as follows:– 
 As per section 3 of the PCA Act 1960, it shall be the duty of 
every person having the care or charge of any animal to take all 

reasonable measures to ensure the well being of such animal and to 
prevent the infliction upon such animal of unnecessary pain or 
suffering. 
 As per the Section 11(1) of the PCA Act the owner is 
responsible for causing any nuisance to the people in the locality. 
Being the owner of an animal if any person allows it to stray in the 
street due to negligence, it is consid ered to be an offence. Nuisance to 
the people in the locality is caused due to the negligence of the owner 
to keep the animal in one’s proper care and control. This is made out 
generally under Section 11(1) (g)(h)(i) and G) reproduced below: 
Section 11 (1) if any person 
(g)  being the owner, neglects to exercise or cause to be exercised 
reasonably any dog habitually chained up or kept in close 
confinement; or 
(h)  being the owner of (any animal) fails to provide such animal 
with sufficient food, drink or shelter; or 
(i)  without reasonable cause, abandons any animal in 
circumstances which render it likely that it will suffer pain by 
reason of starvation thirst; or 
(j)  willfully permits any animal, of which he is the owner, to get at 
large in any street, while the animal is affected with contagious 
or infectious disease or, withou t reasonable excuse permits any 
diseased or disabled animal, of which  his is the owner, to die 
in any street. 
 Any violation of the above provisions by the owner is punishable with 
fine or imprisonment or with both. 

(6)  Point raised–Rule 2(b) Definition  
 “Animal Welfare organization” means and includes the Society for 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and any other welfare organization for 
animals which is registered under the Societies Registration Act of 1860 or 
any other corresponding law for the time being in force and which is 
recognized by Animal Welfare Board of India.” 
 What is meant by “corresponding law” in the above provisions; can 
there be any law which is not recognized by the Animal Welfare Board of 
India and can the Ministry give some examples of this? 
Ministry’s comments 
 There are no such law which is no t recognized by the Animal Welfare 
Board of India which are applicable for the purpose of registration. The 
Board does not recognize unregistered organizations. The term “which is 
recognized by the  AWBI” refers to Organization not laws. 
(7)  Point raised – Rule 3 Classification of dogs and their  
 sterilization  
 “(1) All dogs shall be classified in one of the following two categories 
(i) pet dogs, (ii) street dogs. 
 (2) The owner of pet dogs shall be responsible for the controlled 
breeding, immunization, sterilization and licensing in accordance with these 
rules and the law for the time being in force within a specified local area. 
 (3) The street dogs shall be sterilized and immunized by participation 
of animal welfare organizations, private individuals and the local 
authorities.” 

 (i)  What is the role contemplated  for private individuals under rule 
3(3)? 
 (ii) Is any action contemplated against those pet owners who do not 
get their pets immunized on a regular basis? 
Ministry’s comments 
 There are street dogs which belong  to the community where even poor 
people feed and take care of such street dogs. These dogs do not belong to 
any particular individual as such belong to the community/area. In such 
cases, any individual belonging to that area takes care of the dog belonging 
to that area. Under Rule 3(30) pet owners are governed by the rules of the 
local authority who may draw up the rules covering this. 
(8)  Point raised–Rule 4 Formation of the Committee 
 “A monitoring committee consisting of the following persons shall be 
constituted by the local authority. Namely: 
(a)  Commissioner/Chief of the local au thority, who shall be the ex-officio 
Chairman of the Committee; 
(b)  A representatives of the Public Health Department of the local 
authority. 
(c)  A representative of Animal Welf are Department if any of the local 
authority;  
(d)  A Veterinary doctor; 
(e)  A representative of the district Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals (SPCA);  
f)  At least two representatives from the Animal Welfare Organization 
operating within the said locality”. 

(i)  What is the tenure of the Committee as also the method of 
selection/nomination of the members on the Committee. Should the 
same not be specified in the rules? 
(ii)  Local representative of the pe ople, representatives of the Animal 
Welfare Organizations do not find any place in the Committee. 
Whether the Ministry have any objection in including these persons? 
Ministry’s comments 
 The tenure of the Committee may be suggested for 2 years. 
 Under Rule 8(f), “the monitoring committee is to consist of among 
others, at least two representatives from AWOs operating within the said 
locality”. 
 There should be no objection for inclusion of representative of the 
people1 a humanitarian and/or a well known individual who is interested in 
Animal Welfare work. in the said locality. 
(9)  Point raised–Rule 5 Functions of the Committee 
 As per rule 5, the Committee has been made responsible for the 
planning and management of the dog control programme. But there is 
nothing in rules to show to public/Government as to how the Committee has 
been discharging its responsibility. Should the rules not provide for regular 
meeting of the Committee and making of its activities public in order to 
induce public awareness as well as accountability to public? 
Ministry’s comments 
 There can be no objection to include a provision in the Rule that the 
monitoring committee of the said locality should meet at least once in a 

month to assess the progress made in regard to implementation of the ABC 
programme. 
(10)  Point raised–Rule 5 (c) Functions of the Committee 
 “The Committee constituted under rule 4 shall be responsible for 
planning and, management of dog control programme in accordance with 
these rules. The Committee may  
(a)  ****  ****  **** 
(b) ****  ****  **** 
(c)  create public awareness. Solicit co-operation and funding”  
 The Rule mentions about soliciting of funds. How are the funds being 
collected and how these are being uti lized? What are the main sources of 
funds for the Committee and in what manner these are accounted for? 
Ministry’s comments: 
 At present, no details are available as to fund raising and utilization by 
the monitoring committee. In cities such as Bangalore, the Municipal 
Corporation pays the entire cost of the programme. In Chennai, the 
Municipality has provided two facilities to two AWOs to carry out the 
programme. In Delhi, the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) has been 
instrumental in forming a Society known as Society for Stray Canine Birth 
Control to take care of the entire programme. 
(11)  Point raised–Rule 7 (6)  
 “The captured dogs shall be brought to the kennels/dog pounds 
managed by the Animal, Welfare Organization (AWOs) On reaching the dog 
pounds all the dogs shall be examined by the veterinarians and healthy and 
sick dogs shall be segregated. Sick dogs shall be given proper treatment in 

the hospitals run by Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
(SPCA)/other institutions and only after they are treated they should be 
sterilized and vaccinated. The dogs will be sterilized/vaccinated under the 
supervision of the veterinarians of the hospital run by the Society for 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCA), Animal Welfare Organization or 
other dog shelters. After necessary period of follow up, the dogs shall be 
released at the same place and locality  from where they were captured and 
the date, time and place of their release shall be recorded. The 
representative of Animal Welfare Organizations (AWO) shall accompany 
the dog squad at the time of release also”. 
 Which are the ‘other institutions’ as mentioned in the Rule; Whether 
these are run by the Government or include private institutions also; 
Whether Government have any objection in inserting the word’ recognized’ 
between the words ‘other’ and ‘institutions’ ? 
Ministry’s comments 
 Other institutions relate to other Animal Welfare Organizations in the 
said locality. There can be no objection for including the word “recognized” 
between the words “other” and “institutions” 
(12)  Point raised–Rule 12  Guidelines for breeders 
 “(i) A breeder must be registered with Animal Welfare, Board of 
India. Breeder must maintain full record of the number of pups born/died 
from individual bitches. 
 (ii) Breeder must maintain record  of the person buying the pups. He 
should ensure that the buyers have the required knowledge for the upkeep of 
the pups” 
 (i) Whether breeding is allowed in a Government flat/complex or 
private housing societies/residential complexes? 

 (ii) What responsibility/accountability Government imposes on the 
breeders so that people do not face nuisance of any kind? 
Ministry’s comments 
 At present, there are no guidelines for breeders. 
(13)  Point raised–Rul e 13 Application of Rule s where local byelaws  
 etc. exist  
 Who is the authority to decide whether the rules in hand or the 
rules/regulations etc. framed under any other law fo r the time being in force 
by the State or the local authority is less or more irksome for the animals? Is 
it not possible to specify such authority in the rules? 
Ministry’s comments 
 At present, there are no specified authority to decide the application of 
Rules where local bye laws etc exist. Generally all Municipal laws that are 
in force contemplate elimination of stray dogs by killing. Obviously, 
nothing can be more irksome for the animals than getting killed. Hence, 
implementation of ABC Programme to control dog population is less 
irksome and should prevail over any method of killing. It may also be 
pointed out that the ABC (Dog) Rules, 2001 have been notified by the 
Government of India under Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1960 
which is a Central Act and, theref ore, they should prevail over the 
Municipal Act which are normally Acts framed by the States. 
4.   The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on the 19th July, 
2005 and decided to call for views/ suggestions of some individuals/ organizations 
active in this field and, thereafter, to h ear the representatives of the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests in the matter. Accordingly, views/ suggestions were 
received from 25 organizations. A copy of  each of the complete documents 

received from the 25 individuals/ organiza tions along with a compilation of the 
same were forwarded to the Ministry fo r their comments/ clarifications on the 
23rd October, 2006. The Ministry furnished their comments on the 24th August, 
2007 which is placed at Annexure-I. 
5.  The Committee is happy to note that  the Ministry has agreed to the 
Committee’s suggestion on the following points: 
(i) Inclusion of provisions for maki ng the activity of the Committee 
of the local authority to br ing the public notice by to 
announcements/advertisements. 
(ii) Specifying the tenure of the monitoring committee and inclusion 
of representatives of the people – a humanitarian and/or a well 
known individual who is interested in animal work in the said 
locality. 
(iii) Inclusion of a provision in  the Rule that the monitoring 
Committee of the said locality sh ould meet at least once in a 
month to assess the progress made in regard to implementation of 
the Animal Birth Control Programme. 
(iv) In Rule 7(6) inclusion of th e word ‘recognized’ between the words 
“other” and “institutions”. 
6.  The Committee also makes the following observations in order to make 
the Rules more effective: 
(i) Monitoring Committee should meet on a regular basis and 
participate in activities concerning animal welfare organized by 
NGOs or other authorities. 

(ii) Punishment for offences of cruel ty to animals should be enhanced 
and a hefty fine should be imposed so that it acts as a deterrent. 
(iii) Organizing seminars and awaren ess campaigns so as to make the 
public aware about animal welfare, especially in 
schools/educational institutions. 
(iv) Further increase in grant-in-ai d/financial assist ance to Animals 
Welfare Organizations, NGOs engaged in the ABC programme. 
 The Committee also feels that better solid waste management 
would go a long way in controlling the population of stray dogs and 
recommends the Ministry of Environment and Forests to take stringent 
measures for more effective implem entation of the waste management 
programmes. 
7.   The Committee directs that in vi ew of the above paragraphs, 
appropriate amendments be carried out by the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests in the Rules expeditiously, under intimation to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

III 
THE COIR BOARD (REGISTRATION AND LICENSING) RULES, 1958 –
LMPLEMENTATION OF 136TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
  The Coir Board (Registration and Licensing) Rules, 1958 framed under the 
Coir Industry Act, 1953 were examined and the Committee in its 136th Report 
which was presented to the House on the 29th August, 2001 recommended as 
follows:- 
“The Committee observed that many  of the provisions of the Coir 
Board (Registration and Licensing) Rules, 1958 have become outdated 
in the liberalized economic scenario ca lling for a major review of these 
provisions. The Committee noted that with the onset of liberalization, 
the Coir Board has already dispensed with the process of licensing. The 
Committee is of the view that there is  enough export potential in the 
Coir Industry and the Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro and 
Rural Industries should put all efforts in reviewing the existing rules in 
line with the present requirements . The Committee hopes that the 
Ministry would expedite the process of review.” 
2.   The Committee forwarded the relevant extracts from the 136th Report to the 
Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro & Rural Industries on the 6th 
September, 2001 for necessary action. The Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 24th 
December, 2001 furnished the status of the proposed action to be taken on the 
recommendations of the Committee, as contained in point Nos. 2,7,8 and 14 of the 
Report (Annexure-II). The points raised by the Committee, the Ministry’s 
comments, the Committee’s observations on the points as contained in the Report 
and the Ministry’s Action Taken Note are reproduced below: 
2.  Point referred 

 The Coir Industry (Registration & Licensing) Rules, 1958 lack in 
format in as much as they indicate neither the name nor the provisions of the 
Act under which these rules have been framed. 
 Whether the Ministry have any objection in rectifying this 
discrepancy? 
Ministry’s comments 
 There is no objection to adopt the standard format and will be 
incorporated at the time of revision of the Coir Industry (Registration & 
Licensing) Rules, 1958. 
Committee’ observation 
 The Committee noted the reply. 
7.  Point referred–Rule 8 regar ding application for renewal 
 Whether Government have any objection in fixing a time period for 
allowing renewal of registration of a coir Spindle/industrial establishment? 
Ministry’s comments 
 Under the existing provisions of Rule 8, the Secretary or other officer 
may entertain an application for renewal which is not made in time if he is 
satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not making the application in 
time. The objective of the provisions is to ensure that the industrial units 
come forward and comply with the provis ions of the rule. It will be difficult 
to enforce renewal of registration within the prescribed time limit especially 
in the absence of a penal provision or any particular incentive. However, a 
time limit of 30 days may be prescribed, with the provisions to relax it, if 
there was sufficient reason for not filing the application in time. 

Committee’s observation 
 The Committee accepted the proposed amendment. 
8.  Point referred – Rules 9, 10 and 23  
 The quantum of fee prescribed for registration of renewal of 
registration for an Industrial Establishment or for issue of a duplicate 
certificate is Rs. 1/- only. No fee is charged on an application for 
registration or renewal of registration of a coir-spindle. Further, as per rule 
23, the fee for license is @ 5 paise per 50 kg subject to a maximum of Rs. 
100/- 
 Whether the amount of fee to be charged as prescribed in the above 
rules has since been revised, if not, whether Ministry have any objection to 
revise the same so as to make it realistic? 
Ministry’s Comments 
 The fee for registration/ renewal of industrial units for export license 
have not been revised so far. The Board is in favour of revision of the fee 
referred to in Rule 9 & 10. 
 The Board has proposed revision of the fee for registration/renewal of 
an industrial establishment as Rs. 10/- and for issue of duplicate certificate 
as Rs.25/- . However, the coir spindles are proposed to be exempted from 
any registration/renewal fee on the ground that such units are run by small 
household entrepreneurs. 
 No fee is proposed to be levied for license as the requirement of a 
license for export has been relaxed by the Central Government by 
Notification No. S.O. 1898 dated 2nd July, 1963. 
Committee’s observation 

 The Committee accepted the proposed amendments. 
14.  Point referred 
 A general perusal of the provisions of the rules gives an impression 
that its provisions have not been updated. For example, the fee etc. 
prescribed for registration/or issue of licences is really too less in the present 
day’s context. For example, rule 20 (a) refers to a scheduled bank or a 
registered bank often years standing for the purpose of obtaining a 
certificate regarding financial status fo r applying for registration as an 
exporter. The condition of Registered Bank of ten years’ standing is not 
relevant in present day’s context. Whether Government have any objection 
in reviewing the provisions of these rules for the purpose of amending those 
provisions that are either irrelevent or insignificant in the present scenario? 
Ministry’s comments 
 Coir Industry (Registration & Licensing) Rules were enacted on 
22.02.1958. On account of various developments especially liberalization 
and economic reforms some of these provisions have become outdated and 
irrelevant as rightly commented upon by the Committee. The Government 
and the Board have no objection in reviewing the provisions of these Rules 
to keep in line with the changed scenario especially in the context of 
economic liberalization policies. 
 However, based on the direction received from the Prime Minister’s 
Office, the Ministry of Law and Justice had requested all 
Ministries/Department of the Government of India to review all laws, 
regulations and procedures so that outdated laws/regulations etc. may be 
deleted and suitable reorienting modifications can be done in those which 
have substantial changes. Accordingly, an Expert Group under the 
Chairmanship of Joint Secretary in this Ministry was constituted for the 

purpose. The Expert Group in its various meetings held with the 
representative of the concerned Organisation, Coir Board in this case had, 
proposed various amendments to the Coir industry Rules, 1954 and the Coir 
Industry (Registration & Licensing) Rules, 1958 which are being finalized 
in consultation with the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs. 
Committee’s Observation 
 The Committee noted the reply. 
Ministry’s Action Taken Note 
 The Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 30th September, 2002 stated 
that out of four recommendations made by the Committee, action on two 
recommendations i.e. the rules at Point No.7 (Rule 8) and 8 (Rule 9,10 and 
23) of the Report have already been amended  vide GSR 383(E) dated 4th 
April, 2004 and GSR 842 (E) dated 9th August, 2002 (Annexure-III). 
 As regards the amendment of rules at point 2 and 14, the Ministry 
sought extension of time frequently. After repeated reminders, the Ministry 
vide O.M. dated the 21st May, 2008 explained in detail the reasons of delay 
in implementing the remaining recommendations of the Committee given in 
136th Report (Annexure-IV). 
 The Committee noted with satisfac tion that the Ministry has 
carried out the amendments in Rules 8 (Point No.7) and Rules 9, 10 and 
23 (Point No. 8) in compliance with the recommendations of the 
Committee. 
 However, the Committe e has taken a serious view over the non--
implementation of the recommendations at Point No. 2 and 14 of the 
Report and seeking frequent extensions. 

 The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises would expedite  the process of review of Rules 
mentioned at point 2 and 14 of the Report in line with the 
recommendations of the Committee as contained in its 136th Report 
and update the Rules, especial ly in the context of economic 
liberalization as suggested by the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
I 
  The Committee observes that State Governments are not taking 
adequate interest in promoting the Se nior Citizens Savings Scheme. The 
Committee feels that the Scheme which wa s introduced in the year 2004 with 
a view to help the people who have at tained the age of 55 years and above 
with annual rate of interest of 9 p er-cent, has failed to fulfil its basic 
objectives. This has happened mainly due  to the fact that more profitable 
schemes are also available with the sa me banks that are supposed to operate 
it. The rate of interest under the sche me is lower in comparison to even 
ordinary deposits made in  the Bank. The Committee also takes note of other 
lacunae, viz. deductions are made on the benefits under Section 80C of 
Income Tax Act, 1961, a nd no withdrawal is ordi narily allowed in the 
Scheme, before the expiry of five years period. 
  The Committee therefore recommends th at the rate of interest on the 
Senior Citizens Savings Scheme, 2004 may be revised and tax incentives such 
as exemption of interest from income ta x may also be added to make it more 
attractive. The whole Scheme the Committee feels, needs to be revisited. 
II 
  The Committee is happy to note th at the Ministry has agreed to the 
Committee’s suggestion on the following points: 
(i)  Inclusion of provisions for ma king the activity of the Committee 
of the local authority to br ing to the public notice by 
announcements/advertisements. 
(ii) Specifying the tenure of the monitoring committee and inclusion 
of representatives of the people – a humanitarian and/or a well 

known individual who is interested in animal work in the said 
locality. 
(iii)  Inclusion of a provision in  the Rule that the monitoring 
Committee of the said locality sh ould meet at least once in a 
month to assess the progress made in regard to implementation of 
the Animal Birth Control Programme. 
(iv) In Rule 7(6) inclusion of th e word ‘recognized’ between the words 
“other” and “institutions”. 
  The Committee also makes the following observations in order to make 
the Rules more effective: 
(i)  Monitoring Committee should  meet on a regular basic and 
participate in activities concerning animal welfare organized by 
NGOs or other authorities. 
(ii) Punishment for offences of cruel ty to animals should be enhanced 
and a hefty fine should be imposed so that it acts as a deterrent. 
(iii) Organizing seminars and awaren ess campaigns so as to make the 
public aware about animal welfare, especially in 
schools/educational institutions. 
(iv) Further increase in grant-in-ai d/financial assist ance to Animals 
Welfare Organizations, NGOs engaged in the ABC programme. 
  The Committee also feels that bett er solid waste management would go 
a long way in controlling the populat ion of stray dogs and recommends the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests to  take stringent measures for more 
effective implementation of the waste management programmes. 

  The Committee directs that in view of the above paragraphs, 
appropriate amendments be carried out by the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests in the Rules expeditiously, under intimation to the Committee. 
III 
  The Committee noted with satisfacti on that the Ministry has carried 
out the amendments in Rules 8 (Point No. 7) and Rules 9, 10 and 23 (Point 
No. 8) in compliance with the recommendations of the Committee. 
  However, the Committee has taken a serious view over the non-
implementation of the recommendations at  Point No.2 and 14 of the Report 
and seeking frequent extensions. 
  The Committee hopes that the Mini stry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises would expedite the process of  review of Rules mentioned at point 
2 and 14 of the Report in line with the recommendations of the Committee as 
contained in its 136th Report and update the Rules, especially in the context 
of economic liberalization as suggested by the committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON  
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
 The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on 18th February, 2009 in the Committee 
Chairperson's Room 126-C, Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 1. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla   –– Chairperson  
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3.  Shri Vikram Verma 
 4.  Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
 5.  Shri Penumalli Madhu 
 6.  Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
 7.  Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 8. Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
S
ECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Subhashree Panigrahi, Deputy Director  
 3. Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Research Officer 
The Chairperson welcomed the Members and following items were taken up: 
z 179th Report on the various rules/regulations examined by the Committee 
regarding Senior Citizens’ Savings Scheme, 2004, The Animal Birth 
Control (Dogs) Rules, 2001 and the implementation of the 136th Report of 
the Committee regarding Coir Board (Registration and Licensing) Rules, 
1956. 

z 180th Report on Statutory Orders Laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha 
during its 214th Session. 
z 181st Report on Drugs and Cosmetics (Eighth Amendment) Rules, 2001 
and the implementation of the 128 th Report of the Committee regarding 
State Bank of Mysore Officer’s Service Regulations, 1979. 
 The Committee then adopted the Reports unanimously. The Committee also 
authorized the Chairperson and in her ab sence Shri Vikram Verma and Shri Ali 
Anwar Ansari to present the Reports to the House on 20th February, 2009. 
2. The Chairperson during the discussion noted with concern that certain 
Ministries had been seeking repeated extens ions for furnishing their replies to the 
Committee’s questionnaires and the queries raised by the Members during the 
meetings, thereby delaying the preparat ion of the Committee’s reports until the 
issue looses its relevance. The Members were of the view that the Committee’s 
questions should be treated at par with the parliamentary questions by the 
concerned Ministries and that the issue of delay in replies should be addressed 
urgently with a view to prescribe a time limit. 
3. Another issue the Committee cons idered was the usage of modern 
techniques by the Ministries in communicating with the Secretariat about the 
notifications to be laid on the Table of the House. The Committee was of the view 
that in order to increase efficiency a possibility should be explored if the 
electronic copy of list of laying items in a standardized prescribed format could be 
provided by the Ministries to the Secretariat. 
4.  The meeting was adjourned at 4.30 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-I 
I 
Blue Cross Society of Pune 
T-4 Florida Estate, Keshav Nagar, Mundhwa, Pune-411036 
Point Points Comments of the Ministry of  
 No.  Environment and Forests  
1. The scale and intensity of the Animal 
Birth Control and Anti Rabies 
programme needs to be increased. 
There is a need for generating more 
NGO’s who would undertake the ABC 
and AR programme. The programme 
must be implemented in an integrated 
manner and should cover not only the 
city of Pune, but the adjacent areas 
covered by the PCMC and the 
Cantonment. 
2. The programme could become more 
effective if it is undertaken as a joint 
Animal Welfare Organization and 
Municipal activity, as laid down in 
Rules 6 and 7 of the Animal Birth 
Control Rules. Municipal Authorities 
look upon it as a ‘compliance’ activity. 
Instead they should adhere to the 
modus operandi of the programme and 
return the immunized dogs to their 
own areas. Also the mandatory 
ABC & AR-programme are 
implemented through AWBI and is 
being implemented, throughout the 
country, involving local authorities, 
Animal Welfare Organizations, 
Societies for Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animal, NGOs and private individuals 
involved in animal welfare etc. The 
scale of financial support for XIth Five 
Year Plan has also been increased. 
 
Rule-6 of Animal Birth Control (Dogs) 
Rules, 2001 lays down obligation of the 
local authorities and Rule-7 lays down a 
detailed and comprehensive procedure 
for the capturing/ sterilization/ 
immunization/release of dogs. The 
intention of the ABC Rules is to involve 
local authorities, Animal Welfare 
Organizations, Societies for Prevention 
of Cruelty to Animals, NGOs and 
private individuals involved in animal 

meetings of the ABC and AR 
Programme Monitoring Committee 
should be convened on a regular basis 
by the concerned local authorities. 
Rarely do they participate in camps or 
awareness drives organized by the 
NGOs. 
3. There is a tendency amongst the 
public, encouraged by an irresponsible 
media, to opt for se nseless/ ineffective 
short-term and apparent cheaper 
options for reducing the number of 
stray dogs i.e. illegal and callous acts 
of wanton poisoning and destruction of 
stray dogs. 
 (i) The police should accept an  
 FIR in this regard as they 
 are bound to do under the 
 Prevention of Cruelty to
 Animals Act, 1960. 
 (ii) Need for the local authorities 
 and the State and Central 
 Governments for a firm and 
 uncompromising stand 
 against such illegal acts. 
 
 
welfare etc. The programme can be 
successful if monitoring committee 
meets on regular basis and participate in 
activities concerning animal welfare 
organized by NGOs or other authorities. 
 
 
The Animal Birth Control (Dogs) Rules, 
2001 enacted under Section 38 of the 
Act lays down a scheme to reduce dog 
population by sterilization and 
immunization of stray dogs by 
participation of animal welfare 
organization, private individuals and 
local authorities. The Scheme 
formulated under these Rules is not 
intended to jeopardize human life but at 
the same time to treat animals with care, 
compassion and in a humane manner so 
as to achieve a gradual reduction and 
stabilization in the population of stray 
dogs on a long term basis. 
Being in the concurrent list, local 
authorities are to take action as per ABC 
Rules/PCA Act. The Central 
Government makes law with intention 
that there is no cruelty on animals and 
any violations in this regard is taken 

 
4. There is need for educating the citizens 
about the need for vaccinating pet 
dogs, responsible pet ownership, the 
importance of garbage free cities for 
reducing stray dogs numbers in cities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Plan should include: 
 (i) Carrying out a stray dog 
 population census with the 
 involvement of AWO’s,
 Municipal bodies, and 
 conservancy staff to locate 
 stray dogs in their 
 respective areas. 
 (ii)  Organization of sterilization 
 and anti-rabies awareness 
seriously. 
Section 3 of the Prevention of Cruelty 
Act, 1960 gives effect to the 
constitutional mandate under article 51-
A(g) and states that “It shall be the duty 
of every person having the care of any 
animal to take all reasonable measure to 
ensure the well-being of such animal 
and to prevent the infliction upon such 
animal of unnecessary pain or 
suffering”. 
The better solid waste management is 
one of the key factors in reducing the 
population of dogs. AWBI takes steps 
for awareness regarding vaccinating 
dogs including pet dogs. 
 
Rule 8 of the ABC Rules provides 
identification and recording of Dogs 
 
 
 
 
Rule 7 of ABC Rules provides for 
capturing / sterilization /immunization / 

 and vaccination drives with 
 the participation of 
 corporators and youth
 organizations. 
 (iii) Liaisioning with adjacent 
 villages and PCMC and the 
 cantonment boards to 
 ensure that all dogs in the 
 vicinity are reached. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. As per Rule 11 incinerators should be 
installed for disposal of carcasses. 
 
7. Need for greater zeal and more 
financial and administrative support. 
 
release of Dogs. Being in the concurrent 
list local authorities are to take action as 
per ABC Rules/PCA Act. 
 
The Animal Birth Control (Dogs) Rules, 
2001 enacted under Section 38 of the 
Act lays dawn a scheme to Reduce dog 
population by sterilization and 
immunization of stray dogs by 
participation of animal welfare 
organization, private individuals and 
local authorities. The local authorities 
have obligation to take appropriate 
action for taking awareness programmes 
through active participation of Animal 
Welfare Organization, NGOs and other 
individuals concerned with animal 
welfare. 
Rule 11 of the ABC Rules provides that 
the carcasses of such euthanized dogs 
shall be disposed of in an incinerator to 
be provided by the local authority. 
 
Financial and Administrative support 
under ABC Rules is provided by AWBI 
as per Government policies. 
ABC & AR programme are 

 
 
 
 
 
 
8. Need to tighten the provisions of Rule 
6(3) and ensuring that this is done as 
per specified fortnightly time periods. 
Need for building accountability by 
mandating an authority which can 
oversee such payments. At present the 
funds received from AWBI are either 
not disbursed or are hopelessly 
delayed. 
 
 
9. Need for compliance to Rule 7(3). This 
required a system that identifies dogs 
and their localities. In actual practice, 
the picking of stray dogs is haphazard, 
leading to confusion at the time of 
release and the usual problems to the 
public that follow. 
implemented through  AWBI and is 
being implemented throughout the 
country, involving local authorities, 
Animal Welfare Organizations, 
Societies for Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animal, NGOs and private individuals 
involved in animal welfare etc. The 
scale of financial su pport for Eleventh 
Five Year Plan has also been increased. 
Monitoring Committee is responsible for 
planning and management of dog 
control programme as per ABC Rules. 
Funds are released through AWBI to 
various organizations and NGOs 
following Government Rules. The 
delays can be curtailed if utilization 
certificates and other required 
documents are submitted in time as per 
GFR provisions stipulated for releasing 
grant-in-aid. 
Rule 7 (3) says that on receipt of 
specific complaint or for capturing dogs 
in normal course the dog squad will visit 
the concerned area, capture the dogs 
identified by the complaint in case of 
complaint oriented capturing and other 
dogs in case of general capturing. All 
the dogs caught will be tagged for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. Rule 7 should stipulate the following: 
 (i) The definition of ‘trained 
 employees of the local 
 authority’ mentioned in Rule 
 7(2)(ii) should be included. 
 The definition must require 
 at least 2 days training every 
 6 months to be imparted to 
 such employees of AWO. 
 (ii) The ‘representative of the 
 AWO’s mentioned in Rule 
 7(2)(iii) must be selected 
identification purposes and to ensure 
that the dogs are released in the same 
area after sterilization and vaccination. 
Only stipulated number of dogs, 
according to the Animal Birth Control 
Program target, shall be caught by the 
van. A record of dogs captured shall be 
maintained in a register, mentioning 
therein the name of the area/locality, 
date and time of capture, names of 
persons in the dogs squad on that 
particular day and details about dogs 
captured such as number of male dogs, 
number of female dogs, number of 
puppies etc. 
 
(i) The rule 7(2)(ii) provides for 
 two or more trained employees 
 of the local authority who are 
 trained in capturing of dogs. 
 Dog catchers are to catch dogs 
 in painless and humane 
 manner. The local authority are 
 competent to take decision 
 regarding training needs of 
 employees. 
(ii) One representative of any of the 
 animal welfare organization is 

 and appointed by the 
 concerned AWO, but must be 
 financially reimbursed by the 
 local authority. 
 (iii)A general clause be inserted 
 that the local authorities 
 should consult with AWOs 
 in the logistics of the pick up 
 and release of the animals, 
 and adopt the systems 
 required by the AWOs. 
 
11. There is an urgent need for 
incinerators. As incinerators are not 
easily available, dead animals remain 
lying on the street for long period 
creating danger for spread of infectious 
disease. 
II 
Animal & Bird Welfare Society 
Vill. Singti, P.O. Singti-Sibpur, P.S. 
Udaynarayanpur, Distt. Howrah,  
West Bengal-711222 
1. Need for strict legislations for 
compulsory vaccination of pet dogs. 
 
 to be involved as per ABC 
 Rules. AWBI takes appropriate 
 action in consultation with 
 AWOs. As per ABC Scheme, 
 Rs. 75/- per stray dog is given 
 to AWOs, for dog catching and 
 admission to ABC Centre and 
 relocation to areas from where 
 they captured. 
(iii)The Monitoring Committee as 
 per ABC Rules is to take a 
 view, in which local 
 representation is there. 
Rule 11 of ABC Rules provide for an 
incinerator to be provided by the local 
authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
ABC Rules deals with vaccination of 
dogs. 
The PCA Act and ABC Rules are 
legislation based on human Approach 
towards animal and, any violation 

 
2. Extensive publicity and propaganda of 
the rules and awareness of the local 
authority about the existing law and its 
amendments and work done by Animal 
Welfare Organizations. 
 
3. Strengthening of the Monitoring 
Committee which conducts the rules.  
  
 
 
III 
Animal Aid Society  
388 Krishna Pura, Near St. Paul’s School, 
Udaipur, Rajasthan-313001 
1. Need for spreading compassion for 
animals. 
 
 
 
 
attracts punishment. 
Animal Welfare Board of India’s 
functions include to keep the law in 
force in India for the prevention of 
cruelty to animals under constant study 
and advise the Government on the 
amendments to be undertaken in any 
such law from time to time. 
ABC Rules provides for functions of the 
Monitoring Committee (Rule 5). The 
Monitoring Committee which is headed 
by Chief of the Local Authority is an 
Empowered Committee and has enough 
powers to implement these Rules. 
 
 
 
 
Section 3 of the PCA Act gives effect to 
the constitutional mandate under Article 
51-A(g) and states that “It shall be the 
duty of every person paving the care of 
any animal to take all reasonable 
measures to ensure the well-being of 
such animal and to prevent the infliction 
upon such animal of unnecessary pain or 
suffering. The policy of Government of 

 
 
 
 
2. Need for creating awareness among 
the public the importance of 
sterilization. Ster ilized dogs are 
healthier, less aggressive and 
incidences of dog-bite is reduced. 
 
 
 
3. Adherence by the organizations 
undertaking stray dog- sterilization to 
internationally recognized standards of 
catching, animal evaluation, 
maintaining aseptic conditions in the 
operating theatre, feeding and all 
aspects of post operative care, and 
release in the location of the pickup. 
IV 
All India Animal Welfare Association
Animal Birth Control Centre, Dr. E. 
Moses Road,  
Mahalaxmi East, Mumbai-4000 011 
1. Offences against animals need to be 
India is based on compassion and 
implementing laws in a human manner 
to achieve a gradual reduction and 
stabilization in the population of stray 
dogs on a long term basis. 
Rule 7 of the ABC Rules details full 
procedure for capturing/ 
sterilization/immunization/ release of 
the dogs. AWBI takes steps for 
awareness camps, seminar etc. for 
creating awareness among the public 
regarding the importance of sterilization 
from time to time. 
The ABC Rules provide for taking care 
of dogs in a humane manner. The ABC 
Rules are based on the internationally 
recognized standards of dogs catching 
and other conditions regarding feeding 
and all aspects of operative and post oper
a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 11 of the PCA Act provides for 

cognizable along with hefty fine and prison 
sentence. At present, most of the cases 
attract meager fines, which the offenders pay 
off and are back to business as usual. 
 
 
 
2. Problem of lack of space and finance 
to maintain animals in case they are 
taken away from offenders. Also lack 
of infirmaries to house any kind of 
animals. 
 
 
3. ABC programme should be extended 
to stray cats, particularly if rabies has 
to be eradicated from the country. 
 
4. Animal Welfare needs to be introduced 
as a subject in schools from primary 
level. 
 
 
 
 
punishment for offences of cruelty to 
animals, The feedback for increasing 
punishment for violation regarding 
enhancement of Punishment for 
offences of cruelty to animals can be 
considered, if found that existing 
punishments are not achieving the 
objectives of the Act. 
Rule 7(8) of ABC Rules provide that 
sufficient space must be provided for 
proper housing and free movement of 
dogs. The obligation of local bodies are 
highlighted in Rule 6 of ABC (Dogs) 
Rules which include making provision 
of various facilities for conduct of ABC 
Rules. 
Some of the stray dogs are the vectors of 
rabies, Population of stray dogs is very 
high compared to stray cats. Therefore, 
the first priority for ABC is stray dogs. 
The subject falls in the Concurrent list. 
AWBI takes a number of steps for 
educating public for welfare of animals 
and there is no denying the fact that if 
schools at primary level are given the 
message of animal welfare that can help 
in bringing down the population of dogs 
etc. in a humane and planned manner. 

5. Rule 3: Classification of Dogs 
 A third category, that of ‘community 
dogs’ may be added. Street dogs 
belonging to an individual, building, 
shop, hotel, any institution and any 
other establishment can come under 
this category. 
6. Rule 5: Function of the Committee 
 (i)  Sub rule (c) ABC programme
must be viewed as a health 
related programme to eradicate 
rabies. Municipalities and State 
Governments must devise a proper 
system of creating awareness 
among the public. Till now, 
AWOs have mainly shouldered the 
responsibility of creating 
awareness. 
 (ii) Sub rule (e ) Independent censor 
system need to be developed for 
pet dogs and stray dogs. 
 (iii) Sub rule (f) Separate records on 
monthly basis of dog bites details 
should be made available from 
Municipal hospitals and private 
doctors to ascertain the number of 
bites from stray dogs. 
 
As per Rule 3 of ABC Rules all dogs are 
to be classified in two categories (i) pet 
dogs and(ii) street dogs. Introduction of 
another category as ‘community dogs’ is 
not practicable as legal obligation of its 
maintenance can not be fixed. 
 
ABC (Dogs) Rules, 2001 aims to check 
stray dog population and consequent 
cases of rabies scientifically and in a 
humane manner by 
sterilization/immunization of stray dogs. 
As per the Rules the Committee 
comprises, of local bodies and AWOs 
have been entrusted with the 
responsibility of creating public 
awareness. As such, AWOs togetherwith 
local bodies have to take steps in 
relation to creating public awareness. 
Rule 5( e) says that get a survey done of 
the number of street dogs by an 
independent agency. The local authority 
has to take necessary action in the 
matter according to ABC Rules. 
Monitoring Committee under ABC 
Rules is to take a view in the matter, 
depending upon the need. 

7. Rule 6 
 (i) Sub rule l(a) Local authorities must 
have reserve open space, preferably 
at every ward level,  for shelters of 
stray dogs. 
 (ii) Sub rule (e) Not installed yet in 
Mumbai. 
 (iii)Sub rule (f) No t done retularly. 
 (iv)Sub rule (2): No animal related 
programme should be implemented 
without the participation of AWOs 
/ individuals as there is need for 
humane approach to animals. 
 (v)Sub rule (3): The Municipality, 
State and Central Government 
should jointly fund the programme 
while AWOs must be responsible 
for its proper implementation. 
8. Rule 7 
 (i) Sub rule (l)(b)(i) &(ii): 
Municipalities generally attend to 
those areas where complaints have 
been registered. No general 
purpose capturing, specially for 
sterilization/ immunization is done. 
 (ii) Sub rule (3) Strict rules should be 
The obligation of the local authority 
under the ABC Rules are defined under 
Rule 6, as evident from the suggestion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) Rule 7 of ABC provides for specific 
complaints as well as capturing for 
general purposes is to be done on 
such dates and time to be specified 
by the Committee. 
 
(ii) The ABC rules provide for the same 

formulated for dog catchers to 
release the dogs in the same area 
from where they were caught. 
 (iii)Sub rule (4) Catching equipment 
should be such that minimum 
injury is caused both to the animal 
and the catcher. 
 (iv)Sub rule (5) Need for creating 
awareness of the ABC programme 
among the public especially of 
release of the dogs in the same 
area. 
 (v) Sub rule (7) It  is advisable to 
restrict catching of dogs from one 
area at a time. 
 
 (vi)Sub rule (8) Enough space must be 
provided for the programme so that 
there is no over crowding in 
kennels. 
 (vii)Sub rule (9):  Visibly pregnant 
dogs, in the first instance, must not 
be caught for sterilization. 
9. Rule 8 
 There should be only one “approved 
identification method” for all those 
in a humane manner 
 
 
(iii) -do- 
 
 
(iv)Under Rule 5 of ABC Rules, 
functions of the Committee is to 
create public awareness, solicit co-
operation and funding. 
 
(v) Rule 7 (7) provides for catching of 
dogs of a particular area. Restricting 
catching of dogs from one area at a 
time will certainly be more effective. 
(vi)It is inherent in Rule 7(8) of ABC 
Rules that sufficien t space must be 
provided for proper housing and free 
movement of dogs. 
(vii) Rule 7(9) discourages capture of 
pregnant dogs and lays down that such 
dogs shall not undergo sterilization. 
 
The ABC Rules Provide for a set and 
approved method. 

who are implementing the ABC 
programme. 
10. Rule 9 
 Euthanasia should be adopted only for 
the good of the dog, when it is 
suffering immeasurably. Euthanasia 
should not be used for the sake of 
saving cost, time and energy. 
11. Rule 10 
 The local authorities must see that the 
ABC centers are eq uipped with an 
insolation ward to keep suspected 
rabid dogs. 
12. Rule 12 
 Breeding of dogs, particularly pedigree 
dogs, be put under strict surveillance. 
Breeders are only interested in getting 
easy money. License should be issued 
by the local authority in conjunction 
with an AWO, only after a thorough 
check of their background and their 
place of breeding. Periodic inspection 
by the local authority along with a 
veterinarian and representative of 
AWO be carried out of the breeding 
centres. Details of every litter 
produced must be submitted to the 
local authority and registration be done 
of the new owners to whom the pups 
 
 
Rule 9 of ABC Rules provides that 
incurably ill and mortally wounded 
dogs, as diagnosed by a qualified 
veterinarian appointed by the 
committee, shall be enthanasied during 
specified hours in a humane manner. 
 
The obligations of local bodies have 
been highlighted in Rule 6 of ABC 
(Dogs) Rules which include making 
provision of various facilities for 
conduct of ABC programme. 
Rule 12 of ABC Rules provides 
guidelines for breeders. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 have been sold. 
 No breeder be allowed to discard 
his/her pet (sterilized or unsterilized) 
on the road. Hefty fine be imposed on 
the breeder and such act be registered 
as cognizable offence punishable 
under law. License to be confiscated 
for a period fixed by the authority. 
13. Rule 13  
 Any new rule, bye-law etc. if formed, 
should be done with the intention of 
protecting the rights of a dog. The 
authorities and AWOs together must 
create a conducive environment where 
animals and persons are able to live in 
harmony without being disturbed and 
troubled by each other.  
 
 
  
 
1. Hurting of stray dogs by the public 
without any reason should be put an 
 end to by enacting laws and 
imposing stringent punishment. The 
laws  and rules should be given 
wide publicity in the print and visual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Any rules under the PCA Act are to be 
made with the intention to have 
compassion for living creatures. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The PCA Act, 1960 under section 11, 
cover various aspects of Cruelty to 
Animals including dogs. 
ABC Rules 7 deal with the matter 

media to create awareness among the 
public. Municipal corporations and 
panchayat authorities should be 
instructed that waste food be 
segregated and deposited in low bins 
so that stray dogs released after 
surgeries can get food and not die of 
starvation. Also concrete containers 
can be constructed in each street filled 
with water for the dogs. Animal 
welfare activities and compassion for 
animals must go hand in hand. 
2. Dogs should be properly relocated in 
their territory after birth control 
surgeries immunization. 
3. The animal welfare organization can 
spread the message of ‘feeding of one 
stray dog by one family.’ This would 
go a large extent help in preventing 
mance of stray dogs hunting for food. 
4. A policy should be evolved to dump 
left over food in houses and social, 
functions in separate bins where the 
stray dogs can have free access to food 
without being a hindrance to the 
public. 
5. The Government should bring out a 
clear policy of animal birth control 
effectively. 
 
 
As per constitutional mandate, it shall be 
the duty of every person having the care 
of any animal to take all reasonable 
measures to ensure the well-being of 
such animal and to prevent the infliction 
upon such animal of unnecessary pain or 
sufferings. The AWO’s are involved in a 
big way to increasing awareness about 
treatment of dogs in a humane way. 
Better solid waste management can led 
to a gradual reduction in the population 
of stray dogs on a long term basis. 
The good waste management can lead to 
better management of dog population. 
The local authority can take proper steps 
in this regard. 
 
 
ABC Rules provide for the same. 
 
 
 
The population of ‘stray dogs’ is 

surgeries and immunization; and 
feeding of dogs after surgery for 
survival. 
6. Government should be liberal in 
granting funds to recognized animal 
welfare organizations for maintenance 
of shelters for animals for treating 
stray animals. In many districts of 
chennai, cyanide, a banned drug is 
being used mercilessly to ‘kill the 
helpless animals. Another method is to 
call Narikoravas (gyp sies) to shoot the 
stray dogs. Government should ban the 
issue of gun licence to this tribe, which 
is being misused. 
7. Animal welfare should be made a 
subject in the primary level to educate 
the younger generation to show 
compassion and kindness towards the 
animals including stray dogs. 
 
 
 
 
 
controlled by the implementation of 
ABC programme. Only rabid, seriously 
injured and terminally ill dogs should be 
euthanised. There has been increase in 
grant-in-aid released to AWO’s, NGOs 
etc. during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. 
However, local authorities are free to 
generate funds for other sources. Any 
violation of the PCA Act or ABC Rules 
is dealt seriously as per provisions under 
Law. 
Monitoring Committee is to take a view 
in the matter. AWBI takes a number of 
steps for educating public for welfare of 
animals and there is no denying the fact 
that if schools at primary level are given 
the message of animal welfare, it can 
help in bringing down the population of 
dogs etc. in a planned manner, without 
unnecessary pain and suffering. 
 
 
 
The intention of the PCA Act and ABC 
Rules is to treat animals in a humane 
way. Any violation of PCA  Act and 
ABC Rules is punishable as per 

 
1. State Governments are in the least bit 
concerned about implementation. 
Class III workers (dog catchers, 
municipal dog pound workers) are 
rough and abusive. Poison is also used 
in several smaller municipalities. 
2. V.I.P. complaints are answered with 
the dog squad rushing to the location 
and killing the dogs despite the dogs 
being sterilized and vaccinated 
according to the rules. 
3. It is a mockery of the system and 
animal welfare organizations spend 
precious time and funds including that 
of the Animal Welfare Board to 
implement the rules when the dogs are 
dilled any way. 
4. The rules will be seriously taken only 
if steep penalty to killers is 
 defined.    
5. Any decision with the dog rules has to 
be done with legal norms and 
principals laid down.   
  
 
provision of Law. 
 
 
Rule 7 of ABC Rules deals with 
complaint cases. Any violation in this 
regard is dealt as per PCA Act and ABC 
rules. 
 
 
The Animal Birth Control – (Dogs) 
Rules, 2001 enacted under Section 38 of 
the Act lays down a scheme to reduce 
dog population by sterilization and 
immunization of stray dogs by 
participation of animal welfare 
organization, private individuals and 
local authorities. The Scheme 
formulated under these Rules is not 
intended to jeopardize human life but at 
the same time to treat animals with care, 
compassion and in a humane manner so 
as to achieve a gradual reduction and 
stabilization in the population of stray 
dogs on a long term basis. 
Being in the concurrent list, local 
authorities are to take action as per ABC 
Rules/PCA Act. The Central 
Government makes law with intention 

1. Extracts from some documents have 
been quoted as suggestions: 
 Document 1 – The WHO Technical 
Report Series: World Expert 
Consultation on Rabies (World Health 
Organization, 2004, Geneva, 
Switzerland) 
 (i) Section 7.0 Page 47 notes 
  ‘Dog destruction alone is not 
 effective in rabies control’. 
 (ii) Section 7.4 Page 53 notes 
  ‘There is not evidence that 
removal of dogs alone has ever had 
a significant impact on dog 
population densities or spread of 
rabies.’ 
 (iii) Section 7.4 Page 54 notes 
  ‘Attempts to control dog population 
through culling, without alteration 
of habitat and resource availability 
have generally been unsuccessful.’ 
 (iv) Section 7.4 Page 54 notes 
  ‘Culling of dogs these (ABC) 
programmes may be counter 
productive as sterilized, vaccinated 
that there is no cruelty on animals and 
any violations in this regard is taken 
seriously. 
The Rules provide for punishment. 
 
 
The PCA Act and ABC Rules have legal 
backing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  This is also the view of the Union of 
India. 
 
(ii) ABC Scheme has had a significant 
impact on the dog population. Solid 

dogs may be destroyed.’ 
 
 
2. Document II – Control of Rabies in 
Jaipur, India by sterilization and 
vaccination of neighbourhood dogs 
(J.F. Reece.& S.K. Chawala, 
veterinary Record, 2006, London; in 
press) 
 (i) This method has record a 28% 
reduction in street dog population. 
 (ii) Also there has been a huge 
reduction in human rabies cases in 
areas of Jaipur covered by the ABC 
programme. 
3. Document III – Summary Figures for 
the Jaipur ABC Programme 2000-
2005. (Help in - Suffering, Jaipur, 
unpublished data) 
 (i) Resumption of removal, by culling 
or other methods, of street dogs 
would not be in the interest of long 
term dog or rabies control in India. 
Evidence shows that removal of 
dogs increases dog population 
instability and increases the 
transmission of rabies. Further, 
removal of dogs is often performed 
waste management is also one of the 
key factors contributing to reducing 
dog population. 
 
(iii) and (iv) The stand of the Union of 
India has been that indiscriminate 
culling of dogs is not a wholesome 
solution to the problem of management 
of street dogs. It has to be done with a 
multi-pronged approach. This would 
include inter alia measures of 
sterilization, immuni zation, capture and 
handling of animal and would also 
include measures for shelter/relocation. 
Euthanasia of street dogs has to be 
resorted only with respect to incurably 
ill and mortally wounded dogs, as 
provided in the Rules. 
ABC programmes has been successful. 
The stand of the Union of India has been 
that indiscriminate culling of dogs is not 
a wholesome solution to the problem of 
management of street dogs. It has to be 
done with a multi pronged approach. 
This would include  inter  alia measures 
of sterilization, immuniazation, capture 
and handling of animal and would also 
include measures for shelter/relocation. 

in cruel and inhumane ways which 
are inconsistent with the tenets of all 
major religions in India. 
l. More and more people must be 
involved in the national programme. 
Wide publicity should be given 
through mass media like AIR, 
Doordarshan for different ‘zonatic’ 
diseases. 
2.. Role of the Municipalities may be 
geared up by enforcing strict schedule 
so that the municipalities would 
seriously take up their moral obligation 
to coordinate and support the NGOs in 
implementing the programme. 
Regarding rule pertaining to 
‘Obligations of Local Authorities’ they 
are often reluctant in providing 
trained dog catchers, in installing 
incinerators, and undertaking periodic 
repair of shelter or pound as mentioned 
in Government notification. 
3. Often Government formalities come in 
between, necessary instruction may be 
issued to respective district authorities 
in constitution of S.P.C.A. as 
mandatory and obligatory to 
implement the Central Government 
and State Government notification 
Euthanasia of street dogs has to be 
resorted only with respect to incurably 
ill and mortally wounded dogs, as 
provided in the Rules. 
Monitoring Committee’s functions 
include creating awareness. AWBI takes 
care of involving media and other 
publicity methods for creating 
awareness regarding different diseases. 
Monitoring Committee, in which 
Commissioner/Chief of the Local 
Authority, is ex-officio Chairman, is to 
take a view in the matter. There is no 
denying the fact that ABC Rules need 
strict implementation by the local 
authorities. 
 
 
 
 
 
-  Do  - 
-  Do  - 
 

properly by involving NGOs of the 
respective areas. 
4. Municipal Corporations of the district 
should extend full cooperation to the 
working NGOs for speedy 
implementation of the rules. Often 
local authorities do not show positive 
response in the implementation of the 
project. 
5. The NGOs should be allowed to get 
some concession in compliance to 
Government notification. At present 
Government grant is confined to 
expenditures like cost of dog catching, 
cost of pre and post operative care, 
and, cost of animal feeding and 
medicines. In actual practice, under the 
project N.G.Os have to keep the 
animals for at least 10 days in their 
shelter and for this they have to spend 
on the cost of electricity, cost of 
cleaning and other sundry expenses 
which are not covered under 
Government grant. Concessions may 
be given in respect of electricity 
charges, fuel charges etc. while 
implementing the Government aided 
project. 
 
 
 
 
Provision of concession in respect of 
electricity charges and fuel charges etc., 
to the NGOs may be favourably 
considered, by the local authority, who 
provide these facilities. 
Grant-in-aid is based on a set procedure 
as per GFR and Government of India 
instructions. 
 
The grants covers expenses pertaining to 
ailments and complications arising 
during post-operative period. 
NGOs are free to approach AWBI in 
this regard. 
 
 
 
 
-  do  - 
 

6. Often the grants are sanctioned in long 
intervals thereby obstructing speedy 
implementation of the projects 
7. Government grant of Rs. 445/- for 
each dog under the project is 
insufficient owing to ever increasing 
prices of medicines, animal feed, 
doctor charges etc. The grant may be 
increased to Rs. 600/- per dog to cover 
other expenses pertaining to existing 
ailments; complications which may 
arise during post-operative period. 
8. NGOs may be allowed to get complete 
feedback so that the project may be 
launched in the same area in a specific 
time gap for sterilization of the 
remaining dogs which were not 
covered earlier. 
9. NGOs may be allowed to conduct 
training/workshops in their 
respective areas. This will not only 
help in the creating of skilled 
personnel for the project, but will also 
help in self employment and keeping 
the surrounding environment in 
hygienic conditions. For this 
Government grant may be given. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABC Rules, if implemented in letter and 
sprit, coupled with proper, solid waste 
management, would lead to gradual 
reduction in the population of dogs. 
Rule 10 of ABC Rules takes care of 
furious or dumb rabid dogs. 
Rule 3(2) of ABC Rules provides that 
the owner of pet dogs shall be 
responsible for the controlled breeding, 
immunization, sterilization and licensing 
in accordance with these rules and the 
law for the time being in force within a 
specified local area. 
 
 
 
 
 

10. Guidelines may be issued for 
administration of three rounds of 
vaccination in three successive years to 
vaccinated dogs for developing certain 
immunity amongst dog population 
against rabies for complete eradication 
of the fatal disease. 
  
     
 
1. Rules 3 (2): Classification of dogs and 
their sterilization 
 (a)Owners of pet dogs must have their 
dogs sterilized before the age of six 
to prevent their breeding. Also they 
should be immunized against rabies. 
Any person wishing to be a breeder, 
must (1) get regi stered with the 
Animal Welfare Board of India or 
such other authority as prescribed 
by AWBI, and, (2) pay a substantial 
licence fee to prevent such breeders 
whose sole purpose is only making 
large: amount of money by sale of 
pups. 
 (b)Maintenance of complete records as 
required by AWBI regarding 
parentage of the pup, number of 
Rule 8 of ABC Rules deals with 
identification and recording of dogs. 
Rabies cases should be informed to the 
Health Dept./Municipality so that they 
can maintain an accurate statistics on 
rabies cases. Rule 10 of ABC Rules 
takes care of furious or dumb rabid 
dogs. 
Rule 12 provides guidelines for 
breeders. Any violation of PCA Act 
attracts for punishment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AWBI advises Central Government on 
making Rules, who gets feed back from 
all concerned. The feedback is a 
continuing process for improving the 
laws. 
Monitoring Committee set up under 

pups born at each litter, number that 
dies, number of pups sold and the 
name of the buyer. 
2. Rule 10: furious or dumb rabid dogs. 
 The clause may be modified to permit 
dogs which in the opinion of the 
Inspection Panel consisting of 
veterinary surgeons appointed by local 
authority and representative from 
AWO approved by AWBI is 
considered to be rabid, to be humanly 
euthanized using over dose of sodium 
pentathlon. This should be followed by 
a post mortem in the Government 
Veterinary Hospital  to check whether 
it was indeed rabid. All such 
incidences of rabies must be informed 
to the AWBI so that an accurate 
statistics of rabies is maintained. In 
case the post mortem indicates 
otherwise, the same must be 
immediately brought to the notice of 
the Inspection Panel to enable them to 
make informed judgment the next 
time. 
3. Rule 12: guidelines for breeders 
 A sub clause may be added to ensure 
compliance by breeders by providing 
ABC Rules is to take view in the matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-   Do  - 
 
 
 
 
A provision for installation of 
incinerators to be installed by the local 
authority already exist under Rule 6 (e) 
of the ABC Rules, for disposal of 
carcasses. 
 
Rule 12 provides detailed guidelines for 
dog breeders 
The application of law is based on 
keeping in mind the sole objective of 
welfare of animals. 

for deterrent fine and any other 
punishment. Repeated offenders must 
be treated with utmost penalty to 
ensure obedience to the rule of law. 
 
 
 
1. The review exercise at this stage is 
premature. A Committee should be set 
up to ensure wide spread 
implementation of the Rules and only 
thereafter feedback should be obtained 
from different parts of the country. 
2. Rule 3: A Sub clause may be added to 
ensure that no pet dog may be kept 
without obtaining licence from 
relevant corporation, municipal 
council, panchayat or local, authority, 
who shall ensure that one-time 
nominal fee is imposed on the owner 
of sterilized dog, whereas annual 
substantial fee may be imposed and 
collected from the owner of 
unsterilized dog. 
3. Rule 5: A sub clause may be added to 
ensure that adequate stock of anti-
rabies vaccines are available with 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The approach has to be humane. The 
ABC Rules has provision of qualified 
Veterinary Doctor. 
Local Authority is to take decision as 
per ABC Rules. 
 
 
The existing classification deals with 
categories of dogs. 
 
 

health authorities for use of the public 
in case of dog bite.  
4. Rule 6: Sub clause (e) may be 
amended as follows: incinerators to be 
installed or burial ground to be 
identified by the local authority for 
disposal of carcasses. 
5. Rule 12: Rules for dog breeders may 
be suitably incorporated. 
6. Rule 13: The clause may be amended 
to read as follows: 
 “if there is in force in any area to 
which these rules extend, any act, rule, 
regulation, bye-law made under any 
law for the time being in force by the 
State or the Local Authority in respect 
of any matters for which provision is 
made under these rules, such rule shall 
have no effect unless it is harmony 
with the provisions of these rules”.
  
 
 
1. Rule 2 (g) definition: In line with’ the 
Supreme Court’s stipulation on human 
sterilization, a veterinary doctor must 
 
 
AWBI is to look into the matter. 
Nominations of the AWO representative 
is on the basis of concern for animals 
and their experience in the field of 
Animal Welfare. 
AWO/NGO are part of Monitoring 
Committee. The implementing agencies 
at the field level is also to observe the 
ABC Rules. 
Veterinary Doctors to decide on the 
drugs/medicine, as per ABC Rules. 
Monitoring Committing is to take action 
in the matter based on ABC Rules. ABC 
Rules also deal with the problem of 
rabid dogs. 
 
Pollution control is essentially a part of 
eco-system. 
 
 
Reimbursement is based on set principal 
prescribed by GFR and other 
instructions of the GOI. 
 

have training in ABC surgery before 
he is involved in ABC programme. In 
India veterinarians are not given 
compulsory surgery training during B. 
Vsc course. 
2. Rule 3 (2): ‘sterilization’ methodology, 
whether only tubectomy, ovary-
hysterectomy, castration, etc. should 
be notified clearly. 
3. Rule 3(3): There should be three 
categories (i) pet dogs, (ii) street dogs, 
(iii) community dogs, the dogs staying 
inside a housing complex, apartments, 
etc., where food is assured and 
movement is self restricted.  
4. Rule 4 (f): Nomination criteria of A 
WO representatives should be on the 
merit/ performance of the concerned  
AWO, not on any other consideration. 
 
5. Rule 5(a): The Monitoring Committee 
may give basic guidelines while day to 
day affairs should be entrusted to the 
implementing agency at the field level 
(AWO/ NGO/ Any other.) 
6. Rule 5 (b): Veteriinary doctors may be 
allowed to decide on the 
 
Rule 7 deals with all types of 
complaints. 
The Local Authority has to deal with the 
matter, as per ABC Rules. The approach 
towards animals has to be humane. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The ABC Rules provides for sufficient 
and proper housing for dog kennel 
 
The rules provides for administering 
sodium pentahol for adult dogs and 
thiopental introperitoneal for puppies by 
a qualified veterinarian in humane 
manner. 

drugs/medicines. Only banned 
drugs/medicines to be clearly notified. 
 Inclusion of ‘rabid dogs’ contradicts 
with Rule 10(4). 
7. Rule 6(1) (e): Installation of 
incinerators without proper pollution 
control should not be made mandatory. 
8. Rule 6(3): Without regular and 
mandatory implementation of 
‘reimbursement’ clause, the whole 
scheme would be infeasible. 
9. Rule 7(1) (i)&(ii): General purpose 
cannot be separated from specific 
complaints, because a field worker 
cannot refuse to attend the later saying 
 he is on a general trip, it may 
be possible in Government set up but 
not in a community work by NGO. 
 (i) & (ii) cannot be separated in a 
community work. 
10. Rule 7(4): Instead of the manner of 
catching, emphasis should be given to 
 checking the condition/ injury 
during catching. A strict stipulation by 
total ban on metal tongs may lead to 
no catching of aggressive/biter dogs 
The inspection by a panel of two 
persons provided by ABC Rules is to 
make sure that inspection is by qualified 
person in a humane way.  
 
 
Local Authority has to ensure that 
incinerators are pollution free. 
 
 
 
 
 
The approach has to be humane one as 
in ABC Rules and PCA Act. 
Success of Rules depend on proper 
implementation by authorities 
concerned.  
 
 
 
Local authorities have to fully co-
operate with the NGOs in the ABC 

resulting in aversion in the community 
to the programme itself. In any case, 
catchers should be covered by some 
Government funded insurance scheme 
available to other people working in 
high risk/hazardous situations (each 
dog is a potential carrier of rabies, 
apart from other zoonotic infection) 
11. Rule 7(8): An isolation/ quarantine 
area must be available for suspected 
rabies/ communicable zoonotic dogs. 
12. Rule 9: Rule should notify banned 
drugs. 
13. Rule 10(3)(ii): A qualified veterinarian 
is adequate. A layman may not be the 
right person to monitor or participate 
in an inspection. If two persons are 
necessary then even an  AWO 
representative must be a veterinarian. 
14. Rule 11: Pollution factor in 
incinerators may be noted. Near to the 
Disposal Area, a Central Post Mortem 
facility (carcasses of suspected rabid 
dogs may be colour marked at ABC 
centres) should be provided by the 
local authority to ascertain incidences 
of rabies. 
programme, to make it a success. 
 
 
 
 
The local authorities must take full 
responsibility for control of stray dogs 
population and in the implementation of 
the ABC programme. 
Sterilization of pet dogs is to be done 
according to ABC Rules.  
 
The local authorities must take full 
responsibility for control of stray dogs 
population and in the implementation of 
the ABC programme. 
 
 
ABC rules already cover this aspect 
PCA Act provides fo r punishment for 
violation. 
 
 

15. Rule 13:  A rational approach, 
keeping community sentiment/ priority 
in mind, should be adopted while 
framing the rules. Otherwise no 
amount of awareness will be adequate 
to make the community tolerant to the 
dogs. 
 
 
 
1. Often the ABC Rules, 2001 are not 
implemented because they are viewed 
as voluntary or insignificant. There is 
no accountability or consequences for 
the local authorities if they choose to 
disregard the Rules. 
2. Often there is limited cooperation from 
local authorities. A realistic evaluation 
of the ABC programme can only be 
conducted after the ABC rules have 
been widely implemented by local 
Governments. 
3. The responsibility for the success of 
the ABC Rules has been unofficially 
 transferred to the animal 
welfare NGOs. In actually, it is for the 
local authorities to spearhead these 
 
 
 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals as a 
subject falls in the concurrent list and 
therefore Monitoring Committee can 
keep a better check. A representative of 
the Ministry cannot attend Monitoring 
Committee Meeting as there will be 
number of Monitoring Committees all 
over India. However, A WBI has a 
system to get a feedback. Public
 involvement is done through 
the participation of NGOs/ AWO’s and 
local bodies concerned with welfare of 
animals. 
Monitoring Committee can take a view 
in the matter, depending on the local 
need. 
 
 
 
The Monitoring Committee may decide 
on this aspect. Any action is to be taken 
as per the PCA Act and ABC Rules. The 
Animal Birth Control (Dogs) Rules, 
2001 enacted under Section 38 of the 

programmes and for the NGOs to 
support and assist in their 
implementation. The ABC Rules may 
be amended to create accountability 
and consequences for those local 
authorities that do not implement the 
guidelines within a stipulated time 
period despite having a stray dog 
problem within their jurisdiction. 
4. Rule 3(3): It is important to mandate 
that the pet be sterilized as soon as 
possible 
5. Rule 6: Strict consequences be 
mandated for local authorities not 
willing to provide the items stipulated 
in (a) to (f) or not willing to implement 
the ABC programme within their 
stipulated jurisdiction despite having a 
stray dog problem. 
6. Rule 10 : Rule may be modified to 
permit dogs that, in the opinion of the 
Inspection Panel consisting of 
Veterinary surgeons appointed by the 
local authority and a representative 
from the AWO approved by the 
AWBI, is considered to be rabid to be 
humanely euthanized using an 
overdose of sodium pentathol. 
Act lays down a scheme to reduce dog 
population by sterilization and 
immunization of stray dogs by 
participation of animal welfare 
organization, private individuals and 
local authorities. The Scheme 
formulated under these Rules is not 
intended to jeopardize human life but at 
the same time to treat animals with care, 
compassion and in a humane manner so 
as to achieve a gradual reduction and 
stabilization in the population of stray 
dogs on a long term basis. 
The Animal Birth Control (Dogs) Rules, 
2001 enacted under Section 38 of the 
Act lays down a scheme to reduce dog 
population by sterilization and 
immunization of stray dogs by 
participation of animal welfare 
organization, private individuals and 
local authorities. The Scheme 
formulated under these Rules is not 
intended to jeopardize human life but at 
the same time to treat animals with care, 
compassion and in a humane manner so 
as to achieve a gradual reduction and 
stabilization in the population of stray 
dogs on a long term basis. 
Dog licences may be issued with a 

 
 
 
1. Need for providing provision for 
lodging FIR in case of killing of stray 
dogs also in this regard there is need 
for chalking out a line of action for the 
police in case of such mishaps in 
coordination with the local authorities 
and the NGOs operating in that area. 
2. A representative of the Ministry must 
attend the meeting of the Monitoring 
Committee to keep a check press 
person must also be called for the 
meetings so that the discussions can be 
released for the general public as 
public involvement is crucial for the 
success of the programme.  
 
    
 
3. Areas of a city must be divided and 
allotted to different NGOs by the 
Monitoring Committee. Each area 
needs to be taken up one at a time. 
Public also need to be made aware of 
validity period of 3 to 5 years for 
checking the sterilization/immunization 
of pet dogs, Dog licence should be made 
available at different zone/divisional 
office of the municipalities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The AWBI has a system for conducting 
inspection of the AWOs. 
Management of Stray Dogs population 
has to be done with a multi pronged 
approach. It discriminate culling of dogs 
is not a wholesome solution to the 
problem of management of street dogs. 
 
 
 

the programme. 
4. Whenever dogs are found poisoned, it 
is observed that a majority of them are 
marked, which means, they were 
operated. The shy ones even escape the 
poisoning. Therefore, there is a need to 
study these dogs that cannot be caught 
even after several attempts and use of 
tranquilizer guns, if the programme 
has to succeed. The Monitoring 
Committee must find a solution to this 
problem. 
 
 
 
 
5. The license fee to keep a dog must be 
reasonably high and a door-to-door 
check must be maintained on an yearly 
basis to ensure that anti rabies 
vaccination is given. A neutered dog 
can be charged less compared to an 
unoperated dog to ensure that people 
also neuter dogs not meant for 
breeding. Slum breeding has to be 
halted to give way to responsible dog 
breeding. A breeders cab may be 
 
 
 
 
 
Local authorities are to abide by the 
ABC rules and fully co-operate with the  
AWOs in the implementation of the 
ABC Programme. 
Local authorities are to abide by the 
ABC rules and fully co-operate with the  
AWOs in the implementation of the 
ABC Programme. 
AWBI provides financial assistance. 
However, local authorities are free to 
generate funds fo r implementing any 
programme relating to Animal Welfare. 
MoE&F provides funds to AWBI for 
further disbursement to AWOs for 
implementation of the programme. 
AWBI is making every effort to release 
the first and second installments of 
grants in time to the AWOs. Delays of 
funds can be eliminated if necessary 
documents are provided in time. 
Local authorities are to abide by the 

chalked out by directing kennel clubs 
not to issue certificates without 
production of licenses per puppy born. 
6. The purpose of the license is to ensure 
dogs are immunized per year. 
However, Municipal Corporations like 
that of Pune have stated issuing a life 
long license. This should not be 
allowed as people will not bother 
vaccinating their dogs once the license 
is obtained. License can be issued for 2 
years. Dog licenses should be made 
available at different offices earmarked 
throughout the city so that animal 
lovers will also come forward to get 
license. It should be mandatory be give 
a stray dog a license only upon 
neutering. 
7. There should be regular inspection of 
the NGOs by the Animal Welfare 
Board. Problems being faced by the 
NGOs must be addressed to. Also, 
funds should be released timely, and 
good kennels should be provided.  
1. It is learnt that the Municipal 
Corporation is going to resume the 
killing of street dogs instead of 
sterilizing them. This should be 
ABC rules, which provide for humane 
approach and have to fully co-operate 
with the AWOs in the implementation of 
the ABC Programme. The AWBI 
conducts inspection for proper 
monitoring. 
The panchayats should provide all 
assistance, including finance to the 
AWOs to make the programme 
successful. 
The MoE&F is providing funds to 
AWBI for release of regular and 
continuous grants to AWOs engaged in 
the welfare of animals. 
 
AWBI provides financial assistance. 
However, local authorities are free to 
generate funds fo r implementing any 
programme relating to Animal Welfare 
under existing provision of GOI.  
 
 
 
Sterilization cum immunization 
programme under ABC Rules is solution 
to the problem of stray dogs in a humane 

condemned. It is a stated fact that 
killing does not reduce or check dog 
population. This will only encourage 
the increase of dog numbers are 
recreate the irrational fear of stray 
dogs that animal lovers and the 
programme are trying to remove.  
 
 
 
1. Inspite of the programme, killing of 
dogs is taking place in different areas. 
2. There is lack of assistance and 
cooperation from panchayat and 
Municipal Corporations. 
 
3. There as need for clearing foreign 
financial contributions. 
 
 
4. Often initial funds are sanctioned and 
received from the AWBI on time. 
However, funds are delayed and often 
not forthcoming during the successive 
years. 
manner. Under Sec. 38 of the PCA Act, 
the Animal Birth Control Rules 
throughout India has been made, for 
uniform implementation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AWBI provide funds for various 
programmes based on a set principle of 
grant-in-aid, as per GFR & GOI 
instructions and norms stipulated in the 
respective Central Sector Schemes. 
 
Local authority has a responsibility to 
implement the ABC programme. The 

 
 
5. Inspite of the rules, killing of animals 
is taking place in many parts. Often 
death is inflicted by choking instead of 
humane methods and by injection of 
strychnine. The implementation of the 
Rules needs proper monitoring. 
6. Need for assistance, financial or 
otherwise from panchayats. 
 
 
7. Need for regular and continuous flow 
of funds from the AWBI to the NGOs 
for sustained and long term progress of 
the project. 
8. Need for exploring possibility of 
foreign financial contributions.  
 
 
 
 
 
1. The Kerala High Court in Case No. 
sterilization of street dogs is to be done 
as per ABC Rules. 
 
 
The Local Authority are to follow ABC 
Rules. The Animal Birth Control (Dogs) 
Rules, 2001 enacted under Section 38 of 
the Act lays down a scheme to reduce 
dog population by sterilization and 
immunization of stray dogs by 
participation of animal welfare 
organization, private individuals and 
local authorities. The Scheme 
formulated under these Rules is not 
intended to jeopardize human life but at 
the same time to treat animals with care, 
compassion and in a humane manner so 
as to achieve a gradual reduction and 
stabilization in the population of stray 
dogs on a long term basis. 
The success of PC A Act and ABC 
Rules depend on proper coordination. 
Animal Husbandry Depts. (Central & 
State), Ministry of Health, Government 
of India as also the Municipal 
administration Depts. cooperation in this 
programme is essential to make this 

WP (C) No. 23543 of 2003 have 
interpreted that whatever the ABC 
Rules prescribed; local authorities can 
catch and kill stray dogs. The Court 
quoted from chapter (3) 11 (2) b-i.e. 
“nothing in this section shall apply to 
the destruction of stray dogs in lethal 
chamber later substituted by other 
methods with a minimum suffering.” 
The Court opined that Rules cannot 
override Act and therefore, 
municipalities can kill stray dogs. This 
is a grave discrepancy and against the 
spirit of both the prevention of Cruelty 
to Animal Act and the ABC Rules. 
 
 
 
1. I.  Hindrances 
 1. Non availability of continuous 
funding. Often it is very limited grant 
and the availability is much delayed 
with serous set back to the speed of the 
programme. 
 2. Under Rule 6(3) the local authority 
has to reimburse. However, the local 
authority is reluctant to part with any 
programme a success. 
 
 
The success of the ABC and AR 
programme depends upon active 
participation of municipal corporation/ 
NGOs, individuals and all concerned. A 
proper coordination would definitely 
help in proper waste management 
system and awareness can help in this 
regard, would definitely help to achieve 
this goal. 
The local bodies may consider allotting 
land to the NGOs engaged in ABC 
programmes. 
There will be no delay if the  AWOs 
submit the documents required to the 
AWBI, Chennai for the purpose of 
release of grants like U.C. & 
sterilization certificate from the local 
authority. The NGOs should co-operate 
with the Board in this matter. 
The scheme provides for Rs.445/-. 
 
 

kind of help even medically to increase 
the sterilization of the street dogs. 
 3. Often a lot of convincing to the 
Commissioner of the Municipality is 
needed about the scheme. Often they 
are unaware of the pr oject and there is 
lack of positive intention among the 
officers concerned who view the 
project as a burden in the absence of 
clear-cut instructions laid down in their 
manual. The result is the killing of 
dogs without any reason, follow-ups 
and leaving aside the basic problem. 
 
 
 
 4. Here is lack of coordination between 
the local authority and the NGOs. 
 5. Considering the social responsibility 
under direct public health and 
departments like Animal Husbandry, 
Municipal Corporations do not provide 
any guidelines or assistance to address 
the problem. 
2. II. Suggestions 
 1. The aim and objective of the scheme 
 
 
 
 
Both the male and female dogs should 
be sterilization, as per ABC Rules. 
It may not be possible/feasible for the 
Board Members to attend the meeting of 
the AWOs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PCA Act provides punishment for 
violations.  
Identification and recording of dogs is 
done under Rule 8 of ABC Rules. 

should be to complete it within the 
shortest time possible. 
 2. It is the local authority’s obligation 
to investigate the progress of the 
project. 
 3. A proper coordination between the 
departments of Animal Husbandry, 
Municipal Corporation and the NGOs 
must be in place. 
 4. There must be continuous minimum 
financial assistance to keep the scheme 
going and spreading. 
 5. The garbage system and the 
dumping of wastage also need to be 
streamlined. 
 6. There is need for creating awareness 
and education programmed to the 
masses and the implementing 
authorities. 
 
 
 
1. I. Drawbacks/ constraints in the 
implementation of the ABC Rules  
 Immediate allotment of permanent 
 
 
 
 
 
The AWBI, Chennai is only an advisory 
body for recommending policies and 
rules relating to animal welfare to the 
Central Govt. The State Govt. is the 
implementing Authority. Hence, the 
implementation of all Acts and Rules is 
the responsibility of the State Govt. As 
such, dog breeding should be monitored 
and controlled by the State Animal 
Husbandry Departments. 
The intention of the PCA Act and ABC 
Rules is to have humane approach 
towards animals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

land to the NGOs engaged in 
sterilization of stray dogs so that land 
can be secured for infrastructural 
development i.e. sterilization and 
immunization projects. An NGO 
whose land is insecure cannot give 
optimum output. Intervention of both 
State and Central Government is a 
must if the NGOs are to achieve 
optimum results. 
2. Delay in receiving grant-in-aid from 
the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests brings the ABC project to a 
halt.  
 
   
 
3. Sanctioning of Rs. 1200/- per 
sterilization operation (including dog 
catching and relocation) instead of the 
present rate of Rs. 445/-. The rise in 
prices of medicines, instruments, food, 
cleaning agents, fuel, etc. has resulted 
in the cost per operation to increase.
   
4. Often only female stray dogs are 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The SPCAs is part of Monitoring 
Committee. The local authorities and 
other involved in the implementation of 
ABC Rules and AR programmes are to 
discharge their responsibilities in a big 
way for making these programmes a 
success. 
There has to be regular monitoring 
committee meetings for successful 
implementation of ABC programme. 
 
 
 
 
The ABC Rules and PCA Act provide 
for compassion and humane approach 
towards animals. The Animal Birth 
Control (Dogs) Rules, 2001 enacted 

caught for sterilization. Only male 
stray dogs having maggot-wounds are 
picked up for neutering, following 
dogfights during the mating season. 
1. Success of the project depends on 
sufficient funds being allotted 
regularly. For this, procedure for 
allotment of funds needs to be 
simplified. Also, one Member of 
AWBI should attend the meetings of 
the NGOs regularly for allotment of 
funds and for coordination purposes 
with various local bodies. There is 
need for nominating one person of the 
respective area as Member of AWBI. 
This will ease the work of 
implementation of the rules. 
2. At time dogs are being poisoned by 
unknown persons. The NGOs are 
helpless to do anything due to limited 
resources. There is need to file FIR by 
local bodies i.e. Municipal 
Corporation/ Corporation Board. Also, 
post mortem, disposal of carcasses etc. 
need to be carried out under their 
arrangement. 
3. In foreign countrie s, chips are inserted 
in the body of the animal to store data 
under Section 38 of the Act lays down a 
scheme to reduce dog population by 
sterilization and immunization of stray 
dogs by participation of animal welfare 
organization, private individuals and 
local authorities. The Scheme 
formulated under these Rules is not 
intended to jeopardize human life but at 
the same time to treat animals with care, 
compassion and in a humane manner so 
as to achieve a gradual reduction and 
stabilization in the population of stray 
dogs on a long term basis. 
Municipalities/ Corporations to take 
action to implement ABC / AR 
programme as they are the 
implementing authorities. 
 
 
 
The provision of Rule 5(b) is applicable 
to put to sleep critically ill or fatally 
injured or rabid dogs in a painless 
method. Rule 10(4) is applicable for dog 
to have a high probability of having 
rabies. The provisions are not 
contradictory. 

of operation / immunization. This 
possibility needs to be explored.  
 
 
 
1. Rule 3(2) and (3): The Breeding of 
dogs by the breeders should be limited 
and monitored through AWBI. The 
breeding of ownerless dogs can be 
controlled through ABC programme. 
 
 
 
 
2. Rule 3 (10): The furious or dub rabid 
dogs should be humanly euthanised 
only after having confirmed of the fact 
by a panel of specialized veterinary 
doctors approved by the AWBI and 
under the local Government Veterinary 
Hospital. Post mortem of such dogs 
should be carried out by Government 
Hospital or authorized NGOs with 
approved facilities for such post 
mortems to confirm that the euthanised 
The real intention an d purpose of rule 9 
is that an incurable / mortally wounded/ 
rabid dog should not be subjected to 
prolonged pain and suffering. 
There is no doubt better coordination 
and corporation will be effective for 
implementation of the ABC Rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Animal Birth Control (Dogs) Rules, 
2001  enacted under Section 38 of the 
Act lays down a scheme to reduce dog 
population by sterilization and 
immunization of stray dogs by 
participation of animal welfare 
organization, private individuals and 
local authorities. The Scheme 
formulated under these Rules is not 
intended to jeopardize human life but at 
the same time to treat animals with care, 
compassion and in a humane manner so 
as to achieve a gradual reduction and 
stabilization in the population of stray 

dog was indeed rabid. 
 
 
 
1. District Animal Welfare Societies in 
Forests and Village Development 
Department do not function regularly 
and properly. They must be activated 
and made to discharge their duties in 
relation to the ABC Rules and AR 
programme. 
2. Rule-4 : The monetary Committees 
often do not function in the 
Municipalities, resulting in lack of 
coordination between the AWO 
(NGOs) and the Municipalities/ 
Corporations. The Commissioner, 
Municipality is Ex-officio Member of 
the District Animal Welfare Society.  
3. The Municipal Act should be amended 
suitably to make it mandatory for the 
Municipalities/ Corporations to act 
with compassion and responsibility 
and not resort to killing of stray dogs 
indiscriminately and by in-human 
dogs on a long term basis. 
 
 
After implementing the ABC 
programme on a large scale throughout 
India continuously for period of four to 
five years, a review of the rules could be 
undertaken. 
Monitoring Committee is competent to 
take a view in the matter. 
Guidelines for breeders are in Rule 12. 
 
The Rule 13 is based on the principle of 
humane approach towards animal and 
hence is as per the spirit of PCA Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

methods. 
4. Municipalities/ Corporations allocate 
some amounts in the budget every year 
and call for tenders for killing stray 
dogs. The amounts may be utilized not 
for killing the dogs but for ABC/ AR 
programme as envisaged in the ABC 
Rules. 
5. Rule 5(b) may be deleted as it is taken 
advantage of by the Municipalities/ 
Corporations merely for killing dogs 
indiscriminately. Rules 5 (b) and 10(4) 
are self-contradictory leading to 
anomalies while dealing with the act of 
killing of dogs. 
 Dog shelters should be provided in 
every district to solve this problem and 
be placed at the disposal of the Animal 
Welfare Societies. 
6. Rule 9 may be deleted as it is being 
taken advantage of as an excuse for 
killing the dogs on mass scale. 
 
7. Need for coordination and cooperation 
between the 
Municipalities/Corporations, Animal 
Husbandry Department and Animal 
 
 
Guidelines for breeders exist in Rule 12 
of ABC Rules. 
Proper implementation of ABC Rules by 
local authority in letter and spirit is 
essential for its success. 
Animal Welfare Board of India has been 
entrusted with the task of creating public 
awareness on the various aspects of 
animal welfare including those 
pertaining to ABC programme though 
newsletters, pamphlets and conducting 
trainings and seminars directly or with 
the help of AWOs.  
 
 
Monitoring Committee can take a view 
in the matter depending on local needs. 
AWOs involved in the matter are doing 
the work of volunteers who ensure 
taking care of street dogs, as per ABC 
Rules and PCA Act. 
 
 

Welfare Organizations (NGOs) for 
effective implementation of the ABC 
Rules. 
 
 
 
1. The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
Act, 1960 forbids cruelty to animals, 
including stray dogs. Section 11(1) (1) 
makes it clear that stray dogs are 
protected by this Act. At the same time 
Section 11 (3) permits destruction of 
stray dogs as may be prscribed by law. 
Thus an exception is created whereby 
under certain circumstances, 
euthanasia of certain dogs may be 
permitted. PCA does not elaborate on 
the circumstances under which this 
exception may be resorted to, Rules 
should clarify these circumstances and 
also method to be used. 
2. Review exercise at this stage is 
premature. A Committee should be set 
up to ensure widespread 
implementation of the rules. 
 
 
 
 
Rule 9 of ABC Rules provides that 
incurably ill and mortally wounded dogs 
as diagnosed by a qualified veterinarian 
appointed by the committee shall be 
euthanised during specified hours in a 
humane manner. Any action in this 
regard is to be taken as per ABC Rules. 
Animal Welfare Board of India has been 
entrusted with the task of creating public 
awareness on the various aspects of 
animal welfare, including those 
pertaining to ABC programme and 
re-homing/rehabilitation though 
newsletters, pamphlets and conducting 
trainings and seminars directly or with 
the help of AWOs. 
Rule 9 of ABC Rule deals with 
euthanasia of street dogs. Rule 11 deals 
with disposal of carcasses. 
 
The Animal Birth Control (Dogs) Rules, 
2001 enacted under Section 38 of the 
Act lays down a scheme to reduce dog 
population by sterilization and 
immunization of stray dogs by 

3. Rule 3 : A sub clause (d) may be added 
to provide that no pet dog may be kept 
without obtaining license from the 
relevant authority - City Municipal 
Corporation, who shall ensure that 
one-time nominal fee is imposed on 
the owner of sterilized dog, whereas 
annual substantial fee is imposed and 
collected from the owner of 
unsterilized dog. 
4. Rule 12 : Rules for dog breeders may 
be suitably incorporated in the rules. 
5. Rule 13: The Rule may be amended as 
follows: 
 ‘If there is in force in any area to 
which these rules extend, any act, rule, 
regulation or bye-law made under any 
law for the time being in force by the 
State or the Local Authority in respect 
of any matters for which provision is 
made under these rules, such rule shall 
have no effect unless it is in harmony 
with the provisions of these rules.’ 
 
 
 
1. Rules and laws should be enacted for 
participation of animal welfare 
organization, private individuals, and 
local authorities. The Scheme 
formulated under these Rules is not 
intended to jeopardize human life but at 
the same time to treat animals with care, 
compassion and in a humane manner so 
as to achieve a gradual reduction and 
stabilization in the population of stray 
dogs on a long term basis. 
Involvement of all concerned can help in 
better implementation of ABC Rule. 
Proper implementation of the ABC 
programme would certainly result in 
decline in population of stray dogs and 
incidences of rabies. 
Proper implementation of the ABC 
programme has contributed to decline in 
population of stray dogs and incidences 
of rabies, There is no denying the fact 
that this huge task of sterilization of 
stray dogs can be achieved if all the 
State Government/local authorities take 
interest in implementing the ABC 
programme. AWBI interacts with State 
Governments to motivate them to 
implement the programme. 

licensing dog breeders 
 Dog breeders should be licensed (free 
of charge) by the local veterinary 
authorities under supervision by local 
AWOs, who would ensure that no 
bitch has more than two litters in her 
life time, by having her neutered after 
her second litter, and who would 
remove the license of any breeder 
mistreating or in-breeding animals. 
The neutered female dog should be 
suitably rehomed by the dog breeder or 
else he may face prosecution under the 
PCA Act, 1960. 
2. Rectify the existing pitfalls in the dog - 
sterilization programme. These pitfalls 
include:  
z  Failure of Government/ 
Government bodies to provide 
finance when scheduled. 
z  Corruption by employees/ 
supervisors (especially in 
purchasing). 
z  Misuse of vehicles. 
z  Diversion or theft of medicines/ 
dog food. 
z  Obstruction by local officials/ 
Agreed to. 
The Animal Birth Control (Dogs) Rules, 
2001 stipulate that all Municipalities 
should start the ABC programme in co-
operation with local AWOs/ NGOs.  
 
Better garbage management is a key for 
bringing down population of dog and 
improving upon animal welfare also. 
 
 
Veterinary doctors  to follow ABC 
Rules. NGOs are welcome to take active 
interest. 
 
 
Welcome suggestion. 
The ABC Rules provide for a humane 
approach towards dogs. 
 
 
 
 

municipal vets. 
z  Failure by Municipalities to 
implement projects despite 
 availability of finance. 
z  Dumping of sterilized dogs by the 
municipalities into areas other 
than from where they had been 
picked.  
3.  Publicizing the ABC cum Anti -Rabies 
immunization programme and 
networks.  
  A budget should be allocated for 
advertising for local volunteers and to 
publicize the location of clinics. 
Neuter and return should be advertised 
and explained to the public. A Public 
Relations Bureau could be engaged to 
handle this. 
4.  A network of volunteer dog wardens 
should be established in each clinic 
area. School children enthused by the 
Education Project might also help. 
Their job would be to locate, feed, 
befriend and catch street dogs, then to 
care for them after release, notifying 
their local clinics of illness, injuries or 
complaints. Dog wardens would help 
Suggestion welcome 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABC & AR programme are 
implemented through AWBI and is 
being implemented throughout the 
country, involving local authorities, 
Animal’ Welfare. Organizations, 
Societies for Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animal, NGOs and private individuals 
involved in animal welfare etc. The 
scale of financial support for Xlth Five 
Year Plan has also been increased. 
Monitoring Committee can take a view 
in the matter depending upon local 
needs. . 
-  Do  -  
 
 
PCA Act provides fo r punishment for 

to re-catch dogs for booster 
vaccinations. 
5.  Weak, small or handicapped dogs 
would be held in clinics or passed on 
to animal welfare associations pending 
adoption/ rehoming or as a last resort. 
 
 
6.  Local newspapers should be 
encouraged to help with adverts or 
rehoming of dogs which cannot be 
returned to their community, for eg. 
Grown puppies with no home territory, 
or small or weak dogs. 
7.  Removal and incarceration, with or 
without euthanasia, is futile, never-
ending and unaffordable. 
8.  Mass sterilization-cum-vaccination of 
street-dogs is the only practical and 
permanent solution, but it requires 
political will, short-term funding and 
efficient implementation. 
 
 
violation. 

 
 
 
 
 
9.  There should be informative 
programmes in schools, cinema halls, 
television, radio, etc. 
XXIV  
Animal Welfare Board of India  
(Ministry of Environment and Forests)  
Post Box No. 8672, 13/1, Third Seaward Road, 
Valmiki Nagar,  
Thiruvanmiyur, Chennai-600 041 
Point                 Points
 Comments of the Ministry of  
 No. 
 Environment and Forests 
1.  The Animal Birth Control which is a 
permanent and long term solution is 
based on WHO recommendations. The 
State Governments required to enforce 
the Rules by directing the local 
administration 
departments/municipalities to 
implement the ABC programmes in 

order to achieve stray dogs control. 
The fact that the stray dogs population 
continues to remain high is a pointer to 
the fact that the ABC programme has 
not been effectively implemented by 
the State Governments. In cities where 
the ABC programme has been adopted 
for the last 4 to 5 years, the population 
of stray dogs and incidences of rabies 
cases have recorded a decline. 
2.  The Animal Welfare Board is 
providing financial assistance of the 
ABC/AR programme to more than 56 
Animal Welfare Organizations spread 
all over the country. 
Neutering/sterilization of the stray 
dogs estimated around 18 to 20 million 
is a gigantic programme and can be 
achieved only if all State Governments 
are motivated to seriously implement 
the ABC programme in letter and 
spirit. 
3.  The AWBI of India has submitted the 
project “Rabies Free India” to the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
and the Ministry of Agriculture (Deptt. 
of Animal Husbandry) for conducting 
the ABC/ARV programme on a large 
scale. The Dept. of Animal husbandry 

of the Ministry of Agriculture has 
decided to enumerate the stray dog 
population also in ensuring census 
which will help proper planning in the 
control of stray dogs.    
XXV 
Karuna Society For Animal and Nature  
2/138/C Karuna Nilayam, Behind S.C. 
Quarters, Enumulapalli,  
P.O. Prasanthi Nilayam, Andhra Pradesh-515 
134 
Point                 Points
 Comments of the Ministry of  
 No. 
 Environment and Forests 
1. Heavy pressure on Government and 
municipalities regarding garbage 
management and by law, all 
municipalities have to start ABC in 
cooperation with NGOs or AWO. 
2. Garbage management together with a-
septic ABC plus AR is the only 
humane answer to bring down the 
number of human rabies death and to 
improve animal welfare and human 
welfare alike.  
3. Qualified veterinary doctors have to be 

trained in ABC by Government 
veterinary colleges to do a quality job. 
They should have legal permission to 
work at NGOs as part of their job. 
4. Veterinary colleges should take up 
ABC in the area of the College as an 
e.g. and stray animal have to be 
included in the country’s veterinary 
care.  
5. Pups should not be separated from the 
mother for ABC purpose. After the 
pups are 3-6 month old, the females 
with the mother can be operated 
together and released back in their own 
territory. 
6. Quality inspections have to be 
performed on the NGOs. and other 
institutions conducing ABC 
programme. On the national and state 
level, qualified inspectors have to be 
trained to be able to inspect and report 
the performance of the organizations, 
including the accounts. Corruption at 
all levels-Government and NGO-has to 
be stopped. 
7. Outside of cities, ABC centres should 
be central and big enough to cover the 
whole district. This will make 

inspections easy and the results can be 
better controlled. 
8. ABC programme should not be 
conduct in times of seasonal 
distemper/parvo out breaks. 
9. Anti rabies vaccinations should be 
freely available at all the vet. 
Hospitals. 
10. The legal consequences for offenders 
of cruelty to dogs or killing of stray 
dog should come on the level of the 
Wild Life Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 