141 
       COM-I 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE  
LEGISLATION 
 
HUNDRED AND FORTY FIRST REPORT 
 
(Presented on July 31,  2002)   
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
(July 31,  2002/Sravana 9, 1924 ) 
 
C O N  T  E  N  T  S 
 


 1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
   
 
 2. INTRODUCTION     
  
      
 3. REPORT      
             
         
(i)     Bank Officer Employees’ (Conduct) Regulations, 
1976 - Implementation of the recommendations of the 
Committee  
as contained  in its 124th Report.  
(ii)     The Bank (Officers’) Service Regulations, 1979- 
Implementation of the recommendations of the 
Committee as contained in its 124th Report.    
 
(iii)      The State Bank of Travancore (Officers’) 
ServiceRegulations, 1979.                           
  
(iv)     The Canara Bank/Punjab National Bank (Officers’) 
Regulations, 1979- Implementation of the  
recommendations of the Committee as contained in 
its 104th Report. 
 
(v)       The Bank Officer Employees’ (Discipline and 
Appeal) Regulations, 1976-  
Implementation of the recommendations of the 
Committee as contained in its 106th Report.  
 
(vi)       The Small Industries Development Bank of  India 
Act, 1989- Framing of Regulations under the.  
 
(vii)       Banking Service Commission Act, 1984 – Delay
 in framing of Rules/Regulations.    

 
(viii)       Summary of Recommendations     
                                                                            
  
      (ix)      Minutes      
  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE  30th May, 2002) 
 
  
 1.    Shri A. Vijaya Raghavan  Chairman 
2.  Shri M.V. Rajashekaran 
3.  Shri Kapil Sibal  
4.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
5.  Dr. A. R. Kidwai 
6.  Shri Dilip Singh Judev 
7.  Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh ‘Lalan’ 
8.  Shri  B.P. Singhal 
9  Shri  Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
10.  Shri  S. Sivasubramanian 
11.  Shri  Janeshwar  Mishra     
12.  Shri  Drupad Borgohain 
13.  Shri V.Maitreyan  
14.  Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 

 Secretariat 
1. Shri S. Vijay Kumar,  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary 
  3.    Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary 
4.    Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Committee Officer 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordin ate 
Legislation, having been authorized by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this 
Hundred and Forty First Report of the Committee. 
. 
1.2 The Committee considered and adopted the Report in 
its meeting held on July 25, 2002. 
 
1.3 The matters examined by the Committee arise out of 
the scrutiny of various Rules/Regulations and the 
issues, related therewith, alongwith Government’s 
comments received thereon.  The observations and 
recommendations  which, in the opinion of the 
Committee, should be brought to the notice of the 
House, are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of 
the Report. 
 
 

NEW DELHI 
July 25,  2002. 
 
 
A. VIJAYA 
RAGHAVAN 
Chairman 
 Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation, 
 Rajya Sabha 
                                                              
 
 

REPORT 
I 
The Bank Officer Employees’ (Conduct) Regulations, 
1976- Implementation of the recommendations of the 
Committee as contained in its 124th Report. 
 
 
 The  Bank Officer Employee’s (Conduct) Regulations, 
1976, framed under the Banking Companies(Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 were examined by the 
Committee and the matter was reported to the House on April 
23, 1999 in the 124 th Report of the Committee.  The 
observations/recommendations of the Committee as contained 
in the said Report are as under:  
 
“5.    The Committee notes with satisfaction that the 
Ministry of Finance as well as the Banks have accepted 
the recommendations of the Committee in relation to 
Regulations 3(1) and 6(4). 
 
6. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Finance 
as well as the Ban ks based in Calcutta and Chennai 
called for no change in relation to Regulation 3(3). The 
Ministry and the Banks had maintained that having 
regard to the nature of work in the banking Industry 
and in the exigencies of work, it was not always possible 
to give written instructions to the subordinates.  It was, 
therefore, submitted by the Banks that no change is 
called for in this regard.  The Committee considered the 
matter and came to the conclusion that any oral 
direction issued under the regulation should always be 
confirmed in writing and there should be no objection 
to this change in the regulation. 
 

7. With regard to Regulation 6(1) the Committee 
observed that while the Indian Bank, Indian Overseas 
Bank and Allahabad Bank maintained that there was 
no need t o specifically mention in the regulation that 
the competent authority must record the reasons for 
directing an official to discontinue honorary work, the 
Chennai based Indian bank had no objection for 
recording in writing of the reasons if so desired by th e 
Committee.   
8.     With regard to Regulation 22(1) relating to second 
marriage the Committee noted the reply of the Banks 
and decided not to pursue for any change in the 
Regulation. 
 
9.    The Committee noted the views of the Ministry and 
the Banks on R egulations 4, 10 and 22(3) and decided 
that these regulations may remain in their existing 
form. 
 
10.   The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Finance 
shall make necessary modifications/amendments in the 
regulations in cases where they have agreed with t he 
Committee’s suggestions and also as per the 
Committee’s recommendations as stated above, in 
relation to regulations 3(3) and 6(1), expeditiously 
under intimation to the Committee”. 
 
2. The above extracts from the Report were forwarded to 
the Ministry of Finance on May 18, 1999 for necessary action. 
 
3. The Ministry vide their O. M. dated December 3, 2001 
furnished a copy of the notification No. OCR/ 1/ 2001 dated 
June 2, 2001 publishing the UCO Bank Officer Employees’ 
(Conduct) Amendment Regulations, 2001 (Ann exure) 

carrying out amendments in regulations 3(1), 3(3), 6(1) and 
6(4) as per the Committee’s recommendations. 
 
4.  The Committee notes with satisfaction that the 
Ministry/ UCO Bank have amended regulation 3(1) by 
substituting the words “bank employee” with the words 
“officer employee”; regulation 3(3) by providing for 
confirmation in writing of oral direction given by the superior 
official; regulation 6(1) providing for  recording of reasons 
while directing an official to discontinue any honorary work of 
social or charitable nature, etc. in view of exigencies of bank 
work ; and regulation 6(4) by substituting the word “fee” by 
the words “payment in the form of fee, remuneration, 
honorarium and the like in cash or kind”. 
 
5. The Committee recommends the Ministry of Finance to 
take necessary action to ensure that all the  nationalised banks 
carry out these amendments in their conduct regulations 
expeditiously with intimation to it. 
 
Annexure 
[vide para 3, page 2] 
 
 
 
The Gazette of India 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 
 
No.22 NEW DELHI, SATURDAY, JUNE 2, 2001 
(JYAISTHA 12, 1923) 
(separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be 
filed as a separate compilation)  
 
[PART III-SECTION 4] 

[Miscellaneous Notifications including Notifications, Orders, 
Advertisements and Notices issued by Statutory Bodies] 
 
DATE : 26 April, 2001. 
 
No. OCR/1/2001.  In exercise of the powers conferred by 
Section 19 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act 1970 (5 of 1970), the Board of 
Directors of UCO Bank in consultation with Reserve Bank of 
India and with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government, hereby makes the following Regulations to 
amend the UCO Bank Officer Employees’ (Conduct) 
Regulations, 1976, namely :- 
 
 
1. (i) These Regulations may be called the UCO Bank 
Officer  
Employees’ (Conduct) Amendment 
Regulations, 2001. 
  
(ii) They shall come into force on the date of their 
publication in the “Official Gazette”. 
 
2. In the UCO Bank Officer Emplo yees’ (Conduct) 
Regulations, 1976.- 
 
(i) in regulation 3, for sub -regulation (1), the 
following shall be substituted, namely :- 
“(1) Every Officer employee shall, at all times 
take all possible steps to ensure and protect the 
interests of the bank and discharg e his duties 
with utmost integrity, honesty, devotion and 
diligence and do nothing which is unbecoming of 
an officer employee”. 
 

(ii) in regulation 3, after sub -regulation (3), the 
following 
 proviso shall be inserted, namely :- 
 
“Provided wherever such directi ons are oral in 
nature the same shall be confirmed in writing by 
his superior official.” 
 
(iii) in regulation 6, in sub -regulation (1) for the  
existing proviso, the following shall be 
substituted, namely :- 
 
“Provided that an officer employee may, 
without such sanction undertake honorary work 
of a social or charitable nature or occasional 
work of a literary, artistic scientific, 
professional, cultural, educational, religious or 
social character, subject to the condition that his 
official duties do not thereby suffer but he shall 
not undertake or shall discontinue such work if 
so directed by the competent authority after 
recording reasons for the same.” 
 
(iv) in regulation 6, for sub -regulation (4), the 
following shall be substituted, namely :- 
 
“(4) No officer employee shall accept any 
payment, in the form of fee, remuneration, 
honorarium and like in cash or kind for any 
work done by him for any public body or any 
private person without the sanction of the 
competent authority.” 
 

II 
The Bank (Officer’s) Service Regulations, 1979 - 
Implementation of the recommendations of the 
Committee as contained in its 124th Report. 
 
 
 The Committee in its 124 th Report presented to the 
House on April 23, 1999 ha d inter-alia examined the Bank 
(Officer’s) Service Regulations, 1979 of the Subsidiary Bank 
of State Bank of India, viz the State Bank of Travancore and 
the State Bank of Mysore framed under the State Bank of 
India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959.  The Commit tee in its 
Report had recommended as under: 
 
 (i)  Regulation 50(3) 
 
The Committee had a detailed discussion on the 
provisions of Regulation 50(3).  It was convinced that the 
directions from the superior official under this regulation 
could not always be i n writing.  But, in the opinion of the 
Committee, there should be no objection to the confirmation 
of such oral directions in writing at the earliest available 
opportunity.  The Committee recommends that the regulation 
be amended, accordingly. 
 
(ii)  Regulation 50(4)   
 
The Committee considered the views of the Ministry of 
Finance as well as the views of the State Bank of Mysore on the 
Committee’s suggestion to replace the words “Bank Official” 
by the word “Officer” and recommended that the Committee’s 
suggestion for suitable modification of regulation 50(4) which 
has been accepted by the Ministry of Finance should be acted 
upon and the regulation may be modified suitably. 
 

(iii) Regulation 51(1) 
 
The Committee expresses its satisfaction that the 
representatives of both the Banks have, during the course of 
discussion, agreed to the suggestion of the Committee that the 
reasons for directing a Bank Official to discontinue any work 
of social or charitable nature should be recorded in writing .  
The Committee recommends that the suitable action may be 
taken for amendment of the regulation 51(1). 
(iv) Regulation 51(4) 
 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the 
Ministry of Finance as well as the representatives of the banks 
have agreed to replace the word “fee” by the word “payment” 
which is more appropriate.  It hopes that suitable amendments 
would be carried out expeditiously. 
 
(v) Regulation 54, 64(1) & (2) 
 
The Committee notes the explanation furnished by the 
Ministry of Finance as well as the representatives of the banks 
on Regulations 54, 64(1)and (2) and decides that the 
regulations may remain in their existing form .” 
 
2. Relevant extracts from the 124 th Report were 
forwarded to the Ministry of Finance on May 18, 1999 for 
necessary action.  In response thereto the Ministry vide their 
O. M. dated  November 29, 2000 informed as follows: 
 
 “This Ministry has accepted all the recommendations 
regarding amendment t o the Bank (Officers) Service 
Regulations as contained in its 124 th Report viz. 50(3), 
50(4), 51(1) and 51(4) in respect of associate banks of 
State Bank of India. Reserve Bank of India and State 

Bank of India have been requested to take necessary 
steps to amend these regulations.”   
 
3. The Ministry of Finance on December 3, 2001 
furnished a copy of the notification S.B.D. No. 4/2001 dated 
June 30, 2001 publishing amendments to the State Bank of 
Bikaner & Jaipur/ Hyderabad/  Indore/ Mysore/ Patiala/ 
Saurashtra/Travancore Officers Service Regulations, 1979 
(Annexure). 
 
4. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the 
Ministry of Finance have amended Regulation 50 (3) by 
providing that oral directions from superior official  under the 
Regulations shall be confirmed in  
writing ; Regulation 50(4) by substituting the words “Bank 
Official” by the word  “officer”; Regulation 51(1) by providing 
that reasons be recorded while directing a Bank Officer to 
discontinue any work of socia l or charitable nature; and 
Regulation 51(4) by substituting the word “fee” by the words  
“payment in the form of fee, remuneration, honorarium and 
the like in cash or kind.”  

Annexure   
[vide para 3 page 7] 
 
STATE BANK OF INDIA 
ASSOCIATES & SUBSIDIARIES GROUP 
MUMBAI 
 
SBD. No. 4/2001      June 
30, 2001 
 
N O T I F I C A T I O N  
 
 In exercise of the powers under Sub -section (1) of 
Section 63 of the  State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 
1959, and as approved by the Reserve Bank of India and the 
Board of Directors of the concerned Associate Banks, the State 
Bank of India has approved the undernoted amendments to 
Regulation No. 50(3), 50(4), 51(1) & 51(4) of State Bank of 
Bikaner & 
Jaipur/Hyderabad/Indore/Mysore/Patiala/Saurashtra/Travan
core Officers’ Service Regulations, 1979 :- 
 
Regulation 50(3) : 
 
No officer shall, in  the performance of his official duties or in 
the exercise of powers conferred on him, act otherwise than in 
his best judgment except when he is acting under the  direction 
of his official superior. 
 
Provided wherever such directions are oral in nature the same 
shall  be confirmed in writing by his superior official. 
 
Regulation 50(4) : 
 

Every officer shall, at all times take all possible steps to ensure 
and protect the interests of the Bank and discharge his duties 
with utmost integrity, honesty, devotion and  diligence and do 
nothing which is unbecoming of an officer. 
 
Regulation 51(1) : 
 
No officer shall, except with the previous sanction of the 
Competent Authority, engage directly or indirectly in any 
trade or business or undertake any other employment.  
Provided that an officer may, without such sanction undertake 
honorary work of a social or charitable nature or occasional 
work of a literary, artistic, scientific, professional, cultu ral, 
educational, religious or social character, subject to the 
condition that his official duties do not thereby suffer but he 
shall not undertake or shall discontinue such work if so 
directed by the Competent Authority after recording reasons 
for the same. 
 
Regulation 51(4) : 
 
No officer shall accept any payment, in the form of fee, 
remuneration, honorarium and the like in cash or kind for any 
work done by him for any public body or any private person 
without the sanction of the Competent Authority.  

 
III 
 
STATE BANK OF TRAVANCORE (OFFICERS’) 
SERVICE REGULATIONS, 1979. 
 
 The State Bank of Travancore (Officers’) Service 
Regulations, 1979 were examined and certain points were 
referred to the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic 
Affairs, (Banking Division) on the 28 th September, 1993 for  
their comments. 
2. The requisite comments were furnished by the Ministry 
during the Committee’s discussion with the Management of 
the State Bank of Travancore and representative of the 
Ministry of Finance at Kochi on the 8 th October, 1993.  The 
points referred to and the comments thereon are enclosed  
(Annexure-I). 
3. The relevant extracts from the study note on the above 
discussions (Annexure-II) were forwarded to the Ministry of 
Finance, (Banking Division) on the 6 th May, 1994 for 
furnishing action taken notes on the 
observations/recommendations of the Committee contained 
therein. 

4. After some reminders the Ministry vide their 
communications dated the 6 th February, 1995 informed as 
under: 
“that recommendations/suggestions contained in the 
study note are being examined in consultation with State 
Bank of Travancore, State Bank of India and Indian Banks’ 
Association.  The comments of this Ministry will be furnished 
to Rajya Sabha Secretariat, as early as possible.” 
Later on, the Ministry of Finance vide their 
communication dated 8 th January, 1996 informed  that  State 
Bank of India had taken up the matter with Reserve Bank of 
India and that a reply from State Bank of India was awaited.  
The Ministry promised to  furnish the information to Rajya 
Sabha Secretariat in due course. 
5.          In the meantime, certain additional points on the above  
Regulations, were culled out and referred to the Ministry on 
the 6 th November, 1996 for their comments. The points 
referred to and the comments received on 14th November, 1996 
are placed at Annexure III. 
6.          The  subject was again discussed with the 
representatives of the State Bank of Travancore  and 
Ministry of Finance at Chennai on November 14, 1996.    A 
study note on the above discussion (Annexure-IV) was  

forwarded to the Ministry  on September 3, 1997 for their 
comments on the points raised therein.  In the absence of  any 
response to the Committee’s above communication, the 
Committee considered the question of delay on the part of the 
Ministry of Finance in responding to the communications on 
its behalf.  The Committee took a serious view in the matter 
and decided to call the Secretary of the Ministry of Finance 
to explain the reasons for inordinate delay in responding to 
its communications.  The Committee’s feelings were 
communicated to the Ministry on the 5th  May, 2000.  As a 
consequence, the Ministry furnished the action  taken note 
vide their communication dated May 30,  2000 enclosed as 
Annexure-V. 
7. The Committee notes Ministry’s comments on para -3 
regarding deletion of provisions of Chapter –III; para -3.1 
regarding powers of the competent authority to decide about 
the period of probation  (Regulation -15); Para-3.5  regarding 
definition of ‘family’ (Regulation 3(h); paras -3.7 and 3.8 
(Regulation 30(2), and para -3.9 (Regulation -29).  The 
Committee is satisfi ed that the Ministry have agreed to the 
Committee’s suggestion to incorporate Government’s 
guidelines with regard to raising retirement age from 58 to 60 
years in the regulations of the State Bank of  India as well as 

all the Associate Banks.  The Committe e further notes with 
satisfaction that the Ministry have agreed to incorporate a new 
sub-clause in Regulation 3(1) defining the term “perquisites’ 
in respect of the State Bank of India Officer’s Service 
Regulations and the Officer’s Service Regulations of 
subsidiary banks of the State Bank of India.  The Committee 
is also happy to note that the Ministry have agreed to amend 
provisions of regulation -38 regarding lapse of leave, after 
death of the employee or when he ceases to be in the service  of 
the bank, suitably as there was some ambiguity in its wording. 
8. The Committee however expresses its unhappiness 
over the long delay on the part of the Ministry of Finance in 
taking action on Committees recommendations and 
responding to communications on its behalf.  It, however, 
hopes that the Ministry would be more responsive in future 
and would carry out the necessary amendments in the State 
Bank of Travancore (Officer’s) Service Regulation, 1979 by 
notifying the same expeditiously under intimation to it. 
 
Annexure-I 
(Vide para, 2 page 10) 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the points raised thereon 
 

1. Point referred 
Regulation 7 
 
  Proviso 
  
  * * * * * 
 
Provided that  any  difficulties or anomalies arising out 
of the above placement shall be referred to a 
Committee of such persons as the Board or Executive 
Committee may appoint and the decision of that 
Committee in this regard shall be final. 
 
i) Whether any guidelines have been issued regarding 
appointment of a Committee by the Board or  the Executive 
Committee? 
 
ii) What is the remedy available to the person aggrieved 
by the decision of the Committee? 
 
Comments of the Bank 
 
(i) The salary scales of the officers were   rationalised and 
new scales have been introduced with effect from 1.10.1979 
on the basis of the recommendations contained in the Pillai 
Committee Report.  The officers were also given option to 
continue in the existing scale or to switch over to the new 
scales.  The constitution of the Committee was provided for 
to remedy anomalies in the placement of officers in the 
revised scale.  On  the basis of the Regulation, a Committee 
consisting of Managing Director, General Manager 
(Operations) and General Manager (Planning and 
Development) was constituted.  The Regulation itself provides 
that the committee is constituted  
 

for hearing appeals and remedy anomalies in the placement of 
officers and therefore it should be a Committee of persons 
having sufficient knowledge in the matter.  There are no 
separate guidelines for the constitution of the Committee other 
than that contained in the regulation. 
 
ii) The Executive Committee has been given power to 
review the decision of the Committee under proviso to sub -
regulation (3) of Regulation 13 of the Officers’ Service 
Regulation s(OSR).  The Executive Committee can review the 
decision of the Committee in case any error is brought to its 
notice in the placement of officers by  the Bank or by any 
individual concerned. 
 
1. Point referred  
Regulation 8 (3) 
 
Where two or more officers having different seniority 
in the scales of pay immediately   before the appointed date are 
fitted at the same stage in the new scale of pay, different 
months may be fixed for the eligibility of such officers for the 
next increment in the new scale of pay. 
 
What is the justification for fixing different months for 
eligibility of officers for the next increment? In case number of 
officers exceed 12 what procedure will be followed? 
 
Comments of the Bank 
 
  As per revised fitment for mula, several officers in 
different stages in the pre-PCR scale, are fitted in  one stage 
in the corresponding new scale of pay: 
 
Pre PCR Scale of pay corresponding fitment as per PCR 
formula. 

 
GRADE BASIC GRADE BASIC 
1. GRADE I Rs. 1050/- JMGS I Rs. 
1740/- 
2. GRADE I Rs. 1000/- JMGS I Rs. 
1740/- 
 
In the above case, even though old scale of pay is 
different for officer No. 1 and No. 2, their corresponding scale 
of pay as per PCR formula  is same viz., Rs. 1740/ -.  In order 
to remove the anomaly, as per the above regulation the officers 
increment would fall as follows: 
 
No.1 would be getting his increment on the 1st October, 1979 
(i.e., date of implementation of PCR) and subsequent 
increments on 1st October every  year. 
 
No. 2 increment would fall on the anniversary date of his 
increment in the old scale.  i.e., if he had been getting his 
increment on the 1 st January every year, his next increment 
will fall on 1st January, 1980. 
 
Where 3 stages in old scale (pre PCR) are involved, those at 
the highest of such stages will be eligible for next increment on 
01.10.79 and those at successive lower stage will be eligible for 
the next increment at the interval of one month each after 1 st 
October, 1979. 
 
Pre  PCR  As per PCR      
Remarks 
GRADE BASIC PAY             GRADE BASIC PAY  
1. GRADE 
A 
Rs. 1950/- SMGS IV 
Rs.2300/- 
Increment 
due on                                                                      
1.10.79 

2. GRADE 
A 
Rs. 1875/- SMGS IV 
Rs.2300/- 
Increment 
due on                                                                      
1.11.79 
3. GRADE 
A 
Rs. 1800/- SMGS IV 
Rs.2300/- 
Increment 
due on                                                                      
1.12.79 
 
 
  As the maximum stages under clubbing is only three, 
there is no possibility of going beyond 3 months. 
 
3. Point referred 
 Regulation 13: Proviso 
  
Provided that the Executive Committee may of its own 
motion review any such decision and where it reviews any such 
decision, it shall give an opportunity to the officer conc erned 
to make his representation in the matter. 
 
i) What is the criteria for reviewing the decision of 
the Committee by the Executive Committee?  Whether it is 
done regularly or in exceptional cases? 
 
ii) Clause (3) of regulation 13 states that the 
decision of the Committee shall be final, whereas the proviso 
to clause (3) empowers the Executive Committee to review the 
decision of the Committee.  There appears to be contradiction.  
Please elucidate. 
 
Comments  of the Bank 
 
i) The decision, if any, given by the Committee is 
not in consonance with the principles of natural justice, such 
matters if brought to the notice of the Executive Committee by 
the Bank the Executive Committee can review the decision of 

the C ommittee appointed for redressal of anomalies.  
However,  there was no occasion to review the decisions  of the 
Committee, as the cases of anomalies brought to the notice of 
the Committee were taken up with State Bank of India, 
Central Office who in turn h ad taken up with appropriate 
authorities viz., IBA and as per the clarification given by them 
the fitment appeal have been disposed off. 
 
ii) As far as the aggrieved officer is concerned, the 
decision of the Committee is final and he cannot appeal to 
Executive Committee for review of the decision of the 
Committee. However, the Executive Committee, suo motto can 
review the decision of the Committee and in such a review shall 
give an opportunity to the officer to represent his case.  In a 
limited sense, we may sa y, the decision of the Committee is 
subject to review by the Executive Committee. 
 
4. Point referred 
Regulation 15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
(3) Any other person appointed to any gr ade including 
Junior Management Grade shall be on probation for such 
period as may be decided by the competent authority. 
 
Provided that the competent authority may, in the case 
of any officer, reduce or dispense with the  period of 
probation. 
 
  This regulation gives blanket power to competent 
authority to decide the period of probation, which might be 
misused.  Whether the Ministry have issued any  guidelines 
to the competent authority?  If so, the details thereof? 
 
Comments of the Bank 
 

 This is  only an enabling provision, to equip the 
competent authority with the powers to reduce or dispense 
with the period of probation, in case of direct appointment in 
senior position, where such probation period of longer 
duration may not be required by virtue  of his experience in 
discharging similar duties.  However, in practice, the authority 
conferred under this regulation is not exercised.  As a part of 
promotional policies every officer is kept on one year 
probation on promotion from one grade to another right upto 
scale VII.  In this connection, no guidelines have been received 
from the Ministry. 
 
 
4.1 Point referred  
Regulation 15: Proviso 
 
This proviso creates disparity among the Bank  Officers 
and directly affects the spirit of equality under article 14 of the 
Indian Constitution.  Whether the Ministry have any objection 
to specify the conditions under which the probation period of 
a particular officer will be reduced or dispensed with? 
 
Comments of the Bank 
 
  Probationary Officers who are entering the  Bank’s  
service for the first time have to be adequately trained 
before they are entrusted with responsible assignments.  
Similarly Trainee Officers (Group  B Officers)  considering 
their limited exposure to various spheres of banking 
activity are also pu t under training for a   period of one 
year.  Taking into account the nature of appointment of 
these category of officers, the probation period has been  
prescribed as two years as against one year for other 
promoted officers.  Even though probation period  has  
prescribed  as two years and one year for probationary 

officers, Trainee Officers and one year for other  
promotees respectively  for all purposes viz., increment, 
seniority, and promotion it is their date of 
appointment/date of promotion which are t aken into 
account and not the date of confirmation,  for determining 
their consequential benefits.  Therefore, fixation of 
different probation period for different category of officers 
is related to needs of training/job requirements and does 
not amount to  violation of Article 14 of the Constitution. 
 
5. Point referred 
       Regulation 19 
 
(1) An officer shall retire from the service of the  Bank on 
attaining the age of fifty eight years or upon the completion of 
thirty years’ service whichever occurs first. 
 
Provided that the Competent Authority may, at its 
discretion extend the  period of service of an officer who has 
attained the age of fifty eight years or has completed thirty 
years’ service as the case may be, should such extension be 
deemed desirable in the interest of the Bank. 
 
Provided further that an officer who had joined the 
service of the Bank either as an officer or otherwise on or after 
the 19th July, 1969 and attained the age of 58 years shall not be 
granted any  further extension in service. 
 
Provided further that an officer may, at the discretion 
of the Executive Committee, be retired from the Bank’s service 
after he has attained 50 years of age or has completed 25 years’ 
service, as the case may be, by giving him three months’ notice 
in writing or pay in lieu thereof. 
 

Provided further that an officer who has completed  25 
years’ service may be permitted by the Executive Committee 
to retire from the Bank’s service, subject to his giving three 
months notice in writing or pay in lieu thereof unl ess this 
requirement is wholly or partly waived. 
 
Under what circumstances an officer may be 
compulsorily retired?  Whether, principles of natural justice 
is followed in doing so? 
 
Comments  of the Bank 
 
  This regulation in principle provides an opportunity to 
review service records and performance of an officer based 
upon which the extension in his service could be considered 
on completing 25 years of service or attaining 50 years of 
age.  However, in practice first such review is being made 
only on attai ning 50 years of age or   on completion of 30 
years of service whichever is earlier in case of those joined 
the services of the Bank after 19.7.69 and 55 years of age 
or 30 years of service whichever is earlier in case of those 
joined before 19.7.1969.  Si milarly, second such review is 
being done on attaining 55/58 years of age depending upon 
their date of joining the service of the Bank.  In case the 
service records and performance report of the officer is not 
satisfactory, he will be given an extension fo r a shorter 
period, and also advised to improve upon deficient areas of 
his performance.  Depending upon his subsequent 
performance, further extension will be considered.  The 
very fact that the discretion to retire the officer at the end 
of 25 years of service or on attaining 50 years is vested with 
the Executive Committee, the highest decision making 
body in the Bank who represent various interests including 
those officers and workmen and does so after 
independently applying their minds, ensures that the  

principles of natural justice are upheld.  Further, no courts 
have so far questioned the powers under the  principles of 
natural justice. 

Annexure II 
[vide para 3, page 10] 
 
Relevant extracts from the study note on the visit 
Of the Committee to Kochi on 8th October, 1993 
 
STATE BANK OF TRAVANCORE (OFFICERS) SERVICE 
REGULATIONS, 1979 
 
3. The Committee assembled at 4.00 P.M. on the 8 th 
October, 1993 in Conference Hall of  Hotel Casino, Willingdon  
Island, Kochi and held discussion with the representatives of 
State Bank of Travancore and the Ministry of Finance. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
Shri Bhubaneswar  Kalita   - Chairman 
Shri M.A. Baby 
Shri Chimanbhai Mehta 
Dr. Yelamanchili Sivaji 
Shri Gopalsinnh G. Solanki 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
Shri A.K. Singh, Committee Officer 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE STATE BANK OF 
TRAVANCORE 
 
Shri K. Ramakrishnan, Managing Director 
Shri D. Ramanujam, General  Manager (P & D) 
Shri K. Bhasker Rao, G.M. (O) 
Shri S. Subramaniam, A.G.M. (Personnel) HRD 
Shri Abraham George, chief Manager (Personnel) 

Shri Sudhakaran Pillai, G.M. (Law) 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 
Shri Y.P. Sethi, Director  
 
3.1 At the outset, Shri K. Ramakrishnan, Managing 
Director of the State Bank of Travancore welcomed the 
Committee and introduced officials of the Bank.  The 
Chairman also introduced the Members and officers of the 
Committee.  Thereafter, Shri Ramakrishnan gave a brief 
account of the working of the Bank and finan cial investments 
in different sectors of society.  The Chairman and Members of 
the Committee sought certain clarifications relating to the 
financial activities of the Bank. 
 
 The Committee, then, initiated discussion in the light of 
the questionnaire and r eply furnished by the Ministry of  
Finance. 
 
3.2 As regards guidelines for the appointment of a 
Committee under proviso to Regulation 7, the Committee was 
informed that a Committee consisting of M.D., G.M. 
(Operations) and G.M. (Planning Development) was 
constituted for hearing appeals and to remedy anomalies 
arising out of the placement of officers in the revised scale.  The 
Committee felt that in the present context the appointed 
committee is of no use and has lost its relevancy.  Therefore, 
the Committee  recommended that the proviso to regulation  
providing for appointment of a Committee, appears to be 
redundant, hence, should be deleted. 
 
3.3. As regards the remedy to the aggrieved person, the 
Committee noted the reply of the Ministry that the Executive 
Committee can review the decision of the appointed 

Committee in case any error is brought to its notice in the 
placement of officers by the Bank or by any individual 
concerned. 
 
3.4 As regards regulation 8 (3) the Committee  accepted the 
justification given for fixing different months for eligibility of 
officers for the next increment. 
 
3.5 As regards proviso to regulation 13, the Committee was 
informed that the Executive Committee can review the 
decisions of the appointed committee, when it is of the view 
that the principles of Natural Justice have not been followed.  
Although there has been no occasion when the decisions have 
been taken for review.  As regards the contradiction between 
clause (3) of regulation 13 and proviso thereto the Committee 
was infor med that the decisions of the appointed committee 
are final for the aggrieved officer.  However, the Executive 
Committee suo motto can review the decisions of the appointed 
committee. 
3.6 As regards the power of competent authority to decide 
the period of probation under regulation 15 the Committee 
accepted the views of the Bank that in case of direct 
appointment in a  senior position, the probation period of 
longer duration would not be required by virtue of his 
experience in discharging similar duties. So  far as guidelines 
to the competent authority are concerned, the Committee was 
informed that no guidelines in this regard have been issued by 
the Ministry. 
 
3.7 As regards proviso to regulation 15 the Committee 
accepted the request of the Bank for re -examining the 
provision.  After reconsideration the Committee 
recommended that the phrase “for reason to be recorded” 
should be added after the word “probation” at the end of the 
proviso under intimation to the Committee.  

 
3.8  As regard proviso III & IV of re gulation 19 the 
Committee noted with satisfaction the comments of the Bank 
stating the circumstances under which an  officer may be 
compulsorily retired. 
 
3.9 The discussion ended at  5.20 P.M. with a mutual vote 
of thanks. 
 
  
Annexure-III 
(Vide para, 5, page 11) 
 
Additional points referred and comments received on 
14.11.1996 from the Ministry. 
 
5.1 Point referred Regulation 3 Definitions 
 
Para (h) defines the term “family” and states that the 
term “family” means and includes spouse of the o fficer (if the 
spouse is not an employee of the Bank).  The intention of this 
portion appears to be that if the spouse of the officer is an 
employee of the Bank, he or she will  not get the benefits 
provided by these regulations which are otherwise made 
available to the spouse wholly dependent on the officer.  It 
appears that the brackets and words (if the spouse is not an 
employee of the Bank) are not required here as they create 
confusion because- 
 
(a) If it is seen from the grammatical and literal 
angles it appears as though if the spouse is 
working in the Bank, he or she is not the  spouse 
of the officer at all; and   
 

(b) the spouse may not be an employee of the Bank 
but of some other Bank or Government 
Department or Public Sector Undertaking. 
 
Whether the Mini stry will  react and remove the 
anomaly in the definition? 
 
Comments of the Bank 
 
  Though the definition of family under regulation 3 (h) 
excludes the spouse who is an employee of the Bank, for the 
purpose of regulation 24 and 45, the family is separately 
defined to include the spouse employed in the Bank also.  
Thus in effect the exclusion affects availment of LFC by 
both  the spouses working in the Bank together.  Since this 
is discriminatory vis-à-vis spouses working in other Banks 
and institutions, suitable amendment may be considered.   
 
5.2 Point referred 
 
Paras (f) defines “emoluments”  para (k) defines “pay” 
and para (m) defines “salary”.  There seems little difference in 
paras (f), (k) and (m ) and the entire Chapter -VI of the 
Regulations pertains to “perquisites” but the term has not 
been  defined anywhere. 
 
The Ministry may like to react in this regard. 
 
Comments of the Bank 
 
 As per regulations “Pay” means basic pay including 
stagnation increment, “salary” means the aggregate of the pay 
and the dearness allowance and “emoluments” means the 
aggregate of the salary and allowances.  This terms appears 
under various regulations and to denote the correct meaning 

they are separately defined. But “p erquisites” are benefits 
over and above emoluments.  All perquisites are explained in 
detail under chapter VI.  Therefore separate definition of 
perquisites is not considered necessary.   
 
5.3  Point referred 
 
Para (j) defines the term “Officer” wherein th e word 
“fitted” has been referred twice.  It is not clear what “fitted” 
means. 
Will the Ministry clarify and make it clear in the definition 
itself? 
 
Comments of the Bank 
 
  “Fitment” means fixing the Basic Pay of an officer at a 
specific sum in the various scales/grades prevailing in the 
Bank.  Any person who, immediately prior to the 
appointed date was an officer of the Bank, upon 
implementation of the regulations will be “fitted” in the 
new pay scale.  The wor d “fitted” used in the definition 
thus differentiates persons in the service of the Bank 
immediately prior to the appointed date and those who are 
subsequently appointed/promoted as officers. 
 
5.4 Point referred Regulation 16 (1) 
 
This sub -regulation provi des that a probationary 
officer shall be confirmed in the service of the Bank if, in the 
opinion of the competent authority, the officer has 
satisfactorily completed the training in any institution to which 
the officer may have been deputed for  training a nd the in -
service training in the Bank and the proviso to the sub -
regulation provides that an officer directly recruited to the 

Junior Management grade may be required also to pass a test 
in a language other than his mother tongue.  
 
What will be the crite ria to judge that the officer has 
satisfactorily completed the training and what will be the basis 
of the “opinion” of the competent authority? Whether it will 
be the assessment report of the institution that has imparted 
training to the officer or the ass essment report of the team 
imparting in-service training in the Bank.  The regulation is 
not clear.  Whether the Ministry would like to make it  more 
comprehensive to remove these anomalies? 
 
Similarly the proviso to the regulation is also not clear.  
Whether the officer has to pass a written test or an oral test 
in a language other than his mother tongue?  Whether this 
provision is being resorted to?  Will the Ministry clarify this 
aspect in the regulation itself? 
 
Comments of the Bank 
   
The Training sche dule of Probationary Officers 
contains only eight weeks of institutional training.  During the 
entire remaining period the trainee undergoes a well 
structured on the job training.  The Trainees are required to 
submit a monthly diary detailing therein vario us fields of 
training undergone by him/her during the month under 
reference.  This diary would be reviewed by the Branch 
manager/HRD Department at Head Office and deficiencies 
observed brought to the notice of the Trainee.  Further, 
Annual confidential rep ort is also written on the trainees by 
the Branch Manager/Head of the Department and reviewed by 
HRD Department at head Office.  These officers are always 
under close watch and guidance and their performance is 
monitored.  These points of control would for m an “opinion” 
and would facilitate an evaluation by the competent Authority. 

  
As Banking is a service industry the officers including 
the trainees have to interact very closely with the local 
population and in the process pick up the local language, at 
least the basics, quite fast.  In fact as they are transferred 
through out the country many pick up many languages.  As the 
purpose of the provision is thus met no specific language test 
is administered to them. 
 
5.5 Point referred Regulation 20 (2) 
 
The second proviso to the sub-regulation provides that 
the competent authority, may, at its discretion, permit an 
officer to resign without notice or forfeiture of security deposit 
or payment in lieu of notice or reduce the  period of notice. 
 
What are the  circumstances in which an officer could 
be permitted to resign without notice on forfeiture of security 
deposit or payment in lieu of notice or reduce the  period of 
notice?  Whether there is any objection in incorporating of the 
same in the  Regulation itself? 
 
Comments of the Bank 
 
  Normally an officer is not permitted to resign without 
notice or forfeiture of security or with reduced notice 
period or with payment in lieu of notice.  In exceptional 
circumstances like taking up assignments with State Ban k 
of India, Reserve Bank of India, other apex level financial 
institutions etc. the competent authority may consider 
waiver of the above condition. 
 
5.6 Point referred Regulation 29 
 

This Regulation provides that the Bank may reimburse 
to an Officer such enter tainment expenses and such fees for 
membership of clubs and professional institutions as may be 
decided by the Board or the Executive Committee in 
accordance with the State Bank’s guidelines. 
 
What is the justification of providing this Regulation? 
Why the terms “entertainment” and “clubs” and “professional 
institutions” have not been defined in the Regulations?  
Whether the Ministry would like to make the provision more 
clear?  Whether Government have issued some guidelines on 
this aspect; if so, what are the details? 
 
Comments of the Bank 
 
  The Bank being basically a commercial institution can 
thrive only by obtaining timely market information and 
intelligence in view of the intense competition in the field. 
“Clubs” and “Professional Institutions” are the  
appropriate “fora’ where Bank officers are able to meet 
prospective customers and access information regarding 
the market and its developments.  It also facilitates creation 
of new business connections.  The entertainment expenses 
are restricted and are m ade available strictly on the basis 
of guidelines issued by Government vide memorandum No. 
3/15/79-BPE(WC) dated 09.04.1984 from Bureau of Public 
Enterprises, New Delhi.  
 
5.7 Point referred Regulation 36 
 
This Regulation provides that leave up to a period of 3 
months at a time may be granted by way of maternity leave 
including in respect of postnatal period or at the time of 
miscarriage or abortion, so however, that no more than 12 

months of such leave shal l be available during the  entire 
period of service of the officer. 
 
The Regulation gives an impression that the female 
employees are entitled to take maternity leave on four 
occasions, not exceeding 12 months period during the entire 
period of service.  W hether the Ministry has any objection in 
clarifying the same? 
 
Comments of the Banks 
 
  The provisions of the regulation are not against the 
Government Policy on Family Planning.  In fact, by 
extending the provisions to cover abortions also Bank is 
encouraging Government’s Family Planning Policies. 
 
5.8 Point referred: Regulation 38 
 
The Regulation begins with the words 
  
“All leave shall lapse on the death of the officer” and 
the proviso states that where an officer retires from the Bank’s 
Service, he shall be eligible to be paid a sum equivalent to the 
emoluments of any  period of privilege  leave that he has 
accumulated. 
 
“The words ‘shall lapse on the death of the officer or if 
he ceases to be in the service of the Bank’ and  ‘shall be eligible 
to be paid a sum equivalent to the emoluments of any  period 
of privilege leave that he has accumulated’ are inherently 
contradictory in nature.  Whether the Ministry have any 
objection in modifying the regulation accordingly? 
 
Comments of the Bank 
 

  Regulation 38 pro vides the general rule that all leave 
shall lapse on the death or cessation of employment of an 
officer.  The general rule is subject to two exemptions 
stated in the provisions.  The first exemption is that leave 
salary equivalent to the privilege leave at  credit shall be 
payable to the legal representatives of the officer on his 
death while in employment.  The second exemption is that 
the office retiring from service shall be eligible to be paid 
leave salary equivalent to the privilege leave at credit upto 
240 days.  Under the circumstances no modification to the 
regulation seems necessary.  
 
5.9 Point referred Regulation 39 
 
It has been  provided by this regulation that an officer on 
leave may be recalled to duty by the  competent authority 
whenever the Bank deems fit to do so.  But, if the officer is 
at that time out of station, he shall be eligible to be paid 
the actual expenses incurred by him and the members of 
his family for coming back to the station and if the officer 
and the members of his family go back to the same station 
from which he was called, for the return journey also.” 
 
  The regulations gives an impression that an officer who 
was availing leave with his family at a distant place from 
the place of duty, in case of recall   to duty, returned to the 
same place where he was availing leave with his family be 
eligible to be paid the actual expenses incurred by him and 
the members of his family which should not be permitted.  
Whether the Ministry have any objection in amending the 
regulation suitably? 
 
Comments of the Bank 
 

  As the officer is being recalled for duty by the 
competent Authority from a vacation he was enjoying with 
his family, it would be fair to pay the actual expenses 
incurred by him and the members of his family for coming 
back to headquarters and if there is any residual unutilized 
leave portion, for going back to the same station from 
where the officer was recalled. 
 
5.10 Point referred Regulation 41 
  
In sub-regulations (i)  and (ii) it has been provided that 
officers of Junior and Middle Management Grade may travel 
by Ist  Class or AC Sleeper by train.  Since the AC Sleeper has 
been bifurcated into  2 tier and 3 tier categories in most of the 
trains, this sub -regulation may be amended to specify the  
category of AC Sleeper according to the entitlement of the 
Junior and Middle Management Grade Officers respectively. 
 
 Whether the Ministry have any objection in doing so? 
 
 
Comments of the Bank 
 
  The regulation provides that Officers in Junior and 
Middle Management Grades may travel by First Class or 
A/C sleeper by train.  As three tier A/C sleeper class is a 
recent introduction and majority of the trains running 
across the country do  not have three tier A/C Sleeper class 
facility, eligibility of A/C Sleeper two tier is being extended 
to all officers in Junior management and Middle 
Management Grades. 
 
5.11 Point referred Regulation 75 
 

This Regulation provides that the Managing Director  
may, from time to time, issue such instructions or directions as 
may, in his opinion, be necessary for giving effect to or 
carrying out the provision of these Regulations. 
 
The Power to implement the Regulations, it is felt, 
should not vest in the Managing Director alone because that 
could lead to arbit rariness.  Instead, the powers including 
appellate power, wherever necessary, should lie with the  
Board. 
 
 Whether the Ministry have any objection in amending the 
Regulation accordingly? 
 
Comments of the Bank 
 
  The power given to the Managing Director is  only to 
issue instructions to implement the regulations as the 
executive head of the Bank and this is in line with section 
29 of State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959. It 
may not perhaps be practical to have the powers shifted to 
the Chairman (who is also the Chairman of state Bank of 
India and all other Associates and Subsidiaries) or the 
Board in which case every issue whether important or 
unimportant will have to be referred to the Board leading 
to administrative delays adversely affecting th e 
effectiveness of the Executive Head. Further, regulation 77 
vests the powers for application or interpretation of any of 
the provisions of the regulations with the Board or the 
Executive Committee. We are therefore, of the view that 
the present arrangement may be permitted to continue. 

Annexure IV 
[vide para 6 page 11] 
 
Relevant extracts from the Study note on the visit of the 
Committee 
 to Chennai on 14th  November, 1996 
 
The Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya 
Sabha, assembled at 10.15 a.m. on  Thursday, the  14 th 
November, 1996, at Wallajah Room, Hotel Connemara, 
Chennai. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1.     Shri M.A. Baby   - Chairman 
2.     Shri Satchidananda 
3. Shri Shiv Charan Singh 
4. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
5. Smt. Ila Panda 
6. Shri S. Mutu Mani 
7. Shri Tara Charan Majumdar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.    Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
2.    Shri N.S. Walia, Committee Officer 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE STATE BANK OF 
TRAVANCORE 
 
1.    Shri V. Srinivasan, Managing Director 
2.    Shri V.R. Potdar, General Manager (Operations) 
3.    Shri K.S. Mohanan, AGM (Personnel & HRD) 
4.    Shri K. Sudhakaran Pillai, AGM (Law) 

5.    Shri S. Narayanan Nair, Chief Manager (Personnel & 
Admn.) 
 
REPRESENTATIVE  OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 
Dr. P.S.  Sidhu, Deputy Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF INDIAN BANKS’ 
ASSOCIATION 
 
Shri K. Krishnamurthy, Sr. Personnel Advisor 
 
2. At the outset, the Managing Director of the State Bank 
of Travancore welcomed the Chairman and Members of the 
Committee and the officials of the Secretariat.  He then made  
a brief presentation on the Bank.  The Committee then took 
up for discussion Memorandum No. 18/96 regarding the State 
Bank of Tranvancore  (Officers’) Service Regulations, 1979 in 
the light of  replies furnished by the Bank to the Questionnaire. 
 
3. As regards the provisions contained in Chapter III of 
the Regulations, the Committee reiterated the 
recommendations made by the previous Committee in 1993 
that they appeared to have become redundant with the efflux 
of time and hence should be deleted for which the 
Bank/Ministry agreed and informed that an exercise was 
already underway in that regard. 
 
3.1 As regards Regulation 15 relating to Probation, the 
Committee after some discussion directed that a common 
formulation should be attempted for all th e Nationalized 
Banks, that State bank of India and its Associate Banks, in that 
regard.  The Committee also reiterated its earlier 
recommendation that the words ` for reasons to be recorded in 
writing’ should be added after the word `probation’  at the end 

of the proviso to sub -regulation (3) of Regulation 15, under 
intimation to the Committee. 
 
3.2 As regards Regulation 19, relating to the age of 
retirement, the Committee sought to know the reasons for 
variation in the Regulations of State Bank of Travancore with 
the corresponding regulations in other Nationalized Banks.  
The Committee felt that the corresponding provisions should 
not be different in case of Associate Banks of State Bank of 
India and the Nationalized Banks and that a holistic view may 
be taken with regard to the issue of compulsory retirement.  
The Committee then felt that there should be a common 
regulation in that regard for the Nationalized Banks and also 
the State Bank of India and its Associates Banks. 
 
3.3 The Committee observed that r etirement was an 
important aspect and that the Government guidelines framed 
in that regard should form part of the Regulations as this went 
against the established principles of subordinate legislation 
devoid of the  backing of the parent Act and the Parli ament 
not being  aware of the them. 
 
3.4 The Ministry of Finance explained the reasons for 
providing/not providing retirement age in the regulation of 
Nationalized Banks and Associate banks.  The Ministry 
further explained the variance of provisions between Associate 
Banks and Nationalized Banks. 
 
3.5 The Committee noted the reply of the bank wherein the 
Bank had agreed to amend the definition of “family” to 
remove the anomaly as pointed by it in the Definition Clause. 
 
3.6 The Committee noted the reply of the Bank  that the 
perquisites varied from Bank to Bank.  However, the 

Committee insisted that the term “perquisites” be defined in 
the Regulations. 
 
3.7 As regards Regulation 20(2) relating to the 
incorporation of the circumstances in which an officer cou ld 
be permitted to resign without notice on forfeiture of security  
deposit or payment in lieu of notice or reduce the period of 
notice, the Committee directed that the same may be listed in 
the Regulation itself. 
 
3.8 The representative of the IBA replied that listing of the 
circumstances was not possible as it would become rigid and 
as and when a new financial institution would come into 
picture, the rigidity would obstruct the normal functioning.  
The  Committee, however, insisted that some norms/guidelines 
should be there in the regulation. 
 
3.9 As regards  Regulation 29, the Committee felt  that the 
guidelines relating to entertainment expenses issued by the 
Government were unrealistic and  the same should be 
reviewed so as to make the provision effective and realistic. 
 
3.10 As regards Regulation 38, the Committee felt that there 
was some ambiguity in its wording and directed that the 
regulation be examined and redrafted.  The representative of 
the Ministry of Finance replied that the regulation as presently 
worded served the purpose but needed redrafting.  The  
Committee directed that it should be amended suitably, under 
intimation to it. 
 
4. The discussion  ended at 12.25 p.m. with a mutual vote 
of thanks. 

Annexure V 
[Vide para 6, page 11] 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEENON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
RELATING TO STATE BANK OF TRAVANCORE 
(OFFICERS) SERVICE REGULATIONS, 1979 
 
 
Committee observation/recommendation 
 
Para 3. As regards the provisions contained in Chapter 
III of the Regulations, the Committee reiterated the 
recommendations made by the previous Committee in 
1993 that they appeared to have become redundant 
with the efflux of time and hence should be deleted for 
which the Bank/Ministry agreed and informed that an 
exercise  was already underway in that regard. 
 
Action Taken Report 
 
The matter had been taken up with State Bank of India 
who have stated that while the rules contained in 
Chapter 3 were applicable to the officer s existing in 
service as on 1 st  October, 1979, this chapter also 
contains certain general guidelines which may remain 
relevant and applicable till officers finally retire from 
the bank’s service.  As certain cases relating to fitment  
are still coming up from time to time, these need to be 
decided on the basis of rules contained in this Chapter.  
Accordingly, SBI are of the view that this chapter need 
not be deleted for the time being. 
 

The Government agrees with the views given  by State 
Bank of India and it is requested that existing provision may 
continue. 
Committee observation/recommendation 
 
Para 3.1 As regards Regulation 15 relating to Probation, the 
Committee after some discussion directed that a 
common formulation should be  attempted for all 
the Nationalized Banks, State Bank of India and its 
Associate banks, in that regard.  The Committee 
also reiterated its earlier recommendation that the  
words ` for reasons to be recorded in writing’ 
should be added after the word `proba tion’ at the 
end of the proviso to sub -regulation (3) of 
Regulation 15, under intimation to the Committee. 
 
Action Taken Report 
 
 Regulation 15 of Subsidiary Banks Officers’ 
Regulations is similar to that of the Nationalized Banks 
Officers Service Regulati ons.  While there is some difference 
in the process for framing of these Regulations, there is no 
material change in the text. 
 
 The above recommendation was reviewed by the 
Committee  on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha in their 
meeting held with the officials of  State Bank of Mysore at 
Mumbai on 16.2.2000 and following observation were made in 
their 128 th Report which was presented to Rajya Sabha on 
14.3.2000. 
 
 “The Committee, however, reviewed its earlier 
suggestion on Regulation 3(h), 15(3), 16(1)  and 36 and noted 
the comments of the bank.” 
 

 In view of the above, the recommendations may please 
be treated as dropped. 
 
Committee observation/recommendation 
 
Para 3.2  As regards Regulation 19, relating  to the  age of 
retirement, the Committee sought to know the 
reasons for variation in the Regulations of State 
Bank  of Travancore with the corresponding 
regulations in other Nationalized Banks.  The 
Committee felt that the `corresponding provisions 
should not be different in case of Associate Banks 
of State Bank of India and the Nationalized Banks 
and that a holistic view may be taken  
 
with regard to the issue of compulsory retirement.  
The Committee then felt that there should be a 
common regulation in that regard for the 
Nationalized Banks and also th e State Bank of 
India and its Associates Banks.  
 
Para 3.3 The Committee  observed that retirement  was an 
important aspect and that the Government 
guidelines framed in that regard should form part 
of the Regulations as this went against the 
established principles of Subordinate Legislation 
devoid of the backing of the parent Act and the 
Parliament not being aware of them. 
 
Action Taken Report 
 
 The provisions of Regulation 19(1) & 19(2) of the State 
bank of Travancore (Officers’) Service Regulations are in line 
with the provisions contained in Rule 19(1) and 19(3) of State 
bank of India Officers’ Service Rules.  The power to amend 

the Regulations of the Subsidiary banks vests with the Central 
Board of Directors of Stat e bank of India who shall do so in 
consultation with the Board of the Subsidiary bank and with 
the previous approval of the Reserve Bank of India.  As 
pointed out by the Committee these regulations are at variance 
with the regulations in the Nationalized Banks due to historical 
reasons. 
 
In so far as age of retirement is concerned, Ministry of 
Finance (Banking Division) have already issued guidelines on 
22.5.1998 to all the public sector banks and financial 
instructions that the retirement age of all Office rs and award 
staff shall be 60 years.  These guidelines have already been 
implemented by all the nationalized   banks,   SBI and its 
subsidiaries and steps are on to amend the Rules/Regulations 
in public sector banks to give effect to these guidelines. 
 
As regards compulsory retirement, the present 
provisions of the Officers Service Regulations of nationalized 
banks, which includes the words `if it is of the opinion that it 
is in public interest’  was incorporation in the year 1995-96 and 
is compatible with  the Fundamental Rules applicable to 
Central Government employees.  Similar amendments are 
proposed to be made to the State Bank of India Officers 
Service Rules and the Subsidiary banks Officers Service 
Regulations dealing with compulsory retirement. 
 
The age of retirement in all the Public Sector Banks has 
been raised from 58 years to 60 years.  The question of 
bringing in a common regulation, keeping in view the 
recommendations made by the Hon’ble Committee with 
regard to State Bank of Travancore and othe r associates of 
SBI as well as  State Bank of India, is under examination and 
banks will  be advised to carry out the necessary amendment 
shortly. 

 
Committee observation/recommendation 
 
Para 3.4 The Ministry of Finance explained the reasons for 
providing/not providing retirement age in the 
regulation of Nationalized banks and Associate 
banks.  The Ministry further explained the variance 
of provisions between Associate Banks and 
Nationalized Banks. 
 
Action Taken Report 
 
 No recommendations  has been made.  H ence no 
reply is needed. 
 
Committee observation/recommendation 
 
Para 3.5 The Committee noted the reply of the Bank wherein 
the Bank had agreed to amend the definition of 
“family” to remove the anomaly as pointed by it  in 
the Definition clause. 
 
Action Taken Report 
 
The above recommendation was reviewed by the 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha in their 
meeting  held with the officials of State bank of India and State 
Bank of Mysore at Mumbai on 16.2.2000 and following 
observations were made in their 128 th Report which was 
presented to Rajya Sabha on 14.3.2000. 
 
“The Committee, however, reviewed its earlier 
suggestion on Regulations 3(h), 15(3), 16(1) and 36 and notes 
the comments of the bank.” 
 

In view of the above, the recommendati on may please 
be treated as dropped. 
 
Committee observation/recommendation 
 
Para 3.6 The Committee noted the reply of the Bank that the 
perquisites varied  from Bank to bank.  However, the 
Committee insisted that the term “perquisites”  be 
defined in the Regulations. 
 
Action Taken Report 
 
This recommendation has been examined in 
consultation with RBI, SBI and IBA and it has been decided to 
incorporate anew sub-clause defining the term `perquisites’ in 
Regulation 3(1) of SBI Officer’s Service Rules and Offic ers 
Service Regulations of Subsidiary banks of State bank of 
India. 
 
Committee observation/recommendation 
 
Para 3.7 As regards Regulation 20(2) relating to the 
incorporation  of  the circumstances in which an 
Officer could be permitted to resign without no tice 
on forfeiture of security deposit or payment in lieu of 
notice or reduce the  period of notice, the Committee 
directed that the same may be listed in the Regulation 
itself. 
 
Para 3.8 The representative of the IBA replied that listing of 
the circumstan ces was not possible as it would 
become rigid and as and when a new financial 
institution would come into picture, the rigidity 
would obstruct the normal functioning.  The 

Committee, however, insisted that some 
norms/guidelines should be there in the regulation. 
 
Action Taken Report 
 
In terms of Regulation 20 (2), the power vested with the 
Competent Authority to permit an officer to resign without 
notice of forfeiture of security deposit or payment in lieu of 
notice or to reduce the period of notice is a discretionary one.  
The Competent Authority is expected to use this discretion 
only under special circumstances and on merits.  Listing the 
circumstances under which such a recourse can be had would 
only make the provisions mandatory under the specified 
circumstances which is not the intention of the existing 
provisions.  Also this may lead to rigidity and obstruct normal 
functioning. 
Committee observation/recommendation 
 
Para 3.9 As regards Regulation 29, the committee felt that the 
guidelines relating to entertainment expenses issued 
by the Government were unrealistic and the same 
should be reviewed so as to make the provision 
effective and realistic. 
 
Action Taken Report 
 
 The matter was examined and as per Government 
guidelines issued on 19.11.1997, the boards of the Public Sector 
banks who meet the following requirements have been allowed 
to have their own policy with regard to eligibility; and 
entitlement for reimbursement of entertainment expenses and 
fee for club membership as well as corporate membership of a 
corporate club/professional  institution and fix the rate, ceiling 
and modalities for reimbursement of such expenses keeping in 

view the functional requirements of the officers covered under 
the scheme. 
 
1. Net profits for the last three years; 
2. Capital adequacy ratio of more than 8% 
3. Net NPA level below 9% of the total bank 
advances; 
4. Minimum owned funds of  Rs. 100 crores 
 
In view of the above, no amendments are proposed to 
be made in the existing Regulation. 
 
Committee observation/recommendation 
 
Para 3.10 As regards Regulation 38, the Committee felt 
that there was some ambiguity and wording and 
directed that the regulation be examined and 
redrafted.   The representative of the Ministry of 
Finance replied that the regulation as present by 
worded served the purpose but needed redrafting.  
The Committee directed that should be amended 
suitably, under intimation to it. 
  
Action Taken Report 
 
 As regards Regulation 38 is concerned, State Bank of 
India have intimated that the amendments to this regulation 
have already been approved by them, RBI and the Boards of 
Subsidiary Bank.  Further action is in hand to carry out the 
amendments. 
 
IV 
 
The Canara Bank/Punjab National Bank (Officers’) 
Regulations, 1979-Implementation of  the 

recommendations of the Committee as contained in 
it’s 104th Report 
  
 
 The Committee in its 104 th Report, which was 
presented to the House on March 15, 1995, had examined the 
Canara Bank/Punjab National Bank (Officers’) Regulations, 
1979.   Relevant Extracts from the above Report were 
forwarded to the Ministry of Finance on March 20, 1995 for 
implementation of  the Committee’s recommendations. 
2. The Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) vide their 
O.M. dated April 27, 1995 informed that the Reserve Bank of 
India and the Indian Banks Association had been asked to re-
examine the recommendations made by the Committee and 
Government’s comm ents on the observations of the 
Committee would be submitted after receipt  of their 
comments. Thereafter, no response was forthcoming from the 
Ministry even after repeated reminders.  The Committee at its 
meeting held on September 14, 1999 took a serious view on the 
inordinate delay on the part of the Ministry of Finance in 
responding to the communications issued on its behalf and 
decided to call the Secretary, (Banking Division) for oral 
evidence. 
3. In the meantime, Ministry furnished Action taken Note 
vide their O.M. dated May 26, 2000. The Committee at it’s 

meeting held on October 12, 2001 considered the subject 
matter. The Committee accepted the position as stated by the 
Ministry on Regulations 2(2), 5, 15, 33(5), and 54 and decided 
that these may remain in their present form. The Committee, 
however, noted with satisfaction the action taken by the 
Ministry on the following recommendations of the Committee: 
I. Committee’s Recommendations  
  The Committee is not convinced with the reply of the 
Ministry that statutory regulation relating to delegation of 
powers, as required under clauses (c),(i) and (j) of Section 
19(2) of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings Act, 1970/80, have not been framed as a 
workable solution and could not be fou nd to reconcile the 
permanent need of operational flexibility.  The Committee 
feels that in the present scenario it has become all the more 
important to have proper delegation of powers in the form 
of Subordinate Legislation. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, re commends that statutory 
regulations relating to Delegation of Powers should be 
framed expeditiously as required under clauses (c), (i) and 
(j) of Section 19(2) of the Banking Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980.  The 
regulations so framed may very from bank to bank keeping 

in view its organizational structure, man -power, business 
deeds, etc. 
 Action Taken  
 RBI have advised all the nationalized banks to frame 
regulations on the matters set out in clauses (c), (i) and (j) 
of S ection 19(2) of Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980. 
II. Committee’s Recommendations Regulation 49(2) 
The Committee feels that during the joining time of an 
officer, in transit, allowances should be allowed according to 
the place of his actual stay and recommends that Regulation 
49(2) should be amended, accordingly. 
Action Taken  
The necessary amendments have already been carried out 
and the amended Regulation 49(2) reads as under: 
“During the joining time an officer shall be eligible to draw 
the emoluments as applicable to the place of transfer.” 
 
4. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of 
Finance/ National Banks have already taken a ction for 
framing regulations on the matters set out in clauses (c), (i) 
and (j) of Section 19(2) of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980 
and necessary amendments have  been carried out in 

Regulation 49(2) so as t o provide that an officer shall be 
eligible to draw emoluments during his joining time as 
applicable to the place of transfer. The Committee hopes 
that all the Nationalized Banks shall frame and notify the 
regulations at the earliest under intimation to it. 
 
V 
The Bank Officer Employees’ (Discipline and Appeal) 
Regulations,1976-Implementation of the 
recommendations of the Committee as contained in its 
106th Report. 
 
 
The Committee in its 106 th Report, which was 
presented to the House on 29 th March, 1995, had inter-alia 
dealt with implementation of recommendations of the 
Committee as contained in its 91st Report on the Bank Officer 
Employees’ (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976.  
 
2. Relevant extracts from the 106 th Report were 
forwarded to the Ministry of Fin ance (Banking Division) on 
March 31, 1995 for necessary action. 
 
3. The Ministry furnished interim replies informing that the 
Reserve Bank of India /Indian Banks Association, DOPT and 
the Ministry of Law & Justice had been requested to examine 
the Committee’s recommendations and the Ministry’s 
observations on the Committees’ recommendations as 
contained in the  106th Report would be sent to the Secretariat 
after receipt of the comments from them.   The Ministry had 
sought extension of time four times upto 31 st December, 1995, 
30th June, 1996, 30th September, 1996 and 31st December, 1996, 

respectively.  Thereafter, reminders were issued on 
Committees’ behalf to which the Ministry failed to respond.  A 
D.O. letter dated 19 th June, 1998 from the Chairman of the 
Committee was also sent to the then Minister of Finance 
drawing his attention to the inordinate delay on the part of the 
Ministry in responding to the  communications issued on 
behalf of the Committee.  However, no reply was forthcoming. 
 
4. The Committee at its meeting held on September 14, 1999 
took a serious view on the  laxity on the part of the Ministry in 
the matter and decided to call the Secretary, Ministry of 
Finance before the Committee. 
 
In the meantime , the Ministry of Finance furnished the 
Action Taken Note on the recommendation of the Committee 
vide their communication dated 26th May, 2000. The 
Committee at its meeting held on 12th October, 2001 
considered the subject matter.  The Committee  accepted the 
position as stated by the Ministry of Finance on the 
recommendations  relating to Regulation 4 regarding deletion 
of the words ‘or for any other good or sufficient reasons’ and 
giving comprehensive definition of the word ‘misconduct’; 
regulation 54(4)  regarding the  acts ‘unbecoming of an 
officer’; and regulation 67 regarding classification of acts of 
misconduct  attracting minor penalties and acts of 
misconduct  attracting major penalties and decided not to 
pursue the same. The Committee, however, noted with 
satisfaction that the Ministry have accepted/taken action on 
the various recommendations of  the Committee as indicated 
below: 
 
I. Committee’s recommendation (Para 2.23) 
 
During the course of discussion with various Officer’s  
Association of the Banks, the Committee was informed that the 

‘Sealed Cover Procedure’ for promotion should be dropped 
altogether, thus ensuring promotion for all eligible and 
deserving officers.  The Committee observed that Sealed cover 
Procedure is being followed in  all the public sector banks in 
terms of which promotion result of an Officer against whom 
disciplinary action has been initiated is placed in a sealed 
cover.  The sealed cover is opened only after the disciplinary 
proceedings concluded.  The Committee was informed that an 
order on ‘Sealed Cover Procedure’ was issued by the 
Government in September, 1992 and the same was circulated 
to all the Banks also. The Committee notes that the said 
circular takes care of the subject and recommends that the 
procedure th us evolved should be followed by the 
managements of all the Banks.  
 
Action Taken  
 
  The observations of the Committee have been noted.  The 
Banks are already following the procedure.  
 
II. Committee’s recommendations (Para 2.24) 
 
There should be strict restriction on issuing of order of 
suspension. The  Committee  also observed that officer 
employees who are detained by the police for a period 
exceeding 48 hours are suspended by the management 
automatically but there is no provision for subsequent 
reinstatement on their release.  Instances were brought before 
the Committee that employees who are cleared of the charges 
or acquitted of the charges are not reinstated after the 
trail/inquiry was over.  It was also brought to the notice of the 
Committee that even after detention for 48 hours though there 
was no filing of charge sheet or  
Court Proceedings, reinstatement had not taken place.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that in such like cases the 

Provision of reinstatement in the rules should be incorporated 
expeditiously so that the officer employees who are cleared 
from the charges are reinstated without any delay. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The Committee’s recommendation is in the specific context 
of cases where reinstatement had not taken place even though 
no charge sheet or court proceedings were filed even after 
detention for 48 hours and it is not so much for incorporating 
a provision for automatic reinstatement.  The Regulations 
already contain provision for modification or revocation of the 
suspension order.  On revocation, the officer employee would 
be reinstated in the bank’s service.  However, revocation of the 
suspension order has to be considered on the facts and 
circumstances of the case.  
 
 Government have already in June, 1981 issued detailed 
guidelines regarding periodic review of cases of officials who 
have been placed under suspension.  A copy of these guidelines 
is enclosed at Annexure.  In para (d) of these guidelines it has 
inter alia been stated- 
 
‘as soon as an official is released from po lice custody 
the competent authority should consider the case to 
decide whether the continuance of the official under 
suspension is absolutely necessary or not.’ 
 
 Keeping in view the specific recommendation of the 
Committee, Government proposes to examine the issue further 
and issue specific guidelines in this regard in consultation with 
Ministry of law and Justice.  
 
III. Committee’s recommendations (Para 2.26) 
 

The Committee also observed that 45 days time limit 
has been fixed for filing an appeal against an order of 
Disciplinary Authority but in some of the banks there is no 
time limit for disposal of such appeals by the Appellate 
Authority.  The Committee, during the course of discussions 
with the managements was informed that some of the 
managements have provision for disposal of appeals within 90 
days.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
managements of all the Banks should uniformly follow the 
practice of disposing the appeals within 90 days.   
 
Action Taken 
 
 Government is in agreement in princi ple that there 
should be uniformity in this regard in all banks.  The matter 
would be processed further in consultation with RBI and IBA.  
 
6. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the 
managements of all the Banks are already following the 
‘Sealed Cover Procedure’ as recommended by the Committee 
(para 2.23). The Committee hopes that the Ministry would 
issue specific guidelines in the matter of reinstatement of the 
officer who had been placed under suspension for being in 
police custody beyond 48 hours but later on cleared of the 
charges after trial/inquiry and intimate about the same to it. 
The Committee reiterates that the managements of all the 
Banks should follow uniformly the practice of disposing the 
appeals within 90 days and hopes that the Ministry/ RBI/ IBA 
shall comply with its recommendation in this regard. The 
Committee, however, takes a serious exception over the 
unduly long time being taken by the Ministry in responding to 
its communications/recommendations and directs them to act 
promptly in such matters in future.  
 
 

Annexure 
(vide para 5 part II, page 46) 
 
 Letter No.1/33/81-Vigilance dated 29.6.81 issued by the 
Ministry of Finance Department of Economic Affairs 
(Banking Division) to the Chairman & Managing Director of 
the nationalized banks.  
 
Subject:  Suspension of officials of public sector 
banks - periodic review of their cases 
(Guidelines) 
   
Sir, 
 
 I am directed to say that several cases have come to the 
notice of the Government where the bank officials facing 
departmental/criminal proceedings have been kept under 
suspension for excessively long periods.  Though suspension is 
not a punishment, it certainly constitutes a great hardship  for 
the  concerned official. In fairness to him it is necessary   that 
the pe riod of suspension should conform to the barest 
minimum.  In this context the following instructions are 
reiterated for guidance and strict compliance:- 
 
(a) An official may generally be placed under suspension 
only in the following circumstances:- 
 
(i) where the continuance in office of the official 
will lead to prejudice investigation, trial or any 
inquiry (e.g. apprehended tampering with 
witnesses or documents); 
 
(ii) where the continuance in  office of the official is 
likely to seriously subvert discipline in the office 
in which he is working; 

 
(iii) where the continuance in office of the official 
will be against, wider  public interest, e.g. if 
there is a public scandal and it is considered 
necessary to place the official under suspension 
to demonstrate the policy of the bank to deal 
strictly with officers involved in such scandals,  
particularly  corruption. 
 
(iv) where preliminary, enquiry into allegations 
made has revealed a prima facie case justifying 
criminal or departmental proceedings which are 
likely to lead to his conv iction and or dismissal 
removal or compulsory retirement from  
service;  and  
 
(v) where the official is suspected to have engaged 
himself in activities prejudicial  to the interest of 
the security of the state. 
 
(b) Even in the above circumstance, an official may  be 
placed under suspension only in respect of misdemeanor of the 
following type: 
 
(i) an offence of conduct involving moral turpitude. 
 
(ii) corruption, embezzlement or misappropriation 
bank money, possession of disproportionate 
assets, misuse of official power of personal 
gains; 
 
(iii) services abandonment of official duty causing 
great loss to the Bank. 
 
(iv) Flight from duty; and  

 
(v) “refusals or caliberate failure to carry out 
written orders of supervisory officers. 
 
(c) While placing an official under suspension the 
competent authority should consider whether the 
purpose cannot be served by transferring the official 
from his post  to a post where be may not repeat the 
misconduct or influence the investigations, i f any, in 
progress.  If the authority finds that the purpose cannot 
be served by transferring the official from his post to 
another post then he should record reasons therefore, 
before placing the official under suspension. 
 
(d) In case where an official is deemed to have been placed 
under suspension under Discipline and Appeal 
Regulations etc, as soon as the official is released from 
the police custody the competent authority should 
consider the case to decide whether the continuance of 
the official under suspension is absolutely necessary or 
not.  If the period of suspension has already exceeded 
the limit of three months and the competent authority 
does not find justification to revoke the suspension in 
such  case he should immediately make a report to the 
next higher authority giving detailed justification for 
continuing the official under suspension. 
 
(e) In order keep the period of suspension to the barest 
minimum the competent authority should take all 
possible steps to file a charge sheet in a court of law, 
where an official has been placed under suspension on 
account of a court case or serve the chargesheet if the 
action is to be taken under the Discipline and Appeal 
Regulations within three months from the date of 
suspension and in case it is not possible to do so to 

report the matter to higher authorities explaining  the 
reasons for delay. 
 
(f) In respect of cases other than those pending in courts, 
the total period of suspension should not ordinarily 
exceed six months except in exceptional cases where it 
is not possible to adhere to this time limit then the 
competent authority should make a report to the next 
higher authority exploring the reasons for delay. 
 
(g) All authorities receiving information/report about the 
continued suspension of officials from their 
subordinate authorities should carefully examine each 
case and see whether the continued suspension of an 
official is absolutely necessary or the suspension should 
be revoked by transferring the official to another post 
of office. 
 
In order to ensure that the above instructions are 
scrupulously observed by subordinate authorities; all cases of 
suspension may please be reviewed regularly, at intervals of 
six months, particularly those where officials are under 
suspension  for more than six months, and wherever it is 
found that the official can be allowed to resume duties by 
transferring him from his post to another post and where 
necessary in consultation with CBI/CID/Police or other 
appreciate agencies, order  should be issued for revoking the 
suspension and allowing the official to resume duties with 
further direction as may be considered desirable in each 
individual case.  The review should not, however, be done in 
a repressed way and it should be borne in mind that 
revocation of suspension does not prejudice the criminal or 
Departmental Proceedings.  
 
The receipt of this letter may kindly be acknowledged. 

 
VI 
 
The Small Industries  Development Bank of India 
Act,1989- Framing of Regulations under the 
 
The Small Industries Development Bank of India Act, 
1989, was examined from the point of view of framing of 
Subordinate Legislation contemplated thereunder and certain 
points were referred to the Ministry of Finance, Department 
of Economic Affairs (Banking  Division) on the 6 th January, 
1994, for their comments.  The Ministry vide their O. M. dated 
the 13 th January, 1994 furnished their comments. The 
Committee discussed the matter with the representatives of the 
SIDBI and the Ministry of Finance on the 19 th January, 1994 
in Chennai.  The points referred, the comments furnished by 
the Ministry and the Committee’s observations thereon are as 
under: 
 
I. Point referredSection 1 (3) 
 
“It shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification appoint and different 
dates may be appointed for different provisions of this 
Act.” 
 
 Whether the SIDBI Act, 1989, has come into force?  If, 
so, the details thereof? 
 
Comments 
 
SIDBI Act, 1989  has come into force with effect from 
March 7, 1990 vide notification dated 7th March, 1990. 
 
Committee’s Observation 

  
The Committee noted  the reply. 
 
II. Point referred Section 34 
 
“The Board may, be general or special order, delegate 
to any Director or Committee constituted under 
Section 12 or to any officer or other employee of the 
Small Industries Bank, subject to such conditions and 
limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, 
such of its powers and duties under this Act as it ma y 
deem necessary.” 
 
Whether delegation of powers has since been made? 
 
Comments 
 
i) SIDBI in its first Board meeting on 2 nd April, 1990 
decided that pending preparation of detailed  
delegation of powers, its officers may continue to 
exercise the same powers a s was in vogue in IDBI 
with such modifications as may be considered 
necessary by the Managing Director. 
 
ii) At its meeting held on September 14, 1990 the 
Board delegated certain powers in favour of MD 
and various other officers of SIDBI in connection 
with sch emes of assistance under refinance and 
bills rediscounting etc. 
 
iii) At the Board meeting dated October 19, 1992 
certain powers for sanction of limits were delegated 
to in-charge of Regional/Branch Offices in respect 
of Direct Discounting of Bills (Equipment) Scheme.  

Powers were also delegated to MD and various 
officers in respect of all types of direct assistance. 
 
iv) Further delegation of powers has been approved 
by the Board at its meeting held on August 10, 
1993 in connection with Administration, Central 
Accounts and Promotion and Development 
Department, etc.  At the same meeting the Board 
also modified some of the delegated powers 
approved under the earlier Board Memorandum 
dated September, 14, 1990.  The Board has 
delegated financial and administrative powers to 
MD  
and officials of the Bank at the Head Office and 
Regional/Branch Offices. 
 
Committee’s Observation 
 
The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry of 
Finance regarding delegation of powers under section 34. 
 
III. Point referred 
 
Whether Government have since framed Regulations 
under Section  52 to carry out the purposes of the Act; 
if so, what are the details thereof? 
 
Comments 
 
The Board of Directors of SIDBI have approved the 
following Regulations under Section 52 of the SIDBI Act: 
 
(i) 
 
 
SIDBI General Regulations 
1990 and 
 
were approved by the 
SIDBI  Board in its 
meeting held on 2 nd 

(ii) SIDBI (Issue and 
Management of Bonds) 
Regulations, 1990 
July, 1990.  These 
Regulations have been 
published in the 
Gazette on 25 th 
October, 1990. 
 
(iii) SIDBI (Employees 
Provident Fund) 
Regulations, 1990 
were approved in 
SIDBI Board meeting 
held on 14th September 
1990.  These have been 
published in the 
Gazette of India on 
20th November, 1990. 
 
 
Committee’s Observation 
 
As regards framing of Regulations under section 52, the 
Committee was not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry as 
it was quite vague.  The Committee felt the need that the 
Ministry should send a detailed note on this point.  Th e 
Committee desired  the Ministry to cover all the aspects by 
framing the Regulations. 
 
 
IV. Point referred 
 
Whether the Regulations as required under Section 52 
(3) have been laid on the Table of both Houses of Parliament, 
if so; the details thereof? 
 
Comments 
 
 SIDBI General Regulations, 1990, SIDBI (Issue and 
Management of Bonds) Regulations, 1990 and SIDBI 

(Employees Provident Fund) Regulations, 1990 have been laid 
on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament on 5 th August, 
1991. 
 
Committee’s Observation 
 
 The Committee noted that various Regulations framed 
under Small Industries Development Bank of India Act, 1999 
have been laid on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament 
on the 5th August, 1991. 
 
V. Point referred Section 54 
 
“If any difficulty arises in g iving effect to the 
provisions of this Act, the Central Government 
may, in consultation with the Development 
Bank, by order, do anything, not inconsistent 
with such provisions, for the purpose of 
removing the difficulty; 
 
Provided that no such order shall be made after 
the expiration of three years from the date on 
which this act receives the  assent of the 
President”. 
 
Whether any Orders have been issued under the 
Section to remove any difficulty in giving effect to the 
provisions of the Act, if so, what are the details thereof? 
 
Comments  
 
 There was no occasion for issue of any order under 
Section 54 for removal of difficulties giving effect to the 
provisions of SIDBI Act. 
 

Committee’s Observation 
 
The Committee noted the reply furnished by the 
Ministry regarding removal of difficulties under Section 54. 
  
2. After several reminders the Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Economic Affairs (Banking Division) vide their 
O.M. dated  January 3, 1996 forwarded a detailed note on the 
compliance of provisions of Section 52 of the SIDBI Act.  The 
subject was again discussed with the representatives of SIDBI 
and Ministry of Finance at Mumbai on January 20, 1996.  The 
Committee expressed its unhappiness over the inordinate 
delay on the  part of the SIDBI in furnishing the requisite 
information sought by the Committee regarding framing of 
the regulations under the SIDBI Act, 1989.  The Committee 
further noted the replies furnished by SIDBI regarding   
framing of the SIDBI General Regulations, 1990, SIDBI (Issue 
& Management of Bonds) Regulations, 1990, SIDBI 
Employees Provident Fund Regulations, 1990 and their having 
been notified and laid on the Table of both the Houses of 
Parliament.  The Committee expressed hope that SIDBI 
Pension Regulations, 1993 would also be notified and be laid 
on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament at the earliest 
opportunity. 
 
After several reminders   the Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Economic Affairs, (Banking Division) vide 
their O.M.  dated 31.5.2001 forwarded a copy of notification 
dated 16.02.2001 containing the  Small Industries 
Development Bank of India (SIDBI) Employees’ Gratuity 
and Superannuating Fund Regulations, 2000.      The   
Committee  notes  with concern that the Ministry have taken 
more than four and a half year in framing and notifying the 
Regulations.  The Committee again expresses its unhappiness 
over the undue delay on the part of the Ministry in framing 

the Regulations.   However, the Committee is satisfied to note 
that the Ministry have ultimately framed and notified the 
pension regulations as per its suggestions.    

 
VII 
Banking Service Commission Act, 1984-Delay in framing of 
Rules/Regulations 
 
 
 The Banking Service Commission  Act was enacted in 
the year 1984.  But till date, the Act has not been enforced by 
the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation, Rajya Sabha which dealt with the subject and in 
its 101 st Report presented to the House on 26 th April, 1 994 
inter-alia examined the aspect of delay in framing of 
rules/regulation under the said Act.  The Committee’s 
observations/recommendations as contained in its 101st Report 
are reproduced below: 
 
“2.10 The Committee notes with deep concern the fact 
that the Banking Service Commission Act, 1984 
has not been enforced even after more than 9 
years. 
 
2.11 The Committee takes serious view of the fact 
that the Ministry have given a routine and even 
contradictory information.   On the one hand, 
they intimated that “act ion has already been 
initiated for setting up of the Banking Service 
Commission and for framing rules under 
Section 31 of the Act” which was further 
supplemented that “the question of appointment 
of Chairman and members of the Commission 
after which the Act would be brought into force 
is under consideration at the highest level in the 
Government”. On the other hand the Ministry, 
subsequently intimated that “the question 
whether the Act should be got repealed or 

continue to be held in abeyance is engaging th e 
attention of the Government”.  The Committee 
feels that the Ministry owes an explanation for 
this. 
 
2.12 The Committee is of the considered view that 
though the timing of giving effect to an Act of 
Parliament is the discretion of the 
Administrative Ministry, it is, however, not the 
intention of Parliament that the Government 
should keep an Act passed by both the Houses of 
Parliament and assented to by the President, in 
limbo for such a long time. 
2.13 The Committee is constrained to observe that 
while the Government has shown great alacrity 
in getting the Bill passed by the Parliament, it is 
strange that the Government drags its feet in the 
implementation of the Act. 
 
2.14 The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
after reviewing the matter either the Act be 
enforced or be got repealed within a period of 
six months and the Committee be informed, 
accordingly.  The Committee is not inclined to 
grant any further extension of time in this 
regard. 
 
2. The Ministry of Finance had informed on the 24 th 
April, 1995 that a Committee had been setup under the 
Chairmanship of Shri D.R. Mehta,  then Deputy Governor of 
the Reserve Bank of India, to review the necessity to setup of a 
Banking Service Commission. 
 
3. In 1996 the Mehta Committee had submitted its Report 
recommending that the Banking Service Commission Act, 

1984 may be repealed.  The Ministry sought extension of time 
up to 30 -9-1996 stating that the Report of the Mehta 
Committee was under examination.  The Ministry was granted 
further another extension of time up to 30-9-1997. 
 
4. The Ministry of Finance informed on the 16 th 
September, 1998 that the Committee setup by the Government 
on Banking Sector reforms under the Chairmanship of Sh. M. 
Narsimhain,  in its report submitted to Government, had made 
various recommendations requiring changes in the legal 
framework of Banking industry and the recommendations of 
this Committee were under examination alongwith the 
decisions to repeal the Banking Service Commission Act,  
1984.  With this the Ministry sought another extension of time 
up 31-12-1998. 
 
5. The Ministry of Finance in their communication dated 
the 24th December, 1998 stated that the Minister had given in 
principal, approval for repealing of the Banking Service 
Commission Act, 1984 and the steps were bei ng taken to 
complete the formalities to repeal the same.  The Ministry was 
again granted extension of time upto 31.3. 1999 to complete the 
process.  Thereafter, the Ministry was given further extension 
thrice upto 31.6.1999, 31.12.1999 and 30.6.2000, respectively to 
complete the process of repealing the Act. 
 
6. In their communication dated 17 th July 2000 the 
Ministry stated as under:- 
 
“After the reform process initiated in early 1990s, 
banks are passing through transition phase during 
which drastic changes are taking place in their manner 
of working, operations, recruitment policies, staffing 
norms etc.  Besides, in the context of technological up -
gradation, there would be need to reassess the 

manpower requirement particularly of those 
possessing requisite sk ills.  Under the above 
circumstances, Government would like to wait for some 
more time before taking a decision on repealing the Act 
or framing of rules/Regulations there under and 
reassess the situation after a few years” 
 
7. The Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) in their last 
communication dated March 26, 2001 informed as: 
 
 “The proposal for abolition of the Banking Service 
Recruitment Boards is under examination and 
modalities for implementing the same are in process in 
consultation with Reserve Bank of India/Indian Banks 
Association.  After the action on this issue is complete 
Government will consider the question of repealing or 
retention of the Banking Service Commission Act, 
1984, the process is expected to get completed by July 
2001”. 
  
8. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Finance have 
in the meantime introduced a Bill in Lok Sabha in March, 2002  
with the objective of repealing the Banking Service 
Commission Act 1984.  The Committee, however, feels that lot 
of time has elapsed even after the introduction of the Bill.  The 
Committee, accordingly desires that the Ministry should 
expedite their action in the matter.  
 
VIII 
 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
I 
 

The Bank Officer Employee’s  (Conduct) Regulations, 
1976- Implementation of the recommendations of the 
Committee as contained in its 124th Report. 
 
The Ministry vide their O. M. dated December 3, 2001 
have furnished a copy of the notification No. OCR/ 1/ 2001 
dated June 2, 2001 publishing the U CO Bank Officer 
Employees’ (Conduct) Amendment Regulations, 2001 
carrying out amendments in regulations 3(1), 3(3), 6(1) and 
6(4) as per the Committee’s recommendations.  
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the 
Ministry/ UCO Bank have amended regula tion 3(1) by 
substituting the words “bank employee” with the words 
“officer employee”; regulation 3(3) by providing for 
confirmation in writing of oral direction given by the superior 
official; regulation 6(1) providing for  recording of reasons 
while directing an official to discontinue any honorary work of 
social or charitable nature, etc. in view of exigencies of bank 
work ; and regulation 6(4) by substituting the word “fee” by 
the words “payment in the form of fee, remuneration, 
honorarium and the like in cash or kind”. 
The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Finance shall 
take necessary action to ensure that all the nationalised banks 
shall carry out these amendments in their conduct regulations 
expeditiously with intimation to it. 

 
II 
 
The Bank (Offic er’s) Service Regulations, 1979 - 
Implementation of the recommendations of the 
Committee as contained in its 124th Report. 
 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the 
Ministry of Finance have amended Regulation 50 (3) by 
providing that oral directions from official  superior under the 
Regulations shall be confirmed in writing ; Regulation 50(4) 
by substituting the words “Bank Official” by the word  
“officer”; Regulation 51(1) by providing that reasons be 
recorded while directing a Bank Officer to discont inue any 
work of social or charitable nature; and Regulation 51(4) by 
substituting the word “fee” by the word  “payment in the form 
of fee, remuneration, honorarium  and the like in cash or 
kind”.   
III 
State Bank of Travancore (Officers’) Service 
Regulations, 1979. 
 
The Committee notes Ministry’s comments on para-3 
regarding deletion of provisions of Chapter–III; para-3.1 
regarding powers of the competent authority to decide about 
the period of probation  (Regulation-15); Para-3.5  regarding 

definition of ‘family’ (Regulation 3(h); paras-3.7 and 3.8 
(Regulation 30(2), and para-3.9 (Regulation-29).  The 
Committee is satisfied that the Ministry have agreed to the 
Committee’s suggestion to incorporate Government’s 
guidelines with regard to raising retirement age from 58 to 60 
years in the regulations of the State Bank of  India as well as 
all the Associate Banks.  The Committee further notes with 
satisfaction that the Ministry have agreed to incorporate a 
new sub-clause in Regulation 3(1) defining the term 
“perquisites’ in respect of the State Bank of India Officer’s 
Service Regulations and the Officer’s Service Regulations of 
subsidiary banks of the State Bank of India.  The Committee 
is also happy to note that the Ministry have agreed to amend 
provisions of regulation-38 regarding lapse of leave, after 
death of the employee or when he ceases to be in the service  
of the bank, suitably as there was some ambiguity in its 
wording. 
The Committee however expresses its unhappiness 
over the lon g delay on the part of the Ministry of Finance in 
taking action on Committees recommendations and 
responding to communications on its behalf.  It, however, 
hopes that the Ministry would be more responsive in future 
and would carry out the necessary amendme nts in the State 

Bank of Travancore (Officer’s) Service Regulation, 1979 by 
notifying the same expeditiously under intimation to it. 
 
IV 
 
The Canara Bank/Punjab National Bank (Officers’) 
Regulations, 1979-Implementation of  the recommendations 
of the Committee as contained in it’s 104th Report 
 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the 
Ministry of Finance/ National Banks have already taken 
action on the advice of RBI for framing regulations on the 
matters set out in clauses (c), (i) and (j) of Section 19(2) of 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980 and necessary amendments 
have  been carried out in Regulation 49(2) so as to provide 
that an officer shall be eligible to draw emoluments during 
his joining time as applicable to the place of transfer. The 
Committee hopes that all the Nationalized Banks shall frame 
and notify the regulations at the earliest under intimation to 
it.   
V 
 
The Bank Officer Employees’ (Discipline and Appeal) 
Regulations, 1976 -Implementation of t he 
recommendations of the Committee as contained in its 
106th Report. 
 

The Committee notes with satisfaction that the 
management of all the Banks are already following the ‘Sealed 
Cover Procedure’ as recommended by the Committee (para 
2.23). The Committee hopes that the Ministry would issue 
specific guidelines in the matter of reinstatement of the officer 
who had been placed under suspension for being in police 
custody beyond 48 hours but later on cleared of the charges 
after trial/inquiry and intimate abou t the same to the 
Committee. The Committee reiterates that the managements 
of all the Banks should follow uniformly the practice of 
disposing the appeals within 90 days and hopes that the 
Ministry/ RBI/ IBA shall comply with the Committee’s 
recommendation in this regard. The Committee, however, 
takes a serious exception over the unduly long time being taken 
by the Ministry in responding to its 
communications/recommendations and directs them to act 
promptly in such matters in future.  
VI 
The Small Industries Development Bank of India 
Act,1989-Framing of Regulations Under the 
 
 
The Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic 
Affairs, (Banking Division) vide their O.M.  dated 31. 05. 2001 
forwarded a copy of notification dated 16. 02. 2001 on Small 

Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) Employees’ 
Gratuity and Superannuating Fund Regulations, 2000.  The 
Committee notes with concern that the Ministry have taken 
more than four and a half year in framing and notifying the 
regulations, the Committee again express its unhappiness over 
the undue delay on the part of the Ministry in framing 
regulations.   However, the Committee is satisfied to note that 
the Ministry have ultimately framed and notified the pension 
regulation as per its suggestions.   
VII 
Banking Service Commission Act, 1984-Delay in framing of 
Rules/Regulations 
 
8. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Finance 
have in the meantime introduced a Bill in Lok Sabha in 
March, 2002  with the objective of repealing the Banking 
Service Commission Act 1984.  The Committee, however, 
feels that lot of time has elapsed even after the introduction of 
the Bill.  The Committee, accordingly desires that the 
Ministry should expedite their action in the matter.  
 
IX 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA. 
 
II 
 
Second  Meeting 
 
 The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday the 25 th 
July, 2002 in Room No. 126 -C (Chairman’s Room) Third 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
  MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri A. Vijay Raghavan,                           Chairman 
2. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
3. Shri B.P. Singhal 
4. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekhar Reddy 
5. Shri Drupad Borgohain 
6. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
7. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S. Vijay Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary 
Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
 
The Committee considered its draft 141st Report. During the 
course of its consideration, the Committee expressed a 
serious concern over the delay on the part of the Ministry of 
Finance in responding to communications on its behalf or 

taking action on its recommendations. As regards item no. 
VII in the draft report on delay in framing rules/regulations 
under the Banking    Service Commission Act, 1984, the 
Committee took note of the fact that Government had since 
introduced a Bill to repeal the said Act in the Lok Sabha in 
March 2002. The Committee, however, felt that a lot of time 
had elapsed ever after the introduction of the Bill and it 
desired that the recommendation portion in the Report on 
this item may be modified suitably in view of the changed 
position. The Committee, however, adopted the draft 141st 
report. 
2.0 xxx   xxx  xxx  
3.0 xxx   xxx  xxx 
4.0 xxx   xxx  xxx 
  
5. The meeting adjourned at 3.45 p.m. 
 
xxx relates to other subjects.  