 
    COMMITTEE ON 
                             TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY EIGHTH 
Delay in Framing of Subordinate Legislation under Acts of Parliament Administered by 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
August, 2016/Shravana, 1938 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
on 
Delay in Framing of Subordinate Legislation under Acts of Parliament Administered by 
various Ministries/Departments 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  11 th  August ,   
 
                                                                                                                             
REPORT 
NO.  
228 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION  
Shravana, 1938 (Saka)  
REPORT  
Delay in Framing of Subordinate Legislation under Acts of Parliament Administered by 
,   2016) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : 
http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 
E-Mail: rsc1sub@sansad.nic.in  
 
  

 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDI 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND 
DELAY IN FRAMING OF SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION UNDER ACTS OF 
PARLIAMENT ADMINISTERED BY 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDI NATE LEGISLATION 
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
DELAY IN FRAMING OF SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION UNDER ACTS OF 
PARLIAMENT ADMINISTERED BY  VARIOUS MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11th August, 2016)
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
August , 2016/ Shravana, 1938 (Saka) 
Hindi  version of this publication is also available 
NATE LEGISLATION  
REPORT  
DELAY IN FRAMING OF SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION UNDER ACTS OF 
VARIOUS MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS  
) 
version of this publication is also available  

 
C O N T E N T S  
      
                                                            PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION  OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
2. 
3. 
INTRODUCTION 
ACRONYMS 
4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. 
 
[[  
6. 
7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT ON DELAY IN FRAMING OF SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION UNDER 
ACTS OF PARLIAMENT ADMINISTERED BY THE VARIOUS MINISTRIES: 
       
I.   DISCUSSION WITH THE MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS  
II.  MEMORANDUM ON DELAY IN FRAMING OF RULES UNDER VARIO US 
ACTS 
III.  MASTER CIRCULARS ISSUED BY THE RESERVE BANK OF INDI A 
UNDER THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1949 
 
SUMMARY OF THE OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
MINUTES* 
 
 
* To be enclosed later 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   15 th  SEPTEMBER, 2014) 
1.  Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy   Chairman 
2. Shri  Biswajit Daimary     
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
5. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
6. Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
7. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
8. Shri S. Muthukaruppan 
9. Shri K. Parasaran 
10. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
11. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
12. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
13. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
14. Vacant 
15. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
S
ECRETARIAT  
1. Shri J.G. Negi , Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
3. Shri  R.S. Rawat, Joint Director 
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director 
5. Smt. Monica Baa, Deputy Director 
 
  

 
  
INTRODUCTION 
1. I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf, this Two Hundred and Twenty 
Eighth Report of the Committee.  
2.  The Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya  Sabha has been constituted under 
Rule 204 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of B usiness in the Council of States.  The 
mandate of the Committee is to scrutinize and repor t to the Council whether the powers to 
make rules, regulations, bye-laws, schemes or other  statutory instruments conferred by the 
Constitution or delegated by Parliament have been p roperly exercised within such 
conferment or delegation as the case may be.   
3. The Committee's concern is centered mainly aroun d the serious implications of 
delayed framing of rules/regulations/orders, etc de spite the Committee’s several 
recommendations on the issue and repeated observati ons in its reports that rules/regulations 
should be framed within six months of the coming in to force of the Act.  The Committee has 
been calling the defaulting Ministries/ Departments  to know the reason for the delay, the 
problems faced by them in framing the rules/regulat ions, etc and to find solutions to the 
problems.  
4. In this Report, the issue of delay in framing of  rules/regulations under Acts 
administered by various Ministries/Departments of t he Government of India  and the issue of 
legality of Master Circulars issued by the Reserve Bank of India under the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 have been covered.  The Report  contains general as well as specific 
observations/recommendations of the Committee on the subject. 
 
5. The   Committee considered and adopted the draft  Report in its meeting held on the 
9
th  August 2016.     
 
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY  
Chairman  
Committee on Subordinate Legislation,  
 Rajya Sabha  
 
NEW DELHI  
11 th  August, 2016 

 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
GAAR-General Anti-Avoidance Rules 
DVC-Damodar Valley Corporation 
SBI-State Bank of India 
LIC-Life Insurance Corporation of India 
CERC-Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
BEE-Bureau of Energy Efficiency 
CEA-Central Electricity Authority 
DG-Director General 
CPCB-Central Pollution Control Board 
CVC-Central Vigilance Commission 
NJAC-National Judicial Appointments Commission 
UTs-Union Territories 
ASI-Archaeological Survey of India 
ICWA-Indian Council of World Affairs 
WMD-Weapons of Mass Destruction 
FTDR Act-Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act 
DCI-Dental Council of India 
AIIMS-All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
CWC-Chemical Weapons Convention 
IIS-Indian Information Service  
CSS-Central Secretariat Service  
CEO-Chief Executive Officer 

 
NID-National Institute of Design 
DIPP-Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion 
RLDA-Rail Land Development Authority 
DeiTY-Department of Electronics & Information Technology 
SICLD-Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout & Design 
CERT-In-Indian Computer Emergency Response Team 
WTO-World Trade Organization 
TRIPs-Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 
NIPER-National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
NPPA-National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
PNGRB-Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board 
BPCL-Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited 
PMP-Petroleum and Mineral Pipelines 
FCI-Food Corporation of India 
GPF-General Provident Fund 
 
 
  

 
REPORT 
ON 
THE DELAY IN FRAMING OF SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION UNDER ACTS OF 
PARLIAMENT ADMINISTERED BY THE VARIOUS MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS 
       
Meaning of the term “subordinate legislation” 
 
 The term “subordinate legislation” refers to notif ications, orders, schemes, rules and bye-
laws referred to in Sections 20 and 21 of the Gener al Clauses Act. In the Indian context, the term 
subordinate legislation refers to rules, regulation s, orders, schemes, bye-laws, statutes, 
ordinances, notifications or any instrument framed under an Act of Parliament or the 
Constitution.  Such subordinate legislations have t o be published in the Gazette of India and laid 
on the Table of both Houses of Parliament. As per 7 5 th  Report of the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation, Rajya Sabha presented to the House on the 29 th  March, 1988, all “Orders” have to be 
laid on the Table of the House as it affords an opp ortunity to Members of Parliament, if they so 
desire, to move an amendment or modification to suc h “Order”, including a Motion for their 
annulment. 
 
Need for subordinate legislation 
 
 
2. The primary function of the Parliament is to pas s legislation which becomes an Act of 
Parliament. In modern times, it is not always possi ble to make laws providing every detail. In 
view of newer areas emerging, the process of law-ma king today has become not only time 
consuming but also an increasingly complicated and a technical affair. Therefore, Parliament 
lays down the broad policy framework and basic purp ose of the legislation in the form of an Act 
and leaves it to the executive, experts and technoc rats to provide for working details within the 
framework of the enactment by way of rules, regulat ions, bye-laws, schemes, Orders or other 
statutory instruments.  Powers have also been veste d/conferred under various provisions of the 
Constitution of India on the different functionaries to frame rules, regulations or schemes dealing 
with various aspects. That is why, delegated legisl ation in present days is increasingly assuming 
an important role in the process of law-making, com prising an important component of 
legislation. 

 
 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation and its Role 
 
 
3. As subordinate legislation has become an importa nt constituent element of legislation, the 
role of legislature is equally important to monitor  and examine that the subordinate legislation is 
in accordance with the spirit of the Act or Constit ution and also to keep a proper check on the 
executive exceeding its powers provided under the A cts of Parliament or the Constitution. 
Legislation is an inherent and inseparable right of  Parliament and it has to ensure that this power 
is not usurped nor transgressed under the guise of subordinate legislation. The Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha is one such in strument and it is constituted to scrutinize 
and report to the Council of States/ Rajya Sabha wh ether the powers to make rules, regulations, 
bye-laws, schemes or other statutory instruments co nferred by the Constitution or delegated by 
Parliament have been properly exercised within such  conferment or delegation as the case may 
be. 
 
4. It is important that legislature must retain in its own hands the essential legislative 
functions which consist in declaring the legislativ e policy and laying down the standard which is 
to be enacted into rule of law, and what can be del egated is the task of subordinate legislation 
which by its own nature ancillary to the Statute which delegates the power to make it.  
 
Important Recommendations of the Committee with reg ard to framing of subordinate 
legislation  
 
5. The Statute can be fully enforced only when all the subordinate legislation stipulated 
under the Act is framed in time. The Committee, whi le carrying out its work, has found that the 
Ministries have taken considerable time in framing of the rules/regulations and therefore the Acts 
remain unimplemented or partially implemented. The Committee has, therefore, made very 
important recommendations/observations regarding th e delay in framing of rules/regulations by 
the Ministries. In 1971 the Committee in its 9 
th  Report prescribed six months time limit for 
framing the subordinate legislation contemplated un der the Act. However, in the same year the 
Committee in its 10 th  Report suggested that if Rules are not framed with in the time limit of 6 

 
months, the Secretary or Head of Department should be informed and in turn Secretary with a 
comprehensive note inform the Minister concerned an d obtain his orders.  The Committee was 
persuaded to make this suggestion for the reason th at for any non-compliance or excessive delay 
in compliance with the provision of a statute the Minister is also answerable to the House. 
 
6. The Committee in due course, however, found that  most of the Ministries do not adhere 
to the time limit of six months prescribed by it fo r framing of rules/regulations and also do not 
give appropriate reasons for such delay. The Commit tee, therefore, recommended in its 31 
st  and 
47 th  Reports as:- 
"In regard to the request of the Ministries for ext ension of time for making rules and 
regulations under various enactments, the Committee  observes that of late such requests 
have almost become a routine' and the Ministries ha ve not been adhering to the time-
limit of six months for making the rules as earlier  recommended by the Committee. In 
some cases the Committee has noticed that while req uesting for extension of time, the 
Ministries do not disclose full facts and advance i nadequate reasons for seeking such an 
extension. 
“The Committee in its Ninth Report recommended that  rules and regulations required to 
be made under a statute should be made as soon as p ossible but in no case later than six 
months from the date on which the statute comes into force." 
                          (Extract from 31 st   Report)  
(presented on 13.3.1979)  
“The Committee feels that the rule-making process c ould well have been completed 
within the time limit of six months which the Committee has laid down for making of rules 
under an Act after coming into force of that Act.  Where however, a Ministry does not 
find it possible to adhere to the time limit, they should inform the Committee of the 
reasons why they cannot make rules within the time limit and seek extension of time for 
completing the rule-making process.” 
(Para 29 of the 47 th  Report)  
      (presented on 14.9.1981)  
 

 
7. Since most of the Ministries still do not adhere  to the time limit of six months despite 
several recommendation in its consecutive reports, the  Committee reiterated its 
recommendations in its 192 nd  Report as under:- 
 
"In addition to the concern expressed by the Commit tee over delay in laying of 
Notifications on the Table of the House, the Commit tee also express its deep concern 
over delay in framing of rules/regulations under di fferent Acts. The Committee in its 47th 
report presented to the House on 14.9.1981 had reco mmended that the rule-making 
process should be completed within a period of six months of the coming into force of an 
Act. The Committee has further recommended that in case a Ministry is not able to 
adhere to this time-limit, it should seek extension  of time for completing the rule-making 
process. The recommendation of the Committee reads as follows:— 
"The Committee feels that the rule-making process c ould well have been completed 
within the time-limit of six months which the Commi ttee has laid down for making of 
rules under an Act after coming into force of that Act. Where however, a Ministry does 
not find it possible to adhere to the time-limit, t hey should inform the Committee of the 
reasons why they cannot make rules within the time- limit and seek extension of time for 
completing the rule-making process." 
 
The Committee is constrained to take note of the fa ct that the Ministries/Departments of 
Government of India are not complying with the Comm ittee's recommendation to 
complete the process of framing of subordinate legi slation contemplated under various 
Acts of Parliament within a period of six months. A t the same time, the Committee also 
does not receive requests for extension of time for  completing the rule-making process in 
terms of its recommendations as above from most of the Ministries/Departments. The 
Committee takes a serious note of the prevailing si tuation in which the 
Ministries/Departments are neither able to complete the task of framing rules/regulations 
under different Acts within the given six months' p eriod nor do they suo-motu approach 
the Committee for seeking extension of time. The Co mmittee further notes that in order to 
ensure timely framing of rules/regulations it has t aken an initiative to monitor the 
progress of framing of subordinate legislation in r espect of all legislations brought about 

 
by different Ministries/Departments of Government o f India from the year 2003 onwards 
with a view to ensure that the framing of subordina te legislation is not delayed. The 
Committee, however, finds that the responses from t he Ministries/Departments have not 
been prompt in this monitoring exercise undertaken on behalf of the Committee. 
In view of the above position, the Committee once a gain reiterates its recommendation 
that the Ministries/Departments should ensure putti ng in place subordinate legislation 
positively within a period of six months of the Act  coming into force of the Act. The 
Committee further recommends that in case the Minis try fails to meet with this deadline, 
they should invariably approach the Committee for s eeking extension of time. The 
Committee further recommends that in cases where th e time-limit of six months is not 
adhered to, they should, while laying rules/regulat ions before the Parliament invariably 
lay a statement explaining the reasons why the fram ing of rules/regulations was delayed 
beyond six months so as to keep the Parliament appr ised of the compliance of the 
Parliament's mandate conferred upon the Executive." 
[Para 2(xiv) of 192nd Report] 
(Presented on 24.8.2011) 
 
8. The Committee had, in its 212 
th  Report also reiterated the need for framing of subordinate 
legislation within the stipulated timeframe by poin ting out specific instances where the framing 
of rules/regulations have been delayed, in some cases, for more than 10 years. 
 
Committee’s Recommendation on uploading of rules/regulations on Ministry’s website 
 
 
9. Keeping in view the importance of subordinate legis lation and the need for the public to 
easily access them, the Committee had also, in its 135 
th  Report, recommended that all 
subordinate legislation should be uploaded on the website of the respective Ministries as under: 
“The Committee would like to take this opportunity to recommend that Ministries, as part 
of their e-governance initiative, put all subordina te legislation on their websites, 
preferably bilingually. The Committee further recom mends that the Ministry of 
Information Technology immediately develop a standa rd application software with an 
Internet interface for use in all Ministries, which  will provide a searchable database of 

 
subordinate legislation linked to the principal Act s administered by the respective 
Ministry.” 
(Para 10 of135th   Report)  
(presented on 27.7.2001)   
 
10. The Committee again in its 201 
st  Report stressed the very need of uploading all the  
rules/regulations, etc on the respective website of  the 
Ministries/Departments/organizations/institutions for the benefit of Members of Parliament and 
the people for easy access which is as under: 
“Rules/Regulations/Orders/bye-laws are laid by diff erent Ministries on the Table of the 
House under various provisions of parent Acts passe d by Parliament. These 
Rules/Regulations/Orders/bye-laws are published in the Official Gazette before being 
laid on the Table of the House. Even after they are  laid, it is very difficult to get access to 
these notifications. The Committee recommends that such Rules/Regulations/Orders, etc. 
laid on the Table of the House should be invariably  uploaded on the websites of 
respective Ministries immediately on the same day when they have been laid on the Table 
of the House, for information of Members of Parliam ent and people at large for their 
easy access.” 
201 st  Report 
(Presented on 14 th  December, 2012)   
 
11. Despite these recommendations, the Committee feels that Ministries/Departments do not 
pay the due attention that subordinate legislation deserves.  While delay in framing subordinate 
legislation hinders implementation, delay in laying  of the rules and regulations before the House 
impinges upon right of Members of Parliament to mov e motion for either amending or annulling 
them altogether. If such a motion is adopted by bot h Houses, the said notification shall remain 
amended or annulled accordingly.  In this backdrop,  the Committee had decided to sit with the 
Ministries and Departments of the Government of Ind ia to understand the problems faced by 
them in fulfilling the requirements concerning subo rdinate legislations and to sensitize them 
about the significance of timely framing of subordi nate legislation and its laying in Parliament. 
Accordingly, the Committee has been calling various  Ministries/Departments in this regard. The 
details of meetings held by the Committee with various Ministries/Departments, the points/issues 

 
that arise out of these meetings and the observatio ns/recommendations of the Committee have 
been enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs. The d etails of pending cases of framing of 
rules/regulations under various Acts passed by Parl iament as on 21 st  July, 2016 has been placed 
as Annexure-I. 
 
I 
DISCUSSION WITH THE MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS 
 
12. The Committee held discussion with the Department of Revenue, Department of 
Economic Affairs and Department of Financial Servic es of the Ministry of Finance on the 27 th  
October, 2014. Secretary, Department of Revenue, br iefed the Committee about the Acts under 
their administrative control and the rules/regulati ons that were to be framed under them. He 
informed the Committee that with respect to Finance  Act, 2013 framing of the requisite 
rules/regulations had been delayed as they related to the General Anti Avoidance Rules (GAAR) 
implementation of which had been deferred upto 1 st  April, 2015 as certain issues connected to it 
were under examination. He also informed the Commit tee about the issues on which 
rules/regulations under the Finance Act, 2014 were in the process of being framed. He also 
informed that all the Acts and subordinate legislat ion were being uploaded on the website of the 
Ministry. He further informed the Committee that ru les framed under the Income Tax Act, 
Excise & Customs Act or Prevention of Money Laundering Act are put into immediate operation 
and they will be valid, subject to Parliament amend ing or nullifying them. In response to the 
issue of framing of subordinate legislation under t he Benami Transaction Act, 1988,  he 
informed that the said Act was to be repealed by a new Act which the Ministry would shortly 
introduce in the Parliament.  
 
13. Secretary, Department of Financial Services bri efed the Committee about the Acts being 
administered by them and the status of framing of s ubordinate legislation under them. Regarding 
framing of rules/regulations under the SBI (Subsidi ary Laws) Amendment Act, 2011, LIC 
(Amendment) Act, 2011 and Actuaries Act, 2007, he i nformed that in the case of the State Bank 
of India Amendment Rules, the Ministry had sought e xtension of time upto 30 
th  June, 2015. In 

 
the case of all others, the Ministry had sought tim e upto 1 st  January, 2015 to frame all the 
rules/regulations.   
 
14. The Committee is happy to note that subsequently th e Department of Financial 
Services have completed the framing of rules/regula tions under the  SBI (Subsidiary Laws) 
Amendment Act, 2011 and have laid them on the Table  of both the Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee, however, regrets to note that the De partment of Revenue and Department 
of Financial Services has not yet completed the fra ming of subordinate legislation under 
the Finance Act, 2013; LIC (Amendment) Act, 2011 and Actuaries Act, 2007 despite a lapse 
of so many years since the passage of these Acts. T he Committee, accordingly, urges the 
Departments to expedite the process and complete th e framing of subordinate legislation 
under these Acts without any further delay.   
 
15. The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of Power, Ministry of Law & 
Justice (Legislative Department), Ministry of Envir onment, Forest & Climate Change and the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation on the 12 
th  February, 2015 on the reasons for delay in the fra ming of 
the rules/regulations under Acts administered by th em.  Secretary, Ministry of Power stated that 
the Electricity Act, 2003 amalgamated all the earli er Acts that existed in the power sector and 
certain amendments were made in the Act in the same  year and all the rules and regulations that 
were required to be framed under the Act by the var ious authorities, i.e. the Ministry, the Central 
Electricity Authority (CEA) or the Central Electric ity Regulatory Commission (CERC), all stand 
notified as well as laid on the Table of the House.   Under the Damodar Valley Corporation 
(DVC) Act, 1948 also, all the contemplated subordin ate legislations have been framed.  With 
respect to Energy Conservation Act, 2001 and the Energy Conservation (Amendment) Act, 2011, 
a total of 21 rules were required to be framed out of which 16 rules have been notified, 2 rules 
have not been considered necessary and 3 are under process and will be notified shortly. Total 13 
regulations were required to be framed under the En ergy Conservation Act out of which 8 
regulations have been framed and 2 are under proces s of framing and would be notified shortly. 
The Ministry is of the view that the remaining 3 re gulations are not necessary. The Committee 
again heard the Secretary, Ministry of Power, CERC,  Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) and 
CEA on 28 September 2015 for further clarifications in the matter of framing of rules/regulations 

 
under the Energy Conservation Act, 2001 and subsequ ent amendments. During this meeting, 
Secretary, Ministry of Power informed the Committee  that as advised by the Committee, the 
Ministry made a reference to the Ministry of Law & Justice with regard to the necessity for 
framing of rules under Section 56 (2)(e) and (v) of the Act and once their comments are received, 
further necessary action would be taken.  He furthe r updated the Committee on the status of 
framing of 3 rules which are still pending by stati ng that rules under Section 56(2)(d) and (l) will 
be finalized by December, 2015, however, rule under  Section 56(2)(n) will take some more time 
as it involves consultation with the State Governments. DG, BEE informed that as advised by the 
Committee, they have referred the matter to the Min istry of Law & Justice on the 3 regulations 
on which they feel that no regulations need to be f ramed.  Based on the advice of the Ministry of 
Law & Justice, the matter will be placed before the  Committee and Parliament. He also updated 
the Committee on the status of framing of 2 regulat ions which are still pending by stating that 
regulation on powers and duties of Director General  (DG), BEE will be notified by 31 st   
December, 2015 and regulations on the manner and in terval of time for conduct of energy audit 
of buildings will be completed by the end of next y ear.  The regulations dealing with the energy 
audit under the powers given to the States has been  referred to the Ministry of Law & Justice as 
to whether it is necessary to frame regulations under Section 58(2)(k) because this has to be done 
by the States.    The Ministry vide  O.M. dated 2 nd  June, 2016 informed the Committee that out of 
21 rules to be framed, 17 rules have been framed an d the Ministry of Law & Justice have opined 
that 2 rules to be framed under Section 13(2)(u) re ad with Section 56(2)(e) of the Act are 
enabling provisions meant for unforeseen circumstan ces and hence rules on these need not be 
framed for the present. The Ministry further stated  that the remaining 2 rules, i.e. (i) Terms and 
Conditions of Service of Officers and other Employe es of the Bureau and (ii) Energy 
Conservation Code Rules are likely to be finalized by December 2016. Out of 13 regulations to 
be framed, 8 regulations have been framed. For regu lations prescribed under Section 58(2)(d) 
and 58(2)(l),  the Ministry of Law & Justice have o pined that these are enabling provisions 
meant for unforeseen circumstances. Accordingly, on ly 3 regulations are left to be framed. The 
Ministry stated that they are likely to be finalize d by December 2016 and sought extension of 
time till December 2016 for finalizing the rules/regulations which was granted to the Ministry.  
 

 
16. The Committee was not convinced with the view of th e Ministry that they did not 
feel the need to notify certain rules and regulatio ns contemplated to be framed under the 
Energy Conservation Act, 2001. In Committee’s view, the Act passed by the Parliament has 
mandated the framing of the said subordinate legisl ation and, therefore, if the Ministry 
does not feel the need for the concerned rules/regu lations then it would be appropriate that 
the information is brought before the House for its  consideration.  The Committee 
observed that even after 13 years some rules have n ot been framed by the Bureau of 
Energy Efficiency (BEE) and only existing guideline s of the Ministry of Finance are being 
followed. In Committee’s view, important issues lik e service conditions, budget, energy 
conservation, duties of DG, Bureau of Energy Effici ency (BEE), levying of fees need to be 
translated into rules/ regulations.  The Committee opined that the Act is a macro- level idea 
and the Ministries have to come out with the rules.  
 
 17. The Committee further observed that statutory organizations like Central Electricity 
Regulatory Commission and Central Electricity Autho rity do not get the subordinate legislation 
framed by them vetted from the Ministry of Law & Ju stice.  The Committee sought clarification 
on this matter from the representatives of the Legi slative Department, Ministry of Law & Justice 
who were present in the Committee’s meeting on 12 
th  February, 2015.  The Legislative 
Department expressed the following views: 
 
 Firstly, it is for the administrative Ministry to decide the necessity of making 
rules, though there is a power delegated under the provisions of the parent Act or Statute.  
But its necessity and to what extent they want to f rame the rules on a particular subject 
matter, is the domain of the administrative Ministry.   
 Secondly, nowadays, there are Acts which provide t hat the enforcement date of 
certain provisions will be different.  There is a different date for different provisions also.  
So, if the substantive provision of the Act has not  come into force, then certainly, there 
are no rules and regulations for that very provisio n which requires rules and regulations 
to be made.   
 Thirdly, it is a discretionary power that the auth ority may make rules and 
regulations or the Commission may makes rules and r egulations.  So, it does not have a 

 
binding effect.  And, as far as the word ‘may’ or ‘shall’ is to be used, generally, this word 
‘may’ has been interpreted as ‘shall’ also by way o f construction.  It is the executive 
power, delegated power.  So, flexibility has been g iven by using the word ‘may’ to the 
Executive.   
 Generally, the phraseology “the authority of the C entral Government to make 
rules and regulations” is working well.  In some ca ses, there might have been a lapse, 
otherwise, all the rules and regulations made under all the Acts are being implemented.   
 
18. The Committee, however, has some reservations in th e matter.  The Committee 
failed to understand how the framing or non-framing  of rules/regulations becomes a 
discretionary power of the Executive when there is express provision in the Act that the 
rules/regulations shall be framed.  In the Committe e’s view, unless the rules are framed, 
the provision of the Act cannot be implemented.  So , whenever a law is to be framed, the 
Ministry of Law & Justice, while vetting the Bills to be introduced in the House, must 
examine whether there is a necessity of making the rules or not.  Because once the 
provision is made, it has to be implemented through a process and the process is prescribed 
in the rules only. 
 
19. The Committee reasoned further that it is not a  question of playing up on the words ‘may’ 
or ‘shall’.  It is a legislative practice of Parlia ment that in all Statutes they used the word only 
‘may’.  But, what is important is that there will b e situations when the Ministry have to make the 
rules; and, there may be situations when only certa in circumstances manifest and Ministry will 
have a duty to make the rules.  Therefore, it is ei ther discretion or a mandate.  But the discretion 
becomes a mandate when certain circumstances precip itate.  This is the law prepared by the 
Supreme Court. Therefore, the Ministry would normally have to make the rules and cannot say it 
is its discretion.  But, if certain situations manifest, then this ‘may’ will get converted into ‘shall’.  
Then, Ministry will be bound by duty to make the rules.   
 
20. Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest & Cl imate Change informed that they 
administer a total of 11 Acts and rules had been made under all these Acts.  He also informed the 
Committee that the concerned Acts and Rules were in the process of being amended to give more 

 
powers to the Pollution Control Boards to control p ollution. Further, on the issue of vacant post 
of the Chairman of CPCB which is not filled since l ong the Committee was informed that the 
post will be advertised once the recruitment rules,  which are under amendment, are finalized.  
Till such time, that responsibility had been assign ed to a senior officer of the Ministry.  The 
Ministry was also reviewing the rules which have be en issued under the various Acts.  The High 
Powered Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri TS R Subramanian had submitted its 
recommendations and one of the important recommenda tions of that Committee is to examine 
the possibility of amalgamating various laws which are currently in force.  So, the Ministry was 
in the process of examining these provisions.    
 
21. The Secretary, Civil Aviation informed the Comm ittee that the Rajiv Gandhi National 
Aviation University Act came into force in Septembe r 2013 and it was thought that it would be 
better to appoint the Vice-Chancellor first so that  he can guide the process of framing of 
rules/regulations.  The Steering Committee for the University which includes some eminent 
academicians in the field of aviation was also of s imilar view that, there should be the Vice-
Chancellor first and some essential faculty who wou ld define the future roadmap for this 
institution, and only on the basis of their advice,  Ministry should frame the rules.  Secretary 
informed that the Select Committee had since been r econstituted and would be meeting soon.  
Regarding the Aircrafts Act,1934, the Secretary inf ormed that all the rules required to be 
formulated had been framed and all the rules have a lso been placed before the House. As for the 
Airport Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act,  2008, Secretary informed that under the 
said Act, 12 rules are required to be framed, out o f which 8 have been framed and the remaining 
4 draft rules are with the Ministry of Law & Justic e for vetting and would be notified as soon as 
the vetting is over.   
 
22. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Power did not complete the framing of 
rules/regulations under the Energy Conservation Act , 2001 even after 14 years of the 
passage of the Act and sought extension of time til l December 2016 for completing the 
framing of rules/regulations under the Act. The Committee takes serious note of the matter 
and recommends that the Ministry should take expeditious action to positively complete the 
framing of rules/regulations under the Act by December 2016 and also keep the Committee 

 
informed in the matter accordingly. The Committee a lso hopes that the Ministry would not 
seek further extension and finish the work within the extended period. 
 
23. The Committee is not convinced with the view of  the Ministry of Power that they 
did not feel the need to frame the rules contemplat ed to be framed under the Energy 
Conservation Act, 2001. The Act, passed by the Parl iament, has mandated the framing of 
the said subordinate legislation and therefore if t he Ministry does not feel the need for the 
concerned rules/regulations, it would be appropriat e that Parliament should be informed 
about it. The Committee, accordingly, recommends th at in cases where framing of 
subordinate legislation is delegated by the parent Act and the Ministry does not feel the 
need for framing of subordinate legislation, the Mi nistry should consult the Ministry of 
Law & Justice and thereafter, if the Ministry of Law & Justice concurs with the view of the 
Ministry, the Ministry should lay a statement on th e Table of the House outlining the 
reasons why they do not feel the need to frame subordinate legislation under the said Acts. 
 
24. The Committee observes that certain autonomous or statutory organizations do not 
follow the practice of getting their subordinate legislations vetted from the Ministry of Law 
& Justice.  The Committee also observes that the Mi nistries/Organizations lack clarity on 
the procedure prescribed for drafting and vetting of subordinate legislation. In this respect, 
the Committee would like to recommend that the Mini stries may consult the Ministry of 
Law & Justice on the steps to be followed for draft ing and framing of subordinate 
legislation. The Committee also recommends that all  Ministries/Departments should 
impress upon the autonomous/statutory organizations under their administrative control to 
follow due process with regard to drafting and framing of subordinate legislation and to get 
their draft rules/regulations duly vetted by the Ministry of Law & Justice. 
 
25. The Committee expressed its anguish about the s elf-proclaimed autonomy by 
certain statutory organizations like CERC which has  not been getting their regulations 
vetted by the Ministry of Law. The Committee felt t hat since the Law Ministry has framed 
the parent legislation, it is in better position to  determine at first stage whether the 
delegation is being exercised within the confines o f powers delegated to subordinate 

 
authority or not. CERC pointed out that their regul ations have stood the test of litigation 
and have not been declared ultra vires . The Committee totally disagrees with this 
proposition and cannot wait for Courts to scrutiniz e each and every regulations. This must 
be vetted at first by the Ministry of Law and Justi ce. The Committee directs the Ministry 
of Power to ensure that all regulations by statutor y organizations under it be vetted by the 
Ministry of Law & Justice before they are laid on the Table of the House.  
 
26. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministr y of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change has framed all the rules/regulations  contemplated under the Acts 
administered by them. The Committee notes that the Subramanian Committee has 
recommended examining the possibility of amalgamati ng various environmental laws 
which are currently in force and hopes that the Min istry would soon come up with more 
effective laws keeping in view the latest developments in the sector. 
 
27. The Committee notes that the Statutes of the Ra jiv Gandhi National Aviation 
University Act, 2013 have since been framed and lai d on the Table of both Houses of 
Parliament. The Committee, however, regrets to note  that the Ordinances and Regulations 
have not been framed till date and accordingly reco mmends that the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation should ensure that the Ordinances and Regu lations are framed at the earliest by 
resolving the impediments in the matter. 
 
28. The Committee is anguished to note that even af ter eight years of coming into force 
of the Airport Economic Regulatory Authority of Ind ia Act, 2008 the contemplated 
rules/regulations have still not been framed. The Committee takes a strong view of  this and 
recommends the Ministry of Civil Aviation should en sure that the legislative framework 
consisting of the rules/regulations as contemplated under the Airport Economic Regulatory 
Authority of India Act, 2008 should be completed at the earliest. The Ministry may impress 
upon the Ministry of Law & Justice to expedite the vetting of the rules/regulations framed 
under Airport Economic Regulatory Authority of Indi a Act, 2008 so that the same can be 
notified at the earliest. 
 

 
29. The Committee in its meeting held on 7 th  April, 2015 with the Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways and Ministry of Personnel, Pub lic Grievances and Pensions (Department 
of Personnel & Training) was informed by the Minist ry of Road Transport & Highways that the 
Ministry administered seven Acts and all the concer ned rules/regulations under them had been 
framed and laid before both the Houses of the Parliament. 
 
30. The  Secretary, Department of Personnel and Tra ining informed the Committee on the 
status of framing of rules/regulations under the administrative control of his Ministry. It was also 
informed that the Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 2 011 had been passed by the Parliament but 
had not been notified till date as certain issues l ike providing safeguards against disclosures 
affecting the sovereignty and integrity of India an d security of the State needed to incorporated 
in the Act. As regards the Lokpal and Lokayukta Act , 2013 it was informed that an Amendment 
Bill was pending in the Lok Sabha which sought to r ecognize the Leader of the Single Largest 
Opposition Party where there was no Leader of the O pposition in the Lok Sabha. Further, as for 
the rules/regulation to be framed under section 59 & 62 of the Lokpal and Lokayukta Act, 2013 
it was informed that they had been framed and laid on the Table of the Parliament.   
 
31. Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training  in its meeting with Committee on 9 
th  
February, 2016 stated that rules under Section 20 o f the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 
2003 have been framed and that the regulations will  be framed as per the Lokpal Act. The Select 
Committee has since given its suggestions on the Lo kpal Act and that the Department will be 
going to Parliament in the coming session and the r egulations will be framed accordingly. 
Secretary, Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) state d that in 2007, rules have been framed 
under Section 20(2)(a) regarding the number of staf f and their conditions of service. Regarding 
Section 20(2)(b) on any other power of the Civil Co urt to be prescribed under Section 11(f) of 
the Act, she stated that Section 11 has already pre scribed the powers of the civil court the 
Commission has, regarding summoning of person, prod uction of document, how to receive 
evidence, etc. Rules have to be framed only on any other matter which may be prescribed. As the 
need was not felt, the rules have not been framed t ill date. Regarding regulations under Section 
21, the draft was prepared in 2006 and 2007, however, for one reason or the other, it could not be 
approved. Finally, when the Lokpal Act was passed, the Commission took the view that the 

 
regulations should be framed thereafter because the  jurisdiction of the CVC will now be 
extended from Group A officers to Group B, C and D,  to the extent Lokpal will refer the matters 
to the Commission.  She also stated that the proced ure to be followed by the Commission is 
already given in Section 9 and on the basis of this  provision only, the proceedings are being 
conducted. CVC has made the draft regulations but i t extends to Group A officers only. As per 
the proposed changes in Lokpal Act, CVC is supposed  to look over Group B, C and D 
employees also, therefore, there may be certain changes in the regulations.  
32. The Committee is constrained to observe that even a fter so many years the relevant 
rules/regulations under Central Vigilance Commissio n Act, 2003 have still not been 
framed. The Committee feels the delay in framing of  the rules/regulations defeats the very 
purpose of enactment of the Act as the Act cannot b e operated in the absence of the  
rules/regulations. The Committee accordingly recomm ends that the Ministry should take 
all steps necessary to complete the framing of the contemplated subordinate legislation 
under the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003. 
33.   The Committee heard the representatives of th e Ministry of Home Affairs (Department 
of Border Management), Ministry of Urban Developmen t, Ministry of Culture, Ministry of 
Tourism, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Ministry of  Law & Justice (Department of Justice) and 
the Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative Departme nt) on the 20 
th  April, 2015.During the 
meeting, Secretary, Department of Border Management, informed the Committee that framing of 
regulations with respect to conditions of service a nd remuneration of the officers under Section 
35(2)(b) are under advanced stage of processing and  will be sent to the Law Ministry for vetting.   
She assured the Committee that these Regulations wi ll be notified within a month. She also 
informed the Committee that the process of framing of regulations under Section 35(2)(c) (d) and 
(e) has started and assured the Committee that it w ill be completed by December, 2015.   
However, the Ministry did not complete the framing of regulations by  December 2015. 
Accordingly, the Ministry was requested vide  O.M. dated 8 January 2016 to finalise the framing 
of regulation within 30 days. Finally, the Ministry vide  O.M. dated 17 March 2016 stated that the 
process of framing of regulations under Section 35( 2) of the Act has been completed and 
furnished the details of regulations framed, the su b-section under which they have been framed 
and the status of laying on the Table of the House.   

 
34. Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development stated tha t the Ministry is administering 13 
Acts out of which the Ministry feels that four Acts  do not require any rules and regulations to be 
made. One Act has been recommended for repeal. In t he remaining eight Acts, all the required 
rules and regulations have been framed.  
35. Secretary, Department of Justice informed the C ommittee that the Constitution (Ninety 
Ninth) Amendment Act, 2014 and the National Judicia l Appointments Commission (NJAC) Act, 
2014 were both notified on the 13 
th  April, 2015. She stated that the Department has is sued rule 
under Section 11(2)(a) of the NJAC Act regarding th e fees and other conditions for the eminent 
persons to be appointed. For rule regarding terms a nd conditions of service of officers, it has to 
be done in consultation with NJAC. Regulations have to be framed by NJAC under Section 12 of 
the Act and that cannot be done until NJAC sits and  examines the matter. As far as other Acts of 
the Justice Department are concerned, Secretary say s that most of the rules and regulations have 
been made. However, she assured the Committee to ch eck the position and get back to the 
Committee. With regard to framing of rules under th e Anand Marriage (Amendment) Act, 2012 
he stated that the rules have to be framed by the S tate Governments, however the Central 
Government has framed the model rules. The Ministry  is taking up the issue with the concerned 
States and with Ministry of Home Affairs for Union Territories to expedite the process of 
drafting the rules under the Act.  
36. Secretary, Ministry of Culture informed the Com mittee that the Ministry administers 13 
Acts. Under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeologica l Sites and Remains Act, 1958 and the 
Amendment Act, 2010 rules have been framed. The Act  is under review for carrying out 
amendments and the matter is being examined by ASI.  No rules have been framed under the 
Indian Treasure Trove Act, 1878. The Antiquities an d Art Treasures Rules, 1973 have been 
framed under the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act,  1972 and most of the provisions of the 
Indian Treasure Trove Act, 1878 are covered in the revised Act of 1972. This Act is also being 
revised and the provisions of the  Indian Treasure Trove Act, 1878 could be covered under the 
revised Antiquities Act.  
37. Additional Secretary. Ministry of Tourism infor med the Committee that the Ministry 
does administer any Act or Statute. He accepted tha t the Ministry of Tourism is an important 
stakeholder in maintenance of heritage buildings an d monuments and informed the Committee 

 
that at all stages of framing of Acts and regulatio ns, the Ministry of Culture is in consultation 
with them. 
38. Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs inform ed the Committee that the Ministry 
administers about 10 Acts. With regard to the Companies Act, 2013 she informed the Committee 
that it was notified on the 29 
th  August, 2013. Out of a total of 470 Sections in th e Act, 98 
Sections which did not require prescription of rule s or subordinate legislations were notified on 
the 12 th  September, 2013. As of now out of the 470 Sections  and 7 Schedules of the Act, 283 
Sections and all Schedules have come into force. Of  the remaining 187 Sections, 177 Sections 
can be made effective only after provisions relatin g to National Company Law Tribunal and 
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal are enforce d. These provisions are challenged in the 
Supreme Court and the Ministry is awaiting the Cour t verdict before coming out with the 
enforcement of the Sections and the rules.  
39. The Committee regrets to note that the Departme nt of Border Management took 
nearly 6 years to complete the framing of necessary  subordinate legislation under the Land 
Ports Authority of India Act, 2010. The Committee n otes that the delay in framing of 
rules/regulations has become a recurring phenomenon and that cases of delay in framing of 
rules/regulations by the Ministries/Departments hav e continued to occur despite the 
recommendations of the Committee for completing the  framing of rules/regulations within 
six months of the coming into force of the Act in i ts earlier reports. The Committee 
impresses upon the Ministries, once again, that del ay in framing of subordinate legislation 
defeats the very purpose of enacting the parent Act /legislation as it cannot be implemented 
without the necessary rules/regulations.  The Committee notes with concern that the matter 
of framing of rules/regulations is dealt with by th e Ministries/Departments in a very casual 
manner and no serious effort is made to expedite th e same. Due to this lackadaisical 
attitude of the Ministries/Departments, matters whi ch are sought to be governed by 
statutory rules/regulations, are often in practice governed by executive 
orders/directions/instructions/circulars. The Commi ttee would like to emphasize that 
executive orders/directions/instructions/circulars are no substitute for statutory 
rules/regulations. The Committee wonders whether th e Ministries/Departments are 

 
deliberately avoiding framing of subordinate legisl ation so that they can exercise discretion 
in the matter and escape Parliamentary scrutiny.  
 
40. With a view to ensure timely framing of rules/r egulations under Acts passed by 
Parliament, the Committee recommends that the frami ng of draft rules should be initiated 
simultaneously with the drafting of the proposed Bi ll on the subject. In this way, the draft 
rules/regulations will be ready when the Bill is in troduced in Parliament. Slight 
modifications/amendments can be made by the Ministr y as per the changes made in the 
draft Bill by Parliament.  
 
41. The  Committee accepts that the delay in framin g of the rules under the Anand 
Marriage (Amendment) Act, 2012 is due to delay on t he part of the State 
Governments/UTs, however, the Committee would like to reiterate that it is the 
responsibility of the administrative Ministry to en sure that the State Governments/UTs 
frame the concerned rules within the stipulated tim e period. Accordingly, the Ministry 
should ensure the same. 
42. The Committee heard the representatives of Mini stry of Coal, Ministry of Mines, 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs ) and Ministry of Home Affairs 
(Department of Home) on the 18 
th  May, 2015. The Secretary, Ministry of Finance (Dep artment 
of Economic Affairs) informed the Committee that they administered twenty five Acts and out of 
these three Acts were on the verge of being repeale d, five Acts do not require any rules to be 
framed, in the case of sixteen Acts subordinate leg islation for all of them had duly been framed 
and for only one Act i.e. the Coinage Act, 2011 the rules are under approval stage. Thereafter, he 
elaborated upon the Acts on the verge of being repe aled and the reasons for the same. The Acts 
for which the need for framing the rules had not be en felt are the International Finance 
Corporations Act, the International Monetary Fund a nd Bank Act, the Asian Development Bank 
Act, the African Development Bank Act, 1983 and the African Development Fund Act, 1982 and 
the reasons for the same were also explained in detail. 
43. The Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs in the meeting held on the 18 th  May, 2015 
informed the Committee that they administered a tot al of Sixty Five Acts. He informed that the 

 
Private Security Agencies (Regulation) Act, 2005 was brought into effect in March, 2006 and the 
Private Security Agencies Central Model Rules were framed by the Ministry in April, 2006. As 
of now twenty six States and Union Territories had framed the contemplated rules/regulations 
under the said Act and efforts were underway to mot ivate the remaining States & UTs to also 
frame the subordinate legislation. Now the Ministry  in its communication dated the 21 st  January, 
2016 stated that except Lakshadweep, all the UTs ha ve framed the rules. In their further 
communication dated the 19 th  February, 2016 it was informed that Lakshadweep  h as framed the 
rules and notified on the 8 th  February, 2016. Thereafter he informed that the As sam Rifles Act, 
2006 come into force on 20 th  February, 2009 whereas the Assam Rifles Rules, 200 8 were 
notified on 17 th  December, 2008. These Rules were notified under Ar ticle 309 of the 
Constitution whereas they should have been notified  under Section 165 of the Assam Rifles Act, 
2006. Consequently this anomaly was rectified and t he Assam Rifles Rules, 2010 were then 
notified under Section 165 of the Assam Rifles Act,  2006. In regard to regulations to be framed 
under Section 166 of the Assam Rifled Act, 2006, th e Ministry in its communication dated the 
7th  January, 2016 stated that framing of regulations a re not compulsory as the Assam Rifles Act, 
2006 and Assam Rifles Rules, 2010 are comprehensive  in nature and covers all the aspects and 
therefore is of the opinion not to frame the regula tions. The Ministry was asked to seek the 
advice of the Ministry of Law & Justice in this reg ard. Now, the Ministry in its latest 
communication dated the 6 th  April, 2016 stated that there is a requirement to make regulations 
and sought six months extension for drafting and co mpilation of regulations which was granted 
up to 30 th  September, 2016.  
44. The Secretary, Ministry of Coal briefed the Com mittee about the Acts under its 
administrative control and the status of framing of  subordinate legislation under them. He also 
informed that the Coal Mines (Special Provisions) A ct, 2015 was necessitated as a result of the 
judgments of Supreme Court in the month of August a nd September, 2014. Consequent to theses 
judgments an Ordinance was promulgated to ensure th at mining could continue in the affected 
coal mines. Thereon a very transparent procedure wa s adopted for ensuring auction of the 
affected coal mines which would ensure maximum reve nues for the States where these mines 
were located. The Coal Mines (Special Provisions) A ct, 2015 gives a legislative framework to 
the Ordinance promulgated earlier. The rules under this Act have also been notified and 
uploaded on the website of the Ministry. 

 
45. Secretary, Ministry of Mines informed the Commi ttee that they were administering two 
Acts and all the contemplated rules under these Act s had been framed and uploaded on the 
website of the Ministry. It was informed that the M ines and Minerals (Amendment) Act, 2015 
had been notified on 27 th  March, 2015 and in the short span of time one rule  i.e. Evidence of 
Mineral Content Rules, 2015 have been notified. The  rules related to auction was at advanced 
stage as all the necessary consultations with the S tate Governments had been done and would 
soon be forwarded for vetting to the Ministry of La w & Justice. Thereafter a few minor 
rules/regulations would be notified at a subsequent stage. 
46. The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry of Home Affairs (Department 
of Home) has ensured that all the States and UTs ha ve framed the concerned rules under 
the Private Security Agencies (Regulation) Act, 200 5.  The Committee takes serious note of 
the fact that even after enforcement of Assam Rifles Act, 2006 in 2009, the Assam Rifles has 
not been able to frame the regulations. The Committ ee hopes that the Ministry would 
impress upon the Assam Rifles to frame the regulati ons within the extended period, i.e. the 
30 th  September and lay them in the Winter Session of 20 16 itself. The Committee also notes 
that the Ministry of Mines has taken proactive step s to ensure framing of rules under the 
Mines and Minerals (Amendment) Act, 2015 and hopes that the remaining rules would be 
framed well in time.  
47. The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of 
Shipping and Ministry of Agriculture (Department of  Agriculture Research & Education) on the 
1
st  June, 2015. Foreign Secretary while briefing the C ommittee about the Acts being 
administered by his Ministry and the rules/regulati ons to be framed under them, informed that 
with regard to the Indian Council for World Affairs  Act, 2001(ICWA Act, 2001), four specific 
rules & regulations have been adopted. These include the Indian Council of World Affairs Rules, 
2006, the Director-General and Other Officers and E mployees of the Council (Salaries and 
Allowances) Rules, 2011, the ICWA Regulations, 2007 , and ICWA Director-General and Other 
Officers and Employees (Conditions of Service) Regulations, 2014.  In regard to the Weapons of 
Mass Destruction  and their Delivery Systems (Prohi bition of Unlawful Activities) Act 2005 
(WMD Act, 2005), under Section 6 of the WMD Act, 20 05 the Weapons of Mass Destruction 
and their Delivery System Rules have been adopted i n 2006.  As for issues covered under 

 
Section 5(1) & 7(2) of the Act, the rules/circulars  issued under the Foreign Trade (Development  
and Regulation) (FTDR) Act, 1992;  and, the WMD Act  as amended in 2010, provides the basis 
for regulating the trade related activities of the controlled items. Therefore, as the relevant 
provisions of the FTDR Act, 1992 have been harmonized with the Weapons of Mass Destruction 
Act, 2005, the need to make separate rules in respe ct of Section 5(1) and 7(2) of the Weapons of 
Mass Destruction Act has not been felt so far.  Hen ce, no need has been felt to frame separate 
subordinate legislation.     Foreign Secretary furt her informed that as for subordinate legislation 
under the Nalanda University Act, 2010 is concerned, University Statutes relating to appointment 
of functionaries, powers and functions of the Gover ning Board etc and the functions of the 
Governing Body etc.  have already been framed and n otified on 31 st  March, 2012.  The Financial 
Regulations were notified on 30 th  December, 2013. As far as the ordinances are conce rned, these 
relate to matters of admission, course study, fees, etc., under Section 29 of the Act.  The Ministry 
in consultation with the Legislative Department, ha ve finalized the draft notification within the 
extended time of 8 th  May, 2015 and these will be laid on the Table of b oth Houses of Parliament 
in the next Session i.e. the Monsoon Session. 
48. Secretary, Shipping informed the Committee that  the Ministry at present administered 24 
Acts out of which five Acts relate to the five Nati onal Waterways.  As per the legal provision, 
every time, the Ministry notified a Waterway, it ha s to be through an Act of the Parliament. All 
the five major waterways have different Acts.  Ther e are no rules to be provided under these 
Acts.  Now, the Ministry is bringing forward a comp rehensive Act to notify 101 waterways in 
the country, which will be developed phase-wise, de pending on the potential and the state of 
preparedness.   This Bill was recently introduced i n the Parliament in the previous Session, and, 
it has been referred to the Parliamentary Committee , and the Ministry was hopeful to get it 
through in the Winter Session of this year.   Out o f the remaining 19 Acts, seven 
laws relate to 
the old admiralty period and five of them are on civil liabilities.  These are now due for repeal by 
a new Act which Ministry are bringing forth as per the recommendation of the Law Commission.   
Regarding the two criminal admiralty laws, the Mini stry of Home Affairs, as they deal with the 
criminal law, have been requested to come up with s ome provision so that there is no lacuna.  
But again, no rules are to be provided there.  Out of the balance of 12 Acts, action in eight has 
been completed, or, there is no provision for a rul e making under these laws.  That leaves the 
Ministry with four Acts.  Out of these four Acts, t hree refer to the Inland Vessels (Amendment) 

 
Act, 2014 and the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendme nt) Act, 2014 and the  Coasting Vessels 
Act, 1838.  Under the Merchant Shipping (Second Ame ndment) Act, 2014, one set of rules have 
already been notified and four more sets of rules w ould be notified by  30 th  September  of this 
year and would be laid before the House in the succ eeding Session.  The Merchant Shipping 
Development Council which met in November, 2013 dec ided to replace the Inland Vessels Act, 
1970.  The draft of this new legislation has been p repared and would be brought before the 
Parliament soon. He also briefed the Committee abou t the recent amendments in the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958 and the effect of international conventions on Indian laws.    Regarding the 
Coasting Vessels Act, 1838, most of the provisions of this very old Act were repealed when the 
Merchant Shipping Act came into being.   Whatever r esidual provisions are there, the proposal 
for incorporating them in the Merchant Shipping Act  has been finalized and the Ministry hoped 
to introduce this Bill by December of this year aft er due inter-Ministerial consultation and 
consultations with stakeholders.   
49. Secretary, Department of Agricultural Research & Education, informed the Committee 
that the Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agriculture Unive rsity was set up to promote agriculture in 
the Bundelkhand region of the States of Uttar Prade sh and Madhya Pradesh and had its 
headquarter in Jhansi.   The subordinate legislatio n of the Central Agriculture University, Imphal 
was being followed while drafting rules & regulatio ns for the Rani Lakshmi Bai Central 
Agriculture University. Secretary informed that Six  Ordinances have since been passed by the 
Vice Chancellor and would be submitted before the B oard and then it would be regularized.  
Secretary explained that since the University has a reas of two different States it needed lots of 
liaisoning between the two State Governments and th at was why it took time.  However, he 
added that this exercise needed to be undertaken to  protect the interest of students.  Further, in 
response to D.O. letter dated the 14 
th  January, 2016 of this Secretariat, the Ministry informed that 
academic regulations and seven Ordinances have been  framed and laid on the Table of the 
House. 
 
50. The Committee observes that the framing  of rules/r egulations under the Indian 
Council for World Affairs Act, 2001, Weapons of Mas s Destruction  and their Delivery 
Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act 20 05 and Nalanda University Act, 2010 
had not been framed even after a considerable perio d of time. The Committee notes that 

 
these Acts have international ramifications and is constrained to note the delay in framing 
of subordinate legislation under them. The Committe e urges the Ministry of External 
Affairs to take all possible measures to complete t he process of framing of subordinate 
legislation under these Acts in time bound manner.   
51. The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minist ry of Shipping has since 
completed the framing of subordinate legislation un der the Merchant Shipping 
(Amendment) Act, 2014 and hopes that the Ministry w ould likewise ensure that the 
rules/regulations under the Inland Vessels (Amendme nt) Act, 2014 and the Merchant 
Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014 are also framed at the earliest. 
52.    The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Minist ry of Agriculture (Department 
of Agricultural Research & Education) in giving sha pe to the rules/regulations/ordinances 
contemplated to be framed under the Rani Lakshmi Ba i Central Agriculture University 
Act, 2014. Given the status of the University the C ommittee expresses its hope that the 
necessary subordinate legislation as contemplated b y the Parent Act would be framed at 
the earliest and brought before the Parliament for its scrutiny. 
 
53. The Committee heard the representatives of Ministry  of Health 
& Family Welfare, 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemica ls), Ministry of 
Women and Child Development and Ministry of Law & Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) 
on 2 nd  June, 2015. The Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare accepted that there had 
been inordinate delay in redrafting the Dental Regu lations under the Dentist Act, 1948 on which 
the Committee had observed certain drafting anomalies in its 212 th  Report. He informed that they 
had since received 4 of the redrafted Regulations f rom the Dental Council of India (DCI) and 
sent to the Law Ministry for vetting. These include d the DCI (Opening of new Dental College, 
Opening of New Higher Course of Study or Training a nd Increase of Admission Capacity in 
Dental Colleges) Regulations, 2006; the   DCI Post- Graduate Diploma Course (Dental materials) 
Regulations, 2008; the Dental Hygienists and Dental  Mechanics Course Regulations, 2008 and 
the PG Diploma Course Regulations, 2008.  The remaining two Regulations are being revised by 
DCI.  Heath Secretary then assured the Committee th at they are following it up with DCI so that 
it is done in a timely manner.    

 
 
54. The Committee was also informed about the status of  implementation of the 
recommendations of the Committee as contained in it s 178 
th  Report regarding framing of 
rules/regulations under the AIIMS Act, 1956.  Secretary stated that most of the recommendations 
of the Committee have been incorporated in the Venk atachalam’s Committee Report which was 
recently submitted to the Ministry and is under its  active consideration.  After the Ministry takes 
a stand on the Venkatachalam’s Committee Report, necessary steps will be taken to give effect to 
recommendations accepted by the Government.    
 
55. Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs informed  that the Department administers three 
Acts i.e. the Notaries Act of 1952, the Advocates A ct of 1961 and the Advocates Welfare Fund 
Act, 2001. Rules have been framed under these three  Acts.  The Secretary, Ministry of Women 
& Child Development informed that under the Prohibi tion of Child Marriage Act, 2006 all the 
States except Assam & Uttrakhand have framed the co ncerned rules. The Secretary, also 
informed that the Rules framed by Assam are pending  with its Cabinet Secretariat and that they 
were expecting Cabinet decision in the near future.   In case of Uttarakhand, the Rules were 
originally framed by the Government of Uttar Prades h.  However, they have initiated action to 
have their own rules.  The Act is not applicable to  the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  The 
Ministry further in their communication dated the 4
th  March, 2016 informed that all the States 
including Assam and Uttarakhand has framed their rules.  
 
56. The Secretary, Ministry of Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) informed the Committee that the Che mical Weapons Convention (CWC) is an 
international treaty which bans the development, pr oduction, acquisition, transfer, use and 
stockpile of all chemical weapons. The Organization  for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 
(OPCW) at Hague, in Netherlands, is implementing th e provisions of the Convention. In 
pursuance of the CWC, the Parliament of India enact ed the Chemical Weapons Convention Act, 
2000 which came into force on 01 st  July, 2005. The said Act was amended vide the Chem ical 
weapons (Amendment) Act, 2012. In compliance with S ection 6 (1) of the Act, vide Notification 
dated 13.06.2005 the National Authority Chemical We apons Convention for implementing the 
provisions of the CWC was established. In complianc e with Section 11, vide  Notification dated 
13.06.2005 the steering Committee was constituted u nder the Chairmanship of the Cabinet 

 
Secretary for the purpose of overseeing the functio ns of the National Authority CWC and 
exercising and performing the powers and functions of the Central Government under the Act. In 
compliance with Section 56 (2) (ba) read with secti on 9 (1) of the Act, (as amended in 2012) 
vide Notification dated 12.03.2014, the CWC (Criteria for Appointment as Enforcement Officer) 
Rules were notified for appointment of Enforcement Officer. In compliance with Section 56 (2) 
(d), (e) and (f) read with section 50 of the Act, v ide Notification dated 13.06.2015, the CWC 
Appeals Rules, 2005 were notified for disposing of appeals by a person aggrieved by any 
direction of the National Authority CWC. 
 
57. However, it was informed that framing of rules on salary and allowances payable to and 
other terms and conditions of the services for the Chairman and members of the National 
Authority CWC under Section (6) of the Act had not yet been completed. In this regard, as per 
decision taken in the 26 th  meeting of Steering Committee held on 26 th  February, 2015, a Sub-
Committee had been constituted under the Chairmansh ip of Additional Secretary, Cabinet 
Secretariat, on 15.05.2015 to draft comprehensive s et of rules under Section 56 of Chemical 
Weapons Convention Act, 2000  and to make suitable recommendations on the issue o f grant of 
amnesty for past violations under various Sections of the Act.  With the enactment of the 
Chemical Weapons Convention (Amendment) Act, 2012, the Sub-Committee constituted by the 
Cabinet Secretary is redrafting the rules comprehen sively and they would be notified as and 
when approved.  The matter is under process.  Howev er, all the rules had been placed on the 
Ministry’s website.  The Ministry is hopeful that t he draft rules would be ready in a couple of 
months. 
 
58. The Committee expresses its deep concern over the f act that the Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare has still not given effect to its recommendations as contained in its 178 th  
& 212 th  Reports on the AIIMS Act, 1956 and Dentist Act, 19 48 respectively regarding 
framing of rules/regulations therein. The Committee  subsequently granted extension of 
time for implementing the 178 th  report and hopes that the Ministry of Health & Fam ily 
Welfare would do the needful within the extended ti me period. The Committee is also 
aware that by amending the AIIMS Act, 1956, Governm ent has established some more 
AIIMS and same Rules and Regulations are being exte nded to them. So it is all the more 
important that all the Rules and Regulations must b e recast with clarity covering all the 

 
areas. The Committee also directs that AIIMS must c ompile taken by AIIMS Institute 
Body and Governing Body as they are important source of law.  
59. The Committee expresses its pleasure to note th at the Ministry of Women & Child 
Development has since ensured that all the States h ave framed the rules under the 
Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006. This is an  important piece of socio-economic 
legislation and has ramifications on the society as  a whole and especially the girl child. The 
rules framed under this Act would help in its proper and effective implementation.  
60. The Committee takes serious note that concerned  rules & regulations under the 
Chemical Weapons Convention Act, 2000 as amended vi de Chemical Weapons Convention 
(Amendment) Act, 2012 have still not been framed. T he Committee expresses its concern 
over the fact that given the international importance of the Chemical Weapons Convention, 
the Ministry has still not been able to give shape to the statutory requirements as mandated 
under the Act. The Committee hopes that the Ministr y  of  Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) would co mplete the necessary formalities 
and complete the framing of rules & regulations as mandated under the Chemical 
Weapons Convention Act, 2000 and Chemical Weapons C onvention (Amendment) Act, 
2012 at the earliest. The Ministry, may take up the  matter with the Ministry of Law & 
Justice for expediting the vetting of the rules/reg ulations at the earliest and resolution of 
objections, if any, raised in the draft rules/regulations.  
 
61. The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Land Resources), Ministry of Informa tion & Broadcasting and the Ministry of 
Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises (Department o f Heavy Industry) on the 8 
th  July, 2015. 
Secretary, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting i nformed the Committee that the Ministry 
administers six Acts, namely, the Prasar Bharati (B roadcasting Corporation of India) 
Amendment Act, 2011; the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867; the Press Council Act, 
1978; the Cable Television Networks Regulation Act,  1995; the Sports Broadcasting Signals 
(Mandatory Sharing with Prasar Bharati) Act, 2007 and the Cinematographic Act, 1952.  
 

 
62. Regarding the Prasar Bharati Act, he stated tha t Section 11 of the Act, which relates to 
transfer of employees to the corporation, could not  be implemented due to resistance from the 
employees. Subsequently, on the recommendations of the Group of Ministers on Prasar Bharati, 
Section 11 of the Act was amended with notification of the Prasar Bharati Amendment Act, 2011 
on 8 th  March, 2012.  It provided that the employees recru ited on or before 5 th  October, 2007 
would be considered Government employees on deemed deputation to Prasar Bharati and the 
employees recruited after 5 th October 2007 would be considered employees of Prasa r Bharati 
Corporation.  In consultation with Prasar Bharati, the Central Government has to notify certain 
rules and regulations governing the terms and condi tions of service of three categories of 
employees, i.e. employees who are on deemed deputat ion to Prasar Bharati; Prasar Bharati 
employees and employees of Indian Information Servi ce, Central Secretariat Service, etc.   
Prasar Bharati, with the approval of the Central Go vernment, has already notified regulations 
relating to authorities for disciplinary proceeding s in respect of those employees who are on 
deemed deputation.  Inter-Ministerial Consultations  are going on in respect of regulations 
relating to service conditions of the Prasar Bharat i employees and the employees of Indian 
Information Service (IIS), Central Secretariat Serv ice (CSS), etc.  Draft rules in respect of terms 
and conditions of posts of IIS, CSS, etc., are stil l awaited from Prasar Bharati.  125 Regulations 
are to be framed under the Prasar Bharati Act out o f which Recruitment Regulations of 11 
categories of posts have been notified.  However, t he Committee decided to have a detailed 
discussion on Prasar Bharati Act and the status of rules/regulations in future meetings. 
 
63. Under the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867, two rules had been notified in 1956 
and 1961. Ten rules under the Press Council Act, 19 78 have already been notified and are in 
operation.  The Cable Television Networks (Regulati on) Act was notified in 1995 and the rules 
framed  thereunder have largely achieved the object ive of regulating the operation of cable 
television network in the country. Rules have already been framed under the Sports Broadcasting 
Signals (Mandatory Sharing with Prasar Bharati) Act , 2007.  With regard to the Cinematograph 
Act, 1952, an Expert Committee headed by Justice Mu kul Mudgal, retired Chief Justice of 
Punjab and Haryana High Court had gone into various issues relating to the Act and submitted its 
recommendations.  The Ministry, after inviting inpu ts of various stakeholders on the proposed 
draft Bill, is in the process of preparing the draf t Cinematograph Bill for vetting by the 

 
Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law and J ustice for inter-Ministerial consultation 
simultaneously.  The Cabinet proposal along with th e draft Bill shall be finalised immediately to 
enable the introduction of the Bill in the Parliame nt.  The Committee, thereafter, on the 19 th  
August, 2015 heard the CEO, Prasar Bharati on the i ssue. He informed the Committee that they 
have framed 12 recruitment regulations that cover 5 0 per cent of the employees.  He further 
stated that framing of 112 recruitment regulations covering much lesser number of employees 
are still pending and will take about a year or two  for completion.  He questioned the need to 
frame the 124 recruitment rules when not a single p erson had been recruited during the last 21 
years.  The moot question is- whether as a professi onal organization and as an autonomous body 
set up by an Act of Parliament- Prasar Bharati woul d be capable of taking a call on a very select 
number of posts and professional recruits on a cont ract basis. He stated that there are very few 
broadcasting bodies in the world which have gone fo r permanent recruitment with benefits like 
pensions, etc.  In his view, rather than focusing s o much on archaic recruitment rules for 
transmission executives, focus should be on recruit ment of professionals like radio jockeys, 
video jockeys, etc on contractual basis, on market rates. 
 
64. Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Pub lic Enterprises (Department of Heavy 
Industry) stated that the Ministry/Department administers no Act and hence no question arises on 
pendency in regard to framing of rules/regulations on their part. Secretary, Department of Land 
Resources informed the Committee that the Departmen t is supposed to make rules under the 
Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land  Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013 but in between Ordinance was  promulgated making changes in 15 
different Sections of the Act. This was passed in L ok Sabha but it could not be passed in Rajya 
Sabha  and now it is with the Joint Parliamentary Committee.  
65. She further informed the Committee that the Act  came into force on 1 
st  January, 2014 and 
was notified on 27 th  September and in October, comprehensive rules were put on the website, but 
those rules were not vetted by the Law Department. After that, when they were sent to Law 
Department, it was of the opinion that the Act itse lf is very elaborate and it does not need 
comprehensive rules.  The Law Ministry only cleared  the portion dealing with social impact 
assessment and consent which were notified in Augus t.  The Department was making rules for 

 
the whole country to begin with but the Law Departm ent opined that the Department was the 
appropriate authority to frame rules only for Union  Territories without Legislature and that the 
State Governments are competent to make their own r ules. The Secretary elaborated that at the 
meeting held on 27 th  June, 2014 with the State Revenue Ministers, the S tates of Madhya Pradesh 
and Tamil Nadu challenged the authority of the Depa rtment to make rules for the whole country 
saying that they were competent to make their own r ules.  The contention was that Puducherry is 
appropriate for the Union Territory of Puducherry a nd the Department can only make it for the 
rest of the Union Territories.  The rules for conse nt have since been notified.  The Department 
has also sought the opinion of the Ministry of Home  Affairs.  In the earlier Act, the Ministry of 
Home Affairs had empowered the Union Territories, d elegated powers to them as appropriate 
Governments and the Union Territories could make rules if necessary. The Department also feels 
that Delhi, Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, and  Andaman and Nicobar Islands are very 
different and making one set of rules and notifying  same yardsticks for them under the Act may 
be difficult.  But, the Ministry of Home Affairs ha s still not delegated the powers.  So, the 
Department has made rules, got them vetted by Law D epartment and are uploading them on the 
website. The draft rules are being  notified today,  i.e. 8 th  July, 2015 giving a time frame of 30 
days for people to give their comments.  The Secret ary, however, added that if the Joint 
Parliamentary Committee makes changes or totally changes it, then the rules which were notified 
and placed before Parliament will have to be made o nce again. The fate of the Ordinance is not 
known and the Department feels that rules should be  made to enable those Governments which 
are in the process of doing it because the Act prov ides that there can be no displacement without 
rehabilitation.  Unless they have a proper rehabili tation package in place, they cannot displace 
people. So, the rules have been put on the website and will be notified 30 days later. But the 
question remains whether they are going to be tempo rary or they will get overawed completely 
depending on the fate of the Ordinance or the Bill.  
66. The Committee notes that the framing of recruitment  regulations under the Prasar 
Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendme nt Act, 2011 has not been 
completed till date and that the Ministry has sough t extension of time till 4 th  December, 
2016 for completing the same. The Committee wonders  how in the absence of recruitment 
regulations, recruitment to vacant posts are being conducted at present. The Committee 
feels that this will give much scope for executive discretion and feels that this is not 

 
desirable. The Committee, accordingly, recommends t hat all pending recruitment 
regulations under the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment 
Act, 2011 should be immediately framed.  
67. The Committee is also happy to note that the Mi nistry of Rural Development 
(Department of Land Resources) has since completed the framing of all rules/regulations 
under the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparen cy in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013. 
68. The Committee heard the representatives of the Mini stry of Defence, Ministry of Heavy 
Industries & Public Enterprises (Department of Publ ic Enterprises) and the Ministry of 
Commerce & Industry (Department of Industrial Polic y & Promotion) on the 9 
th  July, 2015. 
Secretary, Ministry of Defence stated that there ar e 19 Acts under the Ministry and out of these 
19 Acts, under three Acts, viz. the Works of Defenc e Act, 1903, the Armed Forces (Special 
Powers) Ordinance, 1942 and the Armed Forces (Emerg ency Duties) Act, 1947 Rules have not 
been framed.  He submitted that many Acts were enac ted in the 19 th  century; the earliest one 
being the Indian Reserve Forces Act, 1888 but many of these Acts are still relevant because of 
the situation in the Armed Forces and they are still being administered.  He stated that an effort is 
being made to weed out those Acts, regulations and rules which are obsolete.     
69. He stated that the Works of Defence Act was ena cted in 1903 and no rules have been 
framed under it. The Act imposes restrictions on co nstruction of building near defence 
installation The Ministry gets a lot of complaints and representations from the public and 
therefore feels that there is a need to make amendm ents in the Act.  An internal Committee has 
been constituted in May, 2015 to prepare the draft.    He submitted that the Armed Forces Special 
Powers Ordinance, 1942  and the Cantonment (House-A ccommodation) Act, 1923 are suggested 
to be repealed. He also submitted that under the Ar med Forces Emergency Duties Act, 1947, 
there is no rule making provision but the Act is st ill prevalent.  Under the Indian Military 
Nursing Services Ordinance, 1943, drafting of some new rules are in progress. In regard to the 
Armed Forces Special Powers Ordinance, 1942 and the  Military Nursing Services Ordinance, 
1943, the Committee wanted to know how these Ordina nces are still in force without being 
replaced by legislation in Parliament. The Committe e was informed that the Indian Military 
Nursing Services Ordinance, 1943 was converted into Adopted Legislative Order (ALO) in 1950 

 
by Parliament. However, the Committee could not und erstand the reasons why the nomenclature 
“Ordinance” is being continued till date if it has gone through Parliament and how the 
nomenclature “Ordinance” has been converted into a Legislative Order. The Defence Secretary 
stated that these are very old cases and a lot of r esearch is needed to find out what exactly 
happened. He assured the Committee that though it i s definitely a challenging task the Ministry 
will get back to the Committee with the required details of the case. 
70. Secretary, DIPP informed the Committee that the  Acts under the administrative control of 
the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion are the Boilers Act, 1923; the Explosives Act, 
1884; the Geographical Indications of Goods (Regula tion and Protection) Act, 1999; the 
Industrial Development and Regulation Act, 1951; th e Design Act, 2000; the Patents Act, 1970; 
the Salt Cess Act, 1953 and the Trade Mark Act, 1999.  He further stated that the Department has 
framed all the rules and regulations in all the Act s except the National Institute of Design Act, 
2014. The Statutes, Ordinances and rules under the said Act are in active consideration of the 
Governing Body of the NID, Ahmedabad, and the Department will try and finalise them within a 
period of six months.  Secretary, DPE submitted bef ore the Committee that the mandate of the 
Department of Public Enterprises is very limited an d that the Department is just a nodal 
Department coordinating matters relating to general  policies which are non-financial.  He 
informed the Committee that the Department does not  administer any Act nor does it have any 
CPSEs under it. He stated that the Department is ju st disseminating guidelines which are laid 
down by various agencies.   
 
71. The Committee, however, found that the Statutes , Ordinances and rules to be framed 
under the NID Act, 2014 has not been framed after t he expiry of six months, as assured by the 
Secretary, DIPP during the Committee’s meeting held  on 9 July 2015. Accordingly, the Ministry 
was requested vide  D.O. letter dated 12 January 2016 to ensure the fr aming of all Statutes, 
Ordinances and rules contemplated under the NID Act , 2015 within 30 days. In response, the 
Ministry vide  O.M. dated 22 January 2016 submitted that Recruitm ent Rules for the post of 
Director has been framed under Section 38(2) and Or dinance No.1, regarding award of degrees, 
has been framed under Section 30(d) of the Act. The  Ministry stated that other Ordinances shall 
be proposed by the Senate and approved by the Gover ning Council in due course. Regarding 
Statutes, the Ministry stated that they are under a ctive consideration of the Governing Council. 

 
The Ministry, accordingly, requested for extension of time of six months for completing the 
framing of subordinate legislation under the Act. S ecretary, DIPP was called before the 
Chairman of the Committee on 25 April 2016 during w hich he assured the Chairman that the 
framing of Statutes, Ordinances and Rules under NID  Act, 2014 would be completed by 30 
September 2016. 
 
72. The Committee notes that DIPP had framed all the ru les/regulations to be framed 
under Acts of Parliament administered by them excep t National Institute of Design Act, 
2014.  The Committee also notes that Secretary, DIP P had assured the Committee that the 
Department will try to finalize the framing of Stat utes, Ordinances and rules under the 
National Institute of Design Act, 2014 within a per iod of six months from 9 July 2015. 
However, the Department was unable to ensure the fr aming of Statutes, Ordinances and 
rules within this timeframe and sought extension of  time of further six months w.e.f. 22 
January 2016 for completing the same. The Secretary , DIPP, during the meeting with the 
Chairman of the Committee on 25 April 2016 assured that the framing of Statutes, 
Ordinances and rules under the NID Act, 2014 would be completed by 30 September 2016 
and accordingly, the Department was granted extensi on of time till 30 September 2016 for 
completing the same. The Committee, accordingly, re commends that the Ministry should 
expedite the framing of Statutes, Ordinances and ru les and complete all necessary 
formalities with regard to the framing of Statutes,  Ordinances and rules under the NID 
Act, 2014 by 30 September 2016.  The Committee also recommends that DIPP should carry 
out review of the old Acts administered by them lik e the Boilers Act, 1923; the Explosives 
Act, 1884, etc to assess their relevance in today’s  context and take necessary action to 
amend or bring in a new legislation accordingly.   
73. The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
and Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) on the 19 
th  August, 2015.  
Chairman, Railway Board informed that Railways administer five Acts – the Railway Board Act, 
1905; the Railways Act,1989; the Railway Protection  Force Act, 1957; the Railway Property 
(Unlawful Possession) Act, 1966 and the Railway Claims Tribunal Act, 1987.  The Railways Act 
has been amended twice in 2005 and 2008.  In 2005, it was amended for constitution of RLDA, 

 
and, in 2008, it was amended to facilitate acquisit ion of land for special railway projects. All 
required rules/regulations under these Acts have be en framed except one relating to land 
acquisition. The draft land acquisition Rules were submitted to the Ministry of Law and Justice 
who pointed out some anomalies in view of the new L and Acquisition Act.  The draft rules were 
presently being re-examined by the Ministry to brin g them in conformity with the new Act as 
advised by the Law Ministry.  The Committee notes t hat the Ministry of Railways has since then 
framed the Special Rail Projects Land Acquisition Rules, 2016.  
74. Secretary, Department of Commerce informed that  the Department of Commerce 
administers a total of ten Acts and the rules/regul ations under all these ten Acts have since been 
notified,  uploaded on the website of the bodies co ncerned as well as the Department, and all of 
them are under implementation.  Regarding review of  Acts, the Foreign Trade Act, 1992 was 
amended in 2010.  The Tea Act, 1953 is presently un der consideration to review the existing 
provisions and modernize the regulatory regime. The  provisions for registration of growers, 
manufacturers, control over estates, development an d marketing functions are proposed to be 
amended as part of this exercise.  Consultation process with stakeholders is underway and once it 
is completed, the Tea Board will take steps to amen d the legislation.  With regard to the Coffee 
Act, 1942, the provisions relating to procurement, marketing, sale and pricing of coffee are being 
looked into.  The intention is to delete the provis ion relating to pricing of coffee and provide for 
free market operations under the Act.  It is also p roposed to add the developmental functions to 
the role of the Coffee Board.  Consultation with st akeholders has been completed and the 
amendments are being formalized in consultation wit h the Legislative Department.  Once it is 
approved by Cabinet, it will be introduced in the next session of Parliament (Winter session).  
75. The Committee pursued the issue of framing of r ules/regulations under the Foreign Trade 
(Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010. T he Ministry informed the Committee 
that the Safeguard Measures (Quantitative Restricti ons) Rules, 2012 under the Foreign Trade 
(Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010 ha s been framed. With regard to framing 
of Brokering Rules under Section 14A(1) and 14C of the Foreign Trade (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1992 [inserted by Section 15 of th e Foreign Trade (Development and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010], the Ministry vide O.M. dated  nil March, 2013 stated that 
there is no need to notify Brokering Rules as suffi cient provisions are available under Section 

 
14D & 14E (Chapter IVA) of the Act and the Weapons of Mass Destruction and their Delivery 
Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2 005.  Further, vide  D.O. letters dated 17 
November 2014, the Ministry was asked to clarify ho w the provisions of one Act could be a 
tenable justification for not framing of rules unde r another Act.  Thereafter, vide  D.O. letter 
dated 9 January 2016, the Ministry was requested to  seek the advice of the Ministry of Law & 
Justice about the need to frame Brokering Rules under the Act.  The Ministry vide  O.M. dated 29 
June 2016 stated that the advice of the Ministry of  Law & Justice was sought and accordingly, in 
a consultative meeting chaired by the Director Gene ral, Foreign Trade held on 13 May 2016, it 
was decided that Rules would be framed under Sectio n 26(1) of the Weapons of Mass 
Destruction and their Delivery Systems (Prohibition  of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005 read with 
Section 14B(1) of the Foreign Trade (Development an d Regulation) Act, 1992, as amended and 
Section 12 of the  Weapons of Mass Destruction and their Delivery Systems (Prohibition of 
Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005, by the Ministry of External Affairs, in consultation with other 
concerned Departments. 
 
76. The Committee is constrained to point out that the Ministry has not framed 
Brokering Rules under Section 14A(1) and 14C of the  Foreign Trade (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1992 [inserted by Section 15 of th e Foreign Trade (Development and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010]. The argument of t he Ministry for not framing the 
rules is that there is no need to frame the Brokering Rules as sufficient penal provisions are 
available under Section 14D and 14E (Chapter IVA) o f the Act and in the Weapons of 
Mass Destruction and their Delivery Systems (Prohib ition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 
2005.  The Committee fails to understand how the pr ovisions of one Act can be sufficient 
for the purposes of another Act and how the Ministr y can claim that there is no need for 
framing of rules when the Act delegates power to th e Ministries/Departments to frame the 
rules. The Committee, therefore, recommends that th e Ministry of External Affairs, in 
consultation with other concerned Departments should expedite action in the matter. 
 
77. The Committee further recommends that in cases where framing of subordinate 
legislation is delegated by the parent Act and the Ministry does not feel the need for 
framing of subordinate legislation, the Ministry sh ould consult the Ministry of Law & 

 
Justice and thereafter, if the Ministry of Law & Ju stice concurs with the view of the 
Ministry, the Ministry should lay a statement on th e Table of the House outlining the 
reasons why they do not feel the need to frame subordinate legislation under the said Acts. 
 
78. The Committee is happy to note that the Departm ent of Commerce is undertaking a 
review of old Acts administered by them to assess t heir relevance in today’s context and is 
in the process of amending the Tea Act, 1953 and th e Coffee Act, 1942. The Committee, 
however, notes that Bills for the amendment of the Tea Act, 1953 and the Coffee Act, 1942 
has not been introduced in the House till date, des pite the assurance given by the Ministry 
to introduce the Bills by the Winter Session, 2015.  Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should expedite the re view of these old Acts and introduce 
the Bill for amending these Acts in Parliament at t he earliest, preferably by the Winter 
Session of 2016. The Committee also recommends that  on priority basis, other 
Ministries/Departments should also carry out a review of all old Acts administered by them 
to assess their relevance in today’s context and ta ke necessary action to either repeal the 
old Acts which are of no relevance or amend the old Acts for their continued relevance.  
79. The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology 
 (Department of Electronics & Information Technology ) and the 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceut icals) on the 11 th  September, 2015.  
Secretary, Department of Electronics and Informatio n Technology (DeitY) stated that the 
Department administers two Acts-namely the Informat ion Technology Act, 2000 and the 
Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout & Design ( SICLD) Act, 2000.  He submitted that 
there are some areas for which rules have not yet b een framed.  These included rules relating to 
electronic signatures and the duties of subscribers  as provided for under Section 40A, which will 
be framed as and when the new technology for electr onic signatures is specified.   The post of 
Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal was lyi ng vacant for the last three-and-a-half years, 
and the Department was in the process of framing ru les regarding the powers and functions of 
the Chairperson under Section 52A.  Rules on inform ation security practices and administrative 
issues relating to the salaries and allowances of o fficers as provided for under Section 70B are 
also yet to be framed.  Under Section 84A, the rule s relating to encryption policy are ready for 
publication, and, consultations are being done.  Re garding rules on terms and conditions of 

 
officers and employees of CERT-In (Indian Computer Emergency Response Team), rules have 
been framed for Director-General and the same neede d to be expanded to cover other officers 
and employees.  This process will be completed in s ix months or so.  Under Section 70 which 
deals with information security practices and proce dures for protected system, the National 
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre is mandated with the task of prescribing the 
practices and procedures.  The Department is in con sultation with them, and, after taking inputs 
from them, the rules will be framed.   Inputs were also being sought from National Technical 
Research Organization as the Centre is under them.  On the manner and form of information to 
be retained and duration of retention, as provided for under Section 67C, the Secretary informed 
that the definition of 'intermediaries' as defined in the Information Technology Act is very broad 
and making one single prescription of retention of records under the Act has been a very difficult 
task because best practices in industry range from three months to twelve months and sometimes 
beyond that also.   This retention period also dict ates the kind of investment and also involves 
economic reasons.     Nowadays, since the entire th ing is moving on mobile commerce and there 
has been a splurge in mobile commerce activities, i nputs are taken from the Department of 
Commerce.  Essentially, the retention of record is meant for investigation purposes.   So, the 
Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of Commer ce need to be taken on board.   The 
moment there is an electronic transaction, there is  scope for dispute and so the inputs of these 
Ministries have to be taken. 
 
80. The Semiconductor Integrated Circuit Layout-Des ign Act, 2000 was enacted as a 
consequence of the WTO Trade Related Aspects of Int ellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) 
Agreement, which required protection of Intellectua l Property (IP) related to semiconductor 
integrated circuits and layout designs. Under Secti on 6 of TRIPs Agreement, member countries 
had agreed for providing protection to layout desig ns, i.e., topographies of integrated circuits to 
cater to legal frameworks and trading aspects of IPRs by members.  India being a signatory to the 
TRIPs Treaty had formulated this Act which provides  for protection of the Integrated Circuit 
(IC) Layout Design and matters connected therewith.   It empowers the registered proprietor of 
the layout design and gives him an inherent right t o use the layout design, commercially and to 
obtain relief in respect of any infringement of his  patents.  Rules prescribing the procedure for 
registration of an original layout-design of a semi conductor integrated circuit have been framed 

 
and notified on 11 th  December, 2001.  Later, amendments were made and n otified in September, 
2012 and laid on the Table of the Houses of the Par liament in March, 2013.  The areas under 
which rules are yet to be made relate to the condit ions of services for Member, Technical and his 
support staff; and Registrar, Officers of the Regis try and support staff in the Registry which are 
under formulation.  The Rules are being implemented  and the Registry is examining various 
applications made under the Act for registration. 
81. Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals informed t hat they are administering the 
National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research Act, 1998 (NIPER Act)  which 
provides for the formation of one National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research at 
Mohali in Punjab. The Act was amended in 2007 to cr eate six additional NIPERs, one each at 
Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Kolkata, Guwahati, Rae Bareli  and Hajipur.  The second important 
provision is the Drugs and Cosmetics  Act which is administered by the Department of Heal th 
and Family Welfare.  Quality and safety standards a re maintained by the Drug Controller of 
India which comes under the control of the Ministry  of Health and Family Welfare.  The third 
important provision is the Essential Commodities Ac t which is basically administered by the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, but some components, especially, the pricing of drugs, is 
administered by the Department of Pharmaceuticals.  Under these provisions, the National 
Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) was set up which deals with the Drug Control Orders 
of 1995 and 2013.  NPPA controls the prices of drug s while quality and other things are dealt 
with by the Health Ministry.  
82.  Under NIPER Act, the first Statutes were frame d in the year 2003 by the Board of 
Governors of NIPER at Mohali and approved by the Vi sitor, i.e. the President of India. The first 
amendment of the Statute was given in 2003 and the second amendment was given in the year 
2014.  Basically, all academic issues like how to run the institution, how to conduct examination, 
how to admit students, etc., are covered by the Sta tutes and Ordinances.  The Board of 
Governors, headed by the Director of National Institute, issues various Ordinances regulating the 
various academic standards of the institutions.  Al l the regulations, Statutes and Ordinances are 
uploaded on the website of the Ministry as well as in the website of particular institutions.  .   
83. The  Committee  recommends that the Ministry of Electronics and Inf ormation 
Technology should complete the framing of rules/reg ulations contemplated under the 

 
Information Technology Act, 2000 and the  Semiconductor Integrated Circuit Layout-
Design Act, 2000 expeditiously. Keeping in view the  international parameters and fast 
changing scenario in the IT and electronics sector,  the Ministry should ensure that the 
rules/regulations framed should cater to the needs of this sector and meet international 
parameters.   
 
84. The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and the 
Department of Atomic Energy on the 28th September, 2015. Secretary, Department of Atomic 
Energy stated that the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damages Rules was framed under the Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damages Act and that the Nucl ear Liability Fund Rules are pending.  
Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs stated that t he Ministry of Tribal Affairs is the nodal 
Ministry mandated with the administration of the Fo rest Rights Act, 2006.  To give effect to the 
Act, the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional For est Dwellers Rules, 2008, were published on 
1
st  January, 2008.  However, even after more than four years of implementation of the Act, it was 
observed that the flow of intended benefits of this  legislation to the eligible forest dwellers had 
remained constrained and several problems were impe ding the implementation of this Act in 
letter and spirit.  Therefore, to overcome these la cunae and strengthen the existing Forest Right 
Rules, 2008, the Ministry notified the Scheduled Tr ibes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
Amendment Rules on the 6 th  September, 2012.  Subsequently, the Ministry also issued 
comprehensive guidelines to the States and UTs on the 12 th  July, 2012, for better implementation 
of the Act.   
 
85. The Committee notes that the Department of Atomic E nergy has since framed the 
Nuclear Liability Fund Rules, 2015 under the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damages Act.  
 
86. The Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on status of 
framing of subordinate legislation under Acts admin istered by the Ministry on the 12 
th  October, 
2015. The Secretary in his submission to the Commit tee informed that the Ministry administers 
10 Acts.  The status of framing of subordinate legi slation under them is contained in the 
following paras. 
 

 
87.    Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974:  In terms of Section 31 of the Act, total nine (9) 
rules were framed and amended from time to time.  A ll the concerned rules and their 
amendments are already available on the website of Oil Industry Development Board. The 
Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948: I n exercise of the powers conferred by 
Sections 5 and 6 of the Act rules and regulations h ave been framed.  The rules/regulations 
framed under it are being used for issuing of Petro leum Exploration Licence (PEL)/ Petroleum 
Mining Licence (PML) and administering overall expl oration and production operations in the 
country with the prescribed conditions notified in the Official Gazette. All the contemplated 
subordinate legislation under the Act had been fram ed and uploaded on the website of the 
Ministry.  
 
88.   The Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB ) Act, 2006: Under Section 60(2) 
of the Act, six (6) rules have been framed and noti fied for implementing the various provisions 
of the Act so far.   With regard to regulations, th ese have been framed under Section 61(2) by 
PNGRB and are available in the website of PNGRB. Th e rules/regulations framed are also being 
uploaded on the website of the Ministry.  
 
89.   The Committee was also informed that that three Act s  i.e.  the  ESSO (Acquisition of 
Undertakings in India) Act, 1974; the Caltex (Acqui sition of shares of Caltex Oil Refining 
(India) Limited and of the Undertaking in India of Caltex (India) Limited Act, 1977 and Kosan 
Gas Company (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1979 were  not available on the Ministry’s 
website as they have outlived their utility.   The Law Commission has recommended repeal of 
these Acts with suitable saving clause to be incorporated in the Repealing Act. 
 
90.    The Ministry further informed that the  Burmah Shell (Acquisition of Undertakings in 
India) Act, 1976 had neither lived out its purpose,  nor has it become redundant and/or obsolete. 
It was stated that Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited has to rely on Sections 5(2), 7(3) and 11 
of the said Act, whereby and where under BPCL is en titled to renew its expiring leases for 
further similar period as provided in lease agreeme nts and Sections 5(2) read with 7(3) of said 
Act, which provisions are also protected in view of  the non-obsolete provisions contained in 
section 11 of the said Act. As such, unless adequate protection in respect of the aforesaid renewal 

 
of lease is provided in the repealing Act, it will be detrimental to BPCL’s interest to contest cases 
where BPCL is seeking to continue with sites on the  strength of the said provision. Further, with 
the decontrol of petrol and diesel prices, the priv ate players will be active and BPCL will face 
problem of protecting its prominent sites to do bus iness. Keeping in view the public utility 
character of BPCL and social responsibility cast on  BPCL with respect to opening of RO sites at 
not so economically viable sites, this protection is desirable. 
 
91.    It was informed that  the Petroleum Act, 1934 was oldest Act administered  by the Ministry 
and it seeks to consolidate and amend the law relat ing to import, transport, storage, production, 
refining and blending of petroleum. In fact the Pet roleum Act, 1934 replaced the Indian 
Petroleum Act of 1899 which was amended in 1925-26 in consultation with the local 
governments and finally replaced by the present Act.  The Petroleum Rules, 1976 were published 
on the 30 
th  June, 1976 and came into force w.e.f. August 1976.   The Petroleum Rules, 2002 
which superseded the Petroleum Rules, 1976 were not ified on 1 st  March, 2002.  The Petroleum 
(Amendment) Rules, 2011 were notified on 1 st  December, 2011.  The Act and rules are available 
on the website of the Ministry.  
 
92.     The Petroleum and Mineral Pipelines (PMP) Act, 1962 : PMP Act, 1962 was amended in 
2011 vide  the Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Land) 
Amendment Act, 2011 and notified on 13.1.2012.  The  provisions of the Act came into force 
w.e.f. 1.3.2012.    Under the PMP Act, 1962, the Pe troleum and Mineral Pipelines (Acquisition 
of Right of User in Land) Rule, 1963 have been fram ed and uploaded on the website of the 
Ministry.  
 
93.   The Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology was set up under the Rajiv Gandhi 
Institute of Petroleum Technology Act, 2007 as an institute of national importance. In exercise of 
the powers conferred by Section 29 read with Sectio n 30 of the Act, the 1 st  Statutes of the Rajiv 
Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology have been framed and published on 16 th  October, 
2009.  These are being uploaded on the website of the Ministry. 
 

 
94. Thereafter, in continuation of its emphasis on timely framing of subordinate legislation, a 
D.O. letter was issued in the second week of Januar y, 2016 seeking the status of framing of 
rules/regulations/ordinances under the Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) 
Act, 2006 and Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology Act, 2007.  
 
95. In response the Ministry vide its O.M. dated th e 12 
th  February, 2016 informed the status 
of framing and laying of rules/regulations/ordinanc es under the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of 
Petroleum Technology Act, 2007. It was observed tha t the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum 
Technology had still not completed the process of f raming/notifying the subordinate legislation 
contemplated to be framed under the Act. In fact on  certain issues it was seen that the Board of 
Governors had approved the Rules but the details re garding whether they had been laid before 
the Parliament had not been furnished. The Committee expresses its concern at this state o f 
affairs and urges the Ministry of Petroleum & Natur al Gas to advice the Rajiv Gandhi 
Institute of Petroleum Technology on the need for v etting of the concerned 
rules/regulations/ordinances by the Ministry of Law  & Justice, their publication in the 
official Gazette and laying the notifications before the Parliament .     
 
96. The Committee observes that the Ministry of Petrole um and Natural Gas have still 
not completed the process of framing the rules/regu lations under the Petroleum & Natural 
Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) Act, 2006 despite a la pse of more than nine years. The 
Committee expresses its grave concern at this state  of affairs and recommends to the 
Ministry to complete the framing of the rules/regul ations as contemplated under the Act at 
the earliest and without any further delay.  
 
97. The Committee notes that all the subordinate legisl ation under the various Acts 
administered by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natur al Gas have not been uploaded on its 
website and recommend that the Ministry should take  adequate measures to update its 
website and ensure that all the Acts and concerned subordinate legislation administered by 
it are uploaded on its website.  Further, the Acts which have been recommended for 
repelling by the Law Commission should be repealed and if necessary, a suitable saving 

 
clause should be inserted in the Repealing  Act and  the same be made available on its 
website for reference purposes.  
 
98. The Committee further notes that some of the Ac ts administered by the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas like the Petroleum Act, 193 4, are very old. The Committee 
therefore recommends that these old Acts may be rev isited with the purpose of review and 
the Ministry may look into the possibility of frami ng new set of legislation to replace them, 
if necessary, keeping in view the latest advances i n the field of petroleum technology and 
the needs of the country. The Committee also hopes that the Ministry would complete the 
framing of rules/regulations, if any, under the Acts at the earliest.   
 
99. The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative 
Department) on the issue of delay in vetting of sub ordinate legislation on the 9 
th  February, 2016. 
Additional Secretary, Legislative Department assure d the Committee that the Department is 
taking utmost care to vet the rules and regulations  within a reasonable time by ensuring that no 
subordinate legislation is pending for more than fi fteen days.  The files for vetting have been 
classified into three categories.  Proposals having  deficiencies such as incomplete file sent 
without approval of competent authority, non-enclos ure of up-to- date copies of Gazette 
notification and papers or where further informatio n or discussion is required to settle the 
drafting issues with the referring Ministry or Depa rtment are to be returned within three working 
days from the date of receipt of the proposal by re cording a small note pointing out the 
deficiencies, etc.  Secondly, proposal where no fur ther information or document is required from 
the referring Ministry or Department, will be scrutinized and vetted within a period of two weeks 
from the date of receipt.  Thirdly, subordinate leg islation proposals containing detailed rules, 
regulations, byelaws, etc., are to be cleared, in a ny case, within three weeks from the date of 
receipt.  Any proposal requiring time beyond three weeks will invariably be shown to the 
Additional Secretary for approval.   
100. Additional Secretary, Legislative Department s ubmitted before the Committee that the 
Department has only 22 officers who are dealing with principal legislation as well as subordinate 
legislation.  Moreover, there are many subjects whe re Legislative Department is the 
administrative Ministry.  Also, the Department is d ealing with the legislation on more than 
hundred ‘Concurrent List’ subjects. She also inform ed the Committee that the proposal for 
increase of cadre strength is pending with the Depa rtment of Expenditure. On the issue as to 

 
whether a separate wing has been created to deal wi th vetting, she replied that there are only 22 
officers and out of them, a special group has been created to deal with urgent proposals. 
101. On the issue of vetting of subordinate legisla tion of statutory bodies, Additional 
Secretary, Legislative Department clarified that al l statutory bodies are supposed to send their 
subordinate legislation to the Legislative Departme nt for vetting. Specific clarification was 
sought on the claim of CERC that it is an autonomou s body and that its subordinate legislations 
need no vetting from the Legislative Department. Ad ditional Secretary, Legislative Department 
clarified that even as a statutory body, CERC has t o send its subordinate legislations to 
Legislative Department for vetting. She further sta ted that CERC cannot unilaterally decide that 
they need not go to the Legislative Department beca use as per the Allocation of Business Rules, 
they are required to go to Legislative Department. The Additional Secretary also stated that such 
autonomy is self-proclaimed by these institutions a nd nowhere in the Statute this has been 
provided.   
102. The Committee agrees with the views of the Leg islative Department that all 
subordinate legislation of autonomous/statutory bod ies are required to be vetted by the 
Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law & Jus tice. The Committee does not agree 
with the views of certain autonomous/statutory bodi es that they are autonomous and need 
not send their subordinate legislations for vetting  to the Legislative Department. The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends that all Ministr ies/Departments and their 
autonomous/statutory bodies should send their subor dinate legislation for vetting to the 
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law & Justice. The Committee also recommends that 
all Ministries/Departments should sensitize the aut onomous/statutory bodies under them 
regarding the need for sending their subordinate le gislations for vetting by the Legislative 
Department. 
 
103. The Committee heard the representatives of the  Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (Department of Higher Education) along with the representatives of certain Central 
Universities to explain the reasons for delay in framing of Statutes/Ordinances/Regulations under 
the Central University Acts on the 27
th  June, 2016. The Committee notes that most of the Central 
Universities do not frame Statutes/Ordinances under  their Acts also. However, the Secretary of 
the Department of Higher Education appeared before the Chairman on 27 th  June, 2016 to explain 
the reasons for delay of framing of subordinate leg islation under various Acts and assured to 
complete the framing in near future. The Committee wonders how the Central Universities 

 
are functioning in the absence of Statutes and Ordi nances which are supposed to provide 
for important matters like manner of award of degre es, terms and conditions of service of 
teaching and non-teaching staffs, admission procedu re, courses of study, constitution, 
powers and functions of the University authorities,  etc.  The Committee feels that without 
the necessary Statutes and Ordinances, the Universities are functioning with discretion and 
fears that this will adversely impact the future of  the students studying in these 
Universities. The Committee, accordingly, recommend s that the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development (Department of Higher Educatio n) should ensure that all Central 
Universities should immediately frame the necessary Statutes/Ordinances/Regulations so as 
to avoid any discretion and arbitrary actions on the part of the University authorities. 
 
  

 
II 
Memorandum on delay in framing of Subordinate Legislation under various Acts  
 
104. The Committee monitors the framing of subordin ate legislation under various Acts 
passed by both the Houses of Parliament apart from the mandate of the Committee detailed 
under Rule 209 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduc t of Business in the Council of States. The 
practice is going on since 2001. Before 2001, the C ommittee gave various recommendations to 
frame Subordinate legislation in a time bound manne r, i.e. within six months of the Act coming 
into force. In ideal situation the Ministries shoul d start framing of subordinate legislation along 
with framing of parent legislation as some of the P arliaments in the world require tabling of 
subordinate legislation at the time of introduction  of Bill. The Act cannot come into force in its 
entirety as per the intent of Parliament as long as  subordinate legislation is not framed otherwise 
it gives uncontrolled discretionary powers to execu tive which is against the Parliamentary intent. 
Some of the statutory institutions and autonomous b odies of the Govt. have over the years have 
developed their own usages and practices at the exp ense of transparent delegated legislation. 
Such organizations are reluctant to leave their dis cretionary powers and often develop short term 
fire fighting measures instead of having long stand ing norms and procedures as envisaged under 
the Act. 
 
105. The Committee’s original mandate did not inclu de monitoring the framing of subordinate 
legislation in a time bound manner. However, after its functioning it was felt over the years that 
scrutiny of Rules and Regulations will be meaningfu l if framing of such subordinate legislation 
in a time bound is ensured. During formative years of functioning of Committee it came to 
knowledge of Committee that Ministries are not fram ing subordinate legislation within the 
prescribed time frame set by the Committee and ther e is inordinate delays in framing as well 
laying of delegated legislation on the Table of both Houses of the Parliament.  
106. The Committee in its third report while scruti nizing the amendment in the Indian Police 
Service (Pay) Rules, 1954 observed that in this par ticular  case an inordinately long time was 
taken/consumed in consulting, finalizing and ultima tely framing the rules as the Ministry of 
Home Affairs then decided to revised the pay scales  of these officers only in February, 1962 
after consultation with Ministry of Finance and the  State Governments. Although executive 

 
orders were issued from time to time giving effect to the decisions arrived at the actual framing 
of the rules was deferred till September, 1965 as t he Ministry was still processing the 
representations received from the State Government regarding certain posts and fixation of pay 
thereof. Finally, the notification dated the 22 nd  September, 1965 were given effect to 
retrospectively from the 1 st  April, 1960. 
107. Taking serious note of this long delay the Com mittee recommended that the following 
steps may be adopted by the Ministry to avoid such delay in future:- 
(i) The Ministry should lay down a definite time li mit, say six months, within which the 
process of consultation with the state Governments should be completed. 
 
(ii) After the above process is completed rules sho uld be framed as reasonably early as 
possible for giving statutory effect to the decisio n arrived at ensuring that retrospective 
effect to an amendment is not given for a period exceeding two years. 
 
108. Again in 1971 while examining the delay in fin alization of the Food Corporation of India 
(staff) Regulations, 1965, the Committee observed t hat the Regulations providing for the 
methods of appointment, the conditions of service a nd the scale of pay of the officers and 
employees of FCI were at the draft stage. The State  of affairs continued in spite of the fact that 
regulations were purported to have been made in 1965 when FCI came into being the Committee 
was thoroughly dissatisfied with the explanation gi ven by the Secretary of the Department of 
Food and Chairman, FCI and felt that FCI could have  promptly formulated Regulations for its 
employees that in any case it should have not taken  2 to 3 years for the Ministry to come to a 
conclusion that Food Corporation Act 1964 required amendment. The Committee further got 
assurance from the Secretary of the Ministry that s aid regulation would be finalized and 
published in the Gazette soon. To avoid this kind o f situation in future, the Committee in its 9 
th  
Report recommended that:  
"In order that such long and inordinate delays do no t take place in future, the 
Committee recommends that rules and regulations req uired to be made under a statute 
should be made as soon as possible but in no case later than six months from the date on 
which the statute comes into force" 
 
109. Further the Committee while deliberating on de lay in the finalization of the Indian 
Museum Rules, 1970, the Committee reiterated above said recommendation and also impressed 
to adhere to the following procedure:- 

 
" To avoid delay the Ministries could, to start with,  frame broad but clear rules; they 
need not wait to frame all the rules on a particula r subject in one installment especially 
when various authorities/bodies have to be consulte d in the matter. Such rules could be 
amended or new rules added subsequently on the basi s of experience. It is recognized 
that rule should be as perfect as possible, but thi s perfection should not be at the cost of 
expedition. The Ministries should also establish th e practice that if rules are not framed 
within this period of six months the Secretary or t he Head of the Department at the 
Secretary's level should be informed accordingly wh o in turn should by means of a 
comprehensive note  inform the Minister concerned a nd obtain his orders thereon. Such 
a note should invariably refer to the fact whether the particular matter had come within 
the knowledge or comment of a Parliamentary Committ ee or not. The Committee are 
persuaded to make this suggestion for the simple re ason that for any non-compliance or 
excessive delay in compliance with the provision of  a statute the Minister is answerable 
to the House. The Committee trust that if such a co urse is adopted, the cases of such 
abnormal delays will definitely lessen" 
 
110. The Committee further examined the issue of de lay in making rules i.e. The Radiation 
Protection Rules, 1971; The Victoria Memorial Hall (GPF) Rules, 1972, the Insecticides Rules, 
1971, in its fourteenth Report and shown its displeasure over the issue and stated: 
" The Committee expresses its anguish at such long de lays. The Committee hopes and 
trusts that ministries concerned will strictly adhe re to the procedures laid down  in para 
56 of its Tenth Report as quoted above and rules re quired to be made under a statutes 
would be made without delay but in no case later th an six months from the date on 
which the statute comes into force" 
 
111. In 1979, the Committee in its 31
st  Report observed that the Ministries send the reque sts 
for extension of time in a routine way without disclosing full facts to the Committee and advance 
inadequate reasons for seeking extension of time. The Committee again in 1981 in its 47 th  Report 
observed that if Ministries are unable to adhere to  the time limit of six months, they should 
inform the Committee of the reasons why they could not make rules within time limit. 
112. It is pertinent to mention here that consisten t persuasion by the Committee made Ministry 
of Home Affairs to issue comprehensive instructions to all its departments on 21.5.1980 detailing 
the steps to monitor timely faming of rules and reg ulations. The Ministry suggested that in order 
to avoid delay in framing of rules the Sections cou ld, to start with, frame broad but clear rules; 
they need not wait to frame all the rules on a part icular subject in one installment especially 
when various authorities/bodies have to be consulte d in the matter. Such rules should be 
amended early subsequently on the basis of experience. 

 
113. The Committee took a cognizance of this initia tive by the Ministry of Home Affairs and 
recommended in its 41 st  Report in 1980 to all the Ministries to follow sam e procedure as being 
followed by the Ministry of Home Affairs to elimina te delays. However, the Ministries still kept 
delaying framing of Rules and Regulations. Taking i nto cognizance of this fact, the Committee 
in its 192 nd  Report in 2011 recommended that henceforth, if the Ministries are not adhering to the 
time limit of six months, they would invariably lay a statement explaining the reasons of delay in 
framing of rules and regulations while laying them on the table of the House. 
114. The Committee again took up a comprehensive ex ercise in 2013 and started calling 
Secretaries before the Committee to explain the del ay. The Committee deliberated on eight Acts 
where Rules were not framed in a time bound manner.  The Committee presented its 212 th  Report 
to the House with stringent recommendations on the issue of timely framing of Rules and 
Regulations. In fact the Committee stated in the 21 2 th  report that ‘it seems AIIMS feels more 
comfortable in enjoying discretion at the expense o f transparency and even violating the 
mandate of Parliament’.  
115.  Thereafter, the Committee since September, 20 14 has held 14 meetings with more than 
35 Ministries/Departments on the status of framing of rules and regulations under the Acts 
administered by the concerned Ministries/Department . The Committee observed that the 
Ministries have been giving various excuses for not  framing the Rules in time which include 
‘vetting of Rules pending with legislative Departme nt,’ Law Ministry suggested modification,’ 
consultation with stakeholders,’ States are being p ursued’. Matter is sub-judice’, ‘no need of 
rules at present’, rule making provision is only en abling provision and does not mandatorily 
require them to frame all the Rules’ etc. 
116. In the latest instance a meeting of the Secret aries was held by the Cabinet Secretary on 
22 
nd  December, 2015 wherein it was observed that the pr ocedure for Subordinate Legislation as 
laid down in the Manual of Parliamentary Procedure was not being followed strictly by the 
Ministries/Departments. The Secretariat was further requested to provide a comprehensive list of 
Acts on which rules were still pending. The list as  requested was forwarded to the Cabinet 
Secretary by the Secretary-General, Rajya Sabha.  T he Cabinet Secretary, thereafter, wrote a 
D.O. letter dated 13 th  April, 2016 to all the Ministries/Departments high lighting the importance 
of framing the rules as soon as possible to give effect to the relevant Act. It was further requested 

 
that the endeavour should be made to complete the p rocess within one month of the passage of 
the Acts so that the benefits become available to the people. 
 
117. The Committee has taken note of the fact that the delay in framing the rules/regulations 
on an average is about 4 years and 8 months with th e oldest case been monitored by the 
Committee having a pendency of 15 years. Even today  the Ministries/Departments are not 
adhering to the time schedule. In fact it has been noted that the Ministries not only tend to 
inordinately delay the framing of subordinate legis lation but also seek extension of six months at 
a time for completing the said process. Despite Com mittee's initiative to call the secretaries of 
various ministries to explain the reasons for the delay in framing of subordinate legislation it was 
noted that the 59 Acts are presently under consider ation of the Committee in which the framing 
of rules/regulations are still pending.  
 
118. In the backdrop of above, the Committee was of  the view that in the earlier days the mean 
of communication in the country were very limited a nd not so developed. Thus the period of six 
months as recommended by the Committee in its vario us reports for framing of subordinate 
legislation was justified. But with the fast pace o f economic growth in recent times the means of 
communication and information technology have developed in manyfold which provided various 
systems of faster communication such as fax, intern et, mobile services and so on and so forth. In 
this present scenario the flow of information/commu nication among ministries, its subordinate 
offices and various organizations has become easier  and much faster. Keeping in mind these 
developments, the Committee is of the considered vi ew that presently time period of six months 
given for framing of subordinate legislation should be curtailed/reduced significantly.  
 
119. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Minis tries/Departments should 
frame all the essential subordinate legislation at the time of introduction of the bill itself 
and rest of subordinate legislation may be framed w ithin three months of the coming into 
force of the act. The Committee also recommends tha t the period of extension of time 
granted to ministries may be curtailed to thirty da ys at a time for framing of subordinate 
legislation.  In case of delay, the Ministry must ensure that a s tatement explaining the 
reasons of delay in framing of subordinate legislat ion should be invariably laid along with 

 
the rules framed after three months period as has a lready been recommended by the 
Committee in its 192 nd  Report.   
120. The Committee takes note of the fact that due to its consistent monitoring and pursuing 
with the Ministries/Departments to do away the delay in framing of subordinate legislation under 
various acts has resulted very positive results. Th e Committee appreciates the efforts made by 
Cabinet Secretary by calling the meeting of the Sec retaries of Ministries/Departments of 
Government of India and highlighting the importance  of framing of  subordinate legislation 
within prescribed time limit to give effect to rele vant acts so that benefits reaches to the people 
thus serving the very purpose of the concerned acts . The Committee decided that the practice 
of calling the Secretaries of concerned Ministries/ Departments to explain the reasons for 
delay in framing the subordinate legislation under the acts being administered by them 
may be continued. The Committee recommends that a q uarterly statement on the status of 
framing of subordinate legislation under the acts p assed by the Parliament may be sent to 
the Cabinet Secretariat to ensure due implementatio n of  Committee's recommendation of 
timely framing of subordinate legislation by concer ned Ministries/Departments of the 
Government of India. 
  

 
III 
MASTER CIRCULARS ISSUED BY THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
UNDER THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1949  
 
121. The Committee took up for examination the Mast er Circulars issued by the Reserve Bank 
of India under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. In  the course of its discussions with the 
different stake-holders involved it was observed th at the Master Circulars issued by the Reserve 
Bank of India were not being laid before the Parliament.  
122. In this reference the Committee was of the opi nion that the term ‘Subordinate 
Legislation’ is a comprehensive term and includes i n its ambit all notifications, orders, schemes, 
rules and bye-laws framed in pursuance of the Const itution or the legislative functions delegated 
by the Parliament to a subordinate authority. The C ommittee took note of the following 
judgments wherein the Courts had also clarified the  position regarding the term Subordinate 
legislation: 
i. Sections 21A and 35A of the Banking Regulation A ct, 1949 and the strength of the 
directions issued by the Reserve Bank of India came  up for consideration in Ravindra & Ors. 
(supra). The Supreme Court held that, the rate of i nterest and the period of rest for calculating 
interest can be determined on the basis of circular s issued by Reserve Bank of India under the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949. It goes on to hold th at, circulars issued by Reserve Bank of India 
under Sections 35A and 21A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 have statutory force. It is held 
in paragraph 51 as follows:- 
“51. The Banking Regulation Act, 1949 empowers the Reserve Bank of India, on it being 
satisfied that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest or in the interest of depositors or  
banking policy so to do, to determine the policy in  relation to advances to be followed by 
banking companies  generally or by any banking comp any in particular and when the policy has 
been so determined it has a binding effect. In part icular, the Reserve Bank of India may give 
directions as to the rate of interest and other ter ms and conditions on which advances or other 
financial accommodation may be made. Such direction s are also binding on every banking 
company. Section 35A also empowers the Reserve Bank  of India in the public interest or in the 
interest of banking policy or the interests of depo sitors (and so on) to issue directions generally 
or in particular which shall be binding. With effec t from 15.2.1984 Section 21A has been 
inserted in the Act which takes away power of the C ourt to reopen the transaction between a 
banking company and its debtor on the ground that t he rate of interest charged is excessive. The 
provision has been given an overriding effect over the Usury Loans Act, 1918 and any other 
provincial law in force relation to indebtedness.”    
ii.  In the case of Sardar Associated & Ors. (supra ) it was held by the Supreme Court that the 
dicta laid down by the Constitution Bench in Ravind ra & Ors (supra) as, “56……RBI directives 

 
have not only statutory flavor, any contravention t hereof or any default in compliance therewith 
is punishable under sub-section (4) of Section 46 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. 
iii. The Supreme Court in ICICI Bank Ltd Vs Officia l Liquidators of APS Star Industries Ltd 
& others, (2010) 10 SCC has also held that Master Circular have got statutory flavor. 
123. The Committee further observes that the Reserv e Bank of India issues a number of 
instruments from time to time like Circulars, Maste r Circulars, Notifications, Regulations, 
Master Directions and so on. This tends to create c onfusion in the sense that it becomes difficult 
to differentiate between the legal and statutory in struments and other administrative orders and 
instruments.   
124. The Reserve Bank of India since January, 2016 has started issuing Master Directions. 
This may cause further confusion regarding the term inology. The Committee observes that the 
Master Directions issued by the Reserve Bank of Ind ia under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 
come under the term “Subordinate Legislation” or “Regulations”. 
125. The Committee based upon its observations and takin g into consideration the 
various judgments of the Courts recommends that the  Ministry of Finance should ensure 
that the Circulars, Master Circulars, Master Direct ions and other instruments issued by 
the Reserve Bank of India under the Banking Regulat ion Act, 1949 and other Acts passed 
by Parliament should be published in the Gazette an d laid before both the Houses of the 
Parliament as these instruments come under the comp rehensive definition of “Subordinate 
Legislation” and are statutory in nature.  
126. The Committee also observes that Section 52(5)  of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 
provides for laying of all rules issued under the A ct before each House of Parliament and 
accordingly the Committee impresses upon the Minist ry of Finance to ensure that the 
Circulars, Master Circulars, Master Directions and other instruments issued by the 
Reserve Bank of India coming under the definition o f ‘subordinate legislation’ should be 
laid before both the Houses of the Parliament. 
127. RBI should ensure that these Circulars, Master  Circulars, Master Directions and 
other instruments issued by it under the Banking Re gulation Act, 1949 and other Acts 
passed by Parliament should have simplicity, precis ion and clarity so as to be legible to the 
concerned stakeholders and the common man. RBI shou ld also ensure that the 
nomenclature of the instruments issued by it should  be specified so as to differentiate 
between the legal and statutory instruments and oth er administrative orders and 
instruments.   
 
 

 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
128. The Committee is happy to note that subsequent ly the Department of Financial 
Services have completed the framing of rules/regula tions under the  SBI (Subsidiary Laws) 
Amendment Act, 2011 and have laid them on the Table  of both the Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee, however, regrets to note that the De partment of Revenue and Department 
of Financial Services has not yet completed the fra ming of subordinate legislation under 
the Finance Act, 2013; LIC (Amendment) Act, 2011 and Actuaries Act, 2007 despite a lapse 
of so many years since the passage of these Acts. T he Committee, accordingly, urges the 
Departments to expedite the process and complete th e framing of subordinate legislation 
under these Acts without any further delay.  [para 14] 
129. The Committee was not convinced with the view of the Ministry that they did not 
feel the need to notify certain rules and regulatio ns contemplated to be framed under the 
Energy Conservation Act, 2001. In Committee’s view, the Act passed by the Parliament has 
mandated the framing of the said subordinate legisl ation and, therefore, if the Ministry 
does not feel the need for the concerned rules/regu lations then it would be appropriate that 
the information is brought before the House for its  consideration.  The Committee 
observed that even after 13 years some rules have n ot been framed by the Bureau of 
Energy Efficiency (BEE) and only existing guideline s of the Ministry of Finance are being 
followed. In Committee’s view, important issues lik e service conditions, budget, energy 
conservation, duties of DG, Bureau of Energy Effici ency (BEE), levying of fees need to be 
translated into rules/ regulations.  The Committee opined that the Act is a macro- level idea 
and the Ministries have to come out with the rules. [para 16] 
130. The Committee, however, has some reservations in the matter.  The Committee 
failed to understand how the framing or non-framing  of rules/regulations becomes a 
discretionary power of the Executive when there is express provision in the Act that the 
rules/regulations shall be framed.  In the Committe e’s view, unless the rules are framed, 
the provision of the Act cannot be implemented.  So , whenever a law is to be framed, the 
Ministry of Law & Justice, while vetting the Bills to be introduced in the House, must 
examine whether there is a necessity of making the rules or not.  Because once the 
provision is made, it has to be implemented through a process and the process is prescribed 
in the rules only. [para 18] 
131. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Power  did not complete the framing of 
rules/regulations under the Energy Conservation Act , 2001 even after 14 years of the 
passage of the Act and sought extension of time til l December 2016 for completing the 
framing of rules/regulations under the Act. The Committee takes serious note of the matter 
and recommends that the Ministry should take expeditious action to positively complete the 
framing of rules/regulations under the Act by December 2016 and also keep the Committee 

 
informed in the matter accordingly. The Committee a lso hopes that the Ministry would not 
seek further extension and finish the work within the extended period. [para 22] 
132. The Committee is not convinced with the view o f the Ministry of Power that they 
did not feel the need to frame the rules contemplat ed to be framed under the Energy 
Conservation Act, 2001. The Act, passed by the Parl iament, has mandated the framing of 
the said subordinate legislation and therefore if t he Ministry does not feel the need for the 
concerned rules/regulations, it would be appropriat e that Parliament should be informed 
about it. The Committee, accordingly, recommends th at in cases where framing of 
subordinate legislation is delegated by the parent Act and the Ministry does not feel the 
need for framing of subordinate legislation, the Mi nistry should consult the Ministry of 
Law & Justice and thereafter, if the Ministry of Law & Justice concurs with the view of the 
Ministry, the Ministry should lay a statement on th e Table of the House outlining the 
reasons why they do not feel the need to frame subo rdinate legislation under the said Acts. 
[para 23] 
133. The Committee observes that certain autonomous  or statutory organizations do not 
follow the practice of getting their subordinate legislations vetted from the Ministry of Law 
& Justice.  The Committee also observes that the Mi nistries/Organizations lack clarity on 
the procedure prescribed for drafting and vetting of subordinate legislation. In this respect, 
the Committee would like to recommend that the Mini stries may consult the Ministry of 
Law & Justice on the steps to be followed for draft ing and framing of subordinate 
legislation. The Committee also recommends that all  Ministries/Departments should 
impress upon the autonomous/statutory organizations under their administrative control to 
follow due process with regard to drafting and framing of subordinate legislation and to get 
their draft rules/regulations duly vetted by the Ministry of Law & Justice. [para 24] 
134. The Committee expressed its anguish about the self-proclaimed autonomy by 
certain statutory organizations like CERC which has  not been getting their regulations 
vetted by the Ministry of Law. The Committee felt t hat since the Law Ministry has framed 
the parent legislation, it is in better position to  determine at first stage whether the 
delegation is being exercised within the confines o f powers delegated to subordinate 
authority or not. CERC pointed out that their regul ations have stood the test of litigation 
and have not been declared ultra vires . The Committee totally disagrees with this 
proposition and cannot wait for Courts to scrutiniz e each and every regulations. This must 
be vetted at first by the Ministry of Law and Justi ce. The Committee directs the Ministry 
of Power to ensure that all regulations by statutor y organizations under it be vetted by the 
Ministry of Law & Justice before they are laid on the Table of the House. [para 24] 
 
 

 
135. The Committee is happy to note that the Minist ry of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change has framed all the rules/regulations  contemplated under the Acts 
administered by them. The Committee notes that the Subramanian Committee has 
recommended examining the possibility of amalgamati ng various environmental laws 
which are currently in force and hopes that the Min istry would soon come up with more 
effective laws keeping in view the latest developments in the sector. [para 26] 
136. The Committee notes that the Statutes of the R ajiv Gandhi National Aviation 
University Act, 2013 have since been framed and lai d on the Table of both Houses of 
Parliament. The Committee, however, regrets to note  that the Ordinances and Regulations 
have not been framed till date and accordingly reco mmends that the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation should ensure that the Ordinances and Regu lations are framed at the earliest by 
resolving the impediments in the matter. [para 27] 
137. The Committee is anguished to note that even a fter eight years of coming into force 
of the Airport Economic Regulatory Authority of Ind ia Act, 2008 the contemplated 
rules/regulations have still not been framed. The Committee takes a strong view of  this and 
recommends the Ministry of Civil Aviation should en sure that the legislative framework 
consisting of the rules/regulations as contemplated under the Airport Economic Regulatory 
Authority of India Act, 2008 should be completed at the earliest. The Ministry may impress 
upon the Ministry of Law & Justice to expedite the vetting of the rules/regulations framed 
under Airport Economic Regulatory Authority of Indi a Act, 2008 so that the same can be 
notified at the earliest. [para 28] 
138. The Committee is constrained to observe that e ven after so many years the relevant 
rules/regulations under  Central Vigilance Commissi on Act, 2003 have still not been 
framed. The Committee feels the delay in framing of  the rules/regulations defeats the very 
purpose of enactment of the Act as the Act cannot b e operated in the absence of the  
rules/regulations. The Committee accordingly recomm ends that the Ministry should take 
all steps necessary to complete the framing of the contemplated subordinate legislation 
under the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003. [para 32] 
139. The Committee regrets to note that the Departm ent of Border Management took 
nearly 6 years to complete the framing of necessary  subordinate legislation under the Land 
Ports Authority of India Act, 2010. The Committee n otes that the delay in framing of 
rules/regulations has become a recurring phenomenon and that cases of delay in framing of 
rules/regulations by the Ministries/Departments hav e continued to occur despite the 
recommendations of the Committee for completing the  framing of rules/regulations within 
six months of the coming into force of the Act in i ts earlier reports. The Committee 
impresses upon the Ministries, once again, that del ay in framing of subordinate legislation 
defeats the very purpose of enacting the parent Act /legislation as it cannot be implemented 
without the necessary rules/regulations.  The Committee notes with concern that the matter 

 
of framing of rules/regulations is dealt with by th e Ministries/Departments in a very casual 
manner and no serious effort is made to expedite th e same. Due to this lackadaisical 
attitude of the Ministries/Departments, matters whi ch are sought to be governed by 
statutory rules/regulations, are often in practice governed by executive 
orders/directions/instructions/circulars. The Commi ttee would like to emphasize that 
executive orders/directions/instructions/circulars are no substitute for statutory 
rules/regulations. The Committee wonders whether th e Ministries/Departments are 
deliberately avoiding framing of subordinate legisl ation so that they can exercise discretion 
in the matter and escape Parliamentary scrutiny. [para 39] 
140. With a view to ensure timely framing of rules/ regulations under Acts passed by 
Parliament, the Committee recommends that the frami ng of draft rules should be initiated 
simultaneously with the drafting of the proposed Bi ll on the subject. In this way, the draft 
rules/regulations will be ready when the Bill is in troduced in Parliament. Slight 
modifications/amendments can be made by the Ministr y as per the changes made in the 
draft Bill by Parliament. [para 40] 
141. The Committee accepts that the delay in framin g of the rules under the Anand 
Marriage (Amendment) Act, 2012 is due to delay on t he part of the State 
Governments/UTs, however, the Committee would like to reiterate that it is the 
responsibility of the administrative Ministry to en sure that the State Governments/UTs 
frame the concerned rules within the stipulated tim e period. Accordingly, the Ministry 
should ensure the same. [para 41] 
142. The Committee is pleased to observe that the M inistry of Home Affairs (Department 
of Home) has ensured that all the States and UTs ha ve framed the concerned rules under 
the Private Security Agencies (Regulation) Act, 200 5.  The Committee takes serious note of 
the fact that even after enforcement of Assam Rifles Act, 2006 in 2009, the Assam Rifles has 
not been able to frame the regulations. The Committ ee hopes that the Ministry would 
impress upon the Assam Rifles to frame the regulati ons within the extended period, i.e. the 
30 
th  September and lay them in the Winter Session of 20 16 itself. The Committee also notes 
that the Ministry of Mines has taken proactive step s to ensure framing of rules under the 
Mines and Minerals (Amendment) Act, 2015 and hopes that the remaining rules would be 
framed well in time. [para 46] 
143. The Committee observes that the framing  of ru les/regulations under the Indian 
Council for World Affairs Act, 2001, Weapons of Mas s Destruction  and their Delivery 
Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act 20 05 and Nalanda University Act, 2010 
had not been framed even after a considerable perio d of time. The Committee notes that 
these Acts have international ramifications and is constrained to note the delay in framing 
of subordinate legislation under them. The Committe e urges the Ministry of External 

 
Affairs to take all possible measures to complete t he process of framing of subordinate 
legislation under these Acts in time bound manner.  [para 50] 
144. The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minist ry of Shipping has since 
completed the framing of subordinate legislation un der the Merchant Shipping 
(Amendment) Act, 2014 and hopes that the Ministry w ould likewise ensure that the 
rules/regulations under the Inland Vessels (Amendme nt) Act, 2014 and the Merchant 
Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014 are also framed at the earliest. [para 51] 
145.    The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Minist ry of Agriculture (Department 
of Agricultural Research & Education) in giving sha pe to the rules/regulations/ordinances 
contemplated to be framed under the Rani Lakshmi Ba i Central Agriculture University 
Act, 2014. Given the status of the University the C ommittee expresses its hope that the 
necessary subordinate legislation as contemplated b y the Parent Act would be framed at 
the earliest and brought before the Parliament for its scrutiny. [para 52] 
146. The Committee expresses its deep concern over the fact that the Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare has still not given effect to its recommendations as contained in its 178 th  
& 212 th  Reports on the AIIMS Act, 1956 and Dentist Act, 19 48 respectively regarding 
framing of rules/regulations therein. The Committee  subsequently granted extension of 
time for implementing the 178 th  report and hopes that the Ministry of Health & Fam ily 
Welfare would do the needful within the extended ti me period. The Committee is also 
aware that by amending the AIIMS Act, 1956, Governm ent has established some more 
AIIMS and same Rules and Regulations are being exte nded to them. So it is all the more 
important that all the Rules and Regulations must b e recast with clarity covering all the 
areas. The Committee also directs that AIIMS must c ompile taken by AIIMS Institute 
Body and Governing Body as they are important source of law. [para 58] 
147. The Committee expresses its pleasure to note t hat the Ministry of Women & Child 
Development has since ensured that all the States h ave framed the rules under the 
Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006. This is an  important piece of socio-economic 
legislation and has ramifications on the society as  a whole and especially the girl child. The 
rules framed under this Act would help in its prope r and effective implementation. [para 
59] 
148. The Committee takes serious note that concerne d rules & regulations under the 
Chemical Weapons Convention Act, 2000 as amended vi de Chemical Weapons Convention 
(Amendment) Act, 2012 have still not been framed. T he Committee expresses its concern 
over the fact that given the international importance of the Chemical Weapons Convention, 
the Ministry has still not been able to give shape to the statutory requirements as mandated 
under the Act. The Committee hopes that the Ministr y  of Chemicals 
& Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) would co mplete the necessary formalities 

 
and complete the framing of rules & regulations as mandated under the Chemical 
Weapons Convention Act, 2000 and Chemical Weapons C onvention (Amendment) Act, 
2012 at the earliest. The Ministry, may take up the  matter with the Ministry of Law & 
Justice for expediting the vetting of the rules/reg ulations at the earliest and resolution of 
objections, if any, raised in the draft rules/regulations. [para 60] 
149. The Committee notes that the framing of recrui tment regulations under the Prasar 
Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendme nt Act, 2011 has not been 
completed till date and that the Ministry has sough t extension of time till 4 th  December, 
2016 for completing the same. The Committee wonders  how in the absence of recruitment 
regulations, recruitment to vacant posts are being conducted at present. The Committee 
feels that this will give much scope for executive discretion and feels that this is not 
desirable. The Committee, accordingly, recommends t hat all pending recruitment 
regulations under the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment 
Act, 2011 should be immediately framed. [para 66] 
150. The Committee is also happy to note that the M inistry of Rural Development 
(Department of Land Resources) has since completed the framing of all rules/regulations 
under the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparen cy in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013. [para 67] 
151. The Committee notes that DIPP had framed all t he rules/regulations to be framed 
under Acts of Parliament administered by them excep t National Institute of Design Act, 
2014.  The Committee also notes that Secretary, DIP P had assured the Committee that the 
Department will try to finalize the framing of Stat utes, Ordinances and rules under the 
National Institute of Design Act, 2014 within a per iod of six months from 9 July 2015. 
However, the Department was unable to ensure the fr aming of Statutes, Ordinances and 
rules within this timeframe and sought extension of  time of further six months w.e.f. 22 
January 2016 for completing the same. The Secretary , DIPP, during the meeting with the 
Chairman of the Committee on 25 April 2016 assured that the framing of Statutes, 
Ordinances and rules under the NID Act, 2014 would be completed by 30 September 2016 
and accordingly, the Department was granted extensi on of time till 30 September 2016 for 
completing the same. The Committee, accordingly, re commends that the Ministry should 
expedite the framing of Statutes, Ordinances and ru les and complete all necessary 
formalities with regard to the framing of Statutes,  Ordinances and rules under the NID 
Act, 2014 by 30 September 2016.  The Committee also recommends that DIPP should carry 
out review of the old Acts administered by them lik e the Boilers Act, 1923; the Explosives 
Act, 1884, etc to assess their relevance in today’s  context and take necessary action to 
amend or bring in a new legislation accordingly.  [para 72] 
152. The Committee is constrained to point out that  the Ministry has not framed 
Brokering Rules under Section 14A(1) and 14C of the  Foreign Trade (Development and 

 
Regulation) Act, 1992 [inserted by Section 15 of th e Foreign Trade (Development and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010]. The argument of t he Ministry for not framing the 
rules is that there is no need to frame the Brokering Rules as sufficient penal provisions are 
available under Section 14D and 14E (Chapter IVA) o f the Act and in the Weapons of 
Mass Destruction and their Delivery Systems (Prohib ition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 
2005.  The Committee fails to understand how the pr ovisions of one Act can be sufficient 
for the purposes of another Act and how the Ministr y can claim that there is no need for 
framing of rules when the Act delegates power to th e Ministries/Departments to frame the 
rules. The Committee, therefore, recommends that th e Ministry of External Affairs, in 
consultation with other concerned Departments shoul d expedite action in the matter. [para 
76] 
153. The Committee further recommends that in cases  where framing of subordinate 
legislation is delegated by the parent Act and the Ministry does not feel the need for 
framing of subordinate legislation, the Ministry sh ould consult the Ministry of Law & 
Justice and thereafter, if the Ministry of Law & Ju stice concurs with the view of the 
Ministry, the Ministry should lay a statement on th e Table of the House outlining the 
reasons why they do not feel the need to frame subo rdinate legislation under the said Acts. 
[para 77] 
154. The Committee is happy to note that the Depart ment of Commerce is undertaking a 
review of old Acts administered by them to assess t heir relevance in today’s context and is 
in the process of amending the Tea Act, 1953 and th e Coffee Act, 1942. The Committee, 
however, notes that Bills for the amendment of the Tea Act, 1953 and the Coffee Act, 1942 
has not been introduced in the House till date, des pite the assurance given by the Ministry 
to introduce the Bills by the Winter Session, 2015.  Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should expedite the re view of these old Acts and introduce 
the Bill for amending these Acts in Parliament at t he earliest, preferably by the Winter 
Session of 2016. The Committee also recommends that  on priority basis, other 
Ministries/Departments should also carry out a review of all old Acts administered by them 
to assess their relevance in today’s context and ta ke necessary action to either repeal the 
old Acts which are of no relevance or amend the old  Acts for their continued relevance. 
[para 78] 
155. The 
 Committee recommends that the Ministry of Electroni cs and Information 
Technology should complete the framing of rules/reg ulations contemplated under the 
Information Technology Act, 2000 and the  Semiconductor Integrated Circuit Layout-
Design Act, 2000 expeditiously. Keeping in view the  international parameters and fast 
changing scenario in the IT and electronics sector,  the Ministry should ensure that the 
rules/regulations framed should cater to the needs of this sector and meet international 
parameters.  [para 83] 

 
156. The Committee notes that the Department of Atomic E nergy has since framed the 
Nuclear Liability Fund Rules, 2015 under the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damages Act. 
[para 85] 
157. The Committee expresses its concern at this st ate of affairs and urges the Ministry 
of Petroleum & Natural Gas to advice the Rajiv Gand hi Institute of Petroleum Technology 
on the need for vetting of the concerned rules/regu lations/ordinances by the Ministry of 
Law & Justice, their publication in the official Ga zette and laying the notifications before 
the Parliament .    [para 95] 
158. The Committee observes that the Ministry  Petroleum and Natural Gas have still not 
completed the process of framing the rules/regulations under the Petroleum & Natural Gas 
Regulatory Board (PNGRB) Act, 2006 despite a long a  lapse of more than nine years. The 
Committee expresses its grave concern at this state  of affairs and recommends to the 
Ministry to complete the framing of the rules/regul ations as contemplated under the Act at 
the earliest and without any further delay. [para 96] 
159. The Committee notes that all the subordinate legisl ation under the various Acts 
administered by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natur al Gas have not been uploaded on its 
website and recommend that the Ministry should take  adequate measures to update its 
website and ensure that all the Acts and concerned subordinate legislation administered by 
it are uploaded on its website.  Further, the Acts which have been recommended for 
repelling by the Law Commission should be repealed and if necessary, a suitable saving 
clause should be inserted in the Repealing  Act and  the same be made available on its 
website for reference purposes. [para 97] 
160. The Committee further notes that some of the A cts administered by the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas like the Petroleum Act, 193 4, are very old. The Committee 
therefore recommends that these old Acts may be rev isited with the purpose of review and 
the Ministry may look into the possibility of frami ng new set of legislation to replace them, 
if necessary, keeping in view the latest advances i n the field of petroleum technology and 
the needs of the country. The Committee also hopes that the Ministry would complete the 
framing of rules/regulations, if any, under the Acts at the earliest.  [para 98] 
161. The Committee agrees with the views of the Leg islative Department that all 
subordinate legislation of autonomous/statutory bod ies are also to be vetted by the 
Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law & Jus tice. The Committee does not agree 
with the views of certain autonomous/statutory bodi es that they are autonomous and need 
not send their subordinate legislations for vetting  to the Legislative Department. The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends that all Ministr ies/Departments and their 
autonomous/statutory bodies should send their subor dinate legislation for vetting to the 
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law & Justice. The Committee also recommends that 

 
all Ministries/Departments should sensitize the aut onomous/statutory bodies under them 
regarding the need for sending their subordinate le gislations for vetting by the Legislative 
Department. [para 102] 
162. The Committee wonders how the Central Universities are functioning in the absence 
of Statutes and Ordinances which are supposed to pr ovide for important matters like 
manner of award of degrees, terms and conditions of  service of teaching and non-teaching 
staffs, admission procedure, courses of study, cons titution, powers and functions of the 
University authorities, etc.  The Committee feels t hat without the necessary Statutes and 
Ordinances, the Universities are functioning with d iscretion and fears that this will 
adversely impact the future of the students studyin g in these Universities. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that the Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department 
of Higher Education) should ensure that all Central  Universities should immediately frame 
the necessary Statutes/Ordinances/Regulations so as  to avoid any discretion and arbitrary 
actions on the part of the University authorities. [para 103] 
163. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministries/Departments should 
frame all the essential subordinate legislation at the time of introduction of the bill itself 
and rest of subordinate legislation may be framed w ithin three months of the coming into 
force of the act. The Committee also recommends tha t the period of extension of time 
granted to ministries may be curtailed to thirty da ys at a time for framing of subordinate 
legislation.  In case of delay, the Ministry must ensure that a s tatement explaining the 
reasons of delay in framing of subordinate legislat ion should be invariably laid along with 
the rules framed after three months period as has a lready been recommended by the 
Committee in its 192 
nd  Report.  [para 119] 
 
164. The Committee decided that the practice of cal ling the Secretaries of concerned 
Ministries/Departments to explain the reasons for d elay in framing the subordinate 
legislation under the acts being administered by th em may be continued. The Committee 
recommends that a quarterly statement on the status  of framing of subordinate legislation 
under the acts passed by the Parliament may be sent  to the Cabinet Secretariat to ensure 
due implementation of  Committee's recommendation o f timely framing of subordinate 
legislation by concerned Ministries/Departments of the Government of India. [para 120] 
165. The Committee based upon its observations and taking into consideration the 
various judgments of the Courts recommends that the  Ministry of Finance should ensure 
that the Circulars, Master Circulars, Master Direct ions and other instruments issued by 
the Reserve Bank of India under the Banking Regulat ion Act, 1949 and other Acts passed 
by Parliament should be published in the Gazette an d laid before both the Houses of the 
Parliament as these instruments come under the comp rehensive definition of “Subordinate 
Legislation” or and are statutory in nature. [para 125] 

 
166. The Committee also observes that Section 52(5)  of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 
provides for laying of all rules issued under the A ct before each House of Parliament and 
accordingly the Committee impresses upon the Minist ry of Finance to ensure that the 
Circulars, Master Circulars, Master Directions and other instruments issued by the 
Reserve Bank of India coming under the definition o f ‘subordinate legislation’ should be 
laid before both the Houses of the Parliament. [para 126] 
167. RBI should ensure that these Circulars, Master  Circulars, Master Directions and 
other instruments issued by it under the Banking Re gulation Act, 1949 and other Acts 
passed by Parliament should have simplicity, precis ion and clarity so as to be legible to the 
concerned stakeholders and the common man. RBI shou ld also ensure that the 
nomenclature of the instruments issued by it should  be specified so as to differentiate 
between the legal and statutory instruments and oth er administrative orders and 
instruments.  [para 127] 
 
  

 
Annexure-I 
21.7.2016  
PENDING CASES OF FRAMING OF RULES UNDER VARIOUS 
ACTS  
Sl. 
No. 
Ministry  Act Position 
1 Ministry of 
Health & 
Family 
Welfare (D/o 
Health & 
Family 
Welfare) 
All India 
Institute of 
Medical 
Sciences Act, 
1956  
(Assented on 
2.6.1956) 
Ministry was requested vide  D.O. letter 
dated 12.1.2016 to furnish Action 
Taken Reports on Committee’s 
recommendation in its 178 
th   and 212 th  
Reports  and to complete the framing of 
new AIIMS Rules and Regulations 
within 30 days. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 10.2.2016, Ministry 
stated that AIIMS has constituted 
internal committee for the purpose of 
making changes in AIIMS 
Rules/Regulations and sought 3 months 
extension of time for submitting action 
taken report in the matter. 
Extension sought till 10.5.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 5.4.2016, Ministry 
stated that AIIMS has constituted a 
committee under the Chairmanship of 
Prof. Balram Airan to examine the 
recommendation made by other expert 
committees like Valiathan Committee, 
Sujata Rao Committee, Sneha Bhargava 
Committee and Pradhan Committee to 
formulate a holistic proposal on 
amendments in AIIMS Regulations. 
The report of this Committee is 
expected to be submitted by 15.5.2016. 
 
Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare, was called before the 

 
Chairman on 26.4.2016 to explain the 
reasons for seeking extension of time. 
The Chairman after hearing the 
Secretary granted extension of time till 
30.10.2016. 
 
2 Ministry of 
External 
Affairs 
Indian Council 
of World 
Affairs Act, 
2001 
(Assented on 
3.9.2001) 
 
Ministry was requested vide  D.O. dated 
14.01.2016 to provide detailed note by 
22.1.2016 showing as to whether all the 
rules and regulations to be framed 
under the said Act have been framed 
and laid on the Table of both the 
Houses. 
 
The Ministry was requested vide  O.M. 
dated 27.5.2016 to clarify whether all 
rules/regulations contemplated to be 
framed under the act have been framed. 
 
 
Vide  letter dated 31.5.2016, the 
Ministry informed that the ICWA 
Director General and Other Officers 
and Employees (Condition of Service) 
Regulations, 2014 have been framed 
and laid before the House. The ICWA, 
Recruitment Regulations, 2016 are 
under consideration.  
 
Vide  O.M. dated 21.06.2016 the 
Ministry has informed that the draft 
Recruitment Regulations, 2016 are been 
updated as per DOPT guidelines. 
 
 
3 Ministry of 
Power 
Energy 
Conservation 
Act, 2001 
(Assented on 
29.9.2001) 
Ministry was requested vide  D.O. letter 
dated 7.1.2016 to complete the process 
of framing of subordinate legislation 
within 4 weeks and send a status report 
by 21.01. 2016. 
 

 
Vide  O.M. dated 22.1.2016, Ministry 
stated that the Law Ministry has 
informed that the rules under Section 56 
(2) (e) and (v) are enabling provisions 
meant for unforeseen circumstances and 
rules need not to be framed at present. 
It has been informed further that some 
rules are under consideration and will 
be completed by July & December, 
2016.  
 
The Ministry has been requested vide  
O.M. dated 31.5.2016 to clarify 
whether all rules/regulations 
contemplated to be framed under the act 
have been framed and to seek extension 
of time if framing of rules not 
completed. 
 
The Secretary, Ministry of Power 
briefed the Chairman about the reasons 
for delay in framing the 
rules/regulations under the Act. 
Extension granted till 31.12.2016. 
 
4 Ministry of 
Personnel, 
Public 
Grievances & 
Pension 
(Department of 
Personnel and 
Traning) 
The Central 
Vigilance 
Commission 
Act, 2003 
(Assented on 
11.9.2003) 
Ministry was requested Vide  D.O. dated 
08.01.2016 to provide status note by 
21.1.2016 and  finish the framing of 
rules/regulations within 30 days of 
receipt of the letter and to sent a status 
report on the amendments to be made in 
the CVC Act, 2003 on account of  the 
Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013.   
 
Ministry vide  its O.M. dated 27.1.2016, 
stated that changes may have to be 
made in CVC Act, 2003 and  Lokpal 
and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 after the 
passage of the Prevention of Corruption 
(Amendment) Bill, 2011 presently 

 
under consideration of Select 
Committee of the Rajya Sabha. Rules 
will be framed thereafter. 
 
The Secretary apprised the Committee 
in its meeting held on 09.02.2016 that 
the rules have already been framed 
under the CVC Act, 2003 and the 
regulations will be framed shortly.  
 
5 Ministry of 
External 
Affairs 
The Weapons 
of Mass 
Destruction and 
their Delivery 
Systems 
(Prohibition of 
Unlawful 
Activities) Act, 
2005 
(Assented on 
6.6.2005) 
Ministry was requested vide  D.O. letter 
dated 8.1.2016 to consult the Law 
Ministry and provide a detailed note 
within 30 days. 
 
Vide  ID Note dated 28.1.2016, Ministry 
requested additional time till 7.3.2016 
to send status report as they are in the 
process of consulting Law Ministry. 
 
Again Vide  ID Note dated 7.3.2016, 
Ministry has requested additional time 
of 2 months i.e.  upto 7.5.2016 to 
provide status report in the matter. The 
Ministry was accordingly granted 
extension till 7.5.2016. 
 
Again Vide  ID Note dated 7.5.2016, 
Ministry has requested additional time 
of 6 weeks i.e.  upto 18.6.2016 to 
provide status report in the matter. The 
Ministry was accordingly granted 
extension till 18.6.2016. 
 
Ministry to be requested to furnish the 
latest status. 
 
6 Ministry of 
Human 
Resource 
The Manipur 
University Act, 
2005 
Ministry was requested vide  D.O. letter 
dated 14.1.2016 to complete framing of 
Statutes/Ordinances/ 

 
Development 
(Department of 
Higher 
Education) 
(Assented on 
28.12.2005) 
Regulations within 30 days and lay all 
Statutes/Ordinances/ 
Regulations by next Session. Ministry 
also asked to furnish status report on 
laying and framing by 22.01.2016. 
 
Vide O.M. dated 4.2.2016 Ministry 
stated that Manipur University has been 
requested to complete all 
statutes/ordinance contemplated under 
the Act and take necessary action to lay 
them on the table of the House. 
Ministry also stated that 7 statutes have 
been amended and 6 published in the 
gazette. These will be laid as soon as it 
is received by the Ministry. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 23.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
statutes/ordinances/regulations.  
 
Vide  O.M. dated 31.5.2016 Ministry 
stated Manipur University has 
forwarded draft ordinances for approval 
of the Central Government. Some of 
these ordinances were approved and on 
some ordinances Manipur University 
was requested to make some changes. 
The Ministry has again requested 
University to finalize the remaining 
ordinances as soon as possible. 
 
Secretary, Department of Higher 
Education was called before the 
Committee on 27.6.2016 to explain the 
reasons for delay. 
 
7 Ministry of 
Petroleum and 
The Petroleum 
and Natural 
Ministry was requested vide D.O. dated 
13.01.16 to inform whether all the 

 
Natural Gas Gas Regulatory 
Board Act, 
2006 
(Assented on 
31.3.2006) 
 
provisions of the Act have come into 
force and also about framing of all 
rules/regulations under the said Act 
may be provided along with details of 
the rules/regulations framed under 
Sections 61 & 62 by 22.01.2016 and to 
complete the framing of subordinate 
legislation within four weeks of receipt 
of the letter. 
 
Vide  D.O. letter dated 5.2.2016, 
Ministry stated that Ministry had 
prepared and forwarded two rules under 
Section 60 of the Act to PNGRB for 
their comments/view,  which are still 
awaited, the Ministry also sought 
extension of time for 60 days which 
was granted till 10.04.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 26.5.2016, the 
Ministry was requested to inform 
whether all the rules/regulations have 
been framed and to seek extension of 
time if they are still to be framed.  
 
Vide O.M. dated 10.6.2016, the 
Ministry sought extension of time for 
completing the process of framing the 
rules. Extension granted till 31.7.2016. 
 
8 Ministry of 
Micro, Small 
and Medium 
Enterprises 
The Micro, 
Small and 
Medium 
Enterprises Act, 
2006 
(Assented on 
16.6.2006)  
Ministry was requested Vide  D.O. letter 
dated 9.1.2016 to furnish status report 
by 21.01.2016 and ensure completion 
of framing of rules within 30 days.  
 
Vide  D.O. letter dated 14.01.2016, 
Ministry stated that no fund has been 
constituted under Section 14 of the Act 
Rules to be framed under Section 29 (2) 
(c) and (d) for operation of the Fund. 

 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and 
Manipur yet to notify the rules. 
 
Reminder D.O. letter issued to the 
Ministry on 22.01.2016 requesting the 
Ministry to expedite the framing of 
rules by the Ministry and the remaining 
States. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 23.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
rules/regulations.  
 
Vide  O.M. dated 27.5.2016 Ministry 
informed that issue notification for 
creation of MSME Fund under Section 
12 and framing of rules under Section 
29 is underway. Regarding Section 30 
Ministry informed that 33 States/UTs 
have framed the rules and 3 States i.e. 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and 
Manipur are yet to frame the rules.   
9 Ministry of 
Textiles 
The National 
Institute of 
Fashion 
Technology 
Act, 2006 
(Assented on 
13.7.2006)  
Ministry was requested vide  D.O. letter 
dated 9.1.2016 to furnish  action taken 
report by 21.01.2016. 
 
Vide  D.O. letter dated 22.1.2016 and 
4.2.2016, Ministry stated that taking 
into consideration the observations of 
the Committee in its 212 
th  Report, NIFT 
has framed draft statutes which should 
be placed before its Board of Governors 
in its next meeting likely to be held in 
1
st  week of February, 2016. Ordinances 
have been made by the Senate of NIFT 
considering the observation of the 
Committee and being forwarded to the 
Law Ministry for vetting. 
 

 
Vide  O.M. dated 23.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
statutes/ordinances.  
 
Vide  O.M. dated 18.7.2016, Ministry 
stated that second statutes have been 
framed and shall be sent for vetting by 
Ministry of Law & Justice. The third 
ordinance has also been finalized and is 
being sent to Ministry of Law & Justice 
for vetting. 
 
10 Ministry of 
Finance 
(Department of 
Financial 
Services) 
The Actuaries 
Act, 2006 
(Assented on 
27.8.2006) 
 
Ministry was requested vide  D.O. letter 
dated 14.1.2016 to complete the process 
of framing of subordinate legislation 
within the time period granted by the 
Committee, i.e. by the 15 
th  January, 
2016 and send a status report  by 
22.1.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 22.1.2016 Ministry 
stated that it is in continuous follow up 
with the Institute of Actuaries to ensure 
early finalization of pending regulations 
within the extension of time sought till 
15.7.2016. Extension granted till 
15.7.2016.   
 
11 Ministry of 
Defence 
The 
Cantonment 
Act, 2006 
(Assented on 
13.9.2006) 
 
Ministry was requested vide D.O. dated 
5.1.16 to complete the framing of 
rules/regulations within four weeks of 
issue of the letter and to send a status 
report by 5.2.2016.  
 
Vide  D.O. dated 23.02.2016, Ministry 
has sought an extension of six months 
for completing the process of rule 
framing. Extension sought till 
23.8.2016. 

 
 
The Chairman decided to summon the 
Secretary on 18.7.2016 to discuss the 
delay in framing the rules. However, 
the Secretary, due to his prior 
commitments could not appear. 
 
12 Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
The Assam 
Rifles Act, 
2006 
(Assented on 
3.11.2006) 
 
Ministry was requested vide  D.O. dated 
9.1.2016 to complete the framing of 
Regulations under Section 165  of the 
said Act respectively within 30 days 
from the receipt of this letter and to 
consult the Ministry of Law & Justice 
on the need to frame Regulations.  Also 
requested to furnish a status report by 
22.1.2016 on the steps taken. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 6.4.2016, the Ministry 
has sought extension of time to 
complete the framing of 
rules/regulations under the said act. 
Extension granted till 30.9.2016 
 
13 Ministry of 
Human 
Resource 
Development 
(Department of 
Higher 
Education) 
The Rajiv 
Gandhi 
University Act, 
2006 
(Assented on 
10.1.2007 ) 
 
Ministry was requested vide  D.O. dated 
14.1.2016 to complete the framing of 
framing of Statutes, Ordinances and 
Rules under Section 29, 31, 32 and 
Section 42 of the said Act respectively 
within 30 days from the receipt of this 
letter and to furnish a status report by 
22.1.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 12.2.2016, Ministry 
stated that the 
Statutes/Ordinances/Rules/Regulations 
framed will be published in the official 
gazette and laid before the Parliament. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 20.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to clarify 

 
whether all rules/regulations 
contemplated to be framed under the act 
have been framed.  
 
Vide  O.M. dated 31.5.2016 Ministry 
stated that statutes have been framed 
and laid on the table of the House. The 
framing of ordinance and regulations 
will be undertaken after appointment of 
Vice-Chancellor.  
 
14 Ministry of 
Human 
Resource 
Development 
(Department of 
Higher 
Education) 
The Sikkim 
University Act, 
2006  
(Assented on 
10.1.2007) 
Ministry was requested Vide  D.O. dated 
13.01.2016 to complete the framing of 
Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations 
under Section 28, 30, 31and clause 41 
of the Statutes  of the said Act 
respectively within 30 days from the 
receipt of this letter and to furnish a 
status report by 20.01.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 25.1.2016, Ministry 
stated that Sikkim University has been 
requested to furnish the information 
sought. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 20.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
rules/regulations.  
 
Vide  O.M. dated 10.6.2016, the 
Ministry has furnished the status of 
rules/regulations/ordinances framed 
under the Act.  
 
Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource 
Development was also called before the 
Committee on 27.06.2016 to explain 
the reasons for delay in framing the 
subordinate legislations under the Act. 

 
 
15 Ministry of 
Human 
Resource 
Development 
(Department of 
Higher 
Education) 
The Tripura 
University Act, 
2006 
(Assented on 
10.1.2007) 
 
Ministry was requested Vide  D.O. dated 
13.1.2016 to complete the framing of 
Statutes, Ordinances and Rules under 
Section 29, 30, 31, 32, 40 & 41 of the 
said Act respectively within 30 days 
from the receipt of this letter and to 
furnish a status report by 22.1.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 4.5.2016, Ministry 
furnished the rules/regulations framed 
under the said Act. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 27.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
rules/regulations.  
 
Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource 
Development was also called before the 
Committee on 27.06.2016 to explain 
the reasons for delay in framing the 
subordinate legislations under the Act. 
16 Ministry of 
Human 
Resource 
Development 
(Department of 
Higher 
Education) 
The National 
Institute of 
Technology 
Act, 2007 
(Assented on 
5.6.2007) 
The Ministry was requested vide  D.O. 
dated 13.01.2016 to frame all the 
Statutes, Ordinances and Rules under 
Section 25, 27 and 31 of the said Act 
respectively within 30 days from the 
receipt of this letter and to furnish a 
status report by 22.01.2016. 
 
Vide  D.O. dated 29.1.2016, Ministry 
stated that the first statute of NITs and 
rules under Section 34 of the Act have 
been framed. However, it has been 
stated that Ordinances are to be framed 
by the concerned Institutes. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 20.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 

 
the latest status regarding framing of 
rules/regulations.  
 
Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource 
Development was also called before the 
Committee on 27.06.2016 to explain 
the reasons for delay in framing the 
subordinate legislations under the Act. 
 
17 Ministry of 
Human 
Resource 
Development 
(Department of 
Higher 
Education) 
The Indira 
Gandhi 
National Tribal 
University Act, 
2007 
(Assented on 
20.12.2007) 
 
Ministry was requested Vide  D.O. letter 
dated 14.1.2016 to complete framing of 
Statutes/Ordinances/ 
Regulations within 30 days and lay all 
Statutes/Ordinances/ 
Regulations by next Session. Ministry 
also asked to furnish status report on 
laying and framing by 22.01.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 4.2.2016 Ministry 
stated that IGNTU has been requested 
to complete all statutes/ordinance 
contemplated under the Act and take 
necessary action to lay them on the 
table of the House. Ministry also stated 
that 8 statutes have been amended and 
action taken to notify the same. These 
will be laid as soon as it is received by 
the Ministry. 
 
D.O. issued to the Ministry on 
24.2.2016 to expedite the matter and 
provide status report. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 14.3.2016 Ministry 
stated that Gazette notifications relating 
to amendment of statutes have been 
sent for laying on the Table of the Lok 
Sabha and Rajya Sabha. The University 
has been requested to complete the 
framing of all statutes/ordinances and 

 
take necessary action for laying them 
on the Table of the House. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 23.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
statutes/ordinances/regulations.  
 
Vide  O.M. dated 31.5.2016, Ministry 
stated that IGNTU has forwarded draft 
ordinances for approval of Central 
Government. Some ordinances were 
approved and on some ordinances 
Ministry has requested to make 
changes. Final ordinances are awaited. 
 
Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource 
Development was also called before the 
Committee on 27.06.2016 to explain 
the reasons for delay in framing the 
subordinate legislations under the Act. 
  
18 Ministry of 
Petroleum and 
Natural Gas 
The Rajiv 
Gandhi 
Institute 
Petroleum 
Technology 
Act, 2007 
(Assented on 
20.12.2007) 
 
The Ministry was requested vide  D.O. 
letter dated 13.1.2016 to complete the 
framing of Statutes and Ordinances 
under Section 29, 30, 31, 32 and 40 of 
the said Act within 30 days from the 
receipt of this letter and to furnish a 
status report by 22.1.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 27.1.2016, Ministry 
has stated the position regarding 
framing of Ordinances and Statutes. 
The subordinate legislation framed is 
yet to be laid before the Parliament. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 20.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
rules/regulations.  

 
 
Reply awaited. 
 
19 Ministry of 
Shipping 
The Inland 
Vessels 
(Amendment) 
Act, 2007 
(Assented on 
17.9.2007) 
 
The Ministry was requested vide  D.O. 
dated 09.01.2016 to frame Rules under 
Section 54H within 30 days from the 
receipt of this letter and to file a status 
report by 22.01.2016. 
 
Vide D.O. dated 4.2.2016 Ministry 
stated that the final rules would be 
notified by at 10.4.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 20.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
rules/regulations.  
 
Vide  O.M. dated 2.6.2016, the Ministry 
informed that only one rule remains to 
be framed and it has also been vetted by 
Ministry of Law & Justice and would 
be notified shortly. 
 
20 Ministry of 
Railways 
Railway 
(Amendment) 
Act, 2008 
(Assented on 
31.3.2008) 
 
The Ministry was requested vide  D.O. 
dated 13.01.2016 to frame the all the 
rules/regulations under the said Act 
respectively within 30 days from the 
receipt of this letter and to furnish a 
status report by 22.01.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 16.5.2016, Ministry 
stated that Special Railway Projects 
Land Acquisition Rules, 2016 will be  
processed after these rules are vetted by 
the Ministry of Law & Justice. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 8.7.2016, Ministry 
stated that Special Railway Projects 
Land Acquisition Rules, 2016 have 

 
been notified on 23.6.2016.  
 
21 Ministry of 
Shipping 
The Indian 
Maritime 
University Act, 
2008 
(Assented on 
11.11.2008) 
 
Ministry was requested vide  D.O. letter 
dated 13.1.2016 to complete the process 
of framing of subordinate legislation 
within the 30 days of receipt of this 
letter and send a status report  by 
22.1.2016. 
 
Vide  D.O. dated 28.1.2016, Ministry 
stated that Executive Council held on 
23.12.2015 has formulated 10 
Ordinances and Minutes of this meeting 
will be confirmed at the next meeting of 
EC to be held in March, 2016 thereafter 
these Ordinances will be notified. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 20.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
rules/regulations.  
 
Vide  O.M. dated 02.06.2016 Ministry 
stated that Ordinances framed in the 
33 
rd  EC Meeting dated 23/12/2015 were 
confirmed only in the 34 th  Meeting of 
the EC held on 23.05.2016.  Only after 
the Minutes of the previous EC 
Meeting are confirmed can the 
Ordinances be sent for publication in 
the Gazette as some minor corrections 
may be made by the EC at the time of 
confirmation.  In view of the this the 
Ordinances framed in the 33 
rd  EC 
Meeting held on 23.12.2015(after their 
translation into Hindi) will be sent for 
publication in the Gazette by 
30.06.2016. The Government Press 
may take about 3-4 weeks for the 
publication.  Hence they sought an 

 
extension of time upto 31.07.2016. 
 
22 Ministry of 
Civil Aviation 
Airports 
Economic 
Regulatory 
Authority of 
India Act, 2008 
 
(Assented on 
5.12.2008) 
 
The Ministry was requested vide  D.O. 
dated 14.01.2016 to ensure finalisation 
of the rules/regulations in the extended 
time period granted by the Committee 
till 31 
st  March, 2016 and to furnish a 
status report by 22.01.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 6.4.2016, the Ministry 
has sought extension of time till 
30.6.2016 to complete the framing of 
rules/regulations under the said act. 
 
23 Ministry of 
Labour and 
Employment 
Unorganised 
Workers Social 
Security Act, 
2008 
(Assented on 
30.12.2008) 
 
The Ministry was requested vide  D.O. 
dated 7.1.2016 to ensure that all State 
Governments and Union Territories 
finalise the rules within 30 days of 
receipt of this letter. 
 
Vide  
O.M. dated 3.2.2016, Ministry  
stated that at present 22 States and 2 
UTs have framed the Rules under the 
said Act while, 2 States have their own 
separate legislation on the said issues. 
Remaining States have been requested 
to expedite the process of framing the 
concerned rules. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 20.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
rules/regulations.  
 
Vide O.M. dated 31.5.2016, Ministry  
stated that they are taking up the issue 
of framing of subordinate legislation 
with the remaining States/UTs. 
24 Ministry of 
Human 
The Central 
University Act, 
The Ministry was requested Vide  D.O. 
dated 14.01.2016 to frame all the 

 
Resource 
Development 
(Department of 
Higher 
Education) 
2009 
(Assented on 
20.3.2009)  
 
Statutes, Ordinances and Rules under 
Section 26, 28, 29 and clause 38 of the 
second schedule of the said Act 
respectively within 30 days from the 
receipt of this letter for the remaining 
three Universities and to file a status 
report by 22.01.2016. 
 
Vide  O
.M. dated 4.2.2016, Ministry  
stated that 3 Central University have yet 
to complete the process of framing of 
subordinate legislation and lay them on 
the table of the House. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 20.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
rules/regulations.  
 
Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource 
Development was also called before the 
Committee on 27.06.2016 to explain 
the reasons for delay in framing the 
subordinate legislations under the Act. 
 
25 Ministry of 
Health & 
Family 
Welfare 
(Department of 
Health & 
Family 
Welfare) 
The Clinical 
Establishments 
(Registration 
and Regulation) 
Act, 2010 
(Assented on 
18.8.2010) 
 
This Act was passed by Parliament in 
pursuance of resolution passed by the 
legislatures of Arunachal Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram and 
Sikkim under Article 252 of the 
Constitution that the matter should be 
regulated in those states by Parliament 
by law. Thereafter, the States/UTs of 
Bihar, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Uttar 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Puducherry, 
Andaman & Nicobar Island, 
Chandigard, Daman & Diu, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep and 
Assam. 
 

 
Ministry was requested Vide  D.O. letter 
issued on 05.01.2016 to ensure 
completion of framing of rules by State 
Governments within 4 weeks and to 
furnish status report by 05.02.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 21.1.2016, Ministry 
stated that Uttar Pradesh, Lakshadweep 
and Assam have not yet framed the 
rules. 
 
D.O. issued on 12.2.2016 to ensure 
completion of framing by the remaining 
States .  
 
Vide  O.M. dated 20.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
rules/regulations.  
 
Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare was also called before the 
Committee on 14.06.2016 to explain 
the reasons for delay in framing the 
subordinate legislations under the Act. 
 
26 Ministry of 
Commerce & 
Industry 
(Department of 
Commerce) 
The Foreign 
Trade 
(Development 
and Regulation) 
Amendment 
Act, 2010 
(Assented on 
19.8.2010) 
Ministry was requested vide  D.O. letter 
issued on 09.01.2016 to seek the advice 
of the Law Ministry on the need to 
frame Brokering Rules under the Act 
and provide a detailed note by 
22.01.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 21.1.2016, Ministry 
stated that they have referred the matter 
to the Law Ministry. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 20.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 

 
rules/regulations.  
 
Vide  O.M. dated 29.6.2016, Ministry 
stated that the matter was taken up with 
the Ministry of Law & Justice and as 
per their advice it was agreed that the 
rules would be framed under section 26 
(1) of the Weapons of Mass Destruction 
and their Delivery Systems (Prohibition 
of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005 read 
with section 14B (1) of the Foreign 
Trade (Development and Regulation) 
Amendment Act, 1992, as amended and 
section 12 of WMD Act, 2005 by the 
Ministry of External Affairs. 
 
27 Ministry of 
Power 
The Energy 
Conservation 
(Amendment) 
Act, 2010 
(Assented on 
24.8.2010) 
 
The Ministry was requested vide  D.O. 
dated 07.01.2016 to frame all the 
rules/regulations under Section 56 & 58 
of the said Act respectively within 30 
days from the receipt of this letter and 
to furnish a status report by 20.01.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 22.1.2016, Ministry 
stated that the Law Ministry has 
informed that the rules under Section 56 
(2) (e) and (v) are enabling provisions 
meant for unforeseen circumstances and 
rules need not to be framed at present. 
It has been informed further that some 
rules are under consideration and will 
be completed by July & December, 
2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 31.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to clarify 
whether all rules/regulations 
contemplated to be framed under the act 
have been framed and to seek extension 
of time if framing not completed. 

 
 
The Secretary, Ministry of Power 
briefed the Chairman for the reasons for 
delay in framing the rules/regulations 
under the Act. Extension granted till 
31.12.2016. 
 
28 Ministry of 
External 
Affairs 
The Nalanda 
University Act, 
2010 
(Assented on 
21.9.2010) 
 
Ministry was requested Vide  
D.O.  
letter issued on 12.01.2016 to ensure 
completion of the framing of rules 
within 30 days and provide status report 
by 22.01.2016. 
 
Vide  D.O. letter dated  22.1.2016, 
Ministry  stated that Statutes relating to 
emoluments and terms and conditions 
of University Staff have not yet  been 
framed. 
 
D.O. letter issued to the Ministry on 
18.2.2016 to expedite the framing of 
subordinate legislation and furnish 
status report in the matter. 
 
Vid e D.O. letter dated 24 
th  and 25 th  
February, 2016 Ministry stated that 
draft rules under Section 27 (h) and (i) 
are under consideration. Regarding 
Section 27 (j), University has informed 
that this subject is already covered by 
the university’s First Ordinances 
notified in June 2015 (regarding 
admission procedures, guidelines for 
qualification for degrees, credits etc) 
and therefore no separate legislation is 
required. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 23.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 

 
statutes/ordinances/regulations.  
 
Vide  O.M. dated 31.5.2016, the 
Ministry stated that statutes/regulations 
relating to appointment emoluments 
and other conditions of service is under 
consideration. Statutes/Regulations 
relating to procedure for tribunal of 
arbitration and settlement of dispute 
between employees, students and 
university are under consideration of 
Legal Counsel of the University and 
will be place before the Governing 
Council in its next meeting. 
Regulations regarding constitution and 
conduct of business of Executive 
Committee of University has been 
approved by the Legislative Department 
and is being notified. Regulations 
relating to Building Works Committee 
and Finance Committee is with the 
Legislative Department and will be 
notified after their approval. 
 
29 Ministry of 
Information 
and 
Broadcasting 
The Prasar 
Bharati 
(Broadcasting 
Corporation of 
India) 
Amendment 
Act, 2011 
(Assented on 
8.1.2012) 
 
Extension of time granted till 4.6.2016 
for completing the framing of 
rules/regulations under the Act. 
 
Ministry was requested vide  D.O. letter 
dated 14.1.2016 to complete framing of 
pending subordinate legislation within 
the time period granted by the 
Committee, i.e. by 04.06.2016 and to 
furnish status report on the progress of 
action by 22.01.2016. 
 
Vide  D.O. letter dated 25.2.2016, 
Ministry furnished status report 
showing the progress of framing of 
rules/regulations under the Act. 

 
However, it has been found that the 
Ministry has not completed framing of 
rules/regulations under the Act. 
 
Ministry to be requested to furnish the 
latest status after expiry of extension of 
time i.e.  4.6.2016. 
 
Vide O.M. dated 27.6.2016, Ministry 
requested extension of time till 
4.12.2016. Secretary to be called before 
the Chairman. 
 
30 Ministry of 
Finance 
(Department of 
Financial 
Services) 
The Life 
Insurance 
Corporation 
(Amendment) 
Act, 2011 
(Assented on 
12.1.2012) 
 
The Ministry was requested vide  D.O. 
dated 14.01.2016 to ensure finalization 
of the rules/regulations in the extended 
time period granted by the Committee 
till 30 
th   April, 2016 and to furnish a 
status report by 15.03.2016. 
 
Vide O.M. dated 6.5.2016 the Ministry 
has sought extension for framing and 
laying the subordinate legislation before 
the Parliament. Extension granted till 
31.7.2016. 
 
31 Ministry of 
Science and 
Technology 
(Department of 
Scientific and 
Industrial 
Research) 
The Academy 
of Scientific 
and Research 
Innovation Act, 
2011 
(Assented on 
6.2.2012) 
The Ministry was requested vide  D.O. 
dated 12.01.2016 to complete the 
process of framing and laying of 
subordinate legislation under the said 
Act within 45 days from the date of 
receipt of this letter and to furnish a 
status report by 31.01.2016. 
 
Vide D.O. dated 15.02.2016 the 
Ministry has sought one year extension 
for framing and laying the subordinate 
legislation before the Parliament. 
Extension granted till 31.10.2016. 
 

 
32 Ministry of 
Law & Justice 
(Legislative 
Department) 
The Anand 
Marriage 
(Amendment) 
Act, 2012 
(Assented on 
7.6.2012) 
 
The Ministry was requested Vide  D.O. 
dated 13.01.16 to ensure that the States 
& UTs frame the concerned rules under 
the said Act within 30 days from the 
receipt of this letter and to furnish a 
status report by 22.01.2016. 
 
Vide  D.O. dated 10.3.2016, Ministry 
stated that 5 States have framed the 
rules and the remaining States and 
Union Territories have been requested 
to expedite the process of framing of 
rules. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 27.5.2016, the 
Ministry stated that 5 States have 
framed the concerned Rules and 
reminders have been issued to the other 
States. The Ministry of Home Affairs 
has been requested to expedite the 
process of framing the rules for the 
Union Territories.  
 
Vide  O.M. dated 16.6.2016 the Ministry 
has informed that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs has directed all the UTs to 
frame the rules under the Act at the 
earliest. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 6.6.2016 Ministry has 
stated that a Bill for amending the Act 
has been introduced in the Lok Sabha 
which relates to inclusion of the Leader 
of the single largest party in the House 
of People in the Committee for 
selection of the Lokpal. Accordingly, 
the remaining set of rules would be 
framed after the Lokpal is appointed. 
 
33 Ministry of The Chemical Ministry was requested Vide  D.O. letter 

 
Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals 
(Department of 
Chemicals & 
Fertilizers) 
Weapons 
Convention 
(Amendment) 
Act, 2012 
(Assented on 
11.9.2012) 
 
dated 13.1.2016 to complete the process 
of framing of subordinate legislation 
within the 30 days of receipt of this 
letter and send a status report  by 
22.1.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 26.5.2016, Ministry 
stated that Government is empowered 
to make rules under clauses (a) to (g) of 
sub-section 2 of section 56 of the Act 
for carrying out the purposes of the Act. 
Under Clause (d), (e) and (f) the 
following rules as (i) the CWC Appeals 
Rules, 2005, (ii) the CWC (Criteria for 
Appointment as Enforcement Officer) 
Rules, 2014 are framed, notified and 
laid on the table of the House. Other 
draft rules under Section 56 of the Act, 
duly approved by Cabinet Secretary, 
have been submitted to Ministry of Law 
& Justice for vetting. 
 
34 Ministry of 
Health and 
Welfare 
The All India 
Institute of 
Medical 
Sciences 
(Amendment) 
Act, 2012 
(Assented on 
12.9.2012) 
 
The Ministry was requested Vide  O.M. 
dated 6.1.2016 to confirm if all the 6 
new AIIMS had there own Regulations 
in place by 15.1.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 18.1.2016, Ministry 
have stated that the proviso to section 
29(2) of the said Act is only an 
enabling provision which could have 
been utilized by the institutes for 
framing of regulations.  
 
Vide  D.O. dated 29.1.2016, Ministry 
was requested to inform about the 
status of framing of regulations under 
proviso to section 29(2) of the parent 
Act of 1956. 
 

 
Vide  O.M. dated 20.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
rules/regulations.  
 
Reply awaited. 
 
35 Ministry of 
Finance 
(Department of 
Revenue) 
The Finance 
Act, 2013 
(Assented on 
10.5.2013) 
 
The Ministry was requested Vide  D.O. 
dated 13.01.16 to ensure that the States 
& UTs frame the concerned rules under 
the said Act within 30 days from the 
receipt of this letter and to furnish a 
status report by 22.01.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 17.3.2016 Ministry 
has forwarded the list of subordinate 
legislation framed under the Act. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 20.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to inform 
whether all the contemplated 
rules/regulations have been framed 
under the Act.  
 
Reply awaited. 
 
36 Ministry of 
Corporate 
Affairs 
The Companies 
Act, 2013 
(Assented on 
29.8.2013) 
 
The Ministry was requested vide  D.O. 
dated 09.01.16 to provide a quarterly 
report of the progress made in the 
matter. 
 
Vide  D.O. dated 28.4.16, the Ministry 
has furnished the Quarterly Report on 
the status of framing of rules under the 
said act. 
 
Vide  D.O. dated 18.7.16, the Ministry 
have informed that 144 sections of the 
Act are yet to be commenced for which 
rules will be framed when these 

 
sections commence. For the remaining 
sections the status of rules framed has 
been furnished by the Ministry. 
 
37 Ministry of 
Civil Aviation 
The Rajiv 
Gandhi 
National 
Aviation 
University Act, 
2013 
(Assented on 
18.9.2013) 
 
Ministry was requested Vide  D.O. letter 
dated 6.1.2016 to complete the 
finalization of First Statute within 30 
days. Ministry was also asked the likely 
time to be taken in appointment of Vice 
Chancellor of the University and 
framing of Ordinances and Regulations. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 28.1.2016,  Ministry 
stated that the statutes have been 
finalized and being printed in the 
Official Gazette and will be placed in 
both Houses of Parliament in the 
ensuing session. The Search cum 
Selection Committee for Vice-
Chancellor is held on 28.1.2016 and 
framing of ordinances and regulations 
will be undertaken once VC has taken 
charge. 
 
D.O. letter issued to Ministry on 
8.3.2016 requesting the time frame 
within which the Ministry would 
complete the framing of Subordinate 
Legislation under the Act and to 
provide status report by 18.3.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 14.3.2016,  Ministry 
stated that the Statutes have been 
published in the Gazette of India on 
7.3.2016 and will be laid on the Table 
of the both Houses of Parliament in the 
2
nd  part of Budget Session 2016. 
Further, selection process of the Vice-
Chancellor in under process and 
framing of Ordinances and Regulations 

 
will be undertaken once the Vice-
Chancellor takes charge. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 23.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
rules/regulations.  
 
Reply awaited. 
 
38 Ministry of 
Consumer 
Affairs, Food 
and Public 
Distribution 
(Department of 
Food and 
Public 
Distribution) 
 
The National 
Food Security 
Act, 2013 
(Assented on 
10.9.2013) 
 
Ministry was requested vide  D.O. letter 
dated 11.1.2016 to furnish status report 
on framing of rules by Ministry and 
State Governments by 22.01.2016 and 
ensure completion of framing of rules 
within 30 days. 
 
Vide O.M. dated 22.1.2016,  Ministry 
stated that Ministry of Women & Child 
Development has framed the draft rules 
under Section 39 (2) (a) and matter is 
being followed up under Section 39 (2) 
(b). Ministry is also in constant touch 
with State Governments/UTs to notify 
Rules under Section 40. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 23.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
rules/regulations.  
 
Vide  O.M. dated 3.6.2016 Ministry 
furnished status of framing of 
rules/regulations under the Act. Rules 
under section 39 (2) (a) framed but not 
yet laid. Rules under section 39 (2) (b) 
and (c) to be revised and laid on the 
table of the House. Under section 30 
regarding framing of rules by State 
Government/UTs Ministry stated the 

 
information is being compiled. 
 
39 Ministry of 
Minority 
Affairs 
The Wakf 
(Amendment) 
Act, 2013 
(Assented on 
20.9.2013) 
 
Committee does not accept the views of 
the Ministry and was requested vide 
D.O. letter dated 15.1.2016 to complete 
the process of framing of Regulation 
under Section 57 and send a status 
report  by 5.2.2016. 
  
Vide  D.O. letter dated 25.2.2016 the 
Ministry informed that the requisite 
action to implement the two specific 
provisions was to be taken by the State 
Wakf Board and the State 
Government/UTs. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 20.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
rules/regulations.  
 
Reply awaited. 
 
40 Ministry of 
Personnel, 
Public 
Grievances & 
Pension 
(Department of 
Personnel and 
Training) 
The Lokpal and 
Lokayuktas 
Act, 2013 
(Assented on 
1.1.2014) 
The Ministry was requested Vide  D.O. 
dated 14.01.16 to complete the framing 
of Rules and Regulations under 
Sections 40, 42, 43, 59 & 60 of the said 
Act respectively within 30 days from 
the receipt of this letter and to furnish a 
status report by 22.01.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated, 2.2.2016 Ministry has 
stated that 2 Rules have been framed 
and laid on the Table of the Parliament 
while other rules will be framed after 
the office of the Lokpal becomes 
functional. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 20.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 

 
the latest status regarding framing of 
rules/regulations.  
 
Reply awaited. 
 
41 Ministry of 
Agriculture 
(Department of 
Agricultural 
Research and 
Education) 
The Rani 
Lakshmi Bai 
Central 
Agricultural 
University Act, 
2014 
(Assented on 
4.3.2014) 
 
The Ministry was requested vide  D.O. 
dated 14.1.16 to complete the framing 
of Statutes and Regulations under 
Sections Section  26, 28 & 29 of the 
said Act respectively within 30 days 
from the receipt of this letter. 
 
Vide  letter dated 24.2.2016, Ministry 
stated that Academic Regulations have 
been framed and would be laid before 
the Parliament shortly. It had been 
earlier informed that 7 Ordinances have 
been framed and laid before the 
Parliament 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 20.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to inform 
whether all the contemplated 
rules/regulations/statutes/ordinances 
have been framed under the Act.  
 
Vide  O.M.  dated 30.5.2016, Ministry 
has informed of the regulations and 
ordinances framed under the Act.   
 
42 Ministry of 
Housing and 
Urban Poverty 
Alleviation 
The Street 
Vendors 
(Protection of 
Livelihood and 
Regulation of 
Street Vending) 
Act, 2014 
(Assented on 
4.3.2014) 
 
The Ministry was requested vide  D.O. 
letter dated 12.1.16 to complete the 
framing of rules by the States & UTs 
under Sections 36 & 38 of the said Act 
respectively within 30 days from the 
receipt of this letter and to furnish a 
status report by 22.01.16. 
 
Vide  O.M. letter dated 17.2.2016 the 
Ministry sought extension of time for 

 
six months for the States/UTs to 
complete the process of framing of 
rules. The Secretary also appeared 
before the Chairman on 5.4.2016 to 
brief him about the reasons for the 
delay. Accordingly, Extension granted 
till 30.9.2016. 
 
43 Ministry of 
Finance 
(Department of 
Revenue) 
The Narcotic 
Drugs and 
Psychotropic 
Substances 
(Amendment) 
Act, 2014 
(Assented on 
7.3.2014) 
 
The Ministry was requested Vide  O.M. 
dated 06.01.16 to clarify whether it 
would frame the said regulations as 
provided under Section 9 (1) (a) (iiia) 
by 15.1.16. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 15.1.2016 Ministry 
has stated that the scheme for 
cultivation of poppy is under 
consideration and appropriate rules will 
be notified after finalization of details 
of such a scheme. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 20.5.2016, the 
Ministry has been requested to furnish 
the latest status regarding framing of 
rules/regulations.  
 
Reply awaited. 
 
44 Ministry of 
Personnel, 
Public 
Grievances & 
Pension 
(Department of 
Personnel and 
Training) 
The Whistle 
Blowers 
Protection Act, 
2011 
(Assented on 
9.5.2014) 
The Ministry was requested vide  D.O. 
dated 14.1.16 to inform the steps taken 
for enforcement of the said Act and 
consequently the framing of Rules and 
Regulations under Sections 25, 26 & 27 
of the said Act respectively by 
22.01.16. 
 
Vide  D.O. dated, 21.1.2016 Ministry 
has stated that amendment bill to the 
said Act is pending in the Rajya Sabha 
and Rules will be framed once the Act 

 
comes into force. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 6.6.2016 Ministry has 
stated that the Bill for amending the Act 
has been passed by the Lok Sabha and 
is now pending in Rajya Sabha. The 
rules will be framed once the Act, as 
amended comes into force. 
 
 
45 Ministry of 
Commerce & 
Industry 
(Department of 
Industrial 
Policy & 
Promotion) 
The National 
Institute of 
Design Act, 
2014 
(Assented on 
17.7.2014) 
Ministry was requested vide D.O. letter 
dated 12.1.2016 to complete the 
framing of Statutes/Ordinances/ 
Rules within 30 days and furnish status 
report by 22.1.2016.  
 
Vide  O.M. dated 22.1.2016, Ministry 
requested extension of time till 
22.07.2016 as only one Ordinance has 
been framed and Statutes are under 
active consideration of the Governing 
Council. Extension sought till 
22.7.2016. 
 
Secretary, DIPP appeared before the 
Chairman on 25.4.2016 to explain the 
reasons for seeking extension of time. 
Accordingly, Chairman COSL, granted 
extension of time 30.9.2016.  
 
46 Ministry of 
Human 
Resource 
Development 
(Department of 
Higher 
Education) 
 
The Indian 
Institutes of 
Information 
Technology 
Act, 2014 
(Assented on 
8.12.2014) 
Ministry was requested vide D.O. letter 
dated 12.1.2016 to complete the 
framing of Statutes/Ordinances/ 
Rules within 30 days and furnish status 
report by 22.01.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 29.1.2016, Ministry 
stated that a committee has been 
constituted to frame the First Statutes. 
With regard to Ordinances Ministry 

 
stated that this being a purely internal 
academic matter of IITs, the same may 
be exempted from rules to be framed 
under subordinate legislation. With 
regard to framing of rules, Ministry 
stated that draft notification was sent to 
Ministry of Law & Justice who advised 
to get the comments of all the 
stakeholders i.e. Members of IIT 
Council. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 2.2.2016, Ministry 
sought extension of time till 4.7.2016 
for completing the framing of 
subordinate legislation. Extension 
sought till 4.7.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 4.4.2016, Ministry 
stated that a Committee has been 
constituted to frame the first statutes, 
however, the Committee is yet to 
submit there report. Regarding rules 
necessary amendments as suggested by 
the Legislative Department have been 
made and accordingly, the proposal is 
being sent to Legislative Department.  
 
Secretary, Department of Higher 
Education was called before the 
Chairman on 25.4.2016 to explain the 
reasons for seeking extension of time. 
Chairman, COSL accordingly, granted 
extension of time till 4.7.2016. 
 
Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource 
Development was also called before the 
Committee on 27.06.2016 to explain 
the reasons for delay in framing the 
subordinate legislations under the Act. 
 

 
47 Ministry of 
Shipping 
 
 
The Merchant 
Shipping 
(Second 
Amendment) 
Act, 2014 
(Assented on 
9.12.2014) 
Ministry was requested vide  D.O. letter 
dated 14.1.2016 to complete the process 
of framing of Rules/Regulation within 
the 30 days of receipt of this letter and 
send a status report  by 22.1.2016. 
 
Vide  D.O. dated 26.5.2016,  Ministry 
stated that out of four rules to be 
notified three rules have been 
framed/notified and laid on the table of 
the House. Draft Merchant Shipping 
(Seafarer Accommodation) Rules, 2016 
were pre-published in the gazette on 
29.3.2016 inviting suggestion/objection 
from the public. The suggestions have 
been examined and the notification for 
final rules after pre-publication is being 
referred to the Legislative Department 
for vetting/finalization. 
 
48 Ministry 
Human 
Resource 
Development 
(Department of 
Higher 
Education) 
The School of 
Planning and 
Architecture 
Act, 2014 
(Assented on 
18.12.2014) 
Ministry was requested Vide  D.O. letter 
dated 13.1.2016 to complete the process 
of framing of Rules/Regulations/Statues  
under Sections 28, 30 and 37 within the 
30 days of receipt of this letter and send 
a status report  by 22.1.2016. 
 
Vide  O.M. dated 26.5.2016, Ministry 
stated that approved SPA Rules under 
Section 37 of the School of Planning & 
Architecture Act has been published in 
the Gazette on 27.1.2016 and laid on 
the Table of the Lok Sabha and Rajya 
Sabha 14.3.2016 and 28.4.2016 
respectively. First Statute under Section 
29 of SPA Act, 2014 is at advanced 
stage and shall be notified shortly. 
 
 

 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
 
XXVII 
 Twenty Seventh Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 5.00 pm on Tuesday, the 9 th  August, 2016 in Room No.126-C 
(Committee Chairman’s Room), Parliament House, New Delhi.   
Present 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy    Chairman 
Members 
2. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
3.  Shri S. Muthukaruppan 
4.  Shri K. Parasaran 
5.  Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
6.  Dr.K. Keshava Rao 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
3. Shri R.S.Rawat, Joint Director 
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director 
5. Smt. Monica Baa, Deputy Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  of the Committee to the meeting.  
Then, the following draft reports were taken up for  consideration and adoption by the 
Committee:- 
(i)  the draft 227 
th  Report on Statutory Orders Laid on the Table of th e Rajya  Sabha 
during its 238th  Session; 
(ii)  the draft 228 th  Report on the delay in framing of Subordinate Legi slation under 
Acts of Parliament administered by various Ministries/Departments; and 
(iii) the draft 229 th  Report on Statutory Orders Laid on the Table of th e Rajya  Sabha 
during its 239th  Session 

 
 
3. The Committee considered the reports and unanimo usly adopted the draft 227 th , 228 th  and 
229th  Reports without any amendments after some discussi ons and decided to present these 
Reports, along with the 226 th  Report, which was earlier adopted, to the House on the 11th  August, 
2016.  Accordingly, it authorized its Chairman and in his absence Dr. K. Keshava Rao and Shri 
S. Muthukaruppan, Members of the Committee, to present the Reports to the House. 
4. * * * * 
 
5.     The meeting then adjourned at 5.45 p.m. 
 
 
__________________________________ 
****Relates to other matter. 
 
 