REPORT NO.
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
TWO HUNDRED AND TENTH REPORT
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
September, 2013/Bhadra, 1935 (Saka)
(i) The Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of
Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce,
Production, Supply and Distribution) Rules, 2004; and
(ii) Kandla Port Trust (Authorization of Pilots) Regulations, 1964-
Implementation of 163rd Report of the Committee
(Presented on 3rd September, 2013)
210


Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
TWO HUNDRED AND TENTH REPORT
(i) The Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of
Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce,
Production, Supply and Distribution) Rules, 2004; and
(ii) Kandla Port Trust (Authorization of Pilots) Regulations, 1964-
Implementation of 163rd Report of the Committee
(Presented on 3rd September , 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
September, 2013/Bhadra, 1935 (Saka)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ (i)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ON :.........................................................................
(I) The Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Proh ibition
of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce,
Production, Supply and Distribution) Rules, 2004; and...... 1-22
(II) Kandla Port Trust (Authorization of Pilots) Regulations, 1964-
Implementation of 163rd Report of the Committee............ 23-60
4. M INUTES ............................................................................ 61-63

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on the 8th May, 2013)
1. Shrimati Maya Singh        ------       Chairperson
2. Shri M. P. Achuthan
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
4. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay
5. Shri P. Bhattacharya
6. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder
7. Shri Prakash Javadekar
8. Shri Mangala Kisan
9. Shri Lalhming Liana
10. Shri Rasheed Masood
11. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
12. Shri K. Parasaran
*13. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
14. Shrimati V asanthi Stanley
15. Shri Bhupender Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director
3. Shri R.S. Rawat, Joint Director
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director
5. Shri R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director
6. Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director
(i)
*Nominated w.e.f. 22.07.2013

INTRODUCTION
1. I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having
been authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf, this Two
Hundred and Tenth Report of the Committee.
2. The Committee examined the matters that came up while scrutinizing
(i) The Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement
and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution)
Rules, 2004 and (ii) Kandla Port Trust (Authorization of Pilots) Regulations,
1964-Implementation of 163rd Report of the Committee and issues relating to
them along with the comments received from the concerned Governments.
3. The observations and recommendations of the Committee are contained
in the Report.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report in its meeting
held on the 27th August, 2013.
MAY A SINGH
Chairperson,
Committee on Subordinate Legislation,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)
NEW DELHI;
September 3, 2013

1
REPORT
(I)
THE CIGARETTE AND OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS (PROHIBITION
OF ADVERTISEMENT AND REGULATION OF TRADE AND
COMMERCE, PRODUCTION, SUPPLY
AND DISTRIBUTION) RULES 2004
Background
The linkage between use of tobacco and ill-health is a well-established
medical fact. Tobacco is an avoidable public health hazard. It has been
associated with cancer, vascular and coronary heart disease. This is one industry
or a product where only the manufactures/sellers are benefited by its sales and
not the consumer. The WHO had, in its Plenary held in 1986 and 1990, urged
Member states to provide effective protection to non-smokers from involuntary
exposure to the ill-effects of smoking as also to protect children and the youth
from getting addicted to this scourge. Subsequently, the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare brought out the Cigarette and Other Tobacco Products
(Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce,
Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003. The Committee examined the
Cigarette and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and
Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution)
Rules, 2004 (Annexure – I)- along with its various amendments framed from
time to time by the Ministry in exercise of powers conferred by section 31 of
the above Act.
The basic purpose of the Rules under this Act is to provide preventive
health care to the masses who are otherwise passive smokers. The intention is
to prohibit smoking in public places; segregation of smoking and non-smoking
areas; prohibition of advertisement of cigarette and other tobacco products
which otherwise, should have statutory warning indicating health hazards posed
by tobacco use; and to ban sale of tobacco products to minors and within 100
yards of educational institutions.

2
2. The Rules were examined by the Committee and a questionnaire on the
subject was forwarded to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on the
28th April, 2005. The Ministry furnished their comments/clarification on the
2nd June, 2005- ( Annexure - II ). During the examination of the rules, the
Committee held two meetings to deliberate upon the subject matter. These
rules are meant to look into the aspects off-
(i) proh ibition of advertisement of cigarette and other tobacco
products;
(ii) regulation of trade practices of these products;
(iii) their production; and
(iv) supply and distribution of these products.
3. The points raised by the Committee and the Ministry’s comments-thereon
are given below:-
I. Question :- The Committee noted that the Act under which the
above noted rules have been framed, was notified in the year 2003,
the rules were notified in the Gazette of India on 25.2.2004 and
they were laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 20.8.2004.
The Committee wanted to know as to- :
(i) When did the Act come into force and what were the reasons for
time lag, if any, between the enforcement of the Act and the
notification of the Rules?
(ii) What were the reasons for laying the rules on the Table of Rajya
Sabha so late when these were notified on 25.2.2004?
Ministry’ s Response: The Ministry informed that the Assent of the
President was received on 18th May, 2003. Thereafter, ‘The Cigarette and
other tobacco products (Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade
and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution ) Act, 2003 came into
effect from 1st May, 2004 vide notification No. 200 under Part II-Section 3

3
sub section (ii) of the Gazette of India Extraordinary dated 25.2.2004. The
Rules relating to (i) Prohibition of smoking in public places; (ii) Prohibition of
advertisement of cigarette and other tobacco products; and (iii) Prohibition of
sales to minors, came into effect the same day, i.e., 1st May, 2004 vide
notification No. 93 Part II-Section 3 sub section (i) of the Gazette of India
Extraordinary dated the 25.2.2004. Thus, there was no time lag between
enforcement of the Act and notification of certain rules provided under the
Act.
The Ministry further stated that though the Rules were notified in the
Gazette on 25.2.2004, these were to come into force on 1st May, 2004. Before
the Rules could come into effect, the same could not be laid on the Table of the
House. Moreover, Budget Session of the Parliament was mid-way in May-
June. Hence, the same was tabled in the next Session, i.e. Monsoon Session.
Committee’ s Observations: The Committee noted that there was some
delay in laying of the rules on the Table of the House before their coming
into force as they were laid in the next session. The reply of the Ministry was
not found to be convincing by the Committee.
II. Question: Section 31 of the Act contemplates framing of rules on
a number of aspects. A perusal of the contents of the Rules gives
an indication that they do not cover all the areas specified in Section
31 (2) of the Act.
The Committee desired to know whether the Government have framed
any other set of rules in pursuance of Section 31 of the Act; if so the details,
and if not what were the comments of the Ministry in this behalf?
Ministry’ s Response: The Ministry informed that the Government has
notified vide notification No. 379 under Part II, Section 3, sub-section (i) of
the Gazette of India Extraordinary dated 1st September, 2004 providing for
prohibition of sale of cigarettes and other tobacco products around 100 yards
of educational institutions, which came into effect from 1st December, 2004.

4
The Ministry further clarified that the Government is actively engaged in
the process in consultation with other nodal departments/stakeholders, for
framing of Rules relating to (i) mandatory depiction of statutory warnings
(including pictorial warnings) on tobacco packs; and (ii) mandatory depiction
of tar and nicotine contents along with their maximum permissible limits on
tobacco packs, which are provided for under Section 31 (2) of the Act.
Committee’ s Observations: The Committee feels that the framing of
rules relating to statutory warnings on tobacco products have been extremely
delayed and only enforced since May 31, 2009 while depiction along with
their permissible limits on tobacco packs has not been enforced till date and
needs to be done expeditiously. It is recommended that qualitative statement
on the hazardous effects of tar and nicotine contents should be disclosed to
the public by printing it on the tobacco products. The Committee also notes
with concern that all the rules under section 31 of the Act were framed with
considerable delay.
III. Question: As can be inferred from the title, the rules are meant for
prohibition of advertisement and regulation of trade and commerce,
production, supply and distribution of cigarettes and other tobacco
products. Accordingly, the rules are supposed to cover all these
areas. But, the rules in hand seem to be very brief and they cover
only three aspects, namely, (i) prohibition of smoking in public
places; (ii) prohibition of advertisement of cigarettes and other
tobacco products; and (iii) prohibition of sale to minors. There is
no mention on advertisement of cigarettes and other tobacco
products through various other modes, which are being resorted
to by the manufacturers/traders of these products. The trend of
surrogate advertisements for these products is also being seen
increasingly. Secondly, there are hardly any provisions in the rules
providing for regulation of trade and commerce, production, supply
and distribution of cigarettes and other tobacco products.

5
The Committee further enquired whether the rules, as the title suggests,
should not be more comprehensive and elaborate; what are the comments of
the Ministry in this regard and in what manner are all these areas regulated?
Ministry’ s Response: The Ministry informed the Committee that the title
by itself is comprehensive and elaborate, which only fortifies the Act further.
The areas regulated are as follows:-
Supply and Distribution- : The rules framed relate to-
(i) Ban on sale of tobacco products to minors; and
(ii) Ban on sale of tobacco products within a radius of 100 yards of
educational institutions, cover the supply and distribution aspect
of the Act.
Production- : When the rules relating to maximum permissible limits of
nicotine and tar contents are notified, the production of tobacco products
would be regulated. The Government is actively considering framing the rules
in consultation with other nodal departments/stakeholders.
Regulation of Trade- : When the rules relating to mandatory depiction of
statutory warnings (including pictorial warnings) on tobacco packs are formed,
the trade practices would be regulated.
Moreover, the Government has also set up a Screening Committee to
look into specific complaints regarding violations of the said Act relating to the
prohibition of direct or indirect advertisement of the cigarettes and tobacco
products, including cases of surrogate advertisements.
Committee’ s Observation: The Committee reiterates that the Ministry
should expedite framing of rules pertaining to production (regulation of tar
and nicotine contents) and strengthen rules relating to trade (statutory
warnings) by prescribing stronger, effective and field tested pictorial health
warnings covering at least 90% of the principal display area of the tobacco
products as also the screening committee should enforce the provisions

6
relating to prohibition on advertisement, promotion and sponsorship so as
to put a check on surrogate advertisements as well.
The Committee is also of the view that the rules should cover explicitly
all the issues as given in the title of the rules. The Committee found the
reply vague and evasive. Since the Ministry of Health is administering these
Rules, rest of the stakeholders, which have not been defined, hardly have
any role in framing and determining implementation of these rules.
IV. Question: The Committee inquired as to what are the penal
consequences for violation of provisions of rules 3, 4 and 5 of the
said Rules and whether the penalties prescribed therefor are adequate
enough to ensure compliance of the law?
Ministry’ s Response:The Ministry submitted that the Act provides for (i)
punishment for smoking in certain places (Section 21); (ii) Punishment for
advertisement of cigarettes and other tobacco products (Section 22) ; and (iii)
Punishment for sale of cigarettes or any other tobacco products in certain
places or to persons below the age of eighteen years (Section 24) which are
adequate enough to ensure compliance of the Law.
Committee’ s Observation: The Committee is of the view that cases of
penalization, as provided in the Act, should be given due publicity and
coverage so that they act as a deterrent for prospective/current offenders.
The Committee found that public is hardly aware of these rules. The
manufacturing companies have found out the ways to advertise tobacco
products through surrogate advertisements. These companies also sponsor
major events catching the eye of public. The Committee is of the view that
there should be strict compliance of rules followed by deterrent punishment
and effective monitoring. The Committee recommends that NGOs and other
agencies working for tobacco control should also be involved both in awareness
generation as well as in effective enforcement of the rules and should monitor
and report to enforcing agencies about violation of these rules.

7
4. Thereafter, the Committee in its meeting held on 17th November, 2005
decided to take up the matter with one or two State Governments for the steps
taken there to control the health hazard posed due to shortfalls, if any, in the
regulation of advertisements, trade and commerce of cigarettes and other
tobacco products . The Committee also decided to invite views of a few
institutions/organizations engaged in anti-tobacco campaign.
5. The Committee then, in consultation with the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare identified few such individuals, institutions, organizations from
where inputs on the efficacy of the said rules could be obtained. Out of the list
containing 8 such names- provided by the Ministry, only 5 responded, whereas
3 did not. Even the list/names of the State Governments as desired by the
Committee were neither shortlisted nor supplied by the Ministry to the
Committee.
6. The comments/clarifications thus received from individuals/associations/
institutions which were concerned with the implementation of the said rules
were forwarded to the Ministry for their comments on the points, suggestions
submitted to the Committee by them. The Committee sought dealing of each
such point individually by the Ministry and furnishing of their comments
separately, for consideration of the Committee.
7. Thus, views/suggestions were received from : (i) Dr. K. Srinath Reddy,
Professor and Head, Department of Cardiology, AIIMS; (ii) Dr. Bela Shah,
Sr. Deputy Director General, ICMR; (iii) Voluntary Health Association of
India (VHAI)- Shri Alok Mukhopadhyay, Chief Executive; (iv) Indian Cancer
Society, Delhi branch- Ms Jyotsna Govil, honorary Joint Secretary; and
(v) SWASTHYA, an NGO- Shri K.R.Narayana, President.
8. The views/suggestions sought from these individuals/organizations
covered various aspects viz. definition of ‘open space; indoor work places;
creation of ‘smoking areas’ in hotels and restaurants; designated separate
ventilated ‘smoking rooms’ where health care services are provided; educational
institutions and Government buildings; sponsorships of tobacco products and

8
their promotion; prohibition against incentive, promotion and free supply of
tobacco products and their being used as bonus, premium etc; provisions for
allowing point of sale advertising; size of advertorial/display board; surrogate
advertising; prohibition of advertisements; imposition of pecuniary fines; brand
stretching etc. etc.
9. The views/suggestions received from these identified individuals/
institutions/organizations can be summed up in the following points:-
(i) the packages of tobacco products should boldly/noticeably carry
out ‘tobacco kills’ and ‘ tobacco causes cancer’ warning signs;
(ii) totally ban advertisement of these products. Prominent personalities
not to be shown smoking or using tobacco- Only Point of Sale
advertisement be allowed till they are totally banned;
(iii) license fee of Rs. 3000-5000 be charged from kiosks selling tobacco
products on periodical basis. This would generate some revenue
for the Government as well as reduce illegal sales;
(iv) the ‘No smoking’ area and ‘smoking’ area in a restaurant should
be physically separated from each other with proper ventilation so
that the smoke doesn’t affect the non-smokers under a common
roof. Dividing the area by just putting up a board for few seats
merely won’t do;
(v) indoor work places have been totally ignored; and
(vi) Sale should be stopped near bus/railway stations, cinema halls,
etc. Fines to be enhanced very high for offenders.
Committee’s Observation: The Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare has modified the regulations under the Act and have notified
fresh regulations thereby addressing some of the concerns raised
hereinabove. However, action needs to be taken to ensure total ban on

9
advertisements and surrogate advertisements and sale of tobacco
products to minors, especially at bus stops, railway stations and cinema
halls.
10. The Committee in its meeting held on 8th January, 2010 heard the
Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on the Prohibition on Sale of
Cigarettes and Other Tobacco products around Educational Institutions Rules
2004 and the Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Packaging and Labeling)
Rules, 2008 framed under the Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products
(Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce,
Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003 and sought clarification on the
issue of increasing use of cigarettes and tobacco products amongst youngsters;
process of monitoring of implementation of the rules; periodical assessment of
target achievement; sufficiency of quantum of fine/penalty and effectiveness
of the pictorial warnings.
11. The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare informed that
growing use of tobacco products amongst youngsters is basically due to peer
pressure, thus, it is very important to educate the children from tender age
about the damage caused by use of cigarettes and other tobacco products.
The Committee was further informed that the rules have been notified almost
for every aspect in the Act except nicotine and tar content for which laboratories
are needed and regarding Sections which deal with the powers to seize, inspect
and enforce the Act currently actions are taken under Code of Criminal Procedure
and that the concerned authorities have been notified.
12. Regarding the Committee’s query on a total ban on growing of tobacco,
the Secretary stated that the attempt in this regard have been stalled for the last
20 years due to the huge agricultural labour and farmers dependent on its
production; though steps have been taken for alternative cropping system in a
few districts including Guntur. The Committee was not satisfied with the reply
of Health Secretary that the punishment prescribed under the Act and the Rules
are sufficient enough.

10
13. The Committee suggests that there should be a survey and data
must be maintained on the number of tobacco selling shops around the
educational institutions and the number of people who smoke in the
country. If it cannot be stopped completely, at least it can be reduced by
educating people. Moreover, the pictorial warnings must be more intense,
strong and over more area on the tobacco product pack. The Committee
also wanted to know why the 100 yards had been specified under the
rule.

COMMITTEES OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The Committee, during the course of its discussions with the
concerned Ministry and from the responses/comments on the rules by
various individuals/institutions/organizations, makes the following
observations/recommendations:-
1. The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that the
Ministry took time for laying of the Rules on the Table of the
House despite being aware of the fact that they were to come
into force in 2 months’ time from the date of notification.
2. The Committee notes that the Ministry should have given a
time-frame vis-a- vis framing of Rules relating to mandatory
depiction of statutory warning (including pictorial ones) on
tobacco packs; and for mandatory depiction of nicotine and
tar contents, along with permissible limits, on the tobacco
packs.
3. Rules for direct/indirect advertisements should be clear,
comprehensive and in unambiguous way so that the industry
cannot circumvent them and it, thus, minimises the scope of
surrogate advertisements too. The Committee expects the
Ministry to take necessary and urgent steps to penalize
surrogate/veiled advertisements so that the menace of tobacco
use can be curbed to a very large extent. The quantum of
mandatory and otherwise penalties should be in such a way
that it acts as a deterrent for prospective violators.
4. Having being aware of the fact that this would entail
amendment of Rules, the Committee strongly recommends
that the sale of tobacco products be banned within 100 yards
of religious institutions, museums, zoos, trade fairs,
11

12
exhibition halls, shopping malls as is the case presently with
educational institutions. This would definitely restrict the
access of tobacco to minors and youth and lessen the menace
to a large extent.
5. If the Ministry is serious about the prohibition on sale of
these products in more stringent ways, it might have to go in
for amendment of the Act to include the following:
z To do away with designated smoking areas/places to
ensure 100% smokefree public places,
z Increase on-the-spot to a fine minimum of Rs. 1000/-,
z To prevent point of sale advertisement through packages,
z Ban all internet advertising, promotion, sales,
distribution,
z To ban indirect advertisements,
z Ban selling of tobacco products at bus stands, railway
stations, cinemas, malls, restaurants,
z Ban loose and small pack sales of these products,
z Ban manufacture, import and sale of products which
are imitation of tobacco products,
z Prohibition of free distribution of tobacco products,
z Licencing of shops for selling these products and heavy
penalty for violation of such licences,
z Tobacco companies to disclose to Government about
contents and emission levels and additives, if any, of all
products,

13
z All manufacturers/importers to submit information
related to company–– complete address/contact detail,
number of cigarettes etc. manufactured,
z Provision for the Government for product sampling and
other checks.
6. The Committee recommends that words such as “smoking
causes heart attack”, “ second hand smoke kills”, “ smoking
during pregnancy may cause still birth”, “tobacco causes
gangarene”, “ cigarette smoke has more than 400 cancer
causing chemicals”, “smokeless tobacco has about 28 cancer
causing chemicals” be used in Big/Bold size on the packs.
7. Indirect advertisement/sales promotion of brand extensions
by manufactures of tobacco products and pan masala should
be discouraged and charged heavily.
8. Depiction of tobacco use by actors on screen should be totally
banned without any exception to the effect that it was/is
necessary for the character to have been shown using tobacco.
Giving a mere warning underneath the character (when shown
smoking) hardly matters. What youngsters emulate is the
Actor smoking on screen.
9. Cessation products like nicotine gums, lozenges, patches etc.
should be made more affordable and available next to the
point of sales of tobacco products.
10. Increase the pecuniary penalty to act as a deterrent for
offenders.

14
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Department of Health)
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 25th February, 2004
G.S.R 137.– In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 31 of the
Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and
Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act,
2003 (34 of 2003), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules
namely :-
1. Short title and commencement.–  (l) These rules may be called
the Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition
of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce,
Production, Supply and Distribution) Rules, 2004.
(2) They shall come into force on the 1st day of May 2004.
2. Definitions.– In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) “Act” means the Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products
(Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and
Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003;
(b) “section” means a section of the Act;
(c) “open space” mentioned in Section 3(1) of the Act shall not
include any place visited by the public such as
open auditorium, stadium, railway station, bus stop and such
other places; and
(d) words and expressions use herein and not defined in these
rules but defined in the Act, shall have the meanings,
respectively, assigned to them in the Act.
ANNEXURE-I

15
3. Prohibition of smoking in a public place.- (1) The owner or the
manager or in-charge of the affairs of a public place shall cause to
be displayed prominently a board, of a minimum size of sixty
centimetre by thirty centimetre in the Indian language(s) as
applicable, at least one at the entrance of the public place and one
at conspicuous place(s) inside, containing the warning “No
Smoking Area–Smoking Here is an Offence”.
(2) The owner or the manager or in-charge of the affairs of a
hotel having thirty rooms or restaurant having seating capacity of
thirty persons or more and the manager of the airport shall ensure
that,-
(i) the smoking and non-smoking areas are physically
segregated;
(ii) the smoking area shall be located in such manner that
the public is not required to pass through it in order to
reach the non-smoking area; and
(iii) each area shall contain boards indicating thereon
“Smoking Area/Non-Smoking Area”.
4. Prohibition of advertisement of cigarette and other tobacco
products.- (1) The size of the board used for advertisement for
cigarettes and any other tobacco products displayed at the entrance
or inside a warehouse or a shop where cigarettes and any other
such tobacco products are offered for distribution or sale shall not
exceed ninety centimetre by sixty centimetre and number of such
boards shall not exceed too.
(2) Each such board shall contain in the Indian language as
applicable, one of the following warnings occupying twenty-five
per cent, of top area of the board, namely :-
(i) Tobacco Causes Cancer, or
(ii) Tobacco Kills.

16
(3) The board referred to in sub-rule (2) shall contain only the
brand name or picture of the tobacco product and no other
promotional message and picture.
5. Prohibition of sale to minors.- (l) The owner or the manager or
the in-charge of the affairs of a place where cigarettes
and other tobacco products are sold shall display a board of
minimum size of sixty centimetre by thirty centimetre at
conspicuous place(s) containing the warning “Sale of tobacco
products to a person under the age of eighteen years
is a punishable offence”, in Indian language(s) as applicable.
(2) The onus of proof that the buyer of the tobacco product is
not a minor lies with the seller of the tobacco products.
The seller, in case of doubt may request tobacco purchaser to
provide appropriate evidence of having reached
eighteen years of age.
[F. No. P-16011/2/2003-PH]
BHA V ANI THY AGARAJAN, Jt.. Secy.

Questionnaire furnished by Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya
Sabha on laying of Rules framed under “The Cigarettes and other Tobacco
Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and
Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003”
Sl. Observation Question Reply
No.
17
ANNEXURE-II
1. The Act under which
the above notes Rules
have been framed,
was notified in the
year 2003 and the
Rules were notified in
the Gazette of India on
25.2.2004 and they
were laid on the Table
of the Rajya Sabha on
20.8.2004
(i) When did the Act
come into force and
what are the reasons
for the time lag, if any,
between the enforce-
ment of the Act and the
notification of the
Rules?
Assent of the President
was received on 18
th May,
2003. Thereafter, “The
Cigarettes and other
Tobacco Products
(Prohibition of
Advertisement and
Regulation of Trade and
Commerce, Production,
Supply and Distribution)
Act, 2003" came into
effect from 1
st May, 2004
vide notification No. 200
under Part II-Section 3-
Sub-section (ii) of the
Gazette of India
Extraordinary dated
25.2.2004. The Rules
relating to (i) Prohibition
of smoking in a public
place; (ii) Prohibition of
advertisement of

18
cigarette and other
tobacco products; and
(iii) Prohibition of sale to
minors, came into effect
the same day i.e. 1st May,
2004 vide  notification
No. 93 Part II-Section 3-
Sub-section (i) of the
Gazette of India
Extraordinary dated
25.2.2004. Thus, there is
no time lag between
enforcement of the Act
and notification of certain
Rules provided under the
Act.
Though the Rules were
notified in the Gazette on
25.2.2004, the Rules
were to come into force
on 1
st May, 2004. Before
the Rules could come
into effect, the same
could not be laid in the
Table of the House.
Moreover, Budget
Session of the Parliament
was mid-way in May-
Sl. Observation Question Reply
No.
(ii) What are the
reasons for laying the
rules on the Table of
Rajya Sabha so
late when these were
notified on 25.2.2004?

19
Sl. Observation Question Reply
No.
June. Hence, the same
was Tabled in the next
session, i.e. , Monsoon
Session.
The Government has
notified vide Notification
No. 379 under Part II
Section 3 Sub Section (i)
of Gazette of India
Extraordinary dated 1st
September, 2004
providing for prohibition
of sale of cigarettes and
other tobacco products
around educational
institutions, which came
into effect from 1st
December, 2004.
The Government is
actively in the process/
in consultation with
other nodal departments/
stakeholders, for framing
Rules relating to
(i) Mandatory depiction
of statutory warnings
(including pictorial
warnings) on tobacco
packs; and
2. Section 31 of the Act
contemplates framing
of rules on a number
of aspects. A perusal
of the contents of the
Rules gives all
indication that they do
not cover all the areas
specified in Section 31
(2) of the Act
Whether Government
have framed any other
set of Rules in
pursuance of Section
31 of the Act; if so, the
details and if not what
are the comments of
the Ministry in this
behalf?

20
Sl. Observation Question Reply
No.
(ii) Mandatory depiction
of tar and nicotine
contents alongwith
maximum permissible
limits on tobacco packs,
which are provided for
under Section 31 (2) of
the Act.
The title by itself is
comprehensive and
elaborate, which only
fortifies the Act further.
The areas regulated are
as follows:
Supply & Distribution:
The rules framed Act
relating to (i) ban on sale
of tobacco products in
minors; and (ii) ban on
sale of tobacco products
within a radius of 100
yards of educational
institutions cover the
supply and distribution
aspect of the Act.
3. As can be inferred
from the title, the
Rules are meant for
prohibition of
advertisement and
regulation of trade
and commerce,
production, supply
and distribution of
cigarettes and other
tobacco products.
Accordingly,  the
Rules are supposed to
cover all these areas.
But, the rules in-hand
seem to be very brief
and they cover only
three aspects namely,
(i) Prohibition of
Whether the Rules, as
the title suggests,
should not be more
comprehensive and
elaborate; what are the
comments of the
Ministry in this regard
and in what manner all
these areas are
regulated?

21
Sl. Observation Question Reply
No.
smoking in a public
place; (ii) Prohibition
of advertisement of
cigarette and other
tobacco products in
warehouses/shops;
and (iii) Prohibition of
sale to minors. There
is no mention of
prohibition on
advertisement of
cigarettes and other
tobacco products
through various other
modes, which are
being resorted to by
the manufacturers /
trades of these
products. The trend
of surrogate
advertisements for
these products is also
being seen
increasingly. Secondly,
there are hardly any
provisions in the rules
providing for
regulation of trade and
commerce, produc-
Production :  When the
rules relating to
maximum permissible
limits of nicotine and tar
content are notified, the
production of the
tobacco product would
be regulated. The
Government is actively
considered framing the
rules in consultation with
other nodal departments/
stakeholders.
Regulation of Trade:
When the rules relating to
mandatory depiction of
statutory warnings
(including pictorial
warnings) on tobacco
packs the trade practices
would be regulated.
Moreover, the
Government has also set
up a Screening
Committee to look into
specific complaints
regarding violations of
the said Act relating to the

22
Sl. Observation Question Reply
No.
What are the penal
consequences for
violation of provisions
of Rules 3, 4 and 5 of
the Rules and whether
the penalties prescribed
therefor are adequate
enough to ensure
compliance of the law?
tion, supply and
distribution of
cigarettes and other
tobacco products.
Prohibition of direct or
indirect advertisement of
the cigarettes and
tobacco products,
including cases of
surrogate advertisement.
The Act provides for
(i) Punishment for smoking
in certain places (Section
21); (ii) Punishment for
advertisement of
cigarettes and tobacco
products (Section 22);
and (iii) Punishment for
sale of cigarettes or any
other tobacco products
in certain places or to
persons below the age of
eighteen years (Section
24) which are adequate
enough to ensure
compliance of the Law.

(II)
KANDLA PORT TRUST (AUTHORIZATION OF PILOTS) REGULA TIONS,
1964- - - IMPLEMENTATION OF 163RD REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
The Kandla Port Trust (Authorization of Pilots) Regulations, 1964 framed
under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 were examined by the Committee on
Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha and the matter was reported vide its
163rd Report presented to the House on 23rd May, 2006 (Annexure-I). In
the said report, the Committee had observed as follows:
“The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways (Department of Shipping)
had since prepared a draft of the Kandla Port (Authorization of
Pilots) Regulations for carrying out necessary amendments in the
Regulations of 1964 in line with similar regulations of the Mumbai
Port Trust and also keeping in view its suggestions. The Committee
further notes that the existing regulations would be repealed once
the proposed revised regulations are approved and notified in the
Official Gazette. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would
notify the above amendments expeditiously under intimation to
it.”
2. Relevant extracts of the Report were forwarded to the Ministry of
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways (Department of Shipping) on the 5th
June, 2006 for necessary action. The Ministry vide its O.M. dated the 14th
May, 2007 informed the Committee that they had examined the report and had
wide consultation with Kandla Port Trust. The Ministry now had come out
with a new set of Regulations by incorporating the suggestions of the
Committee. The Ministry also had consultations with the Ministry of Law and
Justice on the matter. The Ministry was reminded a number of times to finalize
the draft Regulations on the matter. During the study visit of the Committee to
23

24
Mumbai on the 26th September, 2011, the matter was taken up with the
representatives of the Ministry of Shipping and Kandla Port Trust to ascertain
the reasons and the practical difficulties involved in the coming out with the
new set of Regulations. During the discussion, the Committee was informed
that the revised Regulations had been sent to the Ministry of Shipping for
notification and publication. It was also informed that earlier the Kandla Port
Trust had held a meeting with the Ministry of Law and Justice on certain
amendments proposed by it in these Regulations. The Ministry of Shipping
also supported the views of the Ministry of Law and Justice and advised them
to amend the Regulations to bring them at par with the Mumbai Port Trust
(Authorization of Pilots) Regulations, 2007. Kandla Port Trust thereafter revised
these Regulations accordingly.
3. Finally, the Ministry vide its O.M. dated the 1st July, 2013 informed the
Committee that they have finalized and notified the Kandla Port Trust
(Authorization of Pilots) Regulations, 2013 (Annexure-II) by incorporating
the suggestions of the Committee in the new Regulations.
4. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Shipping has
finally framed the Kandla Port Trust (Authorization of Pilots)
Regulations, 2013 and incorporated the suggestions of the Committee
as contained in its 163rd Report as under:
(i) In Regulation 2(h), by inserting the definition of the word
“pilot”;
(ii) In Regulation 3, by specifying in detail the qualifications of
candidates for pilot licence;
(iii) In Regulation 20(2), by inserting a provision that a pilot is
governed by the Kandla Port Employees (Recruitment,
Seniority and Promotion) Regulations for all his service
matters and in the event of any misconduct or misbehavior
while in service is liable to disciplinary proceedings under

25
the Kandla Port Employees (Classification, Control and
Appeal) Regulations; and
(iv) In Regulation 42, by inserting that the Master of the vessel
shall pay Rs.200 as compensation for any meal missed by the
pilot.
5. The Committee, however, notes that the Kandla Port Trust
(Authorization of Pilots) Regulations, 2013 have not been laid on the
Table of the Houses of Parliament. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Regulations be laid on the Table of both Houses of
Parliament, at the first available opportunity.

ANNEXURE-III
The Kandla Port Trust (Authorization of Pilots)
Regulations, 1964
The Committee took up for examination the Kandla Port Trust
(Authorization of Pilots) Regulations, 1964 framed under the Major Port Trusts
Act, 1963 and a questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways (Department of Shipping) for their
comments/clarifications on the 20th June, 2003. The Committee also discussed
the subject matter with the Kandla Port Trust and the Department of Shipping
at Kandla on the 2nd July, 2003. Relevant extracts from the above discussion
were forwarded to the Department of Shipping for necessary action on the
29th April, 2004. The Ministry vide their communication dated the 22nd July,
2005 furnished a copy of the draft Kandla Port (Authorization of Pilots)
Regulations- Revised upto 2005 carrying out amendments to the Kandla Port
Trust (Authorization of Pilots) Regulations, 1964 as per the Committee's
suggestions. The points referred to the Ministry, the comments/clarifications
received thereon, the observations of the Committee and the amendments
in the draft revised Kandla Port Trust (Authorisation of Pilots) Regulations
carried out by the Kandla Port/Ministry as per it's sugge stions are reproduced
below:
I. Point referred
Whether the Kandla Port (Authorisation of Pilots) Regulations, 1964 have
since been laid on the Table of both the Houses and if so, the date of laying
thereof?
Ministry's reply (27.6.2003)
The above regulations were laid on the Table of both Houses of Parliament
after which only the notifications have been issued.
26

27
II. Point referred – Regulation 2
"Definitions – In these regulations, unless the context otherwise
requires,-
(i) "Board", "Chairman", "Deputy Chairman" shall have the same
meaning as in the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963.
(ii) "Limits of compulsory Pilot age waters" means the limits defined
under sub-section (2) of section (4) of the Indian Ports Act, 1908
(15 of 1908).
(iii) "Deputy Conservator" means the officer in whom the direction
and management of pilot age are vested.
(iv) "Harbour Master" means the officer appointed by the Board to
perform such duties as may, from time to time, be assigned by the
Deputy Conservator.
(v) "Port" means the Port of Kandla".
The term 'pilot' is generally associated with the Air Planes. But here it
has been used for handling of vessels. Whether Government have any objection
in inserting definition of word 'Pilot' in the regulation itself?
Ministry's reply (27.6.2003)
The word "Pilot" means "one who conducts ships in and out of a harbour,
along dangerous coast, etc." Pilot of a Port is an officer appointed by the
Board to perform the duty of guiding the ships from and to the Port in an
advisory capacity and works under the direction of Harbour Master and Deputy
Conservator.
Committee's observations (2.7.2003)
The Committee had desired that the word 'Pilot' should be defined in the
regulation itself and while defining the word 'Pilot', it should conform to the
qualifications perscribed under the separate regulations.

28
Ammendments carried out by the Kandla Port/Ministry (22.7.2005)
Regulation 2(5) of the draft revised Regulations defines 'Pilot' as 'an
officer appointed by the Chairman to perform the duty of guiding the ships
from and to the Port in an advisory capacity and working direcly under the
Harbour Master and Deputy Conservator.'
III. Point referred-Regulation 6(1)(a) "Qualifications of Candidates:–
(1) A candidate for a Pilot age license shall :
(a) produce certificates of good character and sobriety and be
in possession of a Certificate of Competency as Master
(Foreign-going) granted by the Government of India or its
equivalent and should have, preferably experience of at least
six months as First Mate on a foreign-going ship;
(b) obtain a c ertificate of physical fitness from such medical
authority as may be prescribed by the Board for the
purpose;
(c) unless the Board otherwise determines, serve a period of
probationary training of not less than 6 months. On completion
of the training, the probationer may, if recommended by the
Harbour Master and subject to the approval of the Deputy
Conservator, apply to be examined as to his qualifications to
pilot ships."
The words 'its equivalent' are vague. Whether Government have any
objection in making the provision of Regulation 6(1)(a) specific?
Ministry's reply (27.6.2003)
The Certificate of Competency as Master (Foreign Going) has been
equated with the Certificate of Competency as Dredge Master Grade-I as

29
recommended by Director General of Shipping vide Ministry of Shipping,
Road Transport and Highways (Department of Shipping) Notification No. GSR.
536(E) dated the 22nd November, 1996. Also, in certain cases it is equated
with the service certificate of a Naval officer.
Committee's observations (2.7.2003)
The Committee desired that in order to make the provision specific, the
requisite qualifications of candidates should be indicated in the regulations
itself.
Amendments carried out by the Kandla Port/Ministry (22.7.2005)
Regulation 8(1)(a),(b),(c),(d), of the draft revised Regulations lays down
the requisite qualifications of the condidates.
IV. Point referred – Regulation 6(2)
"The fee for a Pilot's Licence shall be prescribed by the Board from time
to time."
What are the existing rates of Pilot fee prescribed by the Board? When
this fee was last revised?
Ministry’s reply (27.6.2003)
So far, no fee for Pilots Licence has been prescribed because of the fact
that a candidate appointed as Trainee/Probationary Pilot in Kandla Port is issued
with, the licence for Piloting of the vessels in the Port after necessary training
in the channels for various capacity vessels. Further, the Trainee Pilot is an
employee of the Port Trust. Whenever the Pilot leaves his job from the Port
the licence issued to him is invariably taken back.
Committee’s observations (2.7.2003)
The Committee was apprised that no fee for pilot’s licence is being charged
and as such the provision is not relevant and hence could be deleted.

30
Amendments carried out by the Kandla Port/Ministry (22.7.2005)
Regulation 8(2) of the draft revised Regulations provides that no fee for
Pilot’s licence is recovered as the Trainee/Probationary Pilot is an employee of
the Port Trust and whenever the Pilot leaves the job from the Pilot Trust, the
licence so issued to him is surrendered.
V . Point referred–Regulation 8 “Examination Committee:–
The examination shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by the
Board by an Examination Committee constituted as follows:-
(i) The Deputy Conservator (Chairman).
(ii) The Harbour Master.
(iii) A Master of a Foreign-going ship.”
What is the manner in which the examination is conducted? Whether it
is written or practical or both?
Ministry’s reply (27.6.2003)
The examination is conducted orally by the Committee after practical
training under guidance of Senior Pilots for handling of vessels in the Port.
Prior to the examination, a declaration by the Trainee and recommendation of
Senior Pilot regarding the capability of the trainee to pilot vessels is taken.
Committee’s observation
The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry.
VI. Point referred - Regulation 9 "Failure to pass on examination :-
In the event of a probationer failing to pass the specified examination
within nine months of his appointment, he will be liable to be discharged."
How many trials a probationer gets during the period of 9 months. To
what extent the provision of this regulation have been invoked in the past i.e.,

31
service of probationers terminated. Are any options available to the probationers
after the invoking of regulation 9, if so the details?
Ministry's reply (27.6.2003)
A Trainee pilot after completion of his training period is subjected to an
examination by the Committee constituted for the purpose. In case, he fails the
examination, he is given an extension of training period and permitted to appear
in the examination second time. In case his performance is found unsatisfactory
in the second examination also, his services as Trainee Pilot is terminated.
In so far as Kandla Port Trust is concerned, in one case the services of
the Trainee Pilot were terminated in 1999 as he could not get through the
examination inspite of giving him two chances, whereafter there has been no
such cases.
Committee's observation
The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry.
VII. Point referred – Regulation 12 and 13 "Pilot's behaviour:–
Regulation 12
A pilot shall at all times exercise strict sobriety. He shall throughout the
time he is in charge of a vessel, use his utmost care and diligence for his safety
and the safety of other vessels and property. He shall, when necessary, keep
the lead going while the vessel is underway. He shall not lay by the vessel
aground without a written order from the owner or officer in command.
Regulation 13
A pilot shall behave with due civility towards the Owner, Master and
Officers of any vessel under his charge."
(a) Whether the Board has in addition prescribed any code of conduct
for the pilots, and if so, whether the same can not be made part of
the regulations?

32
(b) What action is taken for violation of code of conduct?
Ministry’s reply (27.6.2003)
A regular Pilot is governed by the Kandla Port Employees Regulations,
1964 for all his service matters under which the Kandla Port Employees
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Regulations, 1964 are applicable for initiating
disciplinary proceedings against the Pilots in the event of any misconduct during
his service period.
Committee’s observation (2.7.2003)
The Committee desired that some provision should be incorporated in
the regulations for putting in place some mechanism for evaluation of the
Pilot’s behaviour within a time-frame.
Amendments carried out by the Kandla Port/Ministry (22.7.2005)
Regulation 18 of the draft revised Regulations provides that the Pilot
being an employee of the Board shall be governed by the Kandla Port Employee’s
Regulations, 1964 for all his service matters and in the event of any misconduct/
misbehavior while in service, liable for disciplinary proceedings under the Kandla
Port Employees’ (CCA) Amendment Regulations, 2004.
VIII. Point referred–Regulation 17
“Pilots may leave vessels at anchor in the harbour if not provided with
proper food and sleeping accommodation:-
A pilot shall be provided with reasonable accommodation, if necessary,
and shall be supplied with breakfast between 7 a.m. and 9 a.m. with lunch
between noon and 2 p.m. and dinner between 6 p.m. and 8 p.m. (I.S.T.),
failing which the Master shall pay compensation for food, namely, Rs. 2 for
any of the meals missed by the Pilot.”
(i) What is implied by the term “reasonable accommodation”?

33
(ii) In what background the above regulation was framed and to what
extent it is relevant and being applied in the present times. In case
the provisions are still relevant, should the compensation not be
reasonably revised and if otherwise, should the provision not be
snapped?
Ministry’s reply (27.6.2003)
Generally the Masters or the visiting vessels are always taking care of
the Pilot’s food requirement whenever they board the vessel for piloting the
vessel and no complaint is received in this respect. Most vessels have a specified
Pilot’s Cabin where the Pilot can rest when required ‘Reasonable
Accommodation’ means a Cabin/Accommodation commensurate with the
status of a Pilot and generally means a separate cabin at par with the Cabin of
a Senior Officer of the vessel.
In Kandla Port, to and fro voyage time is about 4 hours and as such the
Pilots are not normally required to stay on board the vessel during the operation
of the vessel. However, it becomes relevant if the Pilot is required to  stay on
board due to reason for a longer period e.g. waiting for turn of tide, etc. So far
as Vadinar Port under the administrative jurisdiction of Kandla Port is concerned,
where the Pilots are required to stay on board the vessel throughout the
operation of the vessel suitable accommodation with all basic necessities
including the food is always made available to Pilots by the Master of the
respective vessels.
Committee’s observations (2.7.2003)
The Committee was informed that normally, situation never arose when
a pilot was required 10 leave the ship for having a meal. The Committee
expressed a view that the provision needs to be updated. Amendments carried
out by the Kandla Port/Ministry (22.7.2005) Regulation 22 of the draft revised
Regulations provides that the master of a vessel, shall provide the Pilot with
reasonable accommodation necessary breakfast, lunch and dinner, as the case

34
may be, if the vessel is at anchor in the Harbour and at SBM in the case of
V adinar failing which the Master of the respective vessel shall pay compensation
at the rate of Rs. 200/- for  any meal missed by the Pilot.
2. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Shipping,
Road Transport and Highways (Department of Shipping) had since
prepared a draft of the Kandla Port (Authorization of Pilots) Regulations
for carrying out necessary amendments in the Regulations of 1964 in
line with similar regulations of the Mumbai Port Trust and also keeping
in view its suggestions. The Committee further notes that the existing
regulations would be repealed once the proposed revised regulations are
approved and notified in the Official Gazette. The Committee hopes that
the Ministry would notify the above amendments expeditiously under
intimation to it.

MINISTRY OF SHIPPING
(PORTS WING)
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 14th February, 2013
G.S.R. 90(E).– In exercise of the powers conferred by Sub-section (1)
of Section 124, read  with Sub-section (1) of Section 32 of the Major Port
Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963), the Central Government hereby approves the
Kandla Port Trust (Authorisation of Pilots) Regulations
, 2013 made by the
Board of Trustees for the Port of Kandla and set out in the
Schedule annexed to this Notification
2.   The said Regulations shall come into force from the date of publication in
the Gazette of India.
[No. H-11011/6/2004-PE-I]
N. MURUGANANDAM,
Jt. Secy.
35

SCHEDULE
Kandla Port Trust (Authorisation of Pilots) Regulations, 2013
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 28 of the Major Port
Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963) and in supersession of the Kandla Port
(Authorisation of Pilots) Regulations 1964, the Board of Trustees of the Port
of Kandla, hereby makes the following regulations, namely-
PART - I
1. Short title and commencement - (1) These Regulations may be called
the Kandla Port Trust (Authorization of Pilots) Regulations, 2013
(2) These Regulations shall come into force from the date of publication
in the official Gazette.
2. Definitions. - In these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires:-
(a) “Board”, “Chairman” and “Deputy Chairman” shall have the same
meaning as in the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963);
(b) “Control Station” Means the station through which the direction
of management of pilotage is vested;
(c) “Deputy Conservator” means the Officer in whom the direction
and the management of Pilotage are vested;
(d) “Harbour Master” means the Officer appointed to perform such
duties as may, from time to time, be assigned to him by the Deputy
Conservator:
(e) “Limits of Compulsory Pilotage Waters” mean the limits defined
under sub-section [2] of Section 4 of the Indian Parts Act. 1908
(15 of 1908);
36

37
(f) “Outer Tuna Buoy” means the name of the fairway buoy at the
entry point of incoming Vessels. Pilotage is compulsory and the
Pilots board the incoming vessels and disembark from outgoing
vessels at pilotage point near Outer Tuna Buoy;
(g) “Master” or “Master of the Vessel” includes any officer (except a
Pilot or Harbour Master) having overall command or charge of the
vessel and is required to keep all equipment required towards the
safety of the vessel, in readiness, which includes anchoring and
steering of the vessel;
(h) “Pilot” means an Officer licensed under these regulations to perform
pilotage duty of guiding the ships to and fro the Port in all advisory
capacity and works directly under Harbour Master and Deputy
Conservator;
(i) “Pilot Licence” means Licence issued to a person to carry out
pilotage of vessels within the port limits of the Port.
(j) “Port” means the Port of Kandla.
PART - II
Licensing - Qualifications and Conditions
3. Qualifications of candidates.-
(1) A candidate for Pilot Licence shall:-
(a) be an Indian national;
(b) produce certificates of good character and sobriety;
(c) be in possession of a :-
(i) Certificate of Competency as Master (Foreign Going)
granted by the Government of India or its equivalent
and have preferably experience of six months as First
Mate on a foreign going ship; OR

38
(ii) Certificate as Dredge Master issued by the Directorate
General of Shipping and have preferably experience
of two years as a Dredge Master; OR
(iii) have successfully completed training as Pilot under
the ln-house Training of Pilots at the Port, as may be
decided by the Board from time to time in consultation
with the Director General of Shipping
(d) obtain a certificate of physical fitness from such medical
authority
(e) unless the Chairman otherwise determines serve a period of
probationary training of not less than six months and
successfully pass the prescribed examination.
Provided that the period of probationary training may be extended beyond
six months for sufficient and valid reasons such as:-
(i) candidate is unable to complete required phases of training due to
his own illness, or has to proceed on leave for sufficient and valid
reasons or due to any national emergency etc.;
(ii) in the interest of the Port or Government of India, the candidate is
required to be allotted some other duties (with prior agreement)
such as Dredging Master, Berthing Master, etc., and is thus unable
to complete his training requirement;
(iii) candidate for valid reasons is unable to pass his examination
during the stipulated period of twelve months and in the view of
the Chairman, needs to be given a fair chance to pass the
examination;
(iv) in case of candidates belonging to SC/ST, special extra training or
guidance is deemed necessary;

39
Provided further that the period of probationary training may be curtailed
under the following circumstances:
(i) if the candidate has been a Pilot in the said Port Trust and has
rejoined subsequently;
(ii) if in future modern technology such as a simulator is used for
training
(2) Position in Station, description and flags and signal of Identification
of Pilots launch or boat.–
(1) The Pilot will board incoming vessels and disembark from outgoing
Vessels by Pilot launch at Outer Tuna Buoy.
(2) The launch or boat will have the word ‘PILOT’ amidships on each
side
(3) The Pilot launch when on station, shall -
(a) during the day time, exhibit a red and white flag, the upper
horizontal half of which shall be white and the lower horizontal
will be red; and
(b) during night, exhibit lights in accordance with the rules or
law for the time being in force.
(3) The Pilot Station and Shore Station.  - The Harbour Master through
Signal Station shall monitor the boarding and disembarking of Pilots and
shall exercise control over them.
(4) Harbour Master’s control over the Pilot. - The Harbour Master shall
have control over Pilots in pilotage charge of vessels while entering or
leaving the Port or mooring or berthing or unberthing at any anchorage
or berth in the Port. The Pilots shall not leave the headquarter without
prior permission from the Harbour Master or an Officer acting on his
behalf. While seeking permission to leave the headquarters the Pilot shall

40
give the address and the telephone number on which he can be contacted,
if required.
4. Pilot Licence. - (1) All Pilots shall hold Pilot Licence to perform the
duties of a Pilot for the Port of Kandla. This Licence for restricted pilotage or
full pilotage, subject to the sanction of the Central Government, shall be issued
under the signature of Chairman and sealed with the common seal of the Board
and revocable by the Chairman.
(2) A Pilot severing his connection from the Port shall forthwith
surrender his Pilot Licence to the Deputy Conservator.
(3) The Pilot Licence may be revoked by the Chairman in
circumstances such as:
(a) proven misconduct and/or misconduct under the conduct
and discipline rules;
(b) professional misconduct; (means wilful default or departure
from the Regulations concerning the pilotage in force from
time to time);
(c) shipping casualties (accidents) where professional
competence is questioned or negligence proved after enquiry
into the accident;
(d) where formal court of enquiry instituted into marine casualty
holds Pilots responsible for an accident;
(e) on cessation from service if the licence is not surrendered
as required under regulation (2) above; and
(f) on being medically found unsuitable for Pilotage jobs.
(4) A Pilot shall retain Licence on subsequent promotions in the Pilotage
services upto the post of Deputy Conservator and continue to pilot
vessels as per the requirement.

41
5. Conditions for joining the Pilot Service in Port.  - A person shall not
be appointed as a Pilot until and unless he satisfies the Chairman that he fulfils
the following conditions, namely:-
(a) The conditions of eligibility laid down in regulation 14(b) and 14(c)
of the Kandla Port Employees (Recruitment, Seniority and
Promotion) Regulations 1964;
(b) On the date of appointment as 3 Probationary Pilot he is of an age
not below 25 years but not exceeding 35 years unless otherwise
relaxed by the Chairman; and
(c) That he possesses the qualifications specified under Regulation 3.
PART - III
TRAINING  AND  EXAMINATION
6. Training. - (1) During the period of training, probationary pilot will
be instructed in duties of a Pilot, the lights, the landmarks, buoyage, etc. of the
Harbour, the handling of ships within the pilotage waters of the Port, berthing
or unberthing of vessels within the dock basins, handling the port
trust owned suction dredger and operating her dredging equipments, etc.
(a) On completion of the training, the probationary pilot may, subject
to the approval of Deputy Conservator, apply to be examined as to
his qualifications to pilot ships;
Provided that the period of Training be extended beyond three
months but not more than six months for sufficient and valid
reasons such as :-
(i) candidate is unable to complete required phases of training
due to his own illness, or has to proceed on leave for sufficient
and valid reasons or due to any national emergency, etc.;
(ii) candidate for valid reasons is unable to pass his examination

42
during the stipulated period and in the view of Chairman
needs to be given a fair chance to pass examination;
Provided further that the training during the period of probation may be
curtailed under the following circumstances:
(i) If the Pilot on probation has been a Pilot in Kandla Port
Trust or any other Major Port in the country and has rejoined
Kandla Port Trust subsequently;
(ii) if in future modern technology such as a simulator is used
for training.
(b) A candidate for a Restricted Pilotage Licence shall comply with
the requirements under (a) and unless the board determines, serve
a period of training of not less than one month or till such time he
attends a minimum of thirty Acts of Pilotage involving crossing
the channel whichever is later.
(c) On completion of the training, the probationary Pilot may, if
recommended by the Harbour Master and subject to the approval
of Deputy Conservator, apply to be examined for grant of restricted
pilotage licence.
(2) No fee for Pilot licencs is recovered as the Probationary Pilot is an
employee of the Port Trust and whenever the Pilot leaves the job from the Port
Trust the licence so issued to him is surrendered.
(3) The candidate selected for appointment, as a Pilot shall execute the Bond
to serve Kandla Port for a minimum period of five years on completion of
Probationary period of two years as per prescribed format at Appendix-A
attached to these Regulations. The indemnity amount should be equal to the
cost of training plus the amount being paid to the probationary Pilot as salary
or stipend.

43
7. Subjects of Examination. - The examination shall include the following
subjects, namely;
¾ regulations and rules framed for navigating in the Harbour and
approaches to the dock and piers;
¾ course and distance between any two places;
¾ rise and set of tides:
¾ depth and character of soundings;
¾ anchorages, rocks, shoals and other dangers, landmarks, buoys,
beacons and lights within the Port;
¾ management of ship and steamers, how to bring them to anchor
and to keep them clear of their anchors in a tideway:
¾ to moor and unmoor and get underway;
¾ to handle a vessel under all conditions; and
¾ such other subjects as may be determined by the Examination
Committee.
8. Examination Committee. – The examination of the Probationary Pilot
shall be conducted by an Examination Committee composed of as follows:
(i) The Deputy Conservator – Chairman
(ii) The Harbour Master – Member
(iii) A Master of a Foreign Going Ship – Member
On completion of prescribed training, the probationary Pilot may apply
to be examined for grant of restricted pilotage licence to the Deputy Conservator,
subject to recommendation by at least two senior Pilots and Harbour Master
regarding capability of the probationary Pilot to pilot vessels.

44
9. Failure to pass Examination. - (1) In the event of a probationary Pilot
failing to pass the specified examination within twelve months of his
appointment, he will be liable to be discharged.
(2) In the event of a probationary Pilot after completion of his training period
fails the examination, he will be given an extension of Training period and be
permitted to appear in the examination a second time. In case his
performance is not found satisfactory in the second examination also, his,
services as probationary Pilot will be terminated,
10. Issue of Licence. - (1) On successful completion of the examination,
the Pilot shall be issued the Pilot Licence under Regulation 4 above.
(2) The fee for a Pilot’s Licence, and for renewal thereof in case, of mutilation
or loss, shall be prescribed by the Board from time to time,
11. Classification of Pilots. - (1) A Pilot on being licensed will be permitted
to pilot V essels as follows:-
(a) during the first six months, attached to the berthing service and
perform berthing or unberthing of vessels (except dangerous
petroleum tankers, men-of-war and ships loaded with explosives)
not exceeding 11000 tonnes gross register during day light hours
only;
(b) during the next six months, vessels (except dangerous petroleum
tankers, men-of-war and ships loaded with explosives) not
exceeding 16000 tonnes gross register during day light hours only;
(c) during the next six months vessels (except dangerous petroleum
tankers, men-of-war and ships loaded with explosives) of 12000
tonnes gross register during hours of darkness;
(d) during the next six months, after passing a departmental examination
conducted by the Deputy Conservator and Harbour Master, vessels
of unrestricted tonnage, type and class during day light hours and

45
vessels upto 16000 tonnes gross register of any type or class during
hours of darkness.
(e) Thereafter, on completion of six months, full tonnage or open
tonnage i.e. all vessels without restriction during day and night
Note:-
(i) Transfer of Pilot from one class to the next higher class will be on
the recommendation of the Harbour Master and subject to the
approval of the Deputy Conservator,
(ii) The period of three months or six months as specified above shall
be extended by the period of leave, if any, availed by the Pilot.
Explanation. For the purpose of above rules, the “hour of darkness”
means half an hour after sunset to half an hour before sunrise.
PART - IV
SHORE  STATION - MONITORING  AND  CONTROL
12. Duties of Pilots. - The duties of a Pilot shall include -
(a) Piloting of V essels in and out of the harbour, berthing, unberthing
and shifting of vessels;
(b) Take command of dredgers as and when necessary and Port crafts
or tugs when proceeding beyond Port limits and also in case of
contingencies like strike, etc. by the workers, on the instructions
of Deputy Conservator;
(c) To attend and monitor the pull back operations during pilotage at
Single Buoy Mooring (SBM) throughout the vessel’s stay.
13. Dock Masters to do duties at Shore Station.  - The Dock Masters at
various shore stations shall perform their duties, in rotation for such periods as
may from time to time be ordered by the Deputy Conservator. The Dock

46
Master at the control station shall perform such duties, including control of the
Vessel Traffic Service Station, as may be specified by the Deputy Conservator.
14. The Pilot Station and the Shore Station. - The Harbour Master at the
Control Station shall monitor the boarding and disembarking of Master Pilots
or Pilots and shall exercise control over them.
15. Operational Control of Pilots. -  The Harbour Master Shall have the
control over Master Pilots and Pilots in pilotage charges of vessels while entering
or leaving the port, mooring or unmooring and berthing or un-berthing at any
anchorage, berth, dock within the port.
16. Boarding inward bound - vessels, etc. -  The Harbour Master at the
Control Station shall ensure that the Master Pilot or Pilot on turn for boarding
inwards are duly boarded upon inbound vessels requiring Pilots. Also ensure
that Master Pilot or Pilot are disembarked from outbound vessels.
17. Power to direct Pilots to take charge of a Vessel of higher tonnage
in certain circumstances. - The Deputy Conservator or Harbour Master may,
if necessary direct a Pilot to pilot a vessel exceeding in tonnage the Vessels
which he is qualified for under regulation 12 to Pilot. In every/such case, the
Deputy
 Conservator or Harbour Master shall forthwith send a report in writing
to the Chairman stating the reasons which in his opinion necessitated such
action
18. Harbour Master to Regulate Attendance of Pilots on Vessels. - Pilots
on shore duty shall be detailed under the supervision of the Harbour Master to
vessels requiring their services and a list showing the rotation in which Pilots,
having regard to their respective classes, are to be allotted to such vessels shall
be drawn up and kept in the office of the Deputy Conservator or Harbour
Master. The allocation of Pilots’ for individual movements in accordance with
the list drawn up in the Deputy Conservator’s office and any adjustments
necessitated by changes or cancellations of allocations of Pilots shall be attended
to by the signal station.

47
PART - V
DUTIES OF PILOTS
19. Pilots to obey the order of the Authority. -  A Pilot shall obey and
execute all orders and regulations given or issued by the Chairman, the Deputy
Chairman, the Deputy Conservator and or the Harbour Master. He shall also
obey all orders given by Deputy Conservator or Harbour Master relating to
berthing, unberthing, shifting and towing of vessels under his charge.
20. Pilots Behaviour. - (1) A Pilot shall at all times exercise strict sobriety.
He shall be the incharge of the vessel throughout the time and use his utmost
care and diligence for her safety and the safety of other vessels and property.
He shall not lay by the vessel aground without a written order from the owner
or Officer in command.
(2) A Pilot is an employee of the Board and governed by the Kandla Port
Employees (Recruitment, Seniority and Promotion) Regulations for all
his service matters and, therefore, in the event of any misconduct or
misbehaviour while in service liable to disciplinary proceedings under
Kandla Port Employees (Classification, Control and Appeal) Regulations
as amended from time to time.
21. Pilots to obtain certificate of service performed by them. -  A Pilot
shall on boarding the vessel handover the arrival or departure report to the
Master who shall enter therein all the required particulars over his signature.
The arrival report shall be duly filled in and returned to the Pilot before the
vessel reaches middle ground the departure report before reaching Outer Tuna
Buoy. Transporting and anchoring certificates shall be filled by the pilot and
presented to the Master for signature when the duties of Pilot are completed.
22. Pilots to go on board vessels in good time. -  A pilot about to take
charge of a vessel which is outward bound, or which is about to be moved
from the berth in which she is lying, shall go on board and report himself to the

48
officer in command at the time appointed, i.e. in sufficient time for her to be
moved out to sea or to her destination.
23. Pilots to see that vessel and her equipment are in order. -  A pilot
before taking charge of an inward or outward bound vessel or shifting of
vessel shall enquire from the Master of the Vessel whether the steering gear is
connected and in proper working order and direct that both the anchors be
ready for letting go.
24. Pilot to acquaint with the movement of vessels. -  All Pilots prior to
boarding the vessel, acquaint themselves with the movement of vessels in the
harbour and the Pilot on board in each of them.
25. Commencement of Pilot’s outward duties. -  The duties of a Pilot in
regard to outward bound vessel shall commence on boarding the vessels at
any wharf, pier, jetty or anchorage.
26. Termination of Pilot’s outward duties. - The duties of a Pilot in regard
to an outward bound vessel shall cease when he has piloted the vessel upto the
limits of the compulsory pilotage waters (Outer Tuna Buoy);
27. Commencement of Pilot’s Inward duties. -  The duties of a Pilot in
regard to an inward bound vessel shall commence when he boards the vessel
at the pilot station within the compulsory pilotage limits of the Port (Outer
Tuna Buoy).
28. Termination of Pilot’s inward duties. - The duties of a Pilot in regard
to any inward bound vessel shall cease at any wharf, pier, berth or jetty or
anchorage when the vessel is safely moored, berthed and secured or anchored
However, in case of Single Buoy Mooring (SBM) operation, the Pilot will stay
on board to monitor the pull back operation throughout the vessel’s stay.
29. Moving of Vessel. -  No Pilot shall move or direct the moving of any
vessel within the Port from one position to another unless the following
conditions are fulfilled –

49
(i) if the vessel is underway, the Master shall be on board;
(ii) if the Master leaves the vessel before the movement is completed,
the Pilot shall direct the vessel to be anchored in such safe position
as may be most easily reached by the vessel and shall not give
directions to proceed with the moving until the return of the Master
to the vessel :-
(iii) throughout the moving the number of officers and crew on board
and available for duty shall be sufficient to perform any duty which
may be required, and if the Pilot on board considers that the number
is not sufficient, he shall call the Master’s attention to the Port
rules and refuse to proceed with the moving unless the Master
first signs a declaration under his own hand expressly assuming
entire responsibility.
Explanation: In this Regulation, the expression “Master” shall include
the first or other officer duly authorized to act for the Master in the event of
the latter being incapacitated from performing the duties of his office.
30. Pilots to report on landing, - On landing, after piloting a vessel inward
and or transporting a vessel in the stream, or returning from the pilot vessel, a
Pilot shall report without delay to the signal station the time of his landing
ashore by entering his name on the roster kept for this purpose, for further
duty.
31. Pilots not to bring vessels into dock when the signal is against
him.- A Pilot shall not bring a vessel into dock or alongside a berth unless
cleared to do so by the shore station.
32. Pilots when on duty to carry with them their licence, etc. -  A
Pilot when on duty shall always have with him an official Tide Table for
the Port, a copy of the Port rules, pilotage regulations presen tly in force and
his licence.

50
33. Loss of Licence. - A pilot losing his licence shall forthwith give notice
thereof to the Deputy Conservator, stating the circumstances in which the
licence was lost, and the Deputy Conservator shall unless he is satisfied that
the loss has been caused by the Pilot’s misconduct, issue the Pilot a temporary
licence pending the grant of a duplicate licence by the Chairman.
34. Pilots to give information of any alterations in navigational marks,
etc. - A pilot who has observed any alteration in the depth of the channels, or
has noticed that any buoys, beacons or light vessels have been driven away,
broken down, damaged or shifted from position, or has become aware of any
circumstances likely to affect the safety of navigation shall forthwith send a
detailed report thereof in writing to the Deputy Conservator
35. Pilots to report casualties. -  A Pilot, whenever, any accident has
happened to or been caused by a vessel while in his charge, shall as soon as
possible and not later than twenty four hours of the accident, report the facts
in writing in the form prescribed for the purpose as per Appendix-B, to the
Deputy Conservator.
36. Pilots to ascertain quarantine and security compliance. -  A Pilot on
boarding an inward bound vessel, shall -
(a) ascertain whether there is, or has been during the voyage, any
infectious disease on board. If there is, or has been, and the disease
is of a serious nature as laid down in the quarantine rules, he shall
anchor the vessel, hoist the quarantine signal and carry out the
instructions contained in the said quarantine rules in this respect;
and
(b) ascertain the vessel’s present draught and see that both anchors
are clear to be let go; see that the national Ensign is hoisted and the
flags denoting the name of the vessel and any other signals, as
required by Port rules from time to time, are hoisted in such a
manner as to be clearly seen from the Port signal station.

51
PART - VI
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
37. Log Book to be kept at control (Signal) station. –  The incharge of
control station shall maintain a logbook containing such particulars as may be
specified by the Deputy Conservator, He shall also forward the logbook to the
Deputy Conservator for inspection once in a week.
38. Senior Pilots to give instructions to subordinate Pilots, Junior Pilots
and Probationary Pilots. - Harbour Master shall instruct the subordinate Pilots
to assist Junior Pilots and Probationary Pilots in all branches of a Pilot’s duty.
39. Pilots giving evidence. - A Pilot shall not attend to give evidence in any
trial or enquiry to which he is not a party, unless he is under subpoena,
without the prior permission of the Deputy Conservator and a Pilot under
subpoena to give evidence shall at once report the fact in writing to the Deputy
Conservator.
40. Pilot’s examination of charts. -  All Pilots shall attend frequently at
the office of the Deputy Conservator or Harbour Master to examine the
latest plans and charts of the port and other information concerning the
Port.
41. Pilot’s uniform. -  Pilots shall wear the prescribed uniform while on
duty and they shall abide by the normal discipline and decorum expected from
officers in uniform when dealing with their controlling officers.
42. Pilot to be provided with proper food and resting accommodation.-
The Master of a Vessel shall provide the pilot with reasonable accommodation,
if necessary breakfast, lunch and dinner, as the case may be, if the Vessel is at
anchor in the harbour and at Single Buoy Mooring (SBM) in the case of Vadinar,
failing which the Master of the respective Vessel shall pay compensation at the
rate of Rs. 200/- for any of the meals missed by the Pilot.

52
PART- VII
GENERAL
43. Interpretation. - If any question arises relating to the interpretation of
these regulations, it shall be referred to the Chairman:-
Provided that any Pilot may within sixty days of the receipt of the order
of the Chairman make a representation to the Board and the Board may make
such orders thereof as it deem fit.
44. Repeal and Savings. - On commencement of these regulations, Kandla
Port (Authorization of Pilots) Regulations 1964 stands repealed:
Provided that - (a) such repeal shall not affect the previous
operation of the said Regulations or orders or practices or anything done or
actions taken thereunder; and
(b) any proceeding under the said Regulations pending at the
commencement of these regulations shall be conducted and disposed
of, so far as may be feasible, in accordance with these regulations.

APPENDIX - A
INDEMNITY BOND
(TO BE EXECUTED BY PILOTS)
Know all men by this presents that I, __________________ resident of
___________________________ in the District of ___________________ at
present employed as a prob ationary Pilot in the Port of Kandla, do hereby
bind myself and my heirs, executors, and administrators to pay to the board
on demand a sum equivalent to the cost of Training plus the amount of
Salary or Stipend on account of my having been placed for training as per
sub-regulation (3) of Regulation 6 of Kandla Port (Authorisation of Pilots)
Regulations, 2013,
And whereas for the better protection of the Board, I have agreed to
execute this bond with such condition as hereunder is written.
Now the condition of the above written obligation is such that in the
event of my resignation or leaving service before serving Kandla Port Trust
for a minimum period of five years on completion of my probationary period
of two years or in the event of my removal or dismissal from service for any
kind of misconduct during the prescribed period of the said five years, I shall
forthwith pay to the Board or as may be directed by the board in demand, the
said sum equivalent to the cost of Training plus the amount of Salary or Stipend
on account of my having placed for training as aforesaid.
And upon my making such payment, the above written obligation shall
be void and of no effect, otherwise, it shall be and remain in full force and
virtue.
Dated this _________ day of ________ on two thousand ___________
Signed and delivered by _______________ in the presence of witness,
(Signature of the Probationary Pilot)
53

54
1. ______________
2. ______________
For and on behalf of the Board accepted by:
Deputy Conservator
Kandla Port Trust
Common seal of the Board of Trustees of the
Port of Kandla affixed in the presence of
(Secretary)
Kandla Port Trust/

APPENDIX- B
PILOT’S REPORT OF ACCIDENT
(To be filled in and sent on shore immediately)
To
The Deputy Conservator,
Kandla Port Trust.
1. Name of Vessel
2. Nature of accident
3. Date and time of its occurrence
4. State of the weather, direction
and force of wind and tide
5. Position of vessel, and all-round
bearing of known objects
6. Nature of the ground
7. Cause of accident
8. Means used to get the vessel afloat or clear
9. Length of time vessel lay aground,
or in collision and if she so remains
at the time of forwarding this report
10. if further means or appliances are
required and if so, what they are
11. Any other particulars
55

56
N.B. In addition to this report, the Pilot must send a written detailed
report within 24 hours
Date: ___________________ Pilot’s Signature ____________________
I have perused and do concur/not concur in the particulars of the accident
above reported which are correct/not correct as stated by the Port.
Signature _____________
Master of the vessel ____________
Remarks of the Master of the Vessel

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
MARITIME DECLARATION OF HEALTH
(To be completed and submitted to the competent authorities
by the Masters of the vessel arriving from the foreign ports)
Submitted at the port of ___________ Date ___________
Name of the Ship or Inland navigation vessel _____________
Registration No./IMO No. ________________
Arriving from ______________ Sailing to _______________
Nationality (Flag) of the vessel __________ Master’s Name ________
Gross Tonnage ________ Tonnage inland navigation vessel _________ Valid
Sanitation Control Exemption/Control Certificate carried on board? Yes/No.
____ Issued at __________________ date ________________________
Re-Inspection required? Yes/No ___________________
Has ship/vessel visited an affected area identified by the World Health
Organization? Yes/No ________________________
Port and date of visit __________________________________
List ports of call from the commencement of voyage with date of departure,
or within past thirty days, whichever is shorter.
_______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
Upon request of the competent authority at the port of arrival, list crew
members, passengers or other persons who have joined ship/vessel since
57

58
international voyage began or within past thirty days, whichever is shorter,
including all ports/countries visited in this period (add additional names to the
attached schedule).
(1) Name _________ joined from (i) ________ (ii) _______ (iii)  ________
(2) Name _________ joined from (i) ________ (ii) _______ (iii)  ________
(3) Name _________ joined from (i) ________ (ii) _______ (iii)  ________
Number of crew members on board _______________
Number of passengers on board _______________
Health Questions
(1) Has any person died on board during the voyage otherwise than as
a result of accident? Yes/No
(2) If there on board or has there been during international voyage any
case of disease which you suspect to be of an Infectious nature?
Yes/No. If yes, state particulars in attached schedule.
(3) Has the total numbers of ill passengers during the voyage been
greater than normal/excepted? Yes/No How many ill persons? _____
(4) Is there any ill persons on board now? Yes/No. If yes, state
particulars in attached schedule.
(5) Was a medical practitioner consulted? Yes/No. If yes, state
particulars of medical treatment or advice provided in attached
schedule.
(6) Are you aware of any condition on board which may lead to
infection or spread of disease? Yes/No. If yes, state particulars in
attached schedule.
(7) Has any sanitary measures (e.g. quarantine, isolation, disinfection

59
or decontamination) been applied on board? Yes/No. If yes, state
particulars in attached schedule.
(8) Has any stoways been found on board? Yes/No. If yes, where did
they join the ship (if shown)? _________.
(9) If there a sick animal or pet on board? Yes/No
Note:. In the absence of a surgeon, the master should regard the following
symptoms as grounds for suspecting the existence a disease of an
infectious nature:
(a) fever, persisting for several days or accompanied by (i) prostration,
(ii) decreased consciousness, (iii) glandular swelling; (iv) Jaundice,
(v) cough or shortness of breath, (vi) unusual bleeding,
or (vii) paralysis.
(b) With or without fever, (i) any acute skin rash or eruption, (ii)
severe vomiting (other than sea sickness), (iii) severe diarrhea, or
(iv) recurrent convulsion
I hereby declare the particulars and answers to the questions given in
this Declaration of Health (including the schedule) are true and correct to the
best of my knowledge and belief.
Signed ________________
Master
Countersigned __________
Date _____________ Ship’s Surgeon (if carried)

ATIACHED SCHEDULE TO THE MARTIME
DECLARATION OF HEALTH
Name Class Age Sex Natio- Port, Nature Date Report Disp- Drugs Comments
or nality Date of of to a osal medi-
Rating joined illness onset port of cines
ship/ of medical case* or
vessel symp- officer other
toms treat-
ment
given
to
patient
*State (1) whether the person recovered, is still ill or died; and (2) whether the person is still
on board, was evacuated (including the name of the Port or Airport) or was buried at sea.
60
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRA ORDINARY
[Part II-Sec-3(i)]

61
IV
Fourth Meeting
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on the 27
th
 August, 2013 in Room
No. 126-C, Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. The following Members
of the Committee were present in the meeting.
Members Present
1. Shrimati Maya Singh ––      Chairperson
2. Shri M.P. Achuthan
3. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
6. Shri K. Parasaran
7. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
8. Shrimati V asanthi Stanley
9. Shri Bhupender Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director
Shri R.S. Rawat, Joint Director
Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director
Shri R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Assistant Director
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and thereafter
the Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration one-by-
one :
(i) Two Hundred and Eighth Report on the Statutory Orders laid on
the Table of the Rajya Sabha during the 228th Session;

62
(ii) Two Hundred and Ninth Report on the taking over of Distance
Education Council (DEC) of IGNOU by the University Grants
Commission (UGC) through an administrative order in violation of
IGNOU Act, 1985 and the Statutes framed thereunder;
(iii) Two Hundred and Tenth Report on the Hallmarking Scheme and
Certain Rules/Regulations framed under the Bureau of Indian
Standards Act, 1986;
(iv) Two Hundred and Eleventh Report on (i) the Cigarettes and Other
Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation
of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution)
Rules, 2004 and (ii) Kandla Port Trust (Authorization of
Pilots) Regulations, 1964- Implementation of 163rd Report of the
Committee.
(v) Two Hundred and Twelfth Report on the Border Roads Engineering
Services ‘A’ (Amendment) Rules, 1988; and
(vi) Two Hundred and Thirteenth Report regarding delay in the framing
of subordinate legislation under the Acts of Parliament and delay
in the laying of Rules/Regulations/Orders on the Table of the
House.
3. The Chair person informed the Members that the issue regarding
shifting the Distance Education Council (DEC) from IGNOU to the University
Grants Commission (UGC) through an administrative order instead of by
amending the IGNOU Act, 1985 needed further discussion as the Ministry
wants to submit more facts to the Committee on the issue which they could
not do so earlier. The Committee, therefore, decided not to report the subject
to the House until the final view is taken on the said ne w facts by the
Committee.
4. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the other reports
and after some discussion adopted the 208
th, 210th, 211th, 212th and 213th Reports.

63
The Committee authorized its Chairperson and in her absence Dr. Bhalchandra
Mungekar and in his absence Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda to present the Reports
to the House on 3 rd September, 2013.
5. * * *
6. The Chairperson thanked the Members present and meeting was
concluded at 3.40 
P.M.
*** Relates to same other matter.