    COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE  LEGISLATION 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi      
De 
                             TWO HUNDRED AND 
THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION RULES, 2006 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE  LEGISLATION 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi                                
De cember, 2014/Pausa, 1936 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION RULES, 2006 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  18 th    Decem ber,   
 
      
REPORT 
NO.  
219 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE  LEGISLATION  
                                                                   
REPORT  
THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION RULES, 2006  
ber,   2014) 

 
C O N T E N T S 
      
                                                            PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION  OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
2. INTRODUCTION 
3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. 
5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT ON THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES  
COMMISSION RULES, 2006 
 
I         BACKGROUND 
II        EXAMINATION OF RULES, OBSERVATIONS AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
III         SUMMARY OF THE OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS  
              OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
MINUTES*
 
 
 
* To be appended later. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   15 th  SEPTEMBER, 2014) 
 
1.  Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy   Chairman 
2. Shri  M.P. Achuthan     
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
5. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
6. Shri Kalpataru Das 
7. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
8. Shri S. Muthukaruppan 
9. Shri K. Parasaran 
10. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
11. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
12. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh 
13. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
14. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
15. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
S
ECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri N. K. Singh , Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
3. Shri  Ravindra Singh Rawat, Joint Director 
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director 
5. Shri R.P. Shukla,  Deputy Director 
6. Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director  
 
(i) 

 INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordina te Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on i ts behalf, this Two Hundred and 
Nineteenth Report of the Committee.  
 
2.  The Committee examined the matters that came up  while scrutinizing the Khadi and 
Village Industries Commission Rules, 2006 and issue s relating to them along with the 
comments received from the Government. 
 
3.   The observations and recommendations of the Co mmittee are contained in the 
Report.  
 
4.  
The Committee considered and adopted the draft Repo rt in its meeting held on the       
17 th   December, 2014.  
 
 
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY  
Chairman  
Committee on Subordinate Legislation,  
 Rajya Sabha  
 
NEW DELHI  
December 18, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DRAFT REPORT  
ON  
THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION RULES, 2006  
  
I.  BACKGROUND 
 
The Khadi and Village Industries Commission Rules, 2006 (Annexure-I)  
were framed in supersession of the Khadi and Villag e Industries Commission 
Rules, 1957, in exercise of powers conferred by Sec tion 26 (1) and (2) of the 
Khadi and Village Industries Commission Act, 1956. The rules were taken up for 
detailed examination by the Committee and a questio nnaire on the subject was 
forwarded to the Ministry of Micro, Small and Mediu m Enterprises for their 
comments/clarifications on 22 nd  August, 2007. The Ministry furnished their 
replies on 8 th  February, 2008 (Annexure-II) . During the course of its 
examination, the Committee also had discussion with  the representatives of (i) 
Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC), Sta te Government of Jammu 
& Kashmir along with the Ministry of Micro, Small &  Medium Enterprises at 
Srinagar on 30 th  June 2012 and (ii) KVIC, State Government of Mahar ashtra 
along with the Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium En terprises at Mumbai on 
11 th  November 2014. Study note on the said study visits  are enclosed as 
Annexure-III & Annexure-IV respectively.  
 
2. The Committee enquired about the reasons that ne cessitated the framing of 
the Khadi and Village Industries Commission Rules, 2006, in supersession of the 
Khadi and Village Industries Commission Rules, 1957 . The Ministry replied that  
with a view to revamp the structure and functioning  of KVIC, the Government 
had constituted an Expert Committee in December 200 4 to recommend suitable 
measures for revamping of KVIC after reviewing its structure, functioning and 
performance. Based on the recommendations of the Ex pert Committee, KVIC 
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 to amend the KVIC Act, 1956 was drafted and 
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 22 
nd  August, 2005 and finally the KVIC 
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 as passed by both Houses of Parliament, after receiving 

the assent of the President in March 2006, became a n Act of Parliament and the 
amended provisions came into force with effect from 15 th  May, 2006. 
 
3. Consequent upon the amendment to KVIC Act, 1956 and also as per the 
provisions of the KVIC (Amendment) Act, there was a  necessity to suitably 
amend the then existing KVIC Rules, 1957 also. Acco rdingly, the Government of 
India, in supersession of the KVIC Rules 1957, noti fied the KVIC Rules 2006 in 
the Gazette of India on 17 
th  August, 2006. The KVIC Rules, 2006 were further 
amended vide  KVIC (Amendment) Rules, 2006 on 30 th  November, 2006 and 
KVIC (Amendment) Rules on 15 th  September, 2007. 
  
II EXAMINATION OF RULES, OBSERVATIONS AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
4. In response to the important points/ issues rais ed by the Committee 
through a detailed questionnaire and discussion wit h the   representatives of the 
Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC), the  Ministry of Micro, Small 
& Medium Enterprises etc., the Ministry has furnish ed their comments/ 
clarifications which are elaborated in the succeedi ng paragraphs along with the 
observations/ recommendations of the Committee. 
 
5. Rule 7-Power to Appoint  
 “The Commission may appoint officers and other empl oyers as it 
considers necessary for the efficient performance o f its functions, with 
prior approval of the Central Government regarding creation of posts and 
filling of vacancies, in accordance with the Govern ment instructions in 
this regard.” 
  
The Committee pointed out that the Rules did not pr ovide for the terms 
and conditions of appointment like qualification, e xperiences, tenure, etc for the 
officers and other employees of the Commission. The  Committee suggested  that 
it would be more appropriate to provide terms and c onditions of service in the 

Rules itself as the existing provisions of Rule 7 w ere not specific. The Ministry 
replied that KVIC, with the previous sanction of th e Central Government, had 
framed various KVIC Employees’ Regulations for gove rning the service 
conditions of the employees. The qualifications, ex perience etc., of various 
categories of Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’ posts of KVIC  have been provided in 
detail under the “Ministry of Industry, Khadi and V illage Industries Commission, 
Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’ posts Recruitment Rules, 19 98” notified as G.S.R. 358 
(E) dated 26 th  June, 1998. Hence, the terms and conditions of app ointment like 
qualification, experiences, tenure, etc for the off icers and other employees of the 
KVIC have not been provided under the KVIC Rules, 2 006 and such inclusion in 
the KVIC Rules, 2006 would also not be appropriate.  The Committee noted the 
replies furnished by the Ministry. 
 
6. The Committee pointed out that  the words “important papers”  and “as 
early as practicable” in Rule 10(2) (a) were vague and capable of varied 
interpretation. The Committee proposed that these p rovisions should be made 
more precise and specific.  The  Ministry replied that the Commission, i.e. the 
decision making body as established under Section 4  of the KVIC Act, 1956 
normally holds its meetings only once in a month an d as per Section 5 (1) of the 
KVIC Act, the Chief Executive Officer (CEO), KVIC i s authorized to exercise 
such powers and discharge such functions in respect  of general superintendence 
over the affairs of the Commission and its day to d ay management as may be 
prescribed. Therefore, all the routine matters conc erning the day-to-day 
management of the affairs of the Commission need no t be referred to the 
Commission and the decisions on such routine matter s can be taken by the CEO. 
Only those important matters affecting the policy o f the Commission or requiring 
the approval of the Commission, papers relating to financial implication, etc. were 
to be submitted to the Commission in its meetings f or decisions. By Rule 
10(2)(a), the Chairman of the Commission was empowe red to cause those 
important papers and matters to be presented to the  Commission as early as 
practicable. The significance of the word “as early as practicable”  may be that 

since the Commission was meeting only once in a mon th, it may not be possible 
for the Commission to take decision on all the matt ers referred to it immediately. 
The Ministry accepted that a time limit of two cons equent Commission 
meetings may be fixed within which they need to be presented before the 
Commission and necessary changes may be effected ac cordingly. The 
Committee accordingly recommends that this should be incorporated in Rule 
10(2)(a) immediately.  
 
7. The Committee questioned the justification for a llowing submission of 
accounts by the Commission “normally” by the end of  October as prescribed in 
Rule 25  and asked whether there was any objection if the w ord “normally”  is 
deleted. The Ministry replied that the intention be hind mentioning the word 
“normally”  in Rule 25 may be to bring flexibility and to avoi d rigidity as regards 
the date of submission of account by the Commission . Since there was a 
provision in Rule 25 extending the date of submissi on of accounts by Central 
Government, the Ministry accepted the Committee’s s uggestion that the 
word “normally”  appearing in Rule 25 could be considered for delet ion. The 
Committee accordingly recommends that necessary ame ndment in Rule 25 
be carried out immediately.   
 
8. The Committee also questioned whether Government  had any objection in 
specifying the extended period beyond the end of Oc tober within which the 
Commission shall have to submit its accounts as pro vided in Proviso to Rule 25 . 
The Ministry replied that there was no need to chan ge the existing provision as 
the reports so submitted by KVIC were also required  to be laid on the Table of 
each House of the Parliament within a period of 9 months from the date of closure 
of KVIC’s accounts, i.e., by 31 December which is w ithin two months of the end 
of October. In case more time beyond December was r equired, extension of time 
had to be sought from the respective Houses of Parl iament. Therefore, there was 
no need to specify the extended period beyond the e nd of October as mechanism 

is already there in place to check the delays. The Committee noted the reply 
furnished by the Ministry. 
 
9. The Committee pointed out that the words “within a reasonable period”  
in Rule 26 (2)  were vague and suggested that a specific time peri od, say three 
months, be incorporated within the Rule itself. The  Committee also pointed out 
that the words “as it things fit”  may be substituted by the words “as it thinks fit” 
so as to rectify the typographical error. The Minis try accepted that a time limit of 
3 months may be prescribed as suggested by the Comm ittee and stated that this 
period was necessary considering the fact that the KVIC is having offices in 
different parts of the country and sometimes the re levant information may have to 
be collected from those offices. On several occasio ns further clarifications are 
also required to be obtained in the matter. As rega rds the suggestion for 
substituting the words “as it thinks fit” in place of the words “as it things fit” , 
action was being taken for correction of the same t hrough an amendment. The 
Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has ag reed that a specific time 
frame of three months may be prescribed to replace the words “within a 
reasonable period ” in Rule 26(2) and hopes that the Ministry will ca rry out 
the amendment expeditiously. The Committee also not es that the Ministry is 
taking action for substituting the words “as it things fit” with the words “as it 
thinks fit”  and recommends that the Ministry should carry out this 
correction immediately if not done so earlier. 
  
10. The  Ministry pointed out another typographical  error in line 5 of Rule 26 
(2) wherein the words “any defect or regularity”  appear while the correct words 
should have been “any defect or irregularity”  and stated that action was being 
taken to substitute the words “any defect or regularity”  with the words “any 
defect or irregularity” . The Committee recommends that the words “any 
defect or regularity”  should be substituted with the words “any defect or 
irregularity”  in line 5 of Rule 26(2) immediately so as to recti fy the 
typographical error.   

 
 
 
11. Rule 30 (2)  
“On receipt of a request under sub-rule (1) the Cen tral Government may 
constitute a Tribunal in accordance with the provis ions of section 19B of 
the Act and refer the question mentioned in such re quest to the Tribunal 
for decision.” 
 
The Committee queried whether there was any objecti on to specifying in 
the Rule itself the time period within which the Tr ibunal shall be constituted upon 
receipt of a request for its constitution. The Mini stry replied that it was felt that 
the existing provisions in this regard should be al lowed to exist keeping in view  
the difficulties/procedural delays in the constitut ion of Tribunal like identifying 
suitable person to be appointed as Tribunal, decidi ng the headquarters, etc., 
references to be made to the Legislative Department  of the Ministry of Law & 
Justice for the vetting of the notification for con stitution of such tribunals, 
preparation of authorized Hindi version of the Engl ish notifications, and getting 
these notifications published in the Gazette of Ind ia, which usually take 
considerable time. Therefore, it would not appear a ppropriate to prescribe any 
time limit. The Committee accepted the reply of the Ministry .  
 
12. Rule 31 (2)  
“The Commission may authorize the Chief Executive O fficer, the 
Financial Adviser or taking into account the recomm endation of the Chief 
Executive Officer in this behalf any other officer of the Commission, such 
powers of entering into contract on its behalf as it may think fit.” 
  
The Committee pointed out that the words “any other officer”  in Rule 
31(2) were vague and provide scope for excessive di scretion which is liable to be 
misused. The Committee suggested the Rule may speci fy the rank/designation of 

such an officer so that the delegation remains reas onable. The Ministry replied 
that the Committee’s suggestion had been considered and the existing words “any 
other officer”  were being considered for substitution by the word s “any other 
officer not below the rank of Director”  through an amendment to the KVIC 
Rules. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Mini stry has accepted 
its suggestion to substitute the words “any other officer”  with the words “any 
other officer not below the rank of Director”  in Rule 31(2) so as to avoid 
excessive scope for discretion and accordingly reco mmends that the 
amendment should be carried out immediately.  
 
13. Rule 33 (2)  
“The Commission shall not be competent to modify, a mend or otherwise 
vary the provisions of the loan rules.” 
  
The Committee questioned the objective behind the p rovision of Rule 33 
(2).  In Committee’s opinion if loan rules are stat utory then obviously the 
amendments therein shall be as per the provisions o f the Act.  The Committee 
failed to understand the justification behind Rule 33 (2). The Ministry replied that 
it agreed with the views of the Committee and Rule 33 (2) was being considered 
for deletion through an amendment to the KVIC Rules . The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that Rule 33(2) should be d eleted immediately as 
agreed to by the Ministry .  
 
14. Rule 34 – Power to borrow 
“The Commission may, with the previous sanction of the Government, 
borrow on the security of its funds or assets for t he purpose specified in 
section 21 of the Act.” 
 
 The Committee enquired about the terms and conditi ons under which the 
Commission has the power to borrow on the security of its funds or assets. The 
Ministry replied that the provision for borrowing m oney had been prescribed in 

the Section 21 of the Khadi and Village Industries Act, 1957 as, ‘Subject to such 
rules as may be made in this behalf, the Commission  shall have power to borrow 
on the security of the Khadi Fund or the Village In dustries Fund or any other 
assets for any purpose for which such funds may be applied. ’ The Ministry stated 
that the terms and conditions for granting loans we re generally laid down by the 
lending agency and not by the borrower. Hence no st andard terms and conditions 
had been prescribed by KVIC so far. However, KVIC w as being instructed to 
obtain the approval of the Central Government to th e terms and conditions of 
borrowing money if it decides to obtain any such lo an against security of its funds 
or assets for the purposes specified to Section 21 of KVIC Act, 1957.  The 
Committee noted the reply furnished by the Ministry. 
 
15. The Committee enquired about the method of calc ulation for writing off 
losses by the Commission  in Rule 35 and how the amount specified in the rules 
are arrived at. The Ministry pointed out that the “ Delegation of Financial Power 
Rules, 1978” were administered by the Ministry of  Finance, Department of 
Expenditure  and further amended by the “Delegation  of Financial Power 
(Amendment) Rules, 2001” on 23th October, 2001.  Th e revised monetary limits 
upto which the losses may be written off mentioned in Rule 35 of KVIC Rules are 
based on “Delegation of Financial Power (Amendment)  Rules, 2001”. The 
Committee noted the reply of the Ministry . 
 
16.  Rule 38 – Periodical returns 
“The Commission shall submit such periodical return s to the Government 
and to such other authority as it may specify. The returns shall be in such 
form as the Government may, from time to time, direct.” 
  
The Committee enquired about the present authority to whom the 
Commission is submitting the periodical returns and  questioned the 
reason/justification for allowing the Commission to  submit the periodical returns 
to an authority other than the Government. The Mini stry replied that the words  

“and to such other authority”  were being considered for omission through an 
amendment to the KVIC Rules. The Committee notes that the Ministry is 
considering omission of the words “and to such other authority”  in Rule 38 
and accordingly recommends that the Rule should be amended immediately. 
 
17. During the course of discussion with the repres entatives of the Khadi and Village 
Industries Commission (KVIC), State Government of J ammu & Kashmir along with the 
Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises at Sr inagar on 30 th  June, 2012, the 
Committee was informed that the Khadi Reform and De velopment Programme had been 
initiated by the Government of India with support from Asian Development Bank to fully 
realize significant growth potential of KVI Sector in terms of employment generation; 
enhance earning of artisans and their empowerment a nd ensure positioning of khadi in 
consonance with current marketing needs. The Commit tee also noted that KVIC and 
KVIBs were implementing the Prime Minister’s Employ ment Generation Programme 
(PMEGP) and that KVIC was the nodal agency at the n ational level. Further, regarding 
human resource development, the Committee was infor med that KVIC was conducting 
training programme through 39 departmental and non- departmental training Centres and 
74,754 persons were provided training during the year 2011-12.  
 
18. The Committee appreciated that KVIC has made concer ted efforts in 
promotion of exclusive brands coupled with quality improvement and product 
development, design intervention and packaging. The  Committee noted that during 
this process, KVIC has expanded the coverage of pro ducts under it’s exclusive 
brands i.e. ‘Khadi’, ‘Sarvodaya’ and “Desi Aahar’ f or gaining customer confidence 
in KVI products and that the government has envisag ed a distinct identity for 
khadi, “Khadi Mark”, to guarantee the genuineness o f khadi sold in the market.  
This mark would help the customers to identify the difference between real and 
spurious khadi .  
 
19.      During the course of discussion with the r epresentatives of the Khadi and Village 
Industries Commission (KVIC), State Government of M aharashtra along with the 

Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises at Mu mbai on 11 th  November, 2014, the 
Committee expressed its concern on the decline in t he popularity of the Khadi products. 
In response, the Committee was informed about the s teps taken in the recent past to 
reinvigorate Khadi like providing interest subsidy for setting up Khadi units; providing 
Marketing development assistance even on khadi sales; collaborating with Institutions for 
Research & Development in the field of Khadi tools & technology; and, initiation of a 
Khadi Reform Development Program. The Committee was  also informed that the 
Ministry was making efforts to make Khadi compulsor y in all government departments 
like Railways and government hospitals.    The Comm ittee felt that much more was 
needed to be done to promote Khadi and village indu stries. Amongst the foremost steps 
needed to be taken is to popularize it particularly  among the youth. It was felt that khadi 
is an instrument to help revive India’s rural secto r and provide a measure of financial 
security especially to rural women. 
  
III SUMMARY OF THE OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS  
OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
20. Rule 10 (2) (a) 
 
In Rule 10 (2) (a), the Ministry accepted that a ti me limit of two 
consequent Commission meetings may be fixed within which they need to be 
presented before the Commission and necessary chang es may be effected 
accordingly. The Committee accordingly recommends t hat this should be 
incorporated in Rule 10 (2) (a) immediately.   
 
 21. Rule 25  
 Since there is a provision in Rule 25 extending th e date of submission 
of accounts by Central Government, the Ministry acc epted the Committee’s 
suggestion that the word “normally”  appearing in Rule 25 can be considered 
for deletion. The Committee accordingly recommends that necessary 
amendment in Rule 25 be carried out immediately.   
 
 

 22. Rule 26(2)  
 The Committee notes that the Ministry has agreed th at a specific time 
frame of three months may be prescribed to replace the words “within a 
reasonable period ” in Rule 26(2) and hopes that the Ministry will ca rry this 
out expeditiously. The Committee also notes that th e Ministry is taking 
action for substituting the words “as it thinks fit” in place of the words “as it 
things fit”  and recommends that the Ministry should carry out this 
correction immediately if not done so earlier. The Committee also 
recommends that the words “any defect or regularity”  should be substituted 
with the words “any defect or irregularity”  in line 5 of Rule 26(2) immediately 
so as to rectify the typographical error.   
 
23. Rule 31(2)  
The Committee notes that the Ministry has accepted the suggestion of 
the Committee to substitute the words “any other officer”  with the words 
“any other officer not below the rank of Director”  in Rule 31(1) so as to avoid 
excessive scope for discretion and accordingly reco mmends that the 
amendment should be carried out immediately.  
 
24. Rule 33(2)  
The Committee fails to understand the justification  behind Rule 33 
(2). The Ministry replied that it agrees with the v iews of the Committee and 
Rule 33 (2) is being considered for deletion throug h an amendment to the 
KVIC Rules. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that Rule 33(2) 
should be deleted immediately as agreed to by the Ministry.  
 
 25. Rule 38 
 
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry is  considering 
omission of the words “and to such other authority”  in Rule 38 and 
accordingly recommends that the Rule should be amended immediately. 
 

STUDY NOTE ON THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION RULES, 
2006  
The Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sab ha had discussions on the Khadi 
and Village Industries Commission Rules, 2006 with the representatives of Khadi and Village 
Industries Commission, State Govt. of J&K along wit h the Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium 
Enterprises on the 30 th  June, 2012 in Srinagar. 
PRESENT  
1.  Shri Prakash Javadekar  In the Chair 
 
Members 
2.  Shri Narendra Kashyap 
3.  Dr.Janardhan Waghmare 
4.  Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
5.  Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
6.  Shri Shantaram Naik 
7.  Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
8.  Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra 
   
Secretariat 
1.  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary  
2.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises 
1.  Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri D.C.Pattanayak, Financial Adviser & CEO, Khadi and Village Industries 
Commission 
 
Representatives of State Govt. of J&K  
1.  Shri Ravinder Singh, CEO, J&K Khadi and Village Industries Board 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman, in his opening rem arks, enquired how far the amendment of 
the KVIC Act in 2006 and the framing of KVIC Rules,  2006 have helped in the effective and 
efficient functioning of KVIC; the status of implementation of the Committee’s suggestion in the 
rules which were accepted by the Ministry in its re ply dated the 8 
th  February, 2008 such as 
prescribing time limit of 3 months in Rule 26(2) to  remedy any defect or irregularity that may be 

pointed out by the Audit Officer; substituting the word “any other officer” with the words “any 
other officer not below the rank of Director in Rul e 31(2); deleting Rule 33(2) and deleting the 
words “any other authority” in Rule 38 so that the periodical returns are submitted by the 
Commission to the Government only; whether any amen dments have been carried out in the 
KVIC Rules, 2006 since it was framed and if so, the  details thereof; the amendments, if any, 
suggested by KVIC and the State Government in the K VIC Rules to make the rules more 
effective; the difficulties faced by KVIC and other  stakeholders in the promotion and growth of 
khadi and village industries; the steps taken by th e Government to promote khadi and village 
industries and whether these steps are felt adequate by KVIC and the State Government.  
 
 
3. The Committee noted that the power of the Chairm an to exercise general superintendence 
over the affairs of the Commission and its day to d ay management in the earlier KVIC Act has 
been taken away by the KVIC Act, 2006 and that some of the administrative functions performed 
by the Chairman have been entrusted to the Chief Ex ecutive Officer. The Committee fails to 
understand the logic of taking away powers from the  Chairman and making the CEO more 
powerful than the Chairman. The Committee also note d that the powers and duties of the 
Chairman of the KVIC are not prescribed in the Act whereas it was prescribed in the case of the 
CEO of KVIC.  
 
4. The Committee was informed that the Khadi Reform  and Development Programme has 
been initiated by the Govt. of India with support f rom Asian Development Bank to fully realize 
significant growth potential of KVI Sector in terms  of employment generation; enhance earning 
of artisans and their empowerment and ensure positi oning of khadi in consonance with current 
marketing needs. The Committee is also informed tha t KVIC and KVIBs are implementing the 
Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme (P MEGP) and KVIC is the nodal agency 
at the national level. Regarding human resource dev elopment, KVIC is conducting training 
programme through 39 departmental and non-departmen tal training centres and 74,754 persons 
were provided training during the year 2011-12.  
 

5. KVIC has also made concerted efforts in promotio n of exclusive brands coupled with 
quality improvement and product development, design  intervention and packaging. During this 
process, it expanded the coverage of products under  KVIC’s exclusive brands i.e. ‘Khadi’, 
‘Sarvodaya’ and “Desi Aahar’ for gaining customer confidence in KVI products. The Committee 
was informed that the government has envisaged a di stinct identity for khadi, “Khadi Mark”, to 
guarantee the genuineness of khadi sold in the mark et.  This mark will help the customers to 
identify the difference between real and spurious khadi.  
 
6. The meeting thereafter concluded with mutual vot e of thanks.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STUDY NOTE OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
 
The Committee met at 02.30 pm on the 11 th  November, 2014 at Mumbai to discuss with the 
representatives of KVIC, State Government of Mahara shtra along with the Ministry of Medium, 
Small and Micro Enterprises on the Khadi and Villag e Industries Commission Rules, 2006.  The 
following Members of the Committee were present in the meeting:- 
 
Present 
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy   Chairman 
Members 
2. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
3. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
4. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh 
6. Shri Shankarbhai Vegad 
7.  Shri Palvai Govradhan Reddy  
 
Special Invitee 
 
1.  Shri Rajkumar Dhoot  
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
 
  1.    Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
  2.    Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
        3.    Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director  
 
Representatives of KVIC & Ministry of Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises 
 
1.  Shri B.H. Anil Kumar, Joint Secretary & Chief Executive Officer 
2.  Shri D.C. Pattanayak, Financial Advisor 
3.  Shri G. Hanuwate, Dy. Chief Executive Officer 
 
Representative of Government of Maharashtra 
 
1.  Shri Ramesh D. Devkar, Principal Secretary 
 
2.       At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of  the Committee and, thereafter, 
taking up the subject of Khadi and Village Industri es Commission Rules, 2006, sought 
clarifications on the following issues i.e. (i) How  far the amendment of the KVIC Act in 2006 

and the framing of KVIC Rules, 2006 have helped in the effective and efficient functioning of 
KVIC and khadi and village industry; (ii) the statu s of implementation of the Committee’s 
suggestions in the rules which were accepted by the  Ministry in its reply dated the 8 th  February, 
2008 such as prescribing time limit of 3 months in Rule 26(2) to remedy any defect or 
irregularity that may be pointed out by the Audit O fficer; substituting the word “any other 
officer” with the words “any other officer not belo w the rank of Director in Rule 31(2); deleting 
Rule 33(2) and deleting the words “any other author ity” in Rule 38 so that the periodical returns 
are submitted by the Commission to the Government o nly; (iii) Why the powers and 
responsibilities of the Chairman, KVIC have not bee n prescribed in the Act when the powers of 
CEO, KVIC have been prescribed; and (iv) the steps taken by the Government to promote khadi 
and village industries and whether these steps are felt adequate by KVIC and the State 
Government.       
 
3.      Chief Executive Officer, KVIC informed the Committee about the differences between  the 
KVIC Rules, 1957 and the KVIC Rules, 2006 and the n eed to bring in these new set of Rules. 
The most important difference between these two Rul es is that the Chief Executive Officer has 
been entrusted with financial and administrative po wers as the administrative powers of the 
Chairman, KVIC have been withdrawn vide  amendment made to the KVIC Act. Likewise, the 
powers vested with the Chairman regarding maintenan ce of accounts of receipts and expenditure 
of the Commission has now been vested with the Fina nce Adviser. Similarly, the duty to place 
audit reports of the CAG before the Commission and the follow up action thereon, has been 
vested with the Financial Advisor.  
  
4.     On a concern expressed by the Committee on t he decline in the popularity of the Khadi 
products, the Committee was further informed about the steps taken in the recent past to 
reinvigorate Khadi like providing interest subsidy for setting up Khadi units; providing 
Marketing development assistance even on khadi sale s; collaborating with Institutions for 
Research & Development in the field of Khadi tools & technology; and, initiation of a Khadi 
Reform Development Program. It was also informed th at the Ministry was making efforts to 
make Khadi compulsory in all government departments  like Railways and government hospitals.    
  

 
5.       Concluding the meeting the Chairman was of  the opinion that much more was needed to 
be done to promote Khadi and village industries. Am ongst the foremost steps needed to be taken 
is to popularize it particularly among the youth. I t was felt that khadi is an instrument to help 
revive India’s rural sector and provide a measure o f financial security especially to rural women. 
He, thereafter, directed the Ministry to furnish th eir comments/clarifications on the issues raised 
during the meeting within two weeks. 
 
6.  The meeting, thereafter, concluded with a mutua l vote of thanks. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 