 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                           
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023/Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
253 
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
DELAY IN FRAMING OF RULES AND 
REGULATIONS UNDER VARIOUS ACTS BY THE 
MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha  on  12th  December, 2023) 
 
 
(Presented on  12th  February, 2019) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
C O N  T  E  N  T  S 
          
                                                                                                                                          PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
                                    (ii) 
3. ABBREVATION 
 
                                   (iii) 
4. REPORT 
 
                                   1-17 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE 
 
                                  18-22 
6.  MINUTES                                    23-35 
 
 

 
 
 
i 
 
 
 
LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
(RECONSTITUTED ON THE 2nd November, 2022) 
 
1. Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee                               -          Chairman 
2. Shri Raghav Chadha * 
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
5.  ( vacant  ) ** 
6. Shri R. Dharmar 
7. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
8. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
9. Dr. Amar Patnaik  
10. Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
11. Shri S Niranjan Reddy 
12. Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
14. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
15. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
______________________________________________________________ 
* Shri Raghav Chadha suspended from the service of the House w.e.f. 11th August, 2023. 
** Vacancy caused due to retirement of Ms. Sushmita Dev  w.e.f  18th August, 2023. 
______________________________________________________________________ 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Khursija, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajendra Tiwari, Director 
3. Shri  Rajendra Prasad, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Thangzalun Khuptong, Deputy Secretary 
5. Ms. Aditi Chaudhary, OSD to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha 
6. Shri P.P. Raumon, Under Secretary 
7. Shri Naresh Kumar, Committee Officer 
 
 

 
 
 
ii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
1.  I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf this Two Hundred and 
Fifty Third Report of the Committee. 
2. The Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha is constituted under 
Rule 204 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of States. 
The mandate of the Committee is to scrutinize  and report to Rajya Sabha  whether the 
powers to make  Rules, Regulations, Bye -laws, Schemes and other statutory 
instruments conferred by the Constitution or delegated by Parliament have been 
properly exercised within such conferment or delegation as the case may be. 
3. The Rules/Regulations/Orders etc. are required to be framed within six months 
of the coming into force of the particular Act.  However, the Committee noticed that 
despite the time limit prescribed for completion of framing of subordinate legislation 
and the several ob servations and recommendations of the Committee on the matter, 
various Acts are still pending since many years in various Ministries.   
4. The Committee's apprehension is also focused around the serious implications 
of delay in making of Rules and Regulati ons. Therefore, the Ministries under whom 
Acts are pending for a considerable time were identified and heard in two spells on 
29th May and 30 th June, 2023 in the meetings held with the Ministries to know the 
reasons for delay and the problems faced by the Ministries in framing the 
rules/regulations, etc. This report is prepared on the basis of these deliberations and its 
observations/recommendations are contained in the Report.  
5. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report in its meeting held on  
5th October, 2023. 
 
DR. LAXMIKANT BAJPAYEE,  
Chairman 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation,  
Rajya Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI 
5th OCTOBER, 2023 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
iii 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
ACI   Arbitration Council of India 
CSU   Central Sanskrit University, Delhi  
IIAC   India International Arbitration Centre 
IIM   Indian Institute of Management 
NCFSE  National Curriculum Framework for School Education 
NDIAC  New Delhi International Arbitration Centre 
NEP, 2020  National Education Policy, 2020 
NSFA   National Food Security Act, 2013 
NSU   National Sanskrit University, Tirupati 
PNGRB  Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board 
RTE Act  Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 
SLBSNSU  Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri National Sanskrit University, New Delhi 
UGC   University Grants Commission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
1 
 
 
REPORT  
Committee on Subordinate Legislation and its roles 
1. The Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha has been set up to scrutinize 
and report to the House whether the powers to make rules, regulations, bye -laws, schemes or 
other statutory instruments conferred by the Constitution or delegated by the Parliament have 
been properly exercised within such conferment or delegation, as the case may be. 
Functions of the Committee: 
2. Rule 209 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha lays 
down the functions of the Committee thus: 
 After each rule, regulation, bye -law, scheme or other statut ory instrument (hereinafter 
referred to as the ‘order’) framed in pursuance of the Constitution or the legislative functions 
delegated by Parliament to a subordinate authority and which is required to be laid before 
Parliament, is so laid before the Council, the Committee shall, in particular consider 
 i. Whether the order is in accord with the provisions of the Constitution or the Act 
 pursuant to which it is made; 
 ii. Whether the order contains matter which in the opinion of the Committee should   
 more properly be dealt within an Act of Parliament; 
 iii. Whether the order contains imposition of taxation; 
 iv. Whether the order directly or indirectly bars the jurisdiction of the court; 
 v. Whether the order gives retrospective effect to any of the provisi ons in respect of                  
which    the Constitution or the Act does not expressly give any such power; 
 vi. Whether the order involves expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India or the 
 public revenues; 
 vii. Whether the order appears to make some unusual or unexpected use of the powers 
 conferred by the Constitution or the Act pursuant to which it is made; 
viii. Whether there appears to have been unjustifiable delay in its publication or laying      
the order before Parliament; and 
 ix. Whether for any reason the form or purport of the order calls for any elucidation.
  

 
 
 
2 
 
3. Besides the functions as enumerated in Rule 209, the Committee goes into matters, 
where the rules, regulations, bye -laws and other statutory instruments as contemplated in th e 
Constitution or envisaged in an Act of Parliament have not been framed or the framing 
thereof has been inordinately delayed. The Committee also monitors the timely laying of 
notifications containing the subordinate legislations. 
4. The Committee in its Ninth Report has recommended that rules/regulations required to 
be made under a statute should be made as soon as possible and in no case later than six 
months from the date on which the statute comes into force. As a follow up to this, the 
Committee, in it s Forty -seventh Report, recommended that if it was not possible for a 
Ministry to adhere to this time schedule, it should intimate to the Committee the reasons 
therefor and seek extension of time for completing the rule making process. 
5. A Statute can be fully enforced only when all the subordinate legislation s stipulated 
under the Act are framed in time. The Committee, while carrying out its work, has found that 
the Ministries have taken  considerable time in framing  the rules/regulations and , therefore, 
the Acts remain unimplemented or partially implemented.  The Committee  has, however, 
found that most of the Ministries do not adhere to the time limit of six months prescribed by it 
for framing the  rules/regulations. The Committee has noted that delay in framing the  
rules/regulations has become a recurring phenomenon and the matters, which are sought to be 
governed by statutory rules, are often in actual practice governed by executive directions , 
guidelines, etc. in absence of properly framed statutory rul es. This situation often leaves 
scope for corruption and favouritism. 
6. Further, regarding seeking extension of time for framing the  Rules from the 
Committee, the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs, has specifically mentioned in Para  11.3.2 
of Manual of Parliamentary Procedures in the Government of India as under:- 
  “In case the departments are not able to frame the rules within the prescribed 
 period of six months, they should seek extension of time from the Committee on 
 Subordinate Legislation stating r easons for such extension; such extension being not 
 more than for a period of three months at a time. The request should be made after 
 obtaining the approval of the Minister.” 
7. The Secretariat, on behalf of the Committee, is regularly sending reminders  to the 
concerned Ministries to speed up the process of framing the rules and regulations which are 
pending with them under the Acts of Parliament.  Besides this, a quarterly statement of the 

 
 
 
3 
 
Acts on which such pendencies lies with the Ministries is forwarded to the Cabinet Secretariat 
for information and further action on its part.   
8. Despite such detailed guidelines and the efforts of the Secretariat; the recommendation 
of the Committee regarding framing the subordinate legislations under a Statute with in six 
months is not being followed by various Ministries. In many of the cases, the Mini stries have 
apologized for the delays and assured strict compliance of the recommendations/observations 
of the Committee in future.  Seeking an extension of time has be come a regular phenomenon, 
whereas framing of subordinate legislation s is being kept in abeyance by some of the 
Ministries.  
 
DISCUSSION WITH THE MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS 
9. In the above context the Committee decided to hear the Ministries, the reasons for the 
delays and the problems they are facing in framing the Rules/Regulations under various Acts 
of Parliament.  Accordingly, the Acts were selected based on duration of pendency in such 
cases. On the 29 th May, 2023, t he Committee held discussion s with the following 
Ministries/Departments regarding delay in framing the rules/regulations under the Acts 
administered by them:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Ministry/Department Name of the Act Assurances given                                       
by the Ministry/Department 
1. Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of 
Food and Public 
Distribution) 
The National Food Security 
Act, 2013 
In the last six months, 7 out of 
33 states have notified these 
rules. The Ministry is constantly 
pursuing the matter with the 
State Governments. Three states 
namely Delhi, Rajasthan and 
Uttarakhand are yet to 
implement these rules. The 
Ministry would imple ment the 
rules in these three states by the 
end of June. 
2. Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs 
The Street Vendors (Protection 
of Livelihood and Regulation 
of Street Vending) Act, 2014 
The Ministry of Home Affairs 
would take follow -up actions 
with the Secretariat so that the 
notification could be laid in 
the ensuing Monsoon Session. 
 
3. Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Department of Legal 
(i) The India International 
Arbitration Centre Act, 2019 
The Arbitration Council of 
India is not in existence, as 

 
 
 
4 
 
Affairs) (ii) The Arbitration and 
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 
2019 
the Bill of Arbitration Council 
of India is pending in 
Parliament. Due to this 
situation, the regulation has 
not been framed, so the 
Ministry has sought extension 
of time further. 
 
4. Ministry of Education 
(Department of School 
Education and Literacy) 
The Right of Children to Free 
and Compulsory Education 
(Amendment) Act, 2019 
The Ministry has published the 
pre-draft of the National 
Curriculum Framework on their 
website and they would finalize 
the National Curriculum 
Framework and publish it in the 
public domain, shortly. 
 
5. Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas  
The Petroleum and Natural 
Gas Regulatory Board Act, 
2006 
The Secretary has informed that 
8 Rules and 38 Regulations 
were fr amed, as on date and 
would inform the Committee 
regarding the latest status of 
framing of subordinate 
legislation under the Act. 
 
10. The National Food Security (NFSA) Act, 2013 was assented to by the President of 
India on the 10 th September, 2013 and the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution administers  the Act. Central Government is required to frame the Rules under 
Section 39 of the Act and State Governments are required to frame the  Rules under Section 
40 of the Act. During the meeting, the Secretary, Department of Food and Public Distribution 
informed the Committee that all the Rules under Section 39 have been framed and laid on the 
Table of both the Houses of Parliament and nothing was pending on the part of the Central 
Government. He, however, informed that under Section 40, Delhi, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand 
were yet to frame the same and their actions were pending as on date. In Delhi four Rules are 
yet to be made operational which may be made operational. The notification of such  Rules in 
Rajasthan is at the final stage and draft rules have been finalized in Uttarakhand. He also 
stated that the Ministry is making regular consultations with the State Governments to 
expedite the action. The Committee noticed that the total delay in framing the subordinate 
legislations under the Act has been more than eight years. 
11. The Committee observes that even after the Act came into force about ten years 
ago, the Rule making process has been stuck up especially on the part of State 

 
 
 
5 
 
Governments. Delhi, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand are yet to complete the process. The 
Committee recommends to the Nodal Ministry to pursue the matter with the State 
Governments for a speedy completion of the actions. The Committee desires to know the 
hindrances faced while implementing the A ct when rules or guidelines were not  framed 
or delayed. The Committee also raises concern about the manner in which the  
implementation of the Act in States  is being done  where rules were not framed and also 
desires to be informed how the Act was administered in the absence of rules during the 
period when the Central Government was unable to frame the rules even though the 
notification of the Act was done in the year 2013.  
12. The Street Vendors (Protect ion of Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending) Act, 
2014 was assented to by the President on the 4th March, 2014 and it came into force w.e.f. 1st 
May, 2014. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs  is administering the Act. Section 36 
of the Act emp owers the appropriate Government to frame Rules and Section 38 of the Act 
empowers the appropriate Government to frame the Scheme. The Joint Secretary, Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs informed that all the Rules and Schemes under the Act were made 
and laid on the Table of the House, however, the laying status of schemes framed under the 
Act by the Lakshadweep was not confirmed even though the rules were framed in the year 
2021. He stated that the framed schemes were sent through the Ministry of Home Affairs. The 
Committee then asked the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and Ministry of Home 
Affairs to re-submit the notifications for laying in the forthcoming session of Parliament.  The 
total delay in framing the subordinate legislation under the Act has, however, been about nine 
years, though it is provided in the Act itself that rules/schemes should be framed within 1 
year/six months respectively from the commencement of the Act. In response thereof , the 
Scheme framed under the Act by Lakshadweep has been laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha 
on the 26th July, 2023 during the Monsoon Session, 2023. 
13. The Committee feels that the Ministry has not follow ed the recommendations  
made by the Committee regarding adherence to time schedule in f raming the 
subordinate legislation. The Ministry even failed to update the Committee regarding the 
status of framing the  subordinate legislation s contemplated under the Act. The 
Committee has, however, noted that the pending scheme pertaining to Lakshadwee p 
was laid in the House during the Monsoon Session of 2023. However, it recommends to 
the Ministry that the Ministry should always keep the Committee abreast with the 
recent developments in the process of framing of subordinate legislation by it in future.  

 
 
 
6 
 
More so, it should always adhere to the time schedule for framing the subordinate 
legislation provided in the Act. 
14.  The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2019 was assented to  by the 
President on the 9th August, 2019 further to amend the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. 
Subsequent to the said amendment, Section 43(B)(1) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 provides for establishment of a Council to be known as the Arbitration Council of India 
(ACI). Further, various Rules a nd Regulations to be framed under the Act post amendment 
are contemplated under Sections 43 C (3), 43 C (4), 43 M (2), 43 M (4), 43 M (5) and 43 L of 
the Act respectively.  T he Ministry had earlier, while seeking extension(s) of time from the 
Committee for  framing the Subordinate Legislation contemplated under the Act, informed 
that four Rules under Section 43C(3), 43C(4), 43M(2), 43M(4) and 43M (5) respectively had 
been framed, notified and laid on the table of the House on 28.07.2022 . As for the 
Regulations to be framed under the Act, the Ministry had informed that the same would be 
framed by ACI after it is constituted. It was noted by the Committee that even after passing of 
more than 3 years since the Act came into force and granting of extensions five times to the 
Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs), framing of some of the 
Subordinate Legislations under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 was still pending.    
15. As regards the reasons for delay, the representatives of Depa rtment informed the 
Committee that a number of stakeholders have demanded autonomy for the ACI and to enable 
establishment of the ACI as an autonomous body, a proposal for comprehensive amendment 
of the Arbitration and Conciliation act, 1996 was under cons ideration in the Department, due 
to which the ACI could not be setup till date . They also mentioned that there was a rethinking 
in the Government that there is a need to work upon revamping the Arbitration Act and bring 
it as a new stand -alone Act because the conciliation aspect of this Act is merged in the 
Mediation Act. Subject to the approval of the Government, the Bill for amending the Act, 
providing for a revamped ACI in its composition and structure, may be introduced in the 
upcoming Session of the Parliament. 
16. The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that all the efforts and exercise 
for making sub ordinate legislations under the A ct after its passage  in the year 2019 
might have gone in vain in the circumstances explained by the Department . The ACI, 
which is expected to frame the Regulations under the Act,  would now only be 
established once the new Act is passed and further the R ules/Regulations required 
under the Act would be delayed further. Committee is of the view that four years have , 

 
 
 
7 
 
since, elapsed without any progress when so much importance is being given to Ease of 
Doing Business in Indi a which may adversely affect the confidence in the international 
business community who would like to invest in the country. The benefits would have 
been supposedly passed down to the common man or concerned persons if the ACI was 
established. The Committee observes with concern that the working system which is 
prevalent across the Departments/Ministry is not in accordance with the objective of the 
Governance. The Committee recommends that ACI should be established on priority. 
The Ministry needs to carry out necessary amendments in the Act to set it up keeping in 
view the upcoming general election next year. The Committee recommends that the 
pending actions may be completed by the month of December. 
17. The India International Arbitration Centre (IIAC) Act, 2019 {formerly named as the 
New Delhi International Arbitration Centre (NDIAC) Act, 2019}, which was assented to by 
the President on the 26 th July, 2019, is being administered by the Ministry of Law  and Justice 
(Department of Legal Affairs) . Rules under Section 30 and R egulations under Section 31  are 
to be framed under  the Act.  The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs informed the 
Committee that the  Rules contemplated under the Act have already been framed by the 
Government and the IIAC has also been set up on the 13 th June last year. Six regulations were 
to be framed by the IIAC, out of which two have already been framed and notified by the 
Government. Further, three more regulations regarding the conduct of arbitration proceedings 
would be notified soon. It was also informed that IIAC proposes to conduct arbitration by the 
later part of this year and the process of framing regulations is going to be  completed very 
shortly. 
18. The Committee observes that arbitration is an important subject. The Committee 
notes that four years have since elapsed and from the present scenario, it may take more 
time in bringing the desired Regulations. The Committee des ires that the pending 
regulations under the IIAC Act may be laid in the House as early as possible. 
19. The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (Amendment) Act, 2019 
was assented to by the President on the 10th January, 2019. The Act amended  the ‘No -
Detention’ provisions in Sections 16 and 38 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
Education (RTE) Act, 2009. This Amendment empowers the appropriate Government to take 
a decision as to whether to hold back a child in the 5 th class or in the 8 th class or in both 
classes after providing additional instruction and granting opportunity for re -examination or 
not to hold back a child till the completion of elementary education. Framing of rules under 

 
 
 
8 
 
the RTE (Amendment) Act, 2019 are required to be done  under Section 38 of the RTE Act, 
2009. The Ministry has already sought three extensions so far in the process of framing the 
rules. 
 20. The Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy has informed that there 
was no provision for detention of children till eighth class in the Right of Children to Free and 
Compulsory Education Act, 2009, however in 2019, the relevant Sections were amended to 
provide for re-examinations in fifth and eighth classes and for promotion of children to sixth 
or ninth class based on the outcome of the re -examinations. The Secretary further informed 
that the National Education Policy (NEP), 2020 was approved by the Government of India on 
29.07.2020 which inter alia provides for school examinations in classes three , five and eight; 
and promotion of the children to next class based on the outcome of the examinations whereas 
the Act of 2019 provides for such provisions for classes five and eight only. He further 
informed that as per para 4.4 of the NEP, 2020, a decisi on has been taken to formulate 
National Curricular Framework for School Education (NCFSE) for which a Steering 
Committee under the chairmanship of Prof. K. Kasturirangan has been constituted. The pre -
draft of NCFSE has been published on the website of the Department and it is expected that 
NCFSE would be soon finalized and published after which the Rule making process will be 
finalized. He also mentioned that NCFSE is likely to be implemented from the academic 
session 2024-25. 
21. The Committee recommends that in view of the sensitiveness of time, the framing 
of rules under the RTE (Amendment) Act, 2019 providing for examinations /re-
examination for classes five and eight may be done and be amended in future to cover 
class three in case further amendment s are brought in the Act to bring it in consonance 
with NEP, 2020.  The process may be completed as soon as possible without waiting for 
the NCFSE Committee’s outcomes. 
22. The Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) Act, 2006 was assented 
to by the President on the 31st March, 2006. The provisions of the PNGRB Act were brought 
into force w.e.f. 1st October, 2007, except Section 16 which came into force w.e.f. the 15th 
July, 2010. Section 60(1) of the Act empowers the Central Government to make  Rules for 
carrying out the provisions of the Act. Section 61(1) empowers the PNGRB to make 
Regulations. As regards the delay, the Ministry has been granted about ten extensions for 
making the Rules. The Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas inf ormed the 
Committee that the constitution of the Board under the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory 

 
 
 
9 
 
Board Act, 2006 was done in the year 2006. Eight Rules and thirty -eight Regulations were to 
be made under the Act.  He also pointed out that framing of tw o particular rules had taken a 
very long time i.e. eleven years and fourteen years respectively, due to non conclusion of 
decision in the matter. The recruitment rules under the Board are yet to be finalized and 
consultations with similar boards and other stakeholders are still taking place. The Committee 
also enquired why the Ministry has not responded to a series of communications sent by the 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat asking to furnish the latest status on framing of Rules under the Act, 
to which the Ministry has stated that the omission in re-submission of data to the Rajya Sabha 
Secretariat may be condoned.  
23. The Committee is dismayed over the undue delay in framing the rules and 
regulations under the Act. Though the Ministry has been granted ten extensions so far, 
yet the process of framing of subordinate legislations is non conclusive. The Committee 
expresses concern over the pace at which the Ministry is working on framing the 
rules/regulations under the Act. The Committee recommends that the steps sh ould be 
taken to complete the process of framing the subordinate legislations in a mission mode.  
24. On the 30 th June, 2023, t he Committee has held discussion s with the following 
Ministries/Departments regarding delay in framing rules/regulations under th e Acts 
administered by them:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Ministry/ 
Department 
Acts Assurances given                                       
by the Ministry/Department 
1. Ministry of                                                                                                  
Education 
(Department of 
Higher Education) 
(i)  The Sikkim University Act, 2006  
 
 
No specific information was 
provided by the Ministry 
(ii) The Tripura University Act, 2006 
 
(iii)The Indira Gandhi National Tribal 
University Act, 2007 
 
(iv)The Central University Act, 2009 
 
(v) The Indian Institutes of Management 
Act, 2017 
 
No specific information was 
provided by the Ministry 
(vi) The Central Universities 
(Amendment) Act,   2019 
 
No specific information was 
provided by the Ministry 
(vii) The Central Sanskrit   Universities 
Act, 2020 
 
The Ministry has requested for 
extension of time for two months 
for laying of pending 
subordinate legislation. 
 

 
 
 
10 
 
2. Ministry   of 
Minority 
Affairs 
The   Wakf (Amendment) Act, 2013 Some States are still to frame the 
Rules and so the Ministry 
requested the Committee to 
grant extension of time till 31 st 
October, 2023 so that the 
Ministry could follow it up with 
the concerned Stated and get all 
the rules made. 
3. Ministry of 
AYUSH 
(i) The National Commission for 
Homeopathy Act, 2020 
No specific information was 
provided by the Ministry              
(ii) The National Commission for Indian 
System of   Medicine Act, 2020. 
(iii) The Institute of Teaching and 
Research in   Ayurveda Act, 2020. 
In order to frame the pending 
regulations, the Ministry 
requested time till December, 
2023 to complete the process of 
framing of the pending 
regulations. 
 
4. Ministry of Health 
and 
Family   Welfare 
(Department of 
Health & Family 
Welfare) 
The National Medical  Commission 
Act,   2019 
 
The Additional Secretary, 
Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare stated that framing of 
regulations under four subjects 
are pending and this would take 
another six months or so. 
 
25. The Sikkim University Act, 2006 was assented to by the President on the 10 th January, 
2007 and came into force w.e.f. 02.07.2007. Section 30 of the Act provides for making the 
first Ordinance by the Vice-Chancellor with the previous approval of the Central Government. 
Section 31 of the Act provides for framing of the Regulations by various authorities of the 
University for the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees, if any, appointed 
by them. The Ministry has forwarded the details regarding framing of forty -eight 
Rules/Regulations/Ordinances under the Act. However, it is not clear as to whether the said 
Rules/Regulations/Ordinances have been laid on the Table of the House. Further, the Ministry 
has stated that the first Statute of Sikkim University were framed and laid on the Table of both 
the Houses of Parliament. As regards Ordinances, it was informed that the first Ordinances of 
Sikkim University has been notified and would be laid in the forthcoming session. In this 

 
 
 
11 
 
regard, it may be stated that the Ministry was requested several times to provide the status 
report regarding framing of subordinate legislations contemplated under the Act and laying of 
the same on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament. However, the Ministry has not given 
a proper response. The Ministry only forwa rds the number of Rules/Regulations/ 
Ordinances/Statutes proposed to be made under the Act without confirming as to whether 
framing of all the subordinate legislations under the Act have been completed or otherwise. 
The total delay in framing the subordinate legislations is about sixteen years under this Act.  
26. The Tripura University Act, 2006 was assented to by the President on the 10 th January, 
2007 and came into force w.e.f. 02.07.2007. Section 31 of the Act provides for making the 
first Ordinance of the University by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government but the same is yet to be made. As regards framing  Regulations under 
Section 32 of the Act, the Ministry stated that the provisions of Section 32 is an enabling 
provision under which the authorities of the University may make regulations for the conduct 
of their business and that of the Committees, if any, appointed by them. Hence, making of 
regulations is not mandatory and the provisions of Section 32 may be invoked  by the 
respective authorities. It may, therefore, not be possible to prescribe a time frame for making 
the Regulations. The total delay in framing of subordinate legislations is about 16 years in this 
case.  
27. The Indira Gandhi National Tribal Universit y Act, 2007 was assented to by the 
President on the 20th December, 2007 and came into force w.e.f. 08.07.2008.  Section 32 of 
the Act provides for making the first Ordinance by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous 
approval of the Central Government.  Secti on 33 of the Act provides for framing of the 
Regulations by various authorities of the University for the Conduct of their own business and 
that of the Committees, if any, appointed by them. The Ministry has stated that the framing of 
Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations has been completed. However, the Ministry has not 
clarified whether these Statutes/Ordinances have been laid on the Table of both the Houses of 
Parliament. The total delay in framing the subordinate legislations is about 15 years. 
28. The Central Universities Act, 2009 was assented to by the President on the 20th March, 
2009 and was deemed to come into force on 15.01.2009. Section 26 of the Act enumerates the 
matters to be provided for by the Statutes. Section 28 of the Act enumerates the ma tters to be 
provided for by the Ordinances. Section 29 provides for framing of the Regulations by various 
authorities of the Universities for the conduct of their own business and that of the 
Committees, if any, appointed by them.  The Ministry has conveyed  that the framing of 

 
 
 
12 
 
subordinate legislations by thirteen Central Universities has been completed. Three Central 
Universities of Jharkhand, Kerala and Orissa are in the process of framing them. The data 
regarding completion of action is, however, not clear . The total delay in framing the 
subordinate legislations is about 14 years. 
29. The Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2019 was assented to by the President on 
the 23rd July, 2019 and came into force on 05.08.2020.  The Ministry merely forwarded nil 
Rules/Regulations/Ordinances/Statutes made under the Act without confirming as to whether 
framing of all the subordinate legislations under the Act have been completed or otherwise. 
The Ministry has, time and again, been requested to formally seek extension o f time from the 
Committee as per the recommendations contained in its 47 th Report but the Ministry has not 
given any proper response thereto. The total delay in framing subordinate legislations is about 
four years. 
30. The Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017 was assented to by the President on 
the 31st December, 2017 and came into force on 31.01.2018. Regulations in respect of 17 
IIMs have been notified and laid on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament. Framin g of 
subordinate legislations with regard to two IIMs namely the IIM Ahmedabad and the IIM 
Bangalore is under process. The total delay in framing the subordinate legislation is about five 
years.  
31. The Central Sanskrit Universities Act, 2020 was assented  to by the President on the 
25th March, 2020 and came into force on 30.04.2020.  The Ministry has informed that 
Ordinances in respect of Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri National Sanskrit University (SLBSNSU), 
New Delhi and National Sanskrit University (NSU), Tirup ati have been framed by the 
Universities concerned and forwarded to the Ministry which have been sent to UGC for their 
views/comments. Framing of the ordinances in respect of Central Sanskrit University (CSU), 
Delhi is underway by the University and will b e submitted very soon.   The Ministry has 
earlier sought five extensions for completing the action.  The total delay in framing the 
subordinate legislations is about three years. 
32. The Committee considered the delay in framing the subordinate legislations  under the 
Acts administered by the Department of Higher Education. The Joint Secretary, Department of 
Higher Education, Ministry of Education submitted to the Committee that there has been delay 
in laying of Regulations, Statutes/Ordinances etc. under the  above Acts and assured the 
Committee that all the Rules and Regulation would be laid on the table of both the Houses of 
Parliament.  

 
 
 
13 
 
33. The Committee regrets to note that the Department of Higher Education has not 
yet completed the framing of subordinate  legislations under the Sikkim University Act, 
2006, the Tripura University Act, 2006, t he Indira Gandhi National Tribal University 
Act, 2007, the Central University Act, 2009, the Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 
2019, the Central Sanskrit Universiti es Act, 2020 and the Indian Institutes of 
Management Act, 2017  despite a lapse of so many years since the passage of these Acts. 
The Committee, accordingly, urges the Department to expedite the process and complete 
the framing of subordinate legislations u nder these Acts within the time frame as 
requested by the Ministry. The Committee is dismayed over the fact that the Ministry is 
not very keen in making Statutes and Ordinances in a time bound manner or they are 
not seeking extension of time with valid rea sons. The Committee points out that some of 
the Acts were enacted in 2006, yet all the Statutes and Ordinances have not been framed, 
so far. This shows that the Ministry is not giving due weightage to their framing. Those 
who were to be benefited from thes e Statutes and Ordinances are deprived of their 
benefits. The Committee also desires to know the monitoring mechanism in the Ministry 
on such matters. The Committee observes that the delay in cases of two IIMs cannot be 
justified as 17 IIMs have framed the  Statutes/Ordinances and all are expected to have 
almost similar Statutes/Ordinances. The reasons for the delay need to be looked into 
seriously. 
34. The Wakf (Amendment) Act, 2013 was assented  to by the President on the 20th 
September, 2013. The Central and State Governments are empowered to frame Rules under 
the Act for uniformity in proper administration of Wakf across all the States/UTs. The total 
delay in framing the subordinate legislation s under the amended Act is about 9 years. The 
Ministry been granted four extensions earlier. The Secretary, Ministry of Minority Affairs 
informed the Committee that all the Rules, that are required to be framed under Section 57 by 
the Central Government, h ave been framed and laid on the Table of both the Houses of 
Parliament and nothing is pending under this Section. Rules under Section 109 and 
Regulations under Section 110 are required to be framed by the State Governments. He has 
also stated that the Ministry is undertaking regular follow ups with the State Governments and 
in order to facilitate the State Governments in this respect, model Rules and Regulations were 
circulated to all the State Governments. The Ministry is continuously pursuing the matter w ith 
the State Governments and as of now, eighteen States have completed the framing of Rules 
and Regulations, twelve more States are likely to frame the Rules in a few months and six 
States do not require the framing of Rules under the Act. 

 
 
 
14 
 
35. The Committ ee notes that the implementation of a legislation requires Rules, 
However, in the instant case the State Governments are delaying the process of framing 
of subordinate legislations. This delay might have caused the delay in reaching the 
benefits to the eli gible persons. The Committee would like to know the implication of 
absence of Rules and Regulations while implementing the Act in the States where the 
Rules are yet to be framed. The Committee recommends that the State Governments 
may be pursued to complet e the process as per the extension of time granted to the 
Ministry/Department by the Committee.  
36. The National Commission for Homoeopathy Act, 2020 was assented to by the 
President on the 20th September, 2020. Rules, Regulations, etc. are required to be framed under 
Sections 54, 55 and other relevant provisions of the Act. The total delay in framing the 
subordinate legislations is about three years.  The Ministry has neither confirmed the 
completion of subordinate legislations contemplated under the Act n or it has sought extension 
to compete the process of framing the Rules/Regulations as on date. 
37. The National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act, 2020 has been assented 
to by the President on the 20 th September, 2020. Rules, Regulations, etc. a re required to be 
framed under Sections 54, 55 and other relevant provisions of the Act. Under Section 54, 
three Notifications were laid on the table of both the Houses of Parliament.  It has been 
informed by the Ministry that about 90% of the work related to Section 55(2) has been 
completed. The total delay in framing the subordinate legislations is about three years. As per 
the latest communication received from the Ministry, four notifications have been issued and 
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha while thre e notifications have been laid on the table of Rajya 
Sabha. Seven Notifications are under legal vetting whereas one Notification is ready for legal 
vetting. Three notifications have been kept pending for seeking public opinion and one 
notification is under draft stage. Till date three extensions have been granted to the Ministry. 
As on date, the Ministry has notified five Rules and six Regulations under the Act. 
38. The Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda Act, 2020 was assented to by the 
President on the 21 st September, 2020. The Government is required to make Rules, 
Regulations, etc. under Sections 27, 28 etc. of the Act.  As per the details provided by the 
Ministry, Rules under Section 27 have been framed and the Notifications thereof were laid o n 
the table of both the Houses of Parliament. Four Regulations under Section 28 are under 
process and are submitted for vetting. The total delay in framing the subordinate legislations 

 
 
 
15 
 
is about three years. The Ministry has been granted two extensions by t he Committee for 
completing the actions. 
39. During the discussion the representatives of the Ministry of AYUSH informed the 
Committee that under the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act, 2020, the 
National Commission for Indian System of Medicine has been constituted and the recruitment 
to various positions in the Commission has been initiated. They have also stated that the 
framing of Rules under Section 54 has been completed and Regulations under Section 55 are 
under various stages of co mpletion and some of them have been notified.  In the case of 
National Commission for Homeopathy Act, 2020, Rules under Section 54 have been framed 
and completed and drafting of Regulations under Section 55 is almost complete and some of 
them have been notified and laid on the table of both the Houses of the Parliament. In the case 
of the Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda Act, 2020 , the Ministry informed that 
all the Rules have been completed and laid on the table of both the Houses of the Parli ament. 
In the case of Regulations, total five Regulations are required to be made and out of it one has 
been notified and the other four are about to be completed soon.  The Secretary, Ministry of 
AYUSH explained that, the Indian Medicine Central Council A ct, 1970 and Indian Medicine 
of Homoeopathy Act, 1972 were replaced with new Acts like the National Commission for 
Homoeopathy Act, 2020 and the National Commission of Indian System of Medicine Act, 
2020 for rectifying the flaws in the earlier Acts and to follow the core objective of Ease of 
Doing Business and bringing in transparency. 
40. The Committee is constrained to observe that even after so many years the 
relevant Rules/Regulations under the above mentioned Acts have not been framed till 
date. The Co mmittee feels that the delay in framing the Rules/Regulations defeats the 
very purpose of enactment of the Acts as the Acts cannot be operated in the absence of 
the Rules/Regulations. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry 
should take all  the steps necessary to complete the framing of subordinate legislations 
under the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act, 2020, the National 
Commission for Homoeopathy Act, 2020 and  the Institute of Teaching and Research in 
Ayurveda Act, 2020. 
41. The National Medical Commission Act, 2019 was assented to by the President on the 
8th August, 2019. The National Medical Commission was constituted vide notification dated 
the 24 th September, 2020. Section 56 of the Act enables the Central Government to make 
Rules. Section 57 of the Act enables the Commission to make Regulations. The Ministry has 

 
 
 
16 
 
requested the extension for the first time even though the Secretariat has asked for the status 
of pendency regularly. The Additional Secretary, Mi nistry of Health and Family Welfare 
informed the Committee that in Section 57, there are forty six subjects to be regulated.  The 
representatives of the Ministry informed that as on date, regulations have been made for about 
thirty eight subjects and the re maining eight subjects are pending for consultations. One such 
Regulation on teachers' eligibility qualification in Medical Institution Regulatory Board, 2022 
will be presented in the upcoming Session of Parliament whereas the remaining may require 
another six months or so to complete them. The total delay in framing the subordinate 
legislations is about four years 
 
42. The Committee notes that the delay in framing of rules/regulations has become a 
recurring phenomenon. The Committee also notes with concern  that the matter of 
framing of rules/regulations is dealt with by the Ministries/Departments in a very casual 
manner and no serious effort is made to complete the exercise within the time limit. The 
Committee expressed its displeasure over the way the Mini stry has dealt the matter 
without making any formal request seeking extension of time from the Committee and 
also not responding to the communications sent by the Secretariat. The Committee 
recommends that these timelines sought by the Ministries should be  adhered to be them 
at any cost.  
 
43. During the meeting of the Committee held on 5 th October, 2023, the Committee 
observed that some Ministries have been seeking extension of time from the Committee 
a number of times, yet the framing of subordinate legis lation has not been completed. 
There is no limit to the number of extensions that can be sought by the Ministry. The 
Ministries have not adhered to the time limit granted to them by the Committee. The 
Committee’s role of monitoring whether subordinate legi slation have not been framed 
or the framing thereof has been inordinately delayed has been downplayed. In this 
regard, the Committee  suggested to have a discussion with the Hon’ble Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha along with the Secretaries of the concerned Ministri es so as to seek a 
solution through dialogue. Further as stated by the Ministries, extensions of time were 
sought from the Committee after taking due approval from the Hon’ble Ministers. 
Hence, in this reagrd, the Chairman of the Committee has written to t he concrened 
Hon’ble Ministers about the delay in framing of subordinate legislation under various 
acts pending in the Ministries.  
 

 
 
 
17 
 
44. The Committee observes that of late the requests for extension of time have 
almost become a routine and the Ministries have not been adhering to the time -limit of 
six months for framing subordinate legislation as earlier recommended by the 
Committee. The Committee has found that the Ministries have taken considerable time 
in framing of the rules/regulations and therefore t he Acts remain unimplemented or 
partially implemented. The Committee has, therefore, made very important 
recommendations/observations regarding the delay in framing of rules/regulations by 
the Ministries. In 1971 the Committee in its 9 th Report prescribed six months time limit 
for framing the subordinate legislation contemplated under the Act. However, in the 
same year the Committee in its 10th Report suggested that if Rules are not framed within 
the time limit of 6 months, the Secretary or Head of Departme nt should be informed 
and in turn Secretary with a comprehensive note inform the Minister concerned and 
obtain his orders. The Committee proposes that the aforesaid observation of the 
Committee may be incorporated not only in new legislation and also in th e existing Acts 
as and when Bills to amend them are brought before the Parliament so as to avoid delay 
in framing of all necessary subordinate legislation contemplated under Acts of 
Parliament administered by various Ministries/Departments. 
 
 
**************** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
18 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT 
A GLANCE 
1. The Committee observes that even after the Act came into force about ten years 
ago, the Rule making process has been stuck up especially on the part of State 
Governments. Delhi, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand are yet to complete the process. The 
Committee recommen ds to the Nodal Ministry to pursue the matter with the State 
Governments for a speedy completion of the actions. The Committee desires to know the 
hindrances faced while implementing the Act when rules or guidelines were not framed 
or delayed. The Committe e also raises concern about the manner in which the 
implementation of the Act in States is being done where rules were not framed and also 
desires to be informed how the Act was administered in the absence of rules during the 
period when the Central Govern ment was unable to frame the rules even though the 
notification of the Act was done in the year 2013.  
(Para 11) 
2. The Committee feels that the Ministry has not followed the recommendations 
made by the Committee regarding adherence to time schedule in fra ming the 
subordinate legislation. The Ministry even failed to update the Committee regarding the 
status of framing the subordinate legislations contemplated under the Act. The 
Committee has, however, noted that the pending scheme pertaining to Lakshadweep 
was laid in the House during the Monsoon Session of 2023. However, it recommends to 
the Ministry that the Ministry should always keep the Committee abreast with the 
recent developments in the process of framing of subordinate legislation by it in future. 
More so, it should always adhere to the time schedule for framing the subordinate 
legislation provided in the Act. 
(Para 13) 
3. The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that all the efforts and exercise 
for making subordinate legislations under the  Act after its passage in the year 2019 
might have gone in vain in the circumstances explained by the Department. The ACI, 
which is expected to frame the Regulations under the Act, would now only be 
established once the new Act is passed and further the Ru les/Regulations required 
under the Act would be delayed further. Committee is of the view that four years have, 
since, elapsed without any progress when so much importance is being given to Ease of 
Doing Business in India which may adversely affect the con fidence in the international 

 
 
 
19 
 
business community who would like to invest in the country. The benefits would have 
been supposedly passed down to the common man or concerned persons if the ACI was 
established. The Committee observes with concern that the wor king system which is 
prevalent across the Departments/Ministry is not in accordance with the objective of the 
Governance. The Committee recommends that ACI should be established on priority. 
The Ministry needs to carry out necessary amendments in the Act t o set it up keeping in 
view the upcoming general election next year. The Committee recommends that the 
pending actions may be completed by the month of December. 
(Para 16) 
4. The Committee observes that arbitration is an important subject. The Committee 
notes that four years have since elapsed and from the present scenario, it may take more 
time in bringing the desired Regulations. The Committee desires that the pending 
regulations under the IIAC Act may be laid in the House as early as possible. 
(Para 18) 
5. The Committee recommends that in view of the sensitiveness of time, the framing 
of rules under the RTE (Amendment) Act, 2019 providing for examinations/re -
examination for classes five and eight may be done and be amended in future to cover 
class three in case further amendments are brought in the Act to bring it in consonance 
with NEP, 2020. The process may be completed as soon as possible without waiting for 
the NCFSE Committee’s outcomes. 
(Para 21) 
6. The Committee is dismayed over the undue delay in  framing the rules and 
regulations under the Act. Though the Ministry has been granted ten extensions so far, 
yet the process of framing of subordinate legislations is non conclusive. The Committee 
expresses concern over the pace at which the Ministry is w orking on framing the 
rules/regulations under the Act. The Committee recommends that the steps should be 
taken to complete the process of framing the subordinate legislations in a mission mode.  
(Para 23) 
7. The Committee regrets to note that the Department of Higher Education has not 
yet completed the framing of subordinate legislations under  the Sikkim University Act, 
2006, the Tripura University Act, 2006, t he Indira Gandhi National Tribal University 
Act, 2007, the Central University Act, 2009, the Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 

 
 
 
20 
 
2019, the Central Sanskrit Universities Act, 2020 and the Indian Institutes of 
Management Act, 2017  despite a lapse of so many years since the passage of these Acts. 
The Committee, accordingly, urges the Department  to expedite the process and complete 
the framing of subordinate legislations under these Acts within the time frame as 
requested by the Ministry. The Committee is dismayed over the fact that the Ministry is 
not very keen in making Statutes and Ordinances in a time bound manner or they are 
not seeking extension of time with valid reasons. The Committee points out that some of 
the Acts were enacted in 2006, yet all the Statutes and Ordinances have not been framed, 
so far. This shows that the Ministry is not giving due weightage to their framing. Those 
who were to be benefited from these Statutes and Ordinances are deprived of their 
benefits. The Committee also desires to know the monitoring mechanism in the Ministry 
on such matters. The Committee observes tha t the delay in cases of two IIMs cannot be 
justified as 17 IIMs have framed the Statutes/Ordinances and all are expected to have 
almost similar Statutes/Ordinances. The reasons for the delay need to be looked into 
seriously. 
(Para 33) 
8. The Committee note s that the implementation of a legislation requires Rules, 
However, in the instant case the State Governments are delaying the process of framing 
of subordinate legislations. This delay might have caused the delay in reaching the 
benefits to the eligible p ersons. The Committee would like to know the implication of 
absence of Rules and Regulations while implementing the Act in the States where the 
Rules are yet to be framed. The Committee recommends that the State Governments 
may be pursued to complete the p rocess as per the extension of time granted to the 
Ministry/Department by the Committee.  
(Para 35) 
9. The Committee is constrained to observe that even after so many years the 
relevant Rules/Regulations under the above mentioned Acts have not been framed till 
date. The Committee feels that the delay in framing the Rules/Regulations defeats the 
very purpose of enactment of the Acts as the Acts cannot be operated in the absence of 
the Rules/Regulations. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministr y 
should take all the steps necessary to complete the framing of subordinate legislations 
under the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act, 2020, the National 

 
 
 
21 
 
Commission for Homoeopathy Act, 2020 and  the Institute of Teaching and Research in  
Ayurveda Act, 2020. 
(Para 40) 
10. The Committee notes that the delay in framing of rules/regulations has become a 
recurring phenomenon. The Committee also notes with concern that the matter of 
framing of rules/regulations is dealt with by the Ministries/D epartments in a very casual 
manner and no serious effort is made to complete the exercise within the time limit. The 
Committee expressed its displeasure over the way the Ministry has dealt the matter 
without making any formal request seeking extension of t ime from the Committee and 
also not responding to the communications sent by the Secretariat. The Committee 
recommends that these timelines sought by the Ministries should be adhered to be them 
at any cost.  
(Para 42) 
 
11. During the meeting of the Committee held on 5 th October, 2023, the Committee 
observed that some Ministries have been seeking extension of time from the Committee 
a number of times, yet the framing of subordinate legislation has not been completed. 
There                   is no limi t to the number of extensions that can be sought by the 
Ministry. The Ministries have not adhered to the time limit granted to them by the 
Committee. The Committee’s role of monitoring whether subordinate legislation have 
not been framed or the framing the reof has been inordinately delayed has been 
downplayed. In this regard, the Committee  suggested to have a discussion with the 
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha along with the Secretaries of the concerned Ministries 
so as to seek a solution through dialogue. F urther as stated by the Ministries, extensions 
of time were sought from the Committee after taking due approval from the Hon’ble 
Ministers. Hence, in this reagrd, the Chairman of the Committee has written to the 
concrened Hon’ble Ministers about the delay in framing of subordinate legislation 
under various acts pending in the Ministries.  
(Para 43) 
 
12. The Committee observes that of late the requests for extension of time have 
almost become a routine and the Ministries have not been adhering to the time -limit of 
six months for framing subordinate legislation as earlier recommended by the 
Committee. The Committee has found that the Ministries have taken considerable time 

 
 
 
22 
 
in framing of the rules/regulations and therefore the Acts remain unimplemented or 
partially implemented. The Committee has, therefore, made very important 
recommendations/observations regarding the delay in framing of rules/regulations by 
the Ministries. In 1971 the Committee in its 9 th Report prescribed six months time limit 
for framing the  subordinate legislation contemplated under the Act. However, in the 
same year the Committee in its 10th Report suggested that if Rules are not framed within 
the time limit of 6 months, the Secretary or Head of Department should be informed 
and in turn Sec retary with a comprehensive note inform the Minister concerned and 
obtain his orders. The Committee proposes that the aforesaid observation of the 
Committee may be incorporated not only in new legislation and also in the existing Acts 
as and when Bills to amend them are brought before the Parliament so as to avoid delay 
in framing of all necessary subordinate legislation contemplated under Acts of 
Parliament administered by various Ministries/Departments. 
(Para 44) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
23 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
 
V 
Fifth Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Monday, the 29th May, 2023 in 
Committee Room A, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
Present 
 
1.    Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee Chairman 
Members 
 
2. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
3. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
4. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
5. Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
6. Shri S Niranjan Reddy 
7. Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Khursija, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajendra Prasad, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Thangzalun Khuptong, Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms Aditi Chaudhary, OSD to Chairman 
5. Shri P. P. Raumon, Under Secretary 
6. Shri Naresh Kumar, Committee Officer 
 
WITNESS 
(A) Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Pubic Distribution) 
 
1. Shri Sanjeev Chopra, Secretary (F&PD) 
 
2. Shri Shantmanu, Additional Secretary & Financial 
Advisor 
3. Shri Subodh Kumar Singh, Additional Secretary 

 
 
 
24 
 
 
4. Smt. Palka Sahni, Joint Secretary 
 
5. Shri Vivek Shukla, Director 
 
Ministry of Women and Child Development 
 
6. Capt. Prabhanshu Srivastav, Deputy Secretary. 
 
Ministry of Education (Department of School Education and Literacy 
 
7. Shri Anil Bhandula, Director 
 
(B) Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
1.     Shri Rahul Kapoor, Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Harjot Singh Sandhu, Deputy Secretary (M/o Home Affairs) 
 
Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) 
 
3. Dr. Niten Chandra, Secretary (LA) 
 
4. Dr. Rajiv Mani, Additional Secretary 
 
5. Shri Avnit Singh Arora, Director 
 
(C) Ministry of Education (Department of School Education & Literacy) 
 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar, Secretary (SE & L) 
2. Shri Vipin Kumar, Joint Secretary   
 
(D) Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
 
1. Shri Pankaj Jain, Secretary 
2. Shri Praveen Mal Khanooja, AS 
3. Ms. Vandana Sharma, Secretary, PNGRB 
 
 
2 . At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the Committee and  explained the 
day’s agenda to them and the various matters of concern to be  discussed in detail during 
the meeting. Thereafter, as per the schedule, 

 
 
 
25 
 
representatives of the Ministry of Consumer A ffairs, Food and Public Distribution  were 
called for the hearing on the reasons for delay in framing of rules under the  National Food 
Security Act, 2013. The Secretary, Ministry of Consumer A ﬀairs, Food and Public 
Distribution informed the Committee that all the rules under the  Section 39 have been 
framed and are laid on the Table of the Houses and nothing  is pending under the Section. 
Under the Section 40, the Secretary informed that  Delhi, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand have 
not completed the actions and are pending  as on date. He also stated that the Ministry is 
making regular consultations with the  State Governments in all means to expedite the 
action. Members raised query  regarding whether any diﬃculty in implementation of the Act 
is faced in such States, where rules are yet to be framed, to which the Secretary replied 
that no such diﬃculty is existing. Members also raised query on the numbers of beneﬁciaries 
as per the status given by the Ministry which is basically based on the  data available in the 
year 2012-13 and the current status thereof. The Ministry  replied that the data required to 
be reviewed and the exercise is to be started in the  calendar year 20 23. Replying to the 
query regarding how the beneﬁciaries are  identiﬁed, the Secretary replied that di fferent 
States have different criteria and it is  the prerogative of the State Governments  to decide it. 
Members raised query  on the grievance redressal  mechanism on the identiﬁcation of 
beneﬁciaries and cost sharing and other related issues. The Secretary assured to provide the 
details later on. The Committee then granted extension of time till 30 th June, 2023 for 
completion of the pending action. 
 
3. Thereafter, Chairman invited the Joint Secretary from the Ministry of Urban 
Aﬀairs to make his presentation regarding the pending legislation under the Street Vendors 
(Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending) Act, 2014. Chairman also 
asked to clear the communication gap that arose on the status of laying of certain 
notiﬁcations in connection with this Act. The Joint Secretary informed that all the rules and 
schemes under the Act were made and  tabled in the  House and the laying status of the 
Lakshadweep is not yet conﬁrmed even though the rules were made in the year 2021. The 
Ministry has stated that laying status of the rules of Lakshadweep could not be conﬁrmed 
from both the Secretariats even though they have sent the papers through the Ministry of 
Home Aﬀairs. Then the Committee asked the representative of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs to give their clariﬁcation. The oﬃcer from that Ministry informed that they have 
sent the papers for laying in the monsoon session during 2022. However, the officers 
from the Committee Secretariat informed that no such papers have been received by them 
for laying as mentioned by the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee then asked 
the Ministry of Urban Affairs and Home Affairs to examine the stage at which the 
communication gap happened and re submit the notiﬁcations for laying in the 
forthcoming session of the Parliament. The Committee also expressed its displeasure on 
the way the Ministries have dealt the matter without making effective measures and 
follow ups. The Ministry has been granted extension up to 31st August, 2023 to complete 
the actions. 
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up the cases of delay in framing of subordinate 
legislation under the India International Arbitration Centr e (IIAC) Act,  2019 {formerly 
named as the New Delhi International Arbitration Centre (NDIAC)  Act, 2019} and the 
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2019 for discussion with the 
representatives from the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs).  
The Committee noted that six regulations were to be framed by the India

 
 
 
26 
 
International Arbitration Centre under the IIAC Act, 2019. The Committee further noted 
that the rules regarding the composition and functions of Committees as provided under 
Section 30(2) of the Act are also required to be framed. As regards the Arbitration and 
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2019 which inter alia provides for setting up of the 
Arbitration Council of India  (ACI), the Committee noted that while four Rules have  
been framed under the Act, ﬁve Regulations are required to be framed by the ACI.  
The Committee was however dismayed to observe that unfortunately the ACI itself has 
not yet been established though, the Act came into force in the year 2019. In the light of 
this, the Chairman asked the Secretary to make the presentation. 
5. The representatives from the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of  Legal 
Affairs) explained to the Committee the aim and intent behind bringing the  Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 which was to strengthen the arbitration ecosystem and conducting 
the arbitration in time -bound and cost e ffective manner  and subsequently bringing the 
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2019  to institutionalize the arbitration 
proceedings wherein the Arbitration Council of India (ACI) was to be established.   With 
regard to the reasons for non-setting up the ACI till date, they informed the Committee that 
a number of stakeholders have  demanded autonomy for the ACI and that to enable 
establishment of the ACI as an  autonomous body, a proposal for comprehensive 
amendment of the Arbitration and  Conciliation Act, 1996 was under consideration in the 
Department. It was further  informed that once the amended new Act is passed, the ACI 
would be established and the regulations to be framed by the ACI would be notiﬁed 
promptly. Members vociferously questioned the rationale behind bringing an altogether 
new Arbitration and Conciliation Act in order to establish the ACI.  The representatives of 
the Ministry responded that there was a rethink in the Government that there is a need  to 
work upon the revamping of the Arbitration Act and bring it as a new stand -alone Act 
because the conciliation aspect of this Act is merged in the Mediation Bill which is 
pending in the Parliament. It was also emphasized that subject to approval of the 
Government, the Bill for amended new Act providing for a revamped ACI in its 
composition and structure may be introduced in the upcoming  Monsoon Session of the 
Parliament. 
6. The Committee noted with concern that all efforts and exercise for making 
subordinate legislation under the Act since its passing in the year 2019 might have  
gone in  vain in the circumstances explained by the Ministry that the ACI would       
now only be established once the new Act is passed and further the 
rules/regulations required under that Act will be delayed further. Members sought 
explanation as to why four years have gone just like that when so much importance  is being 
given to Ease of Doing Business in India which may adversely affect the conﬁdence in 
the international business community who would like to invest in the country. Members 
also emphasized that if there is no change in the composition of  the ACI in the proposed 
amendments of the Act, the ACI needs to be constituted. The representatives of the 
Ministry submitted that the ACI has been given one function of grading of different 
arbitral institutions which will come up in the country for which there is a strong 
opposition among the arbitration practitioners as the grading of arbitration institutes is 
not being the practice worldwide and it should be left to the market forces etc. and that 
if the proposal for not to grade arbitral institutions is approved, the function of the ACI  
would have to be omitted. 
7. As regards the pending subordinate legislation under the India International 

 
 
 
27 
 
Arbitration Centre (IIAC) Act, 2019, the representatives of the Ministry informed that 
while the rules contemplated under the Act have already been framed by the  Government and 
the IIAC has also been set up on 13
th June last year, there were six regulations to be framed 
by the IIAC out of which two have already been framed and notiﬁed  by the Government. 
It was further informed by them that three more regulations have been sent to them by the IIAC 
this month itself regarding the conduct of arbitration proceedings which would be notiﬁed soon. 
The representatives of the Ministry also info rmed that the IIAC proposes to conduct  arbitration 
by the later part of this year and that as far as IIAC Act is concerned, the  process of framing 
regulations is going to be completed very shortly. 
8. Observing that arbitration is an important subject and the Arbitration and 
Reconciliation (Amendment) Act, 2019 in that regard was to provide justice to the citizen 
from sparing them the rigors of the Courts, the Committee noted with much concern that four 
years have passed and as it appears from the present scenario, two to four more years would 
go by to have the new system in place. The  Committee expressed strong disappointment 
that ultimately the beneﬁts supposed to have been passed to common man or concerned persons 
through the ACI could not be given to them and now after passing of four years, a 
comprehensive Bill is being brought and thereafter the Committee has to work further on that 
Act. The Committee observed with concern that the working system which is prevalent across 
the departments is not in accordance with the objective of the Government. With regard to 
request of the Ministry for grant of extension of time for completing the process of framing 
the subordinate legislation under the IIAC Act, 2019, and the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Act, 2019 therein bringing the Bill for a new Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
one of the Members of the Committee suggested that keeping in view the onset of the 
General Elections after December, the Ministry should try to do it by December, 2023 or else 
notify the ACI. Thereafter, the Committee granted the Ministry extension of time upto 
30.09.2023 in the matter with directions that the ACI is to be established on priority and 
the Ministry may carry on doing requisite amendments in the ACI to be set up under the 
new comprehensive Act being brought by the Ministry keeping in view the upcoming 
general election year. 
 
9. Thereafter, the Committee took up the case of delay in framing of subordinate 
legislation under the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (Amendment) Act, 
2019 for discussion with the representatives from the  Ministry of Education (Department of 
School Education and Literacy). The Committee noted that framing of subordinate legislation 
under the Act has been  kept on hold  by the Ministry.  The Committee sought to know the 
progress made since 2019 to frame the subordinate legislation under the Act, the reasons for  
keeping it on hold and the time by which it will be completed.  The representatives  of the 
Ministry informed that there was no provision for detention of children (when  failed in a class) 
till eighth class in the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory  Education Act, 2009 and that 
by way of amendments in 2019, the relevant sections  were amended to provide for 
examinations in ﬁfth and eighth classes and promotion of children to sixth or ninth class based 
on the outcome of the examinations. It was further informed that the rules under the 
Amendment Act,  2019 were to be framed by the appropriate government i . e., the Central 
Government in the case of schools under the Central Government and UTs without  any 
legislation, and State Governments in respect of other schools.   However, in  the meantime, 
National Education Policy, 2020 (NEP, 2020) was approved by the G ovt. of India on 
29.07.2020 which inter alia provided for school examinations in  classes three, ﬁve and eight 

 
 
 
28 
 
and promotion of the children to next class based on  the outcome of the examinations whereas 
the Act of 2019 provided for such provisions for classes ﬁve and eight only.  The 
representatives of the Ministry  further informed that as per para 4.4 of the NEP, 2020, a 
decision has been taken to formulate National Curricular Framework for School  Education 
(NCFSE) for which a Steering Co mmittee under the chairmanship of Prof. K. Kasturirangan 
has been constituted. They further informed that pre-draft of NCFSE has been published on the 
website of the Ministry and it is expected that NCFSE would be  soon ﬁnalized and published.  
The Committee raised queries such as when the  Steering Committee was constituted, what was 
the time-limit given to the Committee, when was the pre -draft published, whether any 
suggestions have been received etc. which were replied to by the representatives of the Ministry. 
In response to a query as to when the NCFSE is likely to be implemented, the representatives of 
the Ministry informed that hopefully it would be implemented in  the session beginning 2024 -
25. One of the members suggested that keeping in  mind the time sensitiveness, the framing of 
rules under the Amendment Act, 2019  providing for examinations for classes ﬁve and eight 
may be proceeded with which would also cover class three in case of further amendment in the 
Act to bring it in consonance with the NEP, 2020. The representatives of the Ministry took note 
of the suggestion.  Thereafter, the Committee granted the Ministry extension of time  upto 
30.09.2023 in the matter. 
 
10. The Chairman then invited the Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural gas and 
other officers to the meeting. The Chairman expressed the concern of the Committee regarding 
the undue delay happened in framing of the  rules under the Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Regulatory Board Act, 2006 despite  the fact that 10 times the Ministry has granted extension 
so far. The Secretary replied that the constitution of the Board under the Act had been set up in 
the year 2006 itself and 8 rules and 38 regulations were to be made.  Out of it, making of two 
rules has taken 11 years and 14 years time due to non conclusion of decision in  the matter. 
The recruitment rules under the Board are  yet to be ﬁnalized and consultation with similar 
boards and bodies are going on.  Members of the Committee also expressed their concern over 
the pace at which  the Ministry is wo rking on the Act.   The Chairman of the Committee also 
asked for the reasons why the Ministry has not responded to a series of communications sent 
by the Rajya Sabha Secretariat asking to furnish the latest  status on the framing of rules under 
the Act wherein the Ministry has not responded to a single time. The Committee also directed 
to furnish the reasons for this lapse in writing  for its information. The Chairman also asked  all 
the Ministries to furnish the replies to the queries raised by the Members, which were   
unanswered, within a week. 
 
11.      The meeting then adjourned at 1.24 pm. 
 
12.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
S.K. Khursija  
Joint Secretary 
29-05-2023 
 
  

 
 
 
29 
 
  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
  
VI 
 Sixth Meeting  
  
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Friday, the 30 th June, 2023 in   Committee Room 
A,  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
Present 
1. Dr.  Laxmikant Bajpayee                        Chairman 
Members 
   2. Ms. Sushmita Dev 
   3. Shri R. Dharmar 
   4. Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
   5. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Rajendra Prasad, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Thangzalun Khuptong, Deputy Secretary 
3. Ms Aditi Chaudhary, OSD to Chairman 
4. Shri P. P. Raumon, Under Secretary 
5. Shri Naresh Kumar, Executive Officer 
WITNESS 
A. Ministry of Minority Affairs, 
  
1.      Shri Indevar Pandey IAS, Secretary 
2.       Shri Shahnawaz Alam, Joint Secretary 
3.      Shri S.P. Singh Teotia, Director 
  
 (B)      Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
 1.     Ms. V. Hekali Zhimomi, Additional Secretary 
 2.     Ms. Kokila Jayaram, Joint Director 
  NMC (National Medical Commission) 
1.      Dr. Pulkesh Kumar, Secretary 
2.      Shri Pankaj Aggarwal, Director 
(C)      Ministry of AYUSH 
1.        Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha, Secretary 

 
 
 
30 
 
2.        Shri Pramod Kumar Pathak, Special Secretary 
3.        Shri Rahul Sharma, Joint Secretary 
4.        Dr. Shashi Ranjan Kumar Vidyarthi, Director 
5.        Smt. Asha Chauhan, Director 
National Commission for Homeopathy (NCH) 
1.      Dr. Anil Khurana, Chairperson 
2.      Dr. Sanjay Gupta, Secretary 
Homeopathy Education Board 
1.      Dr. Tarkeshwar Jain, President 
Ayurveda Board 
1.      Dr. Sreenivasa Prasad Buduru, President 
National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM) 
1.      Shri B.L. Mehra, Secretary 
(D)      Ministry of Education (Department of Higher Education) 
1. Ms. Rina Sonowal Kouli, Joint Secretary (PU) 
2. Ms. Neeta Prasad, Joint Secretary, Language 
3. Shri P.K. Banerjee, Joint Secretary, MGT 
4. Shri Vishwajeet Kumar, Director 
5. Shri Subrat Kumar Pradhan, Director 
6. Shri Subhash Chand Sharu, Director. 
2.          At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the Committee and recalled the 
previous meeting where some of the Ministries were heard on the matter of delay in framing of 
subordinate legislation in various Acts pending under their respective Ministries. The Chairman 
explained the day’s agenda to them and the various matters of concern to be discussed in detail 
during the meeting as in many of the case s the Ministries are not sending any updates and 
requests seeking extensions. 
3.           Thereafter, as per the schedule, representatives of the Ministry of Minority Affairs were 
called for the hearing on the reasons for delay in framing of rules under t he Wakf (Amendment) 
Act, 2013. The Secretary, Ministry of Minority Affairs, informed the Committee that all the rules 
under Section 57 to be framed by the Central Government have been framed and are laid on the 
Table of both the Houses and nothing is pendi ng under the Section. Rules under Section 109 and 
Regulations under Section 110 are required to be framed by the respective State Governments. 
The Ministry also stated that they are making regular follow ups and in order to facilitate the State 
governments in this respect,  model rules and regulations were circulated to all the State 
Governments. The Ministry also stated that they are continuously pursuing the matter with State 
Governments and as of now 18 States have  completed framing of  the rules and regul ations, 12 
more States are yet to complete and in 6 States, there is no requirement of framing of rules under 

 
 
 
31 
 
the Act.  Chairman and Members also raised queries over the functioning and activities of the 
Wakf boards and the control mechanism of the Ministr y in preventing corruption and misuse of 
land and Wakf properties by some vested interests. Secretary, Minority Affairs informed that a 
portal named  Wakf Management System of India (WAMSI) is now started in which all details 
are available.  
4.        The Committee also wanted to know the effect of the rules made on the Wakf Act and how 
it enables the governing of Wakf Boards. For this, Committee asked the Ministry to submit some 
study reports of three cities viz. Meerut, Jabalpur and Dhubri.  The Secretary assured to provide 
the details later on. The Committee then granted extension of time till 31 st October, 2023 for 
completion of framing of Rules and Regulations by the State Governments. 
5.      Thereafter, Chairman invited the representatives from the Mi nistry of Health and Family 
Welfare to make their presentation regarding the pending legislations under  the National Medical 
Commission Act, 2019.   The Additional Secretary informed that The National Medical 
Commission (NMC) was constituted vide notification dated 24th September, 2020. The objectives 
of the Commission were to improve quality and affordability of medical education, to ensure 
availability of medical professions across the country, to ensure that services of medical 
professionals are accessibl e to all citizens, to encourage research among medical professions, to 
ensure an objective, periodic and transparent system of assessment in all   institutions, to ensure 
maintenance of a medical register in the country and to ensure high ethical standards of all aspects 
of medical services. NMC replaced the Medical Council of India.   
6.      The Ministry informed that Section 56 of the Act has prescribed that rules are to be made in 
respect of appointment and nomination of members to the Commission, autono mous boards and 
Secretary, matters related to their emoluments, administrative matters of the Commission 
like annual accounts, annual reports and other reports.   It also includes such other factors in 
determining the criteria for approving or disapproving a scheme for establishment of new medical 
college and enable the submission of list of medical professionals registered for practice in 
India.  The Ministry had vide notifications dated 12.09.2019 and 16.09.2019 notified the rules 
framed under Section 56 o f the Act and both notifications were laid in the Rajya Sabha on 
13.12.2019 and in the Lok Sabha on 10.02.2020 respectively.  Section 57 of the Act prescribes the 
regulations that are to be made.  Section 57 of the Act empowers the National Medical 
Commission to frame regulations. In Section 57, there are 46 subjects to be regulated. The 
Ministry informed that as on date regulations have been made for about 38 subjects out of 46 and 
the remaining pending regulations would require another six months or so to complete them. 
7.      The Committee expressed its displeasure on the way the Ministry has dealt the matter. The 
Ministry neither make any formal request seeking extension of time from the Committee 
nor  respond to the communications sent by the Secretariat. The Committee feels that the Ministry 
has no regard to Parliament and its procedures. The Chairman instructed to take stringent action 
on such negligence from the part of the officials. The Ministry informed the Committee that the 
delay in framing of su bordinate legislation was mainly due to shortage of staff in the 
Commission, as the posting was delayed and the staffs were deployed bit late by the DoPT. The 
Ministry has been granted extension upto 31 st December, 2023 to complete the framing of 
regulations under the NMC Act, 2019.  

 
 
 
32 
 
8.    Thereafter, the Committee took up the cases of delay in framing of subordinate legislation 
under (i)  The National Commission for Homeopathy Act, 2020 (ii) The National Commission 
for Indian System of Medicine Act, 2020; and (iii) The Institute of Teaching and Research in 
Ayurveda  Act, 2020. The Chairman asked the Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH to make the 
presentation and explain the progress made in framing of Rules under the above Acts and the 
reasons for not completing the process so far. In reply, the Secretary explained with the aid of 
power point presentation that in the case of National Commission for Indian System of 
Medicine, the Commission has been constituted and the posting to various positions in the 
Commission has been initiated. He also stated that Rules under Section 54 has been framed and 
completed and Regulations under Section 55 is under various stages of completion and some of 
them have been notified. In the case of National Commission for Homeopathy Act,  2020 Rules 
under Section 54 has been framed and completed and drafting of Regulations under Section 55 
is almost completed and some of them have been notified and laid in the Parliament. In the case 
of Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda   Act, 2020, the Ministry informed that   all 
the Rules have been completed and laid in the Houses. In the case of Regulations, total five 
needs to be made and out of it one has been notified and the other four are about completion 
stage.  
 9.      In response to a query, the Secretary explained that   earlier, Indian Medicine Central 
Council Act, 1970 and Indian Medicine of Homeopathy Act, 1972  which were replaced with new 
Acts like National Commission of Homeopathy, National Commission of Indian System of 
Medicine, for rectifying the flops in the earlier ones and for  Ease of Doing Business. Members of 
the Committee raised queries and for those ones remained un -replied, the Secretary assured to 
give the information in writing. Discussion on the functioning of the Ayush Centres in various 
States was also held.   Extension of time has been granted to the Ministry as requested for 
completing the pending Regulations. 
10.      Finally, the Department of Higher Education has been heard by the Committee. Chairman 
asked the  Ministry the reasons why five communications sent  by the Secretariat were neither 
replied nor attended to properly. Chairman also pointed out that some of the Acts are since 2006 
and 2007 while others are of 2019 and 2020. However, the Ministry has been n ot very keen in 
making rules and regulations in a time bound manner or they are not seeking extension of time 
with valid reasons. This shows that the Ministry is not giving due weightage to Parliamentary 
procedures. The delay in framing the rules and regul ations are depriving many people of the 
benefits due to non existence of rules. The Committee also wanted to know the monitoring 
mechanism in the Ministry on such matters. Concerned officer explained to the Committee about 
the progress made in the Sikkim a nd Tripura University Acts. The Chairman insisted to respond 
within 15 days to the reasons for not responding to the communications sent by the Secretariat. 
Since the Ministry has sent request for extension of time in respect of the Indian Institute of 
Management Act, 2017 and the Central Sanskrit University Act, 2020, the Committee agreed to 
grant extension as per the request made by the Ministry. 
11.  The meeting then adjourned at 12.49 pm. 
12.   A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 Thangzalun Khuptong 
Deputy Secretary 
30-06-2023 

 
 
 
33 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA  
 
VII 
Seventh Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 5
th
October, 2023 in 
Committee Room 3, A - Block, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, 
New Delhi. 
 
Present 
1. Dr.Laxmikant Bajpayee Chairman 
Members 
2. Smt.Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri R.Dharmar 
4. Dr.Amar Patnaik 
5. Shri K.R.Suresh Reddy 
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
7. Shri K.T.S.Tulsi 
8. Shri Vivek K.Tankha 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Khursija, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajendra Tiwari, Director 
3. Shri Rajendra Prasad, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Thangzalun Khuptong, Deputy Secretary 
5. Ms Aditi Chaudhary, OSD to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha 
6. Shri P.P.Raumon,Under Secretary 
7. Shri Naresh Kumar,Committee Officer 
 
Witnesses 
(A)       Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
1. Shri Shyamal Misra, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri B.C.Joshi, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.D.Meena, Director 
(B) (i) Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 

 
 
 
34 
 
1. Shri Anurag Jain, Secretary 
2. Shri Mahmood Ahmed, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Paresh Goel, Director 
 
  (ii)  NITI Aayog 
1. Shri KannanVenkatnarayan,OSD(Health) 
 
   (iii)  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
 
1. Ms. Mandakini Balodhi, Director (Insurance-2) 
2. Dr. Basant Garg, Addl. CEO, NHA 
     (iv)  General Insurance Company (GIC) 
                  1. Shri Inderjit Singh, Secretary General 
  (v)  National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
          1.      Shri Joydeep Shome, DDG and HOD 
           2.      Shri Gautam Ghosh, Principal Consultant, NIC 
      
2. At the outset,  Chairman welcomed the Members of  the Committee and briefed them about 
agenda items for the day.  Thereafter, the first agenda item, the draft 252 nd Report on the 
Wetlands (Conservation and Management) Rules, 2017 was taken for discussion and 
adoption. The  Committee after some discussions, adopted the Report without any changes. 
Then, the draft 253 rd Report on Delay in Fr aming of Rules and Regulations u nder Various 
Acts by the Ministries/Departments was considered by the Committee. The Members 
expressed the ir displeasure over inordinate delay in framing of Rules/Regulations by the 
Ministries/Departments despite several assurances given by them during various 
meetings/personal hearings and suggested for making additions in the report by inserting the 
details of assurances given by the Ministries at the time of oral evidence. The Committee 
reiterated its recommendations contained in its 9 th and 10 th Reports wherein the Ministries 
were advised to complete the rule making process as soon as possible but in no cas e later than 
six months from the date on which the statute comes into force.  The Committee also recalled 
paras 57 & 58 of its 10 th Report wherein it had approved a formula for laying of Statutory 
Rules before both the Houses of Parliament and had recommen ded that the formula should be 
incorporated not only in new legislation but also in the existing Acts as and when bills to 
amend them are  brought before Parliament.  On  the similar lines, the Committee 
recommended that the Ministry of Law and Ju stice may be advised that in future , a time limit 
for framing the Rules and Regulations may be incorporated in the Act itself by the 
administrative Ministries in that particular Act.  The Committee then suggested to include a 
para to this effect in the Report and aut horized its Chairman to incorporate the modifications 
in the Report and adopted the same with these modifications.  The Committee decided to 
present both the Reports during forthcoming Winter Session of  Rajya Sabha.  
 

 
 
 
35 
 
3. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
 
4.  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
 
5. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7.  The meeting then adjourned at 5.02 p.m. 
 
RAJENDRA TIWARI 
DIRECTOR 
 
 
05.10.2023 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 