COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
Parliament of India
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Committee on SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
125th REPORT
( Presented to the House on 22.12.1999)
CONTENTS
1   Composition of the Committee
2.  REPORT
    i        introduction 
    ii      coir board (cca) bye laws, 1969
    iii     rubber board (services) rules, 1961
    iv     spices cess rules, 1988
    V      madras port rrust (general provident fund) regulations, 1997
    vi     mormugao port trust employees (gpf) regulations, 1969
    vii    summamry of recommendations. 
    viii   minutes
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on the 13th August, 1998)
1. Miss Saroj Khaparde¾ Chairperson
2. Shri Satyanarayana Dronamraju
3. Shri Radhakishan Malaviya
4. Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt
5. Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani
6. Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat
7. Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
8. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
9. Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah
10. Prof. A. Lakshmisagar
*11. Shri Munavvar Hasan
1. Shri N. Thalavai Sundaram

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
**13. Shri Sukh Dev Singh Libra
1. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
2. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
Secretariat
1. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary
3. Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
* Nominated on 22.11.99 against the vacancy caused on account of demise of Shri Ish Dutt Yadav.
** Nominated on 27.12.99 against the vacancy on account of resignation by Shri Sukh Dev Singh Dhindsa. 
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do
hereby present this Hundred and Twenty Fifth Report of the Committee.
2. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on 20.12.99.
1.3 The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various Rules/Regulations and the issues, related therewith, alongwith the
Government’s comments received thereon. The observations and recommendations which, in the opinion of the Committee, should be brought to
the notice of the House, are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.
 
  
  
II
The Coir Board (Classification, Control and Appeal)
Bye Laws, 1969.
The Coir Board (Classification, Control and appeal) Bye Laws, 1969 were examined and some points were referred to the Ministry of Industry for
their comments/clarifications on January 5, 1999. 
  
 
2. The points referred and the Ministry’s Comments/clarifications received thereon are enclosed (Annexure-I).
3. The Committee had discussions on the subject with the representatives of the Coir Board and the Ministry of Industry on January 11, 1999 during
its visit to Cochin. Relevant extracts from the study note on the Committee’s visit to Cochin and Thiruvananthapuram is enclosed (Annexure-II)
which contain Committee observations on the various points in the light of the views that emerged during the course of discussion.
4. The Committee considered the above mentioned subject at its meeting held on April 1, 1999. The Committee notes with satisfaction that
the Ministry of Industry has accepted the suggestions of the Committee in respect of bye law 5 regarding classification of posts and

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
bye law 8 regarding penalties. The Committee, however, notes the reply of the Ministry with regard to be law 3. The Committee
hopes that the Ministry of Industry will notify the amendments to bye laws 5 and 8 as agreed to by them expeditiously, under
intimation to it.
Annexure-I
REPLY TO POINTS REAISED IN THE QUESTIONNAIRE ON COIR BOARD SERVICES (CLASSIFICATION, CONTROL &
APPEAL) BYE LAWS, 1969.
1. Point referred- Whether the bye-laws have been laid on the tale of each House of Parliament. If so the details in this regard.
Reply to Point No. 1:-
As per Section 27 (4) of the Coir Industry Act, 1953 (45 of 1953), every Bye-law made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive session aforesaid.
The Section 27 (4) was inserted in the Coir Industry Act based on the Delegated Legislation’s Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1986. Before 1986, it
was required only to notify the Bye-law made/amended in the official Gazette by the Central Government in terms of Section 27 (2) and (3) of the
Coir Industry Act, However, since 1986, every Bye-law made under the Act will have to be laid before each House of Parliament as contemplated
in Section 27 (4). Records are being collected to confirm and get the dates of placement of these Bye-laws o the Table of both the Houses of
Parliament.
2. Point referred- Bye-laws 3-Application
These Bye-laws shall apply to every employee of the Board, but shall not apply to:
a. any person in casual employment;
 
b. any person on daily wages:
c. any person subject to discharge from service on less than one months notice;
2. Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1) the Central Government may by order exclude from the operation of all or any of these
Bye-laws any class of employees of the Board.
3. If any doubt arises as to whether these Bye-laws or any of them apply to any person, the matter shall be forwarded to the Central
Government who shall decide the same.
The non-applicability of bye-laws to any person subject to discharge from service on less than one months notice; as prescribed in bye-laws (c)
above, excluding from the operation of all or any of these bye-laws any class of employees of the Board, mentioned in sub bye-law (2) above and in
case of doubt, as to whether the bye laws or any of them apply to any person, the matter shall be referred to the Central Government who shall
decide as contained in sub bye-law (3) above give a contention to a reader that bye-laws do not apply in general and discriminate among its
employees. Why don’t the Board abolish all the three sub-bye-laws?
Is there any objection to make applicability of bye-laws crystal clear by the Ministry as envisaged in the Central Civil Services (Classification,
Control & Appeal) Rules, 1957 (now 1965) for the persons to whom they will be applicable?
Reply to Point No. 2
There is no discrimination amongst the employees of the Board. The disciplinary proceedings as applicable to regular employees are not applicable
to the Casual employees, daily wagers etc. even under CCS (CCA) Rules. However, the Board will be guided by the recommendations of this
Committee on Subordinate Legislation.
 
 
2. Point referred- Bye-law 5- Classification of Posts
All posts under the Board’s service shall be classified as follows: 
  

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
 
Sl. No. Pay of maximum of the Grouping post  
1. Not less than Rs. 1300/- A
2. Not less than Rs. 900/- but less than Rs.
130/-
B
3. Over Rs. 290/- but less than Rs. 900/- C
4. Rs. 290/-or less D
 
What is the latest classification of posts of the purpose of the bye-laws and whether the present classification is at
par with that of Central Civil Service (Classification, Control & Appeal) Rules, 1965?
Reply to Point No. 3
The classification of posts comes both in the Coir Board Services (Classification, Control & Appeal) Bye –laws,
1969 and the Coir Board Employees (Conduct) Bye-laws, 1968. The classification of posts existing in the Coir
Board Services (CCA) Bye-laws, is as amended vide S.O. No. 4372 dated 17.11.83 which is in accordance with the
pay scales recommended by the 3
rd Central Pay Commission. The classification of posts existing in the CCA Bye-
laws has not been amended consequent to the implementation of the recommendations of the 4th Central Pay
Commission.
However the classification of posts existing in bye-law 2 of the Coir Board Employees (Conduct) Bye-laws, 1968
has been amended
subsequent to the implementation of the recommendations of the 4th Central Pay Commission. The classification
as contained in the Conduct Bye-laws of the Board is reproduced as below: 
 
Sl. No. Description of posts Classification of posts
1. A post carrying a pay or a scale of pay with a maximum of not less than Rs. 4000/- Group A
2. A post carrying a pay or a scale of pay with a maximum of not less than Rs. 2900/- but less
than Rs. 4000/-
Group B
3. A post carrying a pay or a scale of pay with a maximum of over Rs. 1150/- but less than Rs.
2900/-
Group C
4. A post carrying a pay or a scale of pay, the maximum of which is Rs. 1150/- or less. Group D
Consequent to the implementation of the revised pay scales in Coir Board as recommended by the 5
th Central Pay Commission, the Board has
approved amendment of Bye-law 5. Suitable proposals have been forwarded to the Govt. of India vide Board’s letter No. CB/98/Adm/2/15 dated
01.9.1998 for approval and notification of the amendments. The proposed amendment to the bye-law 5 is as follows.
Bye-law 5. Classification of posts.
All posts under the Board’s serviced shall be classified as follows:
 
 
Sl. No. Pay of maximum of the scale of the Grouping post Group

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
1. Not less than Rs. 13,500/- A
2. Not less than Rs. 9000/- but less than Rs. 13,500/- B
3. Over Rs. 4,000/- but less than Rs. 9,000/- C
4. Rs. 4,000/- or less D
4 Point referred- Bye-law 8:
Penalties: The following penalties may, for good and sufficient reasons and as hereinafter provided, be imposed on a Board’s employee namely:
MINOR PENALTIES:
i. Censure;
ii. Withholding of his promotion;
iii. Recovery from his pay of the whole or
 
 
Part of any pecuniary loss caused by him to the Board by negligence or breach of orders;
iv. Withholding of increments of pay;
Under the CCS (CCA) rules 1965 reduction to a lower stage in the time scale of pay for a period not exceeding 3 years without cumulative effect
and not adversely affecting his pension has been prescribed under minor penalties.
Is there any objection from the Ministry/Board to induct the same under the Bye-laws?
Reply to point No.4
Bye-law 8 (v) states as below:
"reduction to a lower stage in the time scale of pay for a specified period, with further directions as to whether or not
the Board’s employee will earn increments of pay during the period of such reduction and whether or the expiry of
such period, the reduction or will not have the effect of postponing the increments of his pay;"
This penalty is categorised as a major penalty in the Coir Board Services (CCA) Bye-laws whereas it is given as a minor penalty in
8
CCS (CCA) Rules. There is no objection to accept this amendment. However, if it is adopted, the same penalty will figure as minor as well as major
penalties under Bye-law 8. If at all this penalty has to be inducted under minor penalties as an additional clause, the Bye-law 8 (v) will also have to
be either deleted or amended appropriately.
5. Point referred- General
There are innumerable contingencies, which are or cannot be defined in bye-laws such as independence and impartiality to be maintained in official
dealings during one’s tenure in the Coir Board, action against employees who are later found ineligible/unqualified for their initial recruitment for
any reason whatsoever it may be action for unauthorised absence from duty or overstayal of leave etc.
Though the bye-laws are similar to the Central Civil Service(CCA) Rules, why not an enabling bye-law is added at the end suitably that as and
where the bye-law is silent, the Central Civil Service (CCA) rules, 1965 applicable to Central Govt. employees will apply?
Reply to point No. 5
Coir Board Employees (Conduct) Bye-laws 1968 take adequate care to meet contingencies of the kind referred.

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
The bye-law (3) of the Coir Board Employees (Conduct) Bye-Laws, 1968 states as below:
General
1. Every employee shall at all times
i. maintain absolute integrity;
ii. maintain devotion to duty; and
iii. do nothing which is unbecoming of an employee
Violation of any of the provisions of the Coir Board Employees (Conduct) Bye-laws, 1968 amounts to misconduct which attracts disciplinary action
under provisions of the CCA Bye-laws.
Coir Board amends its CCA Bye-laws from time to time in line with the amendments to the Central Civil Services (CCA) Rules. There is already a
provision under Bye-law 3 (3) that if any doubt arises as to whether these Bye-laws or any of them apply to any person, the matter shall be referred
to the Central Government who shall decide the same. Therefore, it may not be necessary to add an enabling Bye-law at the end that as and where
the bye-law is silent, the Central Civil Services (CCA) Rules, 1965 applicable to Central Government employees will apply. However, the Board
will be guided by the advise of this Committee on Subordinate Legislation in this regard.
 
ANNEXURE-II
STUDY NOTE ON THE VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE TO
COCHIN AND TRIVANDRUM
FROM 10.01.99 TO 14.01.99 
  
 The Coir Board (Classification Control and Appeal) Bye-Laws 1969
The Committee met with the management of Coir Board and the representative of Ministry of Industry at Bristow Hall, Hotel Taj Malabar Cochin
at 10.00 a.m. on 11.1.99
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Miss Saroj Khaparde Chairperson
1. Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani
2. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav
3. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
4. Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat
5. Shri Ramachandran Pillai
6. Shri N. Thalavai Sundaram
7. Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah
8. Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.C. Agarwal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary
3. Shri S.K. Tripathi, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF COIR BOARD
1. Shri Christy Fernandes, Chairman
2. Shri V. Hariharan, Joint Director
3. Shri P. Ajid Kumar, Deputy Director

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY
Shri Satpal, Director
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the representatives of the Coir Board and Ministry of Industry and gave a brief account of
the Committee, the objective of the visit and introduction of members of the Committee. Thereafter, the Chairman, Coir Board gave a presentation
about the functions and activities of the Coir Board. The Chairman, Coir Board gave a basic idea about how Coir is extracted from Coconut and
used for various purposes. He informed that the Coir Industry is a agricultural rural based small sector industry employing around five lacs odd
workers out of which 85% were women. He further informed that Coir was a eco- friendly export oriented biodegradable product and is therefore,
in great demand. The Committee was also informed that there was immense potential in the Coir Industry and at present only 30% of the raw
material was being used in it. The progress in the Coir Industry has been rather slow because of the slow pace of modernization. It was also
informed that to prevent unhealthy competition and exploitation export of Coir had been allowed only with the permission of the Coir Board. The
Committee was also apprised of the various welfare schemes which are in operation.
The Committee then discussed the agenda for the day.
Point No. 1
The Committee was not satisfied with the reply of the Board that the records regarding laying of the notifications were not traceable. The
Committee desired that the dates regarding laying of the notifications may be communicated at the earliest.
Point No.2 (Bye Law 3)
The Committee noted the reply.
Point No.3 (Bye Law 5)
The Committee was informed that although the classification in Coir Board Service (CCA) bye laws had not been updated but the same had been
updated in the conduct Bye-Laws. The Committee expressed its satisfaction that the Board had agreed to update the classification in the Coir Board
Service (CCA) Bye Laws also.
Point No. 4 (Bye Law 8)
The Committee expressed its satisfaction that the Board had agreed to amend the Bye Law as suggested.
Point No.5
The Committee noted the reply.
The meeting concluded on mutual vote of thanks.
 
  
  
III
THE RUBBER BOARD (SERVICE)RULES, 1961
The Rubber Board (Service) Rules, 1961 framed under the Rubber Act, 1947 were examined and some points were referred to the Ministry of
Commerce on January 5, 1999 for their comments/clarifications.
2. The points referred and the Ministry’s comments/clarifications received thereon are enclosed (Annexure).
3. The Committee had discussion on the subject on January 14, 1999 with the representatives of the Rubber Board and the Ministry of
Commerce during its visit to Thiruvananthapuram. The Committee noted the replies of the Ministry in respect of Rules 2 (c), 6 and 7 and
agreed with the view points of the Ministry of Commerce and Rubber Board on these rules. With regard to Rules 5, 9 and 11 the Committee
expressed satisfaction that the Ministry have agreed to amend the rules as per the Committee’s suggestions.
4. The Committee considered the above mentioned subject at its meeting held on April 1, 1999. The Committee notes with satisfaction that
the Ministry of Commerce has agreed to amend Rules 5, 9 and 11 as per its suggestions. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
Commerce will notify the amendments to these rules expeditiously under intimation to it.
 
ANNEXURE
  
  
 
COMMENTS TO QUESTIONNAIRE OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA TO EXAMINE
RUBBER BOARD SERVICE RULES 1961
Question No. 1 Whether the rules have been laid on the table of each house of Parliament? If so the details in this regard.
Comments Section 25 (3) of the Rubber Act 1947 (XXIV) of 1947 prescribes that every rule made on matters listed under Section 25 of the Act
shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each house of Parliament. The Rubber Board (Service) Rules, 1961 were made in the year
1961 and published on 23rd May, 1961. Records of that period are not available.
Question No. 2 Rule 2 (c)
‘Board’s employee’ means any person employed under the Board other than the Chairman, the Officers appointed under Section 6A of the Rubber
Act, 1947 and the Government Officers lent to the Board.
Why the Chairman and the Officers appointed under Section 6A of the Rubber Act are not treated as Board employee? Kindly explain.
Comments Rule 2 (c) of the Rubber Board (Service) Rules, 1961 are applicable to employees of the Rubber Board excepting for the Chairman and
Officers mentioned in Section 6A of the Rubber Act. There is specific provision in the Rubber Act and Rubber Rules with regard to the appointment
of the Chairman and the Executive Officers appointed under Section 6A.
Under Section 6A of the Rubber Act, the Chairman will be appointed by the Central Government. His terms and functions are also prescribed in the
Rubber Act and Rubber Rules.
The Executive Officers appointed under 6A of the Rubber Act are Rubber production Commissioner and the Secretary. Their terms of appointment
and functions are also specified in the Rubber Act and Rubber Rules. The Central Government makes appointments to these posts. In respect of
Rubber Production Commissioner and Secretary the Government usually stipulates that the terms and conditions of the service will be on par with
the employees of similar grade in the Rubber Board.
Therefore, Chairman and Officers appointed under 6A of the Rubber Act are not governed by the Rubber Board (Service) Rules, 1961.
Question No.3 Rules 5
No person, who has more than one wife living or who having a spouse living marries in any case in which such
marriage is void by reason of its taking place during the life time of such spouse, shall be eligible for appointment to
service;
(b) No woman whose marriage is void by reason of the husband having a wife living at the time of such marriage or
who has married a person who has a wife living at the time of such marriage, shall be eligible for appointment to
service;
Provided that the Central Government may, of satisfied, that there are special grounds for so ordering, exempt any
person from the operation of this rule.
 
 

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
a. Under rule 5 (a) there appears to be no justification in disqualifying a woman from appointment in service if her marriage takes place
without the knowledge that the person with whom she is married already has living wife. Is there any objection in exempting such person by
inserting an appropriate saving provision.
b. Under the proviso what could be the other ground for exempting any person from the operation of this rule? Does it include personal law
which in certain cases permits second marriage? What are the comments of the Ministry in this regard.
Comments Rule 5 restricts appointment to the Board’s service only from persons of monogamous marriage. However, there is no objection to
inserting an appropriate saving provision under rule 5 (a) providing for appointment of a woman married to a man without her knowledge of his
having already a living wife. However the proviso to Rule 5, enabling Government to give exemption on special grounds can be used for avoiding
hardship in such cases.
On the above issue the Board would like to be guided by the valuable opinion of the Committee. However as per Central Civil Services (Conduct)
Rules, 1964, Personal Law is one of the factors for permitting the Government servant for second marriage. The Board would therefore, prefer to
adopt the provisions of the Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, in place of Rule 5 of Rubber Board (Service) Rules, 1961.
Question No. 4 Rule 6
A person whose age exceeds 25 years may not ordinarily be appointed to the service by direct recruitment.
Provided that the Appointment Authority may relax the upper age limit in the case of Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes candidate upto 5 years and shall also provided further that the concurrence of the Central
Government shall be obtained for appointment of persons above 45 years of age.
The words "may not ordinarily" conveys that in certain cases persons exceeding 25 years of age could be directly recruited. Again under the First
proviso the appointing authority has discretionary power to relax the age limit in individual deserving cases. For which category of persons other
than SC and ST these rules are relaxed. What is the criterion for selecting these cases. Whether there are any guidelines in this regard.
Comments Under rule 6 , a person whose age exceeds 25 years may not ordinarily be appointed to the service by direct recruitment.
The Appointing Authority may relax the upper age limit in the case of SC/ST upto 5 years and also in his discretion in individual deserving cases.
If the word ‘ordinarily’ is taken away recruitment of persons within 25 years would become mandatory. This will prevent recruitment of suitably
qualified senior in service persons to higher posts through direct recruitment. For posts for which higher qualifications are needed such as post
graduation. Ph.D. and specified years of experience age limit relevant to each grade is prescribed in the recruitment rules. The 25 years of age
prescribed is for recruitment to base level posts, the qualification of which does not go beyond graduation and which does not require previous
experience. There are many higher posts to which promotion is not the channel of recruitment. These have to be filled up by direct recruitment and
the age limit is suitably prescribed in the recruitment rules. Forego for Group B posts upto the level of Rs. 6500-10500 the age limit is 35 years, for
Group A posts upto the level of Rs. 10000-15200, the age limit is 40 years and for still higher posts in Group A the age limit is 45 years.
 
  
 
The categories of persons other than SC ST to whom age is relaxed in rare individual deserving cases are:
a. Compassionate appointment in dying in harness cases.
b. Candidates of higher qualification like Ph.D. in technical and scientific posts.
c. Candidates with longer years of relevant experience and
d) Suitably qualified in service persons or persons from the Govt. in the light of Govt. order.
Question No. 5 Rule 7
The method of recruitment and other matters relating thereto shall be as specified in columns 7 and 8 of the schedule. Provided that
all vacancies in the scientific posts and in any other class I and II posts classified as technical posts shall be advertised and such
vacancies and all vacancies in other posts
shall be notified to the convened Regional Employment Exchange unless the Chairman is valid reasons to be recorded in writing
decided otherwise and appointment shall be made from among the candidates applying in pursuance of such advertisement or the
candidates recommended by such Employment Exchange, as the case may be.

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
As per the proviso the Chairman for valid reason may not notify the post to the Regional Employment Exchange. Under what circumstances the
Chairman can exercise such power? What is the channel of recruitment in general if this power has been exercised.
Comments The discretionary power of the Chairman under Rule 7 to make recruitment without notification of vacancies through advertisement as
well as through the Employment Exchange has since been deleted in 1966 and the power is not exercised. 
 
Question No. 6 Rule 9
A medical certificate of fitness from a competent authority shall be required from every person at the time of his entry on the
service.
The word "Competent authority" mentioned in the rule has not been defined anywhere. Is there any objection in defining the same in the rules itself.
Comments Under Rule 9 of the Board prescribes medical certificate from a medical practitioner not below the rank of Civil Surgeon Gr. II. There
is no objection to defining the term "competent authority" under Rule 9.
Question No. 7 Rule 11
The appointing Authority may terminate the services of a Board’s Employee appointed to a post by direct recruitment or revert a
Board’s employee appointed to a post by promotion to his permanent post during or at the end of probation extended period of
probation, if his work or conduct in that post is found to be unsatisfactory. If his work and conduct were found to be satisfactory
during the period of the prescribed probation extended period of probation the Appointing or after its completion as the case may be
declare that he has completed his probation satisfactorily.
Whether the person before termination from service or reversion to a lower post is given reasonable opportunity of being heard. Is there any
objection in incorporating such provision in the rules.
Comments Opportunity is given to employees in such cases. However there is no objection for incorporating a provision in Rule 11 to the effect
that before termination from service or reversion to lower post the persons concerned will be given reasonable opportunity of being heard.
IV
THE SPICES CESS RULES, 1988
The Committee examined the Spices Cess Rules, 1988 framed under the Spices Cess Act, 1986 and some points were referred to the Ministry of
Commerce on January 5, 1999 for their comments/clarification thereon. The points referred to the Ministry and the comments received thereon are
as under:-
I Point referred
Whether the rules have been laid on the Table of each House of Parliament, if so, the details in this regard?
Ministry’s reply
The Spices Cess Rules, 1988 had been notified in Gazette of India through notification No. GSR 696 (E) dated 10.6.1988. It has not been possible
to trace the original file on which this notification had been issued as the matter is about 10 years old. However, efforts are being made to trace it to
submit the relevant information. This was further amended vide notification No. GSR 662 (E) dated 19.10.93. The amended notification was laid on
the Table of both the Houses of Parliament.
II Point referred
Rule 3 (1) & (2)
1. Every exporter of Spices shall furnish to the Spices Board every "quarter ending on the 30th June, 30th September, 31st
December and 31st March" a statistical information on export and cess paid on spices in the form and shall be verified by
means of a declaration signed by the exporter of spices.

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
 
  
  
  
  
 
2. 
The statistical information in the form shall be furnished to the Spices Board on or before quarter of each succeeding quarter.
Though there is a mention that cash paid on Spices etc is required to be given in a form under sub-rules (1) and (2) of Rule 3 wherein the exporter
has to give the statistical information, but, no such form has been appended in the publication brought out by spices Board publishing the Spices
Board Act, 1986 together with the Rules framed thereunder.
Ministry’s reply
Vide notification No. 696 (E) dated 10
th June, 1988 a form was prescribed under Rule 3 vide which exporters were required to submit among other
information, details of fob value, rate of export cess and total export cess paid. This form was simplified and frequency of submitting information
reduced vide notification No. GSR 662 (E) dated 19.10.93. The amended from will be included in the publication of the spices Board.
III Point referred
Sub-rule (1) of Rule 3 states that the information furnished by the exporter shall be "verified by means of a declaration signed by exporter of
Spices".
Whether any particular form of deceleration signed by the exporter has been devised;’ why it is not possible to append the form of declaration in the
rules itself?
Ministry’s reply
The form prescribed under Spices Cess Rules, 1988 and further amended on 19.10.93 has a declaration to be given by the exporter;
"I / we declare that information given above are true to the best of my/(our)* knowledge and belief."
* Incorporated vide amended notification No. GSR 662 (E) dated 19.10.93.
IV Point referred
The system of verification prescribed in the sub rule implies that the Board is relying upon the declaration given by the exporter. Whether the
Ministry/Board have come across instances where the declaration made by the exporter had been found not in accordance with the actual exports
and if so, whether Government would consider prescribing some more effective method of verifying the actual figures of exports besides the
declaration so that a correct figure is collected.
Ministry’s reply
Apart from the declaration given by the exporter, Spices Board also gets a copy of the Shipping Bill submitted by the exporter at the time of
shipping the goods from the relevant custom authorities. In the case of major ports like Bombay and Cochin, spices Board has made arrangements
with the Customs authorities for forwarding a copy of the shipping bill to the Board, for cross verification. In case of other ports, the Board’s
officials collect the details of exports, cess paid etc. on a periodic basis from the relevant customs authorities. Such information collected is verified
with the data furnished by the exporters in the prescribed returns.. The discrepancies have been minimal and of a routine nature. The main reason
being the cess is collected by Customs and Customs clearance is given only after the cess is deposited by the exporter. In cases of detection of
discrepancy the cess collecting authorities will be advised by the spices Board for collection of under paid amount or for return of excess cess paid.
With the rationalization of cess on all spices export, such instances of discrepancies due to misclassification are unlikely to occur.
V Point referred
Under-sub rule (2) statistical information shall be furnished "on or before quarter of each succeeding quarter".
23

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
The words in the quotation above are not clear and they do not convey the real intention of the rules.
Whether Government have any objection making the provision simple, and quite clear?
Ministry’s reply
Government has no objection in making the provision more simple and clear.
2. The Committee had discussions on the above points with the representatives of Spices Board the Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
(Department of Commerce) on January 11, 1999 at Cochin. The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry on rule 3 (1) & (2) and expressed its
satisfaction that the Ministry of Commerce and Industry had agreed to append the form as required under the rules for furnishing statistical
information to the Spices Board, in the next publication. The Committee further expressed its satisfaction that the Ministry had agreed to make the
provision of the Rules more simple and clear.
3. The Committee considered the matter in its meeting held on April 1, 1999. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Commerce and
Industry, (Department of Commerce) would carry out the amendments/modifications in the rules as per its suggestions expeditiously under
intimation to it.
V
MADRAS PORT TRUST (GENERAL PROVIDENT FUND) REGULATIONS, 1997
The Committee examined the Madras Port Trust (General Provident Fund) Regulations, 1997. Some points were referred to the Ministry of Surface
Transport on October 15, 1998 for their comments/clarifications thereon. The Committee discussed these points on October 26, 1998 in the light of
the comments furnished by the Ministry with the representatives of the Madras Port Trust and the Ministry of Surface Transport during its visit of
Chennai
2. The points referred to the Ministry and their comments thereon alongwith the observations of the Committee on each point are as under:-
I Point referred
Whether the name of Madras Port Trust has since been changed to Chennai Port Trust? If so, when?
Whether the said change has been notified, laid on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament. If so, the details thereof?
Ministry’s Reply
The Government of Tamil Nadu have notified that according to the city of Madras (Alteration of Name) Act, 1996, city of Madras would be called
as CHENNAI from 30.9.1996.
Accordingly, the Madras Port Trust Board, in its Resolution No. 157, dated 28.10.96, approved the re-naming of the Madras Port Trust as
CHENNAI PORT TRUST and to use the code word ‘ch.P.T.’. The Board had also decided to inform the Government of India, other
agencies and Port Users of the re-naming and also to forward the Amendments required to be made In-service and Non-service Regulations, to the
Government for their approval.
A list of Regulations which required Amendment and to be Notified in the Gazette of India was forwarded to the Government. The Government
have sought for certain clarifications. The reply is being furnished.
Committee’s Observation
The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry.
II Point referred
The Madras Port Trust has notified the GPF regulations, 1997 in replacement of earlier rules/regulations on the subject. What are the circumstances
under which the Madras Port Trust had been compelled to come out with fresh regulations on the subject instead of amending the existing
legislation.

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
Ministry’s Reply
The Madras Port Trust Regulations, relating to Provident Fund and Gratuity framed under the erstwhile Madras Port Trust Act, 1905 continued to
be in force as ‘deemed Regulations’ under Section 133 (20) (c) of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 which deal with both contributory Provident
Fund and General Provident fund.
The Pension Schemes were introduced in the Madras Port Trust with effect from 1
st April, 1963 and the grant of Pensionary benefits are regulated
under the provisions of the Madras Port Trust Pension Regulations, 1987, which have been framed in replacement of the then existing Pension
Rules, 1963.
Consequent on the introduction of the Pension Scheme effective from 1st April, 1963 all persons appointed on or after 1st April, 1963 are
compulsorily governed by the General Provident Fund Schemes.
As such, the Contributory Provident Fund Provisions as contained in the Provident Fund and Gratuity Regulations are applicable only to such of
those employees who have been admitted to the contributory provident Fund prior to the enforcement of the Pension Scheme. The contributory
Provident Fund Regulations will cease to be in operation with the retirement of the last contributory Provident Fund subscriber in the year 2003.
Further due to the re-classification of various categories of posts and bringing the category of Artisans and Labourers into one Schedule of
employees, in accordance with the provisions of Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 some of the provisions of the Provident Fund and Gratuity
Regulations have become obsolete.
While awarding approval to the Trust’s proposal for adoption of the orders contained in the Government Notification No. 20 (6)/Pen/P&PW/86
dated 8.2.1987 extending certain liberalisations with regard to nomination etc., under the contributory Provident Fund Rules, the Ministry in their
letter No. PR-12016/16/87-PEI, dated 14.1.1988 instructed that revised Regulations in supersession of the existing Regulations might be framed by
the Trust under the provisions of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963.
In compliance with Government’s instruction two separate sets of Regulations viz. Madras Port Trust (General Provident Fund) Regulations and
Madras Port Trust (Contributory Provident Fund) Regulations were framed on the pattern of central Government Rules.
Committee’s observation
The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry and observed that there was some delay in framing of these regulations, after instructions from the
Government that revised regulations might be framed under the provision of the Major Port Trust Act, 1963.
III Point referred
Regulation 3 (1) (g) Definition
"Family" means ( i )In the case of a male subscriber, the wife of wives, parent, children, minor brothers, unmarried
sisters, deceased sons, widow and children and where no parents of the subscriber is alive, a paternal grand parent.
Provided that if a subscriber proves that his wife has been judicially separated from him or has ceased under the
customary law of the community to which she belongs to be entitled to maintenance she shall henceforth be deemed
to be no longer a member of the subscriber’s family in matters to which these regulations relate unless the subscriber
subsequently
intimates by express notification writing to the Accounts officer that she shall continue to be so regarded, and
i. In case of female subscriber, the husband, para children, minor brothers, unmarried sisters, deceased sons’ widow and children and
where no parents of the subscriber is alive, paternal grand parent.
Provided that if a subscriber by notification in writing to the Accounts Officer expresses here desire to exclude her
husband from her family, the husband shall henceforth be deemed to be no longer a member of the subscriber’s
family in matters to which these regulations relates, unless the subscriber subsequently cancels such notice in writing.

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
Provision’s in sub clauses (i) & (ii) of clause (g) of sub Regulation (1) of Regulation (3) prescribe different procedures in case of male and
female employees of the Port Trust for exclusion of spouse from the subscribers’ family.
What is the justification for prescribing different procedures? Whether Government have any objection in prescribing a uniform procedure for both
male and female employees?
Ministry’s Reply
In the definition of "Family" different procedures in case of male and female employees are specified in order to accommodated the provisions
contained in laws governing them.
Committee’s observation
The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry on regulation 3 (1) (g) (i) & (ii)
IV Point referred
Regulation (1) (g)
"Explanation"- ‘Child’ means legitimate child and includes an adopted child where adoption is
recognised by the personal law governing the subscriber who lives with an employee and treated as a
member of the family and to whom the employee has through a special will given the same status as
of a natural birth.
What are the implications of the words "who lives with an employee" appearing in the explanation? Whether this phrase include children who are
away from the employee for the purpose of studies but are otherwise dependent on the employee. If that be so, the condition that the child who lives
with an employee appears to be redundant. What are the comments of Government with regard to the retention or otherwise of the stipulation?
Ministry’s Reply
The purpose of Regulation is that the child being adopted one is expected to live with the employee to be treated as a member of the family,
However, it included the child who is away from the employee for his/her studies.
Committee’s observation
The Committee expressed satisfaction that the Ministry had agreed to amend regulation 3 (1) (g) Explanation by deleting the words" who lives with
an employee".
V Point referred
Regulation 6 (7) Nominations:-
"Every nomination made, and every notice of cancellation given by a subscriber shall, to the extent
that it is valid, becomes operative on its acceptance by the Accounts Officer."
As per the above regulation the nomination becomes operative only on its acceptance by the Accounts officer. The regulation does not prescribe a
time limit within which the acceptance by the Accounts
Officer is to be conveyed to the employee. Further, the GPF rules applicable to the central nominations are operative from the date of their receipt.
Whether the Ministry have any objection in replacing the word "acceptance" by the word "receipt"?
Ministry’s Reply
The intention of the Regulation is to verify the correctness of the relationship of the person nominated by the employee with reference to family
particulars already furnished by such employee for other
benefits. However, action will be taken to prescribed a time limit of one month within which the acceptance by Accounts Officer is to be conveyed
to the employee.

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
Committee’s observation
The Committee expressed its satisfaction that the Ministry had agreed to amend regulation 6 (7) prescribing a time limit of one month within which
the acceptance by Accounts Officer is to by conveyed to the subscriber/employee.
VI Point referred
Regulation 9 Rate of subscriptions:
The amount of subscriptions shall be fixed by the subscriber himself subject to the following conditions:-
a. It shall be expressed in whole rupees.
b. It may be any sum so expressed not less than 6 percent of his emoluments and not more than his total emoluments.
c. The amount of subscription so fixed by giving a month’s notice to the Accounts Officer may be:
i. reduced once at any time during the course of the year.
ii. enhanced once during the course of the year.
iii. reduced and enhanced as aforesaid provided that the amount as subscription so reduced shall not be less than the minimum prescribed in
clause (b).
iv. If the amount of subscription payable contain a fraction of a rupee it shall be rounded off to the nearest whole rupee.
As per the above regulation, subscription to GPF by the Port Trust employees can be reduced and enhanced once during the course of a year. In the
case of GPF rules applicable to the Central Government employees there is a provision for enhancement of GPF contribution on two occasions in a
year. Whether the Ministry have any objection in extending similar benefit to the Port Trust Employees?
Ministry’s Reply
There will be no objection of enhancing of GPF subscription on two occasions as applicable to Central Government employee.
Committee’s observation
The Committee accepted the reply of the Ministry on regulation 9 for enhancing/reducing GPF subscription on two occasions in a year as applicable
to the Central Government Employees.
VII Point referred
Regulation 16 (2) (ii) Conditions of payment of Advances:
" An advance shall not except for special reasons be granted until atleast twelve months after the final repayment of
all previous advances."
What is the justification for prescribing a period of 12 months after the final repayment of all previous advances for grant of an advance. The GPF
rules applicable to the Central Government employees do not prescribe any such period and Government servant is entitled for a fresh advance
immediately after repaying the last installment of advance.
Whether the Ministry have any objection in removing this condition?
Ministry’s Reply
According to Regulation, temporary advance is to be granted only after the previous loan is fully repaid. However, in order to avoid hardship to the
employees and to avoid frequent requests from the employees for sanction of loan, necessary provision is made in the Regulation for the grant of
loans once in twelve months.
Committee’s observation
The Committee was satisfied that the Ministry had agreed to remove the condition of 12 months in regulation 16 (2) (ii).
VIII Point referred

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
Regulation 20 (I) (A) (5) Final withdrawals from the Fund:
"The construction of the house should be commenced within six months of withdrawal of money and should be
completed within a period of two years from the date of the commencement of construction."
What is the justification for prescribing periods for commencement and completion of the construction of the house? There are no such condition in
the GPF rules applicable to Central Government employees.
Ministry’s Reply
The intention of the Regulation in fixing the period of commencement and the completion is to ensure that the loan advanced is utilized for the
construction work only and not diverted for other purposes and complete the work within a specified period. As such a period of two years is
prescribed.
Committee’s observation
The Committee was satisfied with the reply of the Ministry on regulation 20 (1) (A) (5).
IX Point referred
Regulation 20 (1) (B)
"After completion of twenty years of service (including broken periods of service, if any) of a
subscriber or within ten years before the date of his retirement on superannuation, whichever is earlier for one or
more of the following purposes"
Whether it is possible to reduce the period of 20 years to the period of 15 years in order to give more benefit to the employees falling in line with
the Government of India?
Ministry’s Reply
Reducing the period to 15 years instead of 20 years as applicable under Government Rules can be considered.
Committee’s observation
The Committee was satisfied that the Ministry had agreed to reduce the period from 20 years to 15 years for the purpose of final withdrawn from
the fund.
X Point referred
Regulation 20 (1) (B) (a)
EDUCATION: for meeting the cost of higher education of the subscriber or any child of the subscriber in the following cases,
namely:-
i. for education outside India for academic, technical, professional or vocational course beyond the High school stage; and
ii. for any medical, Engineering or other technical or specialised course in India beyond the High School stage: provided that the course
of study is not less than three years.
What is the objective of prescribing that a course of study should not be less than three years. Whether the Ministry have any objection to delete the
words "provided that the course of study is not less than
34
three years" as many of the technical courses are expensive and are of lesser duration. The GPF rules applicable to Central Government employee
also do not lay any such condition.
Ministry’s Reply

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
Normally the duration of the courses like Medical, Engineering is more than 3 years and as such the period of three years is specified. However, in
view of the fact, there are any technical courses which are expensive and duration is less than 3 years the sanction of loan will be considered
provided the courses are undertaken from the recognised Institutions.
Committee’s observation
The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry on regulation 20 (1) (B) (a) regarding Medical, Engineering and other technical or specialised
courses in the country.
3. The Committee considered the matter in its meeting held on April 1, 1999. It hopes that the Ministry of Surface Transport would make
necessary modifications/amendments in Regulations 3 (1) (g) Explanation, 6 (7), 9, 16 (2) (ii) and 20 (i) (B) of the Madras Port Trust,
(General Provident fund) Regulations, 1997 on the lines suggested by the Committee and agreed to by the representatives of the Madras
Port Trust, expeditiously, under intimation to it.
VI
MURMUGAO PORT TRUST EMPLOYEES (GENERAL PROVIDENT FUND) REGULATION, 1964
The Mormugao Port Trust Employees (General Provident Fund) Regulations, 1964 were examined and some points were referred to the Ministry of
Surface Transport on January 27, 1999 for their comments/clarifications thereon.
2. The points referred and the Ministry’s comments/clarifications received thereon are enclosed (Annexure-I)
3. The Committee had discussion on the subject on February 3, 1999 with the representatives of the Mormugao Port Trust and the Ministry of
Surface Transport during its visit to Goa. Relevant extracts from the study note on the Committee’s visit containing its observations on the
various points in the light of the views that emerged during the course of discussion are enclosed (Annexure-II).
4.The committee considered the subject at its meeting held on April 1, 1999. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Surface
Transport have agreed to amend regulations 2 (5) Explanation, 13 (6) and 16 as suggested by it. The Committee, however, notes the reply
of the Ministry of Surface Transport in respect of rules 2 (5) and 4. The Committee, hopes that the Ministry will notify the amendments to
the Mormugao Port Trust Employees (General Provident Fund) Regulation, 1964, as agreed by them, expeditiously under intimation to it.
Annexure-I
  
  
 
QUESTIONNAIRE ON MORMUGAO PORT EMPLOYEES (GENERAL PROVIDENT FUND) REGULATIONS, 1964
Q.1 Whether the regulations have been laid on the table of the Rajya Sabha if so, the details in this regards?
Ans. The Mormugao Port Employees (General Provident Fund) Regulations 1964 have been framed after laying down the same on the table of both
the Houses of Parliament i.e. Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha and published the notification in the Gazette of India, vide G.S.R. no. 966 dated 1.7.64.
Q.2 Regulation 2(5) - Definition:
5. Family means:-
i. In the case of a male subscriber, the wife or wives, children, parents minor brothers, unmarried sisters, widow or widows and
children of a deceased son of the subscriber and where no parents of the subscriber is alive, or paternal grandparent.
 

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
 
Provided that if a subscriber proves that his wife has been judicially separated from him or has ceased under the customary law of
the community to which she belongs to be entitled to maintenance she shall henceforth be deemed to be no longer a member of the
subscriber’s family in matters to which these regulations relate unless the subscriber subsequently intimates in writing to the
Accounts Officer that she shall continue to be so regarded.
ii. In case of female subscriber, the husband, children, parents, minor brothers, unmarried sisters, widow or widows and children of a
deceased son and where no
parents of the subscriber is alive, paternal grand parent.
Provided that if a subscriber by notice in writing to the Accounts Officer expresses here desire to exclude her
husband from her family, the husband shall henceforth be deemed to be no longer a member of the subscriber’s
family in matters to which these regulations relate, unless the subscriber subsequently cancels such notice in writing.
Provisos in clauses (i) and (ii) of sub Regulation (5) of Regulation (2) prescribe different procedures in case of male and female employees of the
Port Trust for exclusion of spouse from the subscribers’ family.
What is the justification for prescribing different procedures? Whether Government have any object in prescribing a uniform procedure for both
male and female employees?
Ans. Proviso to clauses (i) & (ii) of Sub Regulation (5) of Regulation 2 are on par with Central Government Rule 2-The female employee can
exclude her spouse without obtaining judicial decree by giving notice of mere desire in writing to the Accounts Officer. We agree that this
procedure is different from that of procedure prescribed to a male employee. Therefore we have no objection in prescribing uniform procedure for
both viz. Male and female employee. However, it is felt that the procedure prescribed in respect of female employee is more lenient, perhaps
incorporated to provide safeguard being weaker section of the society.
Q.3 Regulation 2(5) - explanation:
"Explanation-‘Child" means legitimate child and includes as adopted child where adoption is recognised by the personal law governing the
subscriber or a ward under the Guardians and Wards
Act, 1890 (8 of 1890) who lives with an employee and treated as a member of the family and to whom the employee has through a special will
given the same status as that of a natural born child.
The words ‘who lives with employee’ appearing in the above explanation imply that the definition of the word child would now include
children/wards who are away from their parents for reasons like prosecution of high studies but still continuing to be dependent on them. Whether
the Ministry have any objection in deleting the words from the regulation.
Ans. As regards deletion of the words "who lives with an employee" provided in the explanation of Regulation 2 (5) of M.P.E. (General Provident
Fund) Regulations, 1964, the Mormugao Port Trust
has no objection to delete the words in order to extend the benefit to the children/wards who are residing away from their parents.
Q.4 Regulation 4- Application
1. All permanent employees of the Board other than re-employed persons, and such temporary employees who have rendered continuous
service of one year, shall subscriber to the fund.
2. All permanent employees, other than re-employed persons and all temporary employees who have rendered continuous service of one year,
or more on the date of commencement of the Regulations shall be required to subscribe to the Fund. Temporary employees whose period of
service on the date of commencement of these regulations is less than one year shall be required to subscribe to the Fund from the month
following that in which they complete one year’s service.
3. The Board may at its discretion, require any other category of employees to subscribe to the Fund.
Perhaps all categories of employees of the Port Trust are covered in sub-regulations (1) & (2). What are the other categories of
employees contemplated to be covered under
Sub-regulation (3) and whether the provision of Sub-regulation has ever been invoked if so, the details in this regard?

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
Ans. It is true that all the categories of Board employees including temporary employees who are eligible to subscribe for General Provident Fund
are covered under Clauses (1) & (2) of Regulation 4. However, Clause (3) is provided in the regulation to meet any exigency that may arise in
future without resorting to amendment to the regulations. So far the Board has not invoked the provisions of Clause (3).
Q.5 Regulation 13 (b) - Advances from the Fund:
The appropriate sanctioning authority may sanction the payment to any subscriber of an advance consisting of a sum of whole Rupees and not
exceeding in amount 3 months’ pay or half the amount standing to his credit in the fund, whichever is less for one or more of the following
purposes:
*** *** ****
b. to meet the cases of higher education, including where necessary the travelling expenses of the subscriber or any person actually dependent
on him in the following case namely:-
i. *****
ii. of any medical, engineering or other technical or specialised course in India beyond the high school stage provided that the course of
study is not less than three years;
i. What is the objective for prescribing that a course of study should not be less than three years. Whether the Ministry have any objection to
delete the words "provided that the
 
  
  
 
curse of study is not less than three years" as many of the technical courses are expensive and are of lesser duration.
ii. In the case of GPF Rules applicable to Central Government Employees’ there has been relaxation in the grant of advances for purchase of
various consumer durable. Whether the Ministry have taken any action for incorporating similar provisions in these regulations if so, the
details thereof, if not the reasons therefore?
Ans. i) This provision under 13 (b) (ii) of MPE (General Provident Fund) Regulations 1964 is based on the provisions of Rule 12
of the Central Government Rules. However, this Port Administration has no objection to delete the words "provided that the course
of study is not less than three years" appearing the Regulation 13 (b) (ii). This deletion will be more beneficial to the Port
employees’ children.
i. The Board has not amended MPE (General Provident Fund) Regulations 1964 to provide for relaxation in grant of advances for
purchase of various consumer durable. However, there is a relaxation provided under Reg. 13 (IA) according to which the
appropriate sanctioning authority may sanction advances for the purpose. If the Committee desires Board would consider to amend
our regulations to fall in line with the Central Government rules.
Q.6 Regulation 16 - Withdrawals from the Fund:-
Subject to the conditions specified herein withdrawals may be sanctioned by the authorities competent under sub regulation (2) of regulation 13 to
sanction an advance for special reasons at any time:-
i. after the completion of 20 years of service (including broken periods of service, if any) of a subscriber
within 10 years before the date of his retirement on superannuation, whichever is earlier, from the amount standing to
his credit in the Fund for one or more of the following purposes namely:-
i. For the Central Government Employees, there has been a modification in the condition for withdrawal wherein they have
been allowed to withdraw after completing 15 years of service. The Mormugao Port Trust is still carrying the condition of 20

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
years of service in this regard. What is the justification that a provision which is for the benefit of the employees and which
has been introduced in the Central Government in the year 1995 has not been incorporated in these regulations so far?
i. In the case of GPF Rules applicable to Central Government Employees’ there has been relaxation in the grant of withdrawal
for purchase of various consumer durable. Whether the Ministry have taken any action for incorporating similar provisions in
these regulations if so, the details thereof, if not the reasons therefore?
Ans. i) As the main aim of General Provident Fund is to extend benefits to the family of the employee, liberal withdrawals
are therefore not encouraged. However, were have no objection to amend our regulations to fall in line with Central
Government Rules in order to reduce the qualifying service from 20 years to 15 years for withdrawals.
i. The employee may resort to drawing advances frequently and exhaust the fund. As such the families of the
employees will not receive the maximum benefit at the end of their service. Hence, we have not liberalised our provision’s in
this regard. However, if the Committee desire Board will amend our regulation on par with Central Government Rules.
Annexure-II
  
  
 
study note on the visit of the Committee to Goa and Mumbai from February 1 to 5, 1999 
  
 
MORMUGAO PORT TRUST EMPLOYEES (GENERAL PROVIDENT FUND) REGULATIONS, 1964
The Committee met with the management of Mormugao Port Trust alongwith the representatives of Ministry of Surface Transport at 11.00 a.m. on
February 3, 1999.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Miss Saroj Khaparde, Chairperson
2. Shri M.K. Dhyani
3. Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat
4. Shri Rumandla Ramachandraih
5. Shri N. Thalavai Sundaram
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.C. Agarwal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF MORMUGAO PORT TRUST
1. Dr. Jose Paul, Chairman
2. Capt. V.S. Gopinath, Deputy Conservater
3. Shri N. Dhilleswara Rao, Secretary
4. Shri C.V. Charate, Chief Mechnical Engineer,
5. Shri P. Krishnamurthy, Traffic Manager,
6. Shri P.M. Mahapatra, Financial Adviser
7. Dr. R. Menazes, Chief Medical Officer
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF SURFACE TRANSPORT

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
Shri D. Sircar, Director (Labour)
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of Mormugao Port Trust and Ministry of Surface Transport. Thereafter
she introduced the Members of the Committee. The Chairperson stated in brief about the functions of the Committee and the purpose of its visit. In
turn, the Chairman, Mormugao Port Trust introduced the Members of his team and thereafter made a brief presentation about the various activities
of Mormugao Port Trust.
Thereafter, the Committee took up the agenda and discussed it as under.
Point No. 1 Regulation 2 (5)
The Committee noted the reply of the Mormugao Port Trust and agree that the regulation may be retained in its existing form.
Point No.2 (Regulation 2 (5) Explanation)
The Committee was satisfied that the Port Trust had agreed to amend the regulation as per the suggestion of the Committee.
Point No. 3 Regulation 4
The Committee noted the reply of the Port Trust.
Point No.4 Regulation 13 (6)
The recommendation of the Committee on point (I) was accepted by the Port Trust with regard to point (ii) Committee was satisfied that
Mormugao Port Trust had agreed to amend their regulation as per its suggestion.
Point No.5 Regulation 16 Point No.4 Regulation 13 (6)
The Committee satisfied that Mormugao Port Trust/Ministry have agreed to amend the regulation. On the point No. (ii) Committee was satisfied
that Mormugao Port Trust had agreed to amend their regulation as per its suggestion.
The Committee then discussed the other achievement of Mormugao Port Trust and expressed its satisfaction over the good work done being done
by this organisation.
The meeting concluded with mutual vote of thanks.
******
VII
 
 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The Coir Board (Classification, Control and Appeal) Bye Laws, 1969
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Industry has accepted its suggestion in respect of bye-law 5 regarding classification of
posts and bye-law 8 regarding penalties. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Industry will notify the amendment to bye-laws 5 & 8 as agreed
to by them, expeditiously under intimation to it. 
  
  
The Rubber Board (Service) Rules, 1961
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Commerce and Industry has agreed to amend rules 5, 9 and 11 as per its suggestion. The
Committee hopes that the Ministry will notify the amendments to these rules expeditiously under intimation to it.

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
The spices Cess Rules, 1988
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry on rule 3 (1) and (2) and expresses its satisfaction that the Ministry of Commerce & Industry has
agreed to append the form as required under the rules for furnishing statistical information to the Spices Board, under its next publication. The
Committee expresses its satisfaction that the Ministry has agreed to make the provisions of the rules more simple and clear. The Committee hopes
that the Ministry would carry out the amendments/modifications in the rules as per its suggestions expeditiously under intimation to it.
 
  
  
 
Madras Port Trust (General Provident Fund) Regulations, 1997
The Committee hopes that the Ministry of surface Transport would make necessary modifications/amendments in Regulations 3 (1) (g)
Explanation, 6 (7), 9, 16 (2) (ii) and 20 (I) (B) of the Madras Port Trust (General Provident Fund) Regulations, 1997 on the lines suggested by the
Committee and agreed to by the representatives of the Madras Port Trust, expeditiously, under intimation to it.
Mormugao Port Trust Employees (General Provident Fund) Regulations, 1964
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Surface Transport has agreed to amend regulations 2 (5) Explanation, 13 (6) and 16 as
suggested by it. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will notify the amendments to these regulations, as agreed to by them, expeditiously under
intimation to it.
MINUTES
XI
Eleventh Meeting
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday April 1, 1999 in
 
Room No. 67, first Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. 1. Miss Saroj Khaparde Chairperson
2. Shri Satyanarayana Dronamraju
3. Shri Radhakishan Malaviya
4. Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt
5. Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani
6. Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
7. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
8. Prof. A. Lakshmisagar
9. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav
10. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri M.N. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
3. Shri S.K. Tripathi, Committee Officer
Memorandum No. 12/99 regarding Coir Board (CCA) Bye Laws, 1969
The Committee considered the above Memorandum and noted that the Ministry of Industry had accepted the recommendations of the Committee in
relation to Bye Laws 5 and 8. As regard point No. 1 regarding the laying of notifications, the Committee had directed the Ministry that the date of

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
laying of notifications, on the Table of the Rajya Sabha may be communicated to the Secretariat at the earliest. In this connection, the committee
directed that Ministry may be asked to expedite the information. 
  
  
 
The Committee decided that the matter may be reported to the House.
The Committee however directed the Secretariat to examine separately whether all the Rules/Regulations required to the framed under the Coir
Board Act, 1953 has since been framed.
Memorandum No. 13/99 regarding Rubber Board (Services)
Rules, 1961
The Committee noted with satisfaction that the Ministry of Commerce had agreed to amend the Rules 5, 9 and 11 as per the suggestions of the
Committee. The Committee had already noted the views of the Ministry of Rule 2 (C), 6 and 7. The Committee decided to report the matter to the
House.
Memorandum No. 14/99 regarding Spices Cess Rules, 1988
The Committee considered the above Memorandum and expressed its satisfaction that the Board had agreed to amend sub-rule (2) of rule 3 as per
the suggestions of the Committee.
With regard to laying of the spices Cess Rules, the Ministry had furnished the requisite information. The Committee noted that no further
clarification was required from the Ministry at this stage and accordingly, a decision was taken to report the matter to the House.
Memorandum No. 15/99 regarding the Madras Port Trust (General Provident Fund) Regulations, 1997
The Committee considered the above Memorandum and noted that Madras Port Trust had agreed to amend the regulations 3(1) (g) Explanation
6(7), 9,16 (2) (ii) and 20 (I) (B) as per the suggestions of the Committee. The Committee was however, already satisfied with the replies of the Port
Trust in respect of regulations 3 (1) (g) (I) & (ii), 20 (1) (A) (5) and 20 (1) (B) (a). The Committee decided that the mater may be reported to the
House.
 
  
  
Memorandum No. 16/99 regarding Mormugao Port Trust Employees (General Provident Fund) Regulation, 1964
The Committee considered the above Memorandum and noted with satisfaction that Mormugao Port Trust had agreed to amend regulations 2 (5)
Explanation, 13 (6) and 16 as per the suggestions of the Committee. The Committee, however, noted the reply of the Port Trust in respect of rules
2(5) and 4. The Committee decided that the matter may be reported to the House.
The Committee then adjourned at 12.14 noon.
XXII
Twenty Second Meeting
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, December 20, 1999 in Room No. 126-C (Chairman’s Room) Third Floor, Parliament House, New
Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT

COM
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/125rep.html[25-10-2016 16:29:51]
1. 1. Miss Saroj Khaparde Chairperson
2. 2. Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat
 
 
3. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
3. 4. Shri Rumndla Ramachandraiah
4. 5. Prof. A. Lakshmisagar
5. 6. Shri N. Thalavai Sundaram
6. 7. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri R.B. Gupta, Under Secretary
3. Shri S.K. Tripathi, Committee Officer
The Committee considered its draft 125th Report and after some discussions , adopted the same. The Committee authorised the Chairperson and in
here absence Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat and Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai to present the Report to the House on 22.12.1999.
The Committee then adjourned at 4.05 p.m. 