COM. 1-127 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION 
HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
011 Fldds (Rqulallon and Developmenl) Act, 1948 end Prlroleum a.od 
Narural Cas Rules, 1959 made !hereunder 
{Presented on July 28, 1998) 
....... 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARL'\T 
tmW DELHI 

CONTENTS 
I. COf..II 'OSITION or T l tE CO,\ IMITIEE 
2. REr'OKr ON TilE OrL Fn:.LO\ (REGWLAno~ J\NL> 
DEvrLOPMENT) ACT. 1948 ,,:-oo PETitOU.UM 1'\NO 
NAT\:1\AL CAs Rt.:LE.<, 1959 MAnE TliERtt'SDEII 
J. ~ftNL."TC.S or- Tile MEETr .... cs or TtiE CoMMirn:e 
~. ''""CXt:llrs I To IV 
2507/RS/F-I·A 
(i) 
1-7 
s-to 
11-57 

CO:-.IPOS!T!Oj\; OF THE CO:-t!IHTTEE 
( 1997-98) 
'I Shri Dip~nkar :..1ukhcrjcc-CIJmrm<ln 
• · ' Vacant 
.1 Shri John F. Fernandes ... 
~ 
"5. V:tcant 
@ 1> Vacnnt 
@7 Vacant 
8. Prof Ram Bakh~h S111gh Vanna 
Iii 9 Vacant 
@ 10. Va~ant 
.. 11 VJcant 
l~ Shu Ac.lhtk SlmoJkar 
13. Shri M.l'. Abdu'" '"'"' Samad:wi 
14 Shri R.N. Ar'" 
l~. ~ltn l'ahnm Rcl1ia 
S l ( IU 1 .\ 1 ~ 1 1\T 
I. Shri T;q,an C h allC t J~C Ot:fllll)' S<'<'retlll\ ' 
~ Shrl S C 1\ ~: t rwa l, /Jrpllll' s,w~tart 
3 Shri Dccpn k Ci<>)"'l. Under s,.,.""".l' 
~ Shri Surcndra Kumar Trip.1thi. ('mnmiuer Officer 
· !'->mtn.lled 01 MC"mbcr ood OuitPI.:tn..., c f 1S .J% u a Shu M.A. 83h~ who tt.l$td 10 he 
Mtntt-tt and Cb~mn:an C'f the C'ommallcc CN~~~ ·turnl on brc. rctlrt~nl from. she 
mcmbcnh•P of she H"u'e on ! J OK 
\'oan1 nn aceount or rc:llrcmtnl n! '\·:Sh,, 8. ~H S~.ngh. Satchkl::an:md3., ('; Pr~fh;lra 
RcdJy ond Tori Ch;'lfan M.-,urnd-ar fmm the memlxr\htp of the Holtk. 
~ \'oM:;ml on tJ;.-\."UUnt of tchrcmcnt of S: :Stln Sht" (.'h)tQn SmJ;h. ~;aram Pr:tSad Gup: :~ , 
' \lui~U \hnt .1nd Snt~ ll.t r .• nJ .. !UifU the m~mllenhtr (\f lht Hou"-t 
( i) 

REPORT 
[JI/TRODUCTION 
I, lhc Cha1nnan of lhc Commiucc on Subordinale Legislalion, having 
lx:cn aulhorised by 1hc Commlllce 10 prcsenl 1bc Report on its behalf, do 
hereby prcsenl lhis Hundred and Twcmy Fim Report of the Commiuee. 
1.2 Tl.: Commmce considered and adop1ed 1he Report in its meeling 
held on July 23. 1998. 
1.3 The maucr cxam1ncd by lhe Commlllee arising out of lhc scrutiny of 
1he Penolcum & l'a1uraJ Gas Rules, 1959 framed under the Oil Fields 
(Rcgula1ion and Development) Act, 1948 which in 1be opinion of the 
Commiuee, should be brought 10 the notice of 1hc House, toge1ber wilh 
lhc rccommcndalions. arc conlaincd in the succeeding paragraphs of the 
Rcpon . 
011 Fidds (Ro&ulatlon »nd Development) Act, 1948 and Petroleum and 
Natural Cu Rules, 1959 made thereunder 
The Commmec examined the Petroleum and Narural Gas Rules, 1959, 
framed under the Oil Fields (Regu la! ion and Ocvelopmen1) Acl, 1948 and 
ir. rccommcndnllons, as reproduced below, wen; iqcludcd in rhe 103rd 
Rcpor1 prescn1cd ro the House on 13rh May, 199~l • 
2.11 The Cor •.• niuec notes rha1 the Ministry hove slnte amended rule 10 
of rhe Rules and deleted rhcrcfrom I he limir of area co\•ered by the 
l'crroleum Explorarion Li;;ence. 
2. 12 The Commiuce a lso notes rhatthe Mimsrry have incorporated rule 
32, regarding penalties in lhe Rules . as required under Secrion 9 of 
lhe 011 Fields (Regu lation and Development) Act, 1948 and as 
suggested by rhe Commiuee. 
2.13 The Comminee. however, lakes serious no1e of a large number of 
r rinrrng errors in I he Rules supplicd ·for S<:rutiny by I he Comminec 
"''d recommends lhal eilher the necessary corrigenda 1x: issued al 
rhe earliest. if not already i£sucd. or alternnlivelo/ the conee1ed up­
to-date rules be got reprinteld and laid on 1he Table of b01b 1he 
Houses of Parliament. 
2. 14 As regards issue of nohficauon under rule 5(3) rhe Commiuee is of 
rhe considered view that in the prcscnr economic scenario it has 
lx:come important to presc rilx: by rules Or Olher modes of 
Subordinate Legislation. the basis on which Central Government 
may consider proposals for prospccung or m.ning opcrauon rn 
specified areas, so as to reasonably contain Lhe discretion. The 
Comminee, accordingly. recommend.• rhat notification under rule 
5(3) indicating rhe basis on which proposal• for prospecting and 
Mining opcra1ions may be considered, 1x: issued expcdiliously 
under intimarion 10 lr. 
I 

J 
!\ do~<ukd note "'ill follow soon after the consultations with the Momstry 
ul Law. rd~rrcd to above. arc completed." 
~ I L.otcr un the 1\lim,try of Petroleum & !'rntural Gas furnished a note 
''" the >tatu> of opcrationalisation of NELP (Annexure· I) giving the salient 
l.'.tturc< uf the New Exploration Licensing Policy approved by Cabinet on 
:~ ! '17 >< under : 
Ia) The NF.LP a.Jopt< the policy of open availability of exploration 
),rcaic' Thi' would be in nddiuon to bidding rounds There may 
be produ.;tion shoring contracts between the Government and the 
bodding parties Ol'o:GC and OIL have to compete for obtaining the 
Petroleum Exploration Locenscs (PELs) on competitive basis 
tn>tcad of the cxtsting system of granting them PELs on 
n<'monation basos. However. they "ould be provided a level playing 
held by providing them the 'ame fi<cal and contract terms as 
avatlable to priv31e eompanocs. There would be no state 
parttcipauon through ONGC & OIL 
<bl The o.ke"oon to awaoJ block$ would be taken by the 
CC'E/I(C'ab onct C<>nllnottce on Economic Affairs) on the basos of 
the reeommcndatoons by empowered Commtttee of Seeretaroes 
..:umprlSIOS of S~o.~t:rctnry (P&NG). Finance Secretary nnd Secretory. 
Li,, .. 
(c) Comp:o ni~~. oncluding ONGC and OIL. would be paid 
lntcrnutin oml rricc of llil for <li•covcrics made in the blocks offered 
under NELP Royalty payment~ wou ld be fixed on an ad valorem 
b,"" oolstc:oo.l uf the present system of specif ic rates. Royalty 
P••)mcni' woul<l be at the rate of 12.5% for the onland areas and 
Ill"'• for offshore areas Half of the ro~alty from the offshore areas 
"ould be crcditcll to a ltydroclrbon Development Fund to 
rrontotc and funu exploration related acuvitics Royalty payments 
for cxrlorntion on deep "·''e" would be charged at half the tate 
(or o(f!oohvn: arc:•' ot the firM '\.!\'Cn }·cars after commencement of 
commercial proc.loocuon The contractors \\Ould have the freedom 
10 market th~ crude oil and ga< in the domestic market 
(o.l) /nta·ullo a tutal of 47 blocks (28 offshore and !9 onshore) have 
been idcnttfied for of!cnng under the first offer. A draft brll to 
amcnJ the Oil Fields (Regulation & Development) Act, 1948 
(ORDA) tS beong finoliscd in consultltton with Ministry of Law. 
~ceesur)'.antendments tO P&NG Rules will be processed after the 
ORDA has been amended. 
5 In the mcan·tunc. the Commottec directed OKGC and OIL to appri~e 

4 
their view< and su&ge~tions on the need for amendments to the Act and 
the Rules tn the context of the New Exploration Liccncin& Policy (NELP) 
indicating the specific suggestions on the amendments which need to be 
carried out in the principal legi~\ation and its S\lbordinatc legis\allon 
5.1 The ONGC and OIL vide their leiter dated 14.5.9S communicated 
their comboncd vocws ~nd sugj~cstions as desired by the Commillcc 
(Anncxurc·ll) and submi11ed as follows: 
la) the definitions or cxplorauon license & mineral oils in the ORO 
Act should be simplified so as to \:ccp in line with 1'-'ELP 
Government should incorporate necessary provisions for levying 
varyin1 royalty for oHshorc and onshore areas; and 
(b) suggested for amending the Pcttolcurn and Natural Gas Rule;, 
1959 for operationalising the NELP. 
6. The views and suggestions received from Ot'GC and OIL v.cre 
forwarded to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas for necessary 
action and comments so that the Commillce could take appropriate action 
in this regard 
7. Thereafter o communication dated June 22. 199S (Annexure-Ill) was 
r~eeived from the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas furnishing a note 
on the proposed amendments to the Oil Fiolds (Regulation nntl 
Development) Act, 1948 necessary for operationalising the New 
Exp\orMion Licensing Policy and phased dism~otling of Administered Price 
Mechanism (APM). It wns clarified by the 'Ministry that the views of 
ONGC and OIL were taken care of while proposing the amendments in 
the OR'D Act. 
7.1 On the isSI\0 ol amendment in the P&NG Rules, 1959 necessary to 
operationalise NELP as suggested by ONGC and OIL. the Ministry further 
submitted that these will be taken care of when they finalise the 
amendments which arc under way. 
8. The Committee visited Calcutta on May. 22, 1998 and interacted with 
the representatives of ONGC and OIL. on the subject. 
8.1 The representatives of ONGC and OIL. submitted as fo\lows;-
(i) NOCs will have level playing ground in terms of Payment at 
tntemotional prices; (b) Lucmtive fiscal packages ltke waiving of 
Petroleum Exploration Licence fees, surface rental. customs duty 
etc. and (c) Tax holiday for stipulated period for uploration in 
frontier areas. 
(ii) NOCs will be able to concentrate on systematic explomtion with 
commercial approach as th e role of creating a data base or poorly 
explored basins was entrusted wit\\ the DGR. 
(iii) Award of Block would likely be time bound. 
(iv) Frontier areas will need inputs in terms of frontier technology 

and risk sharing Naroonal Oil Companies will have rhe oprion 10 
bid joinrly wirh sclccrcd pJtln~rs S!'Ccialising in such domains. 
(v) tnsufficienr response may pose a serious consrraint of delay in 
susra ined explorurion progrnmmc Before bids were invired for 
blocks under t'ELP, rhc Government had decided to offer a few 
sclccred blocks 10 ONGC on nomination bnsis so rhnt ONGC's 
cxplorntoon programme du rong Ninth Plan was maximised. 
Application for ohcsc block< hat.! been onade and these were now 
under Govcmmcnt's con~idc:ration 
8.2 The reprcscnrativc; of Ot'GC submotted before the Commonce rhal 
NELP should give on opuon 10 Nauonal Oil Companies (NOCs) to work 
on the besr pan of the sedimentary bJ\Ins resulling iol more focussed and 
cconomuclli)· viable appwJclt to exploration They funher submitted that 
the <olkction of dala for frontier area' would be the responsibiliry of 
IJGH, b=d on "hodt rh~ block> \\Ould be offered by them and rhc 
n<ec~.:uy special funds "ould be created by rhe DGH . Regardong time 
bound programme for ""ard of blud"' for exploration, ONGC submincd 
th,ot rhc Kaloonal Ool Compnnoc< hnd rcquc<rcd the Govcmmcnl for award 
uf l.:l.!'rtOUO blotk.S on nomtnoHion ba:-.i~ tO tht.:rn prior tO invitation of bui\ 
unu~r 1'\ELP Applic~tion h;od nlrcndy boen <ubmiue<l for such award of 
blocks un nomrnnrion b:1sis which wus under considcr.llion of Govcrnmcnr 
of lndi:~ Th~ :~rcas awnnktl ttn nomi nnroon ba~ i s would be under rhc old 
polocy due to the rc.1son lhnl rhc bids hntl not been invirec,Vnwnrdcd under 
rhc NELP nnd would pu<~ibly Hoke <Ome rime. 
&.3 ONGC furrhcr clorificd rhnr b) the ycar 2002, rhe Naloonal Ool 
(\,mpanocs would get ontcrnarional procc as per new pricing policy for 
cxNong areas. 13y such rime, these addotoonal areas moghr be explored and 
hrought ontO production. The Govcrnmcnr was also consodcring a requcsr 
tor wai,cr oi customs dot)' (or 1hc good~ and sc:viccs brought into India a~ 
m the case of rl•c pro,atc con1pnnoc, . Consodcnng all these aspects, rhe 
dc~r>ron to continue cxploratoon on rh" block under old polic) had been 
t.okcn. The Commollcc spccoroc-JIIy cnquorcd whcrher 0:-IGC inlcnJed tO 
continue · \~ith the olJ poliC\ ur to up1 for the nc\\ one. The rcprc~ntati\ICS 
rcplocd thai they mo)\ht lokc lu hu•c I"El.P krms "'irhout bod rn>II3110n II 
"~s nl<o stated thai the ridds where Oi'GC and OIL be hud alrC3dy 
exploited, wt>uld ~onronu~ to he cuvcrcd under the present polky To 
ilVt11d dclny Government ha<l agreed In ,,w:ord •orne bl<>cks on nominnrion. 
'I Thereafter conain poinrs which were raised 111 rite mceung ar Calcuua 
"ere rdo,cd tc the ONGC fvr their wrnmcnts. The Committee enquired 
about rhe views, of ONGC and OIL.. on a desired regulatory framework 
with a view to ensure a level playing field for the National Oil Companies 
vis-a-vis tbc privare sccror companic!> and MNCs, under the NELP In 
theor commcnrs •·idt letter of 4th June. 1998 (Annexurc·IV) ONGC 
subntoued rhal there should be a regui;Hory body on a broader perspective 
2507 1 RS I F-l·A 

6 
which should act as a facihtator The regulatory body can uniformly cover 
both private and public sector. The regulatory framework shoud only 
provide the broad guidelines within which decisions may be taken. The 
companies should be allowed full operational freedom within the boundary 
conditions provided by Produtlion Sharing Contracts {PSCs) 
tO On the need for separation of promoter and the regulator as well as 
the need for an appellate authority lor resolution of disputes tt was 
submitted by ONGC and OIL. that Government being the promoter under 
the NELP. the regulatory functions may be assigned to some agencies of 
the Government and should mclude the representatives from the National 
Oil Companies also. There should be a mechanism for prc!ening an appeal 
by the affected party against the decision of the Regul>tory Body within 
the Re&ulatory frame work m addition to right of appeal before the High 
Court. 
II On the proposed sctling up of the Hydrocarbons Development Fund 
under NELP, the ONGC and OIL took the view that it was a good idea to 
maintoon Hydrocarbon Development Fund created out of a percentage of 
royalty payable. Such funds would help the Government to acquire 
geoscientific data in areas which were not being operated by any oil 
company because of absence of data and uncertainty. Acqutsition of data. 
utilizing such funds would make the likely areas anracuve by reducing 
uncertainty for participation of National Oil Companies and private oil 
companies. The Government may like to consider to extend this proposnl 
"' onshore nrens also as for the present it was limited to offshore areas. 
\2. Subsequently, the MOP&NG in their communication dated June 26, 
1998 furnished a note on lhc proposed amendment to the Oil Fields 
(Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 necessary lor operationalising 
the NELP ~tnd phased dismantling of the Administered Pricing Mechanism 
(APM). Tite amendment was mainly lor giving effect to different rates of 
royalty lor various fields which were not permissible under the old Act. 
The Ministry further stated that neces.~ary amendments in the P&NG 
Rules on this score witt be carried out alter the mtroduction of the 
amendments to the ORO Act. 
RECOMMENDATIONS & SUGGESTIONS 
.}3. One of the main grievance of National Oil Companies was that they 
may be in a disadvantageous position vis·a-vis private com!>anies due tO 
procedural delays particularly in acquiring better technology The 
Committee recommends that the Government should lllk• every step to 
minimise the proctdural delays to ensure thai the National Oil Companies 
art not put In a dlsodvantageous posllion doe to proctdural delays vis-a·vis 
private companies. 1C necessary and feasible llte Government may allow the 
National 011 Companies to adopt pre-quallfic-.llon or suppliers and Umltln& 
tenders ror better ltchnolog)' to o•oid procedural dtla~. 
2S011 RS I F-2·8 

7 
,1-l· The private companies which nrc entering the area of oil explorntion 
arc mainly interested in profit sans any national interest. Once they feel 
that it is not economically viable they leave the activity allogether. 
WhcreBS. the NOCs arc not concerned with profit or no profit and will 
have to stay in the national interest. Tht Committee therefore ...,eommends 
that the NOCs should bt glvrn an option to work in tbt best part or tho 
~imentary basins resulling more toe~ and economirally ~fable 
approach to txploratlon. 
js. The Commiucc feel• that the Hydrocarbon Development Fund 
created by the royally payments should be kept at the disposal of the 
propo<cd regulatory authoroty which "ill be responsible for collection of 
data from high seas as well BS frontier areas. The Committee notes that in 
C) the present d••pcnsation of NELP the fund can be used only for the 
offshore areas. The Comrnltt« therefore recommends thai the fund should 
~ utilised for the acti•llles in onshore areas as well. 
16 For regulating the activuics under the NELP the Committee 
recommends that the Hydrocarbons Authority of India as envisaged by the 
Committee tn para 10 I of the ll9th Report of the Committee on OMR 
.JI. The Committee further note• that the amcndmc'nrs to P&NG Rules. 
1959 to l)pcralion~llsc the NELP arc yet co be finaltscd The Commtttec 
rccommen<.l\ th~t the amendments should be earned out expeditiously and 
"hite firmlislng th~ amendments the suggestions. given by ONGC and OIL 
should be duly con~tdcrcd because both these organisations have practical 
knowledge on coch ancJ every aspcc1 of lhc activities proposed under NELP 
-J-!1. The Comnuttcc reitcra1cs its earlier recommendations as contained­
in the 103rd Report to reprint fol'lhwilh the P&NG Rules rectifying all the 
prin11ng errors and corrected copy thereof may be laid on the Table of 
both Houses of Parliament 
19 The Committee directs the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to 
give an action taken report on the aforcsard rccommeQdations within a 
pcnod of three month\ . 
NEw DELIIt; 
July 23, 1998 DIPAKKAR MUKHERJEE, 
Cha~rmnn. 
Commilf"t on Subordinate Ltgislauon. 

MINUTES OF TilE MEETING OF TilE COMMITTEE ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION. RAJYA SABHA 
XXV 
TI\ E.'TY-FIFTU MEm'iG 
The Commlltee met at 2.3Q P.M. on Wedne5day. June 24, 1998, tn Room 
No 126-A. Parliament House. New Delhi. 
MEMOER< PRESE>.o 
Shu Dipankar MukherJCC-Chuirman 
2 Shu Shtv Char~n Smgh 
3 l'rot Ram Bakh~h Si11gh Varma 
4 Shn S. Muthu Mam 
5 Shn A<lhi~ Shirodkar 
6 Shtt Nabam Rcbia 
SEC'RCTARJAT 
Shri T:tpan Clwttc rjcc. DepUI)' Secrerary 
2. Shri S.C. Agarwa l. [),.,,.a;· SecreJary 
3. lihtt Dccpak Guya l, Under Secn!taT)· 
2.1 The Coiumilloc wn.,it.lrrcd its draf t I 19th Report and oftcr somr 
d.scussion, approved its contents. The Commi ttee howc•cr. dc\trcd that 
the f~~rmat of t/>e draft report may be modified so as 10 make 11 crisp 3nd 
br.cf by suilabk readjustment or certain descriptive port <Ons The 
Commttlec authori<cd the Chairman to cons ider and approve the draft 
rCfX>rl as modtficd in the light of the discussiOns in the meeting. The 
Commiltcc further authorised the Chairman to present the Report 10 the 
IIOU\C 
3 The Cummiuee)' aucm ion was drawn 10 1he contents of ~itni~lry of 
P<trolcum & Natural Gas leiter No. 0· 1101~/1191-0NG-DIV dated the 
22nJ June. 1'.198 encloslllg thcrc .... ith proposed amendment 10 the Otl Fields 
(Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 necessary for operaltonalismg 
the 1\cLP and phased di5mantling of the APM The Commiuee noted thai 
proposals "ere under finalisa lion in the Mmtslry of Petroleum ond Natural 
Ga. for umendmcnt of the Petrokum and Natural Gas Rules. 1959 in 
urdcr to opcraltonalise the ""ELP. 
J I The Commiucc after some diScussrons decided that ac11on may 
bl.' taken 10 finalise the Commtttce's rcpons on the (t) Petroleum 
8 

9 
and t\•tural Gas Rules, 1959 after duly taking toto ><:count the mformatibn 
rccetvcd from the Mmimy: and (ii) The Petroleum Rules. 1976, OISD 
S!itndanls and related areas 
4. Thereafter. the Chairman of the Committee referred to the forth 
commg retirement of SIShri Shiv Charan Singh. Narain Prasad Gupta, S. 
Muthu Mani and Shrimati lla Panda, Members of the Committee, from the 
membership of the Rajya Sabha in the last week of June and fir>t week of 
July, 1998. lie recalled their valuable contribution in the Commillcc's 
deliberations and the cooperation extended by them in the course of 1ts 
worktng . The Chairman expressed hjs gratitude tO all of them. The 
Members rcctprocatcd the sentiments expressed by the Chairman 
S. The Commmcc then adjourned at 3.20 P.M. 

X Ill 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
The Commiuce met at 5.30 p. M. on Friday, December 26. 1997 in Room 
No. 126·A. Thtrd Aoor. Parliament House. New Delhi . 
MEMBERS PRESD<T 
1. Shri M. A. Baby-Chatrman 
2 Shri John F. Fernandes 
3. Shri Satchidananda 
4. Shri Shiv Cbaran Singh 
5. Shri l'lnrain Prasad Gupta 
6. Shnmalt lla Panda 
1. Shri Tara Charan MaJumdar 
1. Shri Tapan Chanerjee, Dtputy Secretor) 
2. Shrl A.K. Gandhi, Comrniuee Officer 
MEMORANDUM No. 33197 
Pttroleum & Natural Gas Rules, 195'1-- /mplemefltut•o" of l03rd Roport 
of rht Comnuuce. 
2 . The Committee considered the above memorandum and noted thai 
except one recommendation (para 2.13). all other recommendations 
contained In its !03rd Report, presented to the House on 13.5.1994, 
pertaining 10 the Petroleum & Natural Gas Rules, 1959, had been 
implemented by the Mintstry of Petroleum & Natural Gas . The 
Committee, accordingly, decided to report the matter to the House . As 
regards the outstanding recommendation. the Committee directed the 
MiniMry to forthwith reprint the Petroleum & Natural Gas Rules, 1959 
rectifying all the printing errors and mcorporating the amendments made 
thereto since 1991 when the Rules were ·last reprinted and also lay copies 
there of on ti-c Table of both the Houses of Parliament . 
3. The Commtttec wanted to know whether the existing Petroleum 4t 
Natural Gas Rules. 1959 were adequate 10 gtve effect to the New 
Exploration Locencing Policy (NELP). if not, whether an) exercise had 
been undertaken in the Ministry to amend the said Rules so as 10 bring it 
in tune with the NELP . The Committee , accordingly, directed that a 
reference may be made to the Ministry of Petroleum & N'atural Gas for 
supply of a comprehensive note on the subject for its consideration . 
4 The Committee then adjourned at 6.15 P.M . to assemble at Chennai 
on 28.12 .1997 10 

ANNEXURE-I 
Status of Optrotlonalisatlon of New exploration Lieensln& Polley 
(NELP) 
The Cabonet approved the New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) on 
28.2.97 as under· 
(i) Adopttn& of the policy of open avaolabihty of exploration acreages. 
This v.oll be in addition to bidding rounds. A wide promotional 
effon will be undenaken to highlight the geological prospectivity of 
acreages on offer and the fiscal regime offered by the Government . 
This Ministry is to take such steps as may be necessary for 
omplementahon of these goals, including carving out blocks, 
publicity and provisions of data etc. 
(ii) A b1dding format will be prepared by this Ministry, which may 
indicate such basis for offering profit sharing in the bids as may be 
decided by th1s Ministry. 
(iii) A rcvoscd model production shanng contract (MPSC) will be 
prepared by this Ministry on consultation with the relevant 
Ministncs. Till such time as the revised MPSC becomes available, 
the existing MPSC with appropriate changes may be used. 
(lv) ONGC and OIL to compete f0r obtaining the petroleum 
exploration licenses on competitive basis instead of the existing 
system of granting them PELs on nomination basis. 
(v) ONGC and OIL to be provided a level playing field by providing 
them the same fiscal and contract terms as available to private 
companies 
(vi) An Empowered Committee of Secretaries comprising Secretary 
(P&NG), Finance Secretary and Secretary (Law) will. intu alia, 
consider bid evaluation criteria, conduct negotiations with bidders, 
wherever necessary and make recommen~tions to the CCEA on 
aviard of blocks. 
(vii) Contractor will be allowed full cost recovery (i.e explorauon cost, 
development cost and productoon cost) with untimned carry 
forward period on contract area basis unlike the previous regime, 
where exploration cost was allowed to be rcco~crcd on contract 
area basis and development and production cost on fieldwisc b3Sis. 
(voii) Continuation of the exiSting policy of no signature. discovert and 
production bonuses. 
(ix) There will be no state participation through ONGC/011.. 
(x) Companies including ONGC/OIL to be paid international price of 
oil for discoveries made on the blocks offered under NELP . 
II 

12 
(xi) Royally payments at the rate of 12.5% for the onland areas and 
10% for offshore areas. Half of the royalty from the offshore 
area will be credited to a hydrocarbon development fund to 
promote and fund exploration related activities, such as 
acquisition of geological data on poorly explored basins, 
promotion of investment opponunities in the upsteam sector. 
mstitution building etc. 
(xii) To encourage exploration in deep water and frontier an:as royalty 
may be reduced or exempted. To begin wnh. royally will be 
charged at half the prevailing rntc for offshore areas for deep 
water beyond 400 metre bathymetry for the first 7 yciU'S after 
commencement of commercial production 
(xiii) Pre·tax sharing of profit oil rather than post-tax as at present. 
(xiv) Exempuon from payment of petroleum exploration license feel 
area rentals 
(xv) Freedom to the contractors for marketing of crude oil and gas in 
the domestic market. 
(xvi) The PSC contracts will be provided fiscal stability during the 
entire period of contracts. 
(.vii) This regime will apply only against contract signed under the 
NELP. 
{xviii) In addition, the question of offenng of some other clements of 
the fiscal package has been separately tak~>n up with tho Mlo 
Finance. 
(xix) The NELP to be implemented straight away f(lr the offshore 
areas as for this no consultation is required with the Stato 
Governments. However, for the onshore areas, the NELP will be 
tnlplemented after obtaining the concurrence of the State 
Government~. 
(xx) To process for effecting the necessary changes in the relevant 
Atts and Rules to implement the above proposals. 
2. Finance Minister had also announced certain fiscal incentives in the 
Union Budget lor the year 1997·98 for NELP. The~ incentives included: 
(i) Companies, inchading ONGC and 011., will be paid the 
tntemotional price of oil for new discoveries made under the 
NELP. 
(ti) Royalty payments will be fixed on an ad valortm basos mstead of 
the present system of specific rates. 
(ioi} Royalty payments for exploration in deep waters will be changed 
at half the rate for offshore areas of the first seven years alter 
commencement of commercial production. 
(iv) Freedom for marketing crude oil and gas in the domestic market. 
(v) Tax holiday for seven years after commencement of commercial 
production for b-locks in the North-East region. 

13 
(vi) ONGC and OIL will get the same duty concessions on import of 
capital goods under the NELP as private poduction sharing 
contracts. 
(vii) Cess levied under the Oil Industry Development Act, l<n4 will be 
abolished for the new exploration blocks. 
(viii) A separate petroleum tax code will be put up in place as in other 
countries to facilitate new investments . 
(ix) Explorati on and production sector has been given infrastructllre 
status under the Income Tax Act . This, inta aliD, provides for a 
five year tax holiday. 
3. Minrster or State for Petroleum an4 Natural Gas announced the policy 
in both Houses of the Parlioment on 1S.3.97, and the highlights <'f the 
NELP were tabled in Parliament. 
4. Pursuant to the approval or the NELP by the Government actions 
were taken by this Ministry to operationalise NELP. The stotus on 
different activities, which ore required to be completed before invitation of 
bids under the NELP arc given as under: 
(i) ldentiOcaHon or blocks to be oiTe.red under NELP: 
A totnl of 47 blocks (28 offshore and 19 on..hore) have been identified 
for offering under the first offer . 
(ii) Consultation with State Governments: 
This matter hns been taken up with the States for scekins thcir 
concurrence, suppon and cooperation Cor implementing the NEU' . We 
have received intimation of appointment or nodal officers by aeveral 
States. The matter is being pursued with the States for thoir concurrence to 
the terms of NELP . 
(iii) Amendments In the ORDA and P&NG Rodes: 
A draft Bitt to amend the Oil Fields (Regulation & Develoment) . Act. 
1948 (ORDA) is berng finalised in consultation with the Mirustry or Lawn. 
Necessary amendments to P&NG Rules will be processe4 •fter the ORDA 
has been amended . 
(iv) Flnallsalloo or Pdrolevm Tax Coole (PTC): 
The draft PTC has been &ubmittcd to the Department or Reven~e. 
Ministry of Finance after malcrng ptelCntation to them on the salient 
provisions of the proposed PTC. 

Oll and Natural Gas Corporation Limited 
Regd. Olfice: Jecvan Bharati Towcr·U. 124. Connaughl Circus. 
New Delht·llOOO\ 
No. ONGCIOLI VCMSG/5·98 
May 14. 1998 
To Sh . Tapan Chaucrjce. 
Deputy Secretary, 
Ra1ya Sabha Secretariat. 
Parltamcnt House An neXt . 
N.Oclhi·l SuGJEC'T. Oil fields IR<iulatlon and Oo,·olopmtot) Act, \948 and 
Petroltum & N$1ural Gas Rules, 1959 (urthtr consid•ralion 
by lhf Comm\11 .. on Subordinate Uglslation, Rajya Sabha. 
This haS reference to your lcncr l'o. RS.7(1)/9S·Com.l dated S.S.9S Sir. 
uddressed to CMD. ONGC on the above mentioned subject 
l. The aciiVtty·wisc progress report on CBM is placed at Annexure·!. 
2. \(tndly f•nd enclosed at An nexure·\! our observations and suggested 
ame n dment~ on Oil Fields (Regulation and Development) Act·l948 and 
Petroleum anu Natural Gas Rulcs·I95CJ. The observations and suggested 
amendments by OIL have been included in the documents placed at 
Anncxurc·ll. Government of India has formulated a New Exploration Ltecnting 
'Polity. in pur~uance of the policy of hbcralisation initiated in 1991·92 and 
tal<in& into cogni~ance the need of enhancing cfiort~ in Exlor~tion and 
Production of Crude Oil Natural Gas in the country by promoting the 
panicipauon of private co01panics on equal footing with the Nauooal Oil 
Companic~ . The New Exploration t.icenc•nll Pohcy haS not yet b<:en approved by 
Government and dcta•ls of the vanous terms and conditions. t~llu\ations 
arc not yet fully l<nown. The policy is aimed at providing a level playing 
f,cld •n "hith all parties could compete on equal terms . The broad salient 
feature~ of the proposed NELP made available so far through publications 
are placed at Annexure·lll. tn viC"' of the paucny of time the Hindi translation of the above 
documents shall be submined later. 
Thanking you 
14 
Yo11rs faithfully. 
ScY· 
(Dr. ,...K. Balyan), 
GM (CMSG·CC) 

COAL liED METIIANE EXPLORATION-A STATUS REPORT 
Coal Bed Methane •• the natural gas generated and oontaincd within the 
coal sequences. It ts Non-Conventional Resource and has occupied today a 
strategi~ posuton While several countries arc actively engaged in the 
E'plorotton of C'DM. USA i> the leader in regard to its production and dc'clor•rent of technology 
O•"<•C is act~>cly pcn.umg ib CBM programme presently focussed to 
c•aluate the CU\1 potcntialuy or the Gondwana Coals in Parbatpur area 
of Jhana Sub basm Vurious activille• undertaken in this rcg:~rd and the 
fu:urc plan of ac11on ior CBM E.otplorauon is as follo,.,s: 
,\Jultl dis<·fpllnar) t~sk force 
t\ mull! dt<etpl•nary ta.'k force comprising of experts from R&D 
lnslltlllcs (KDMIPE. IRS. IOGPT. lOT) and CRBC has been formed wnh 
a ProJc<l Head to provide ncecssilry operotJOnal, laboratory. lochnologrcal 
.1nJ other 111pu1s. The lask force shnll also work our long term rcqutrement 
\1( 'rare "t Ull Cf1Utpmenl/software and area< of training besides "<>rkin[l. 
0111 the lll<tho<Joh.>j!y ami approach for drilhng the released locations. The 
ra~k furcc 'll!tll ·'"" 101kc " vtcw on the CBM potentiality m the other bHs•n< Llf the country 
R<•lca>r of locollon$ 
ONC:C ha' carried our resource appratsnl of Godwana coals. Based on 
the drilling and testing results of the wells drilled so fnr and the 
cncour;,g111g lead.\ obtained from Par.!Jarpur well (JHAA). 3 R&D locrions 
have occn rclcJ,;cJ in this arcJ nnJ arc plunncd to be taken up for drilling 
in '"" flllunci,JJ vcar 
Pttrnlcum £xplor•tlnu Llc•·nce for CBM 
ONGC hns carr.cd out dnihng under tcmpo•o•y work pormit from Stale 
Guvcrnmcnt of Bihar. ONGC has npphcd for 560 sq. km. of area for 
a"ard "" JlOnlinatmn basis for camng out Cl:lM exploration. ONGC has 
been promised un area of 84 sq. km . for which official communication 
a"allcd from MOPNG. All other •rcas for CBM exploration m the 
country have been covered in blocks 10 be offered in a separate bidding procc,s. 
Action, in Hand 
Ccnlt~l Rccion has inniated necessary actions for commencement of 
funhcr exploration a<livit•cs requiring necessary inputs like: 
-Cov11 "'Orks lender for the released locations 
-fiinng of drilling ngs 
-ldcntifying/hiringlmobihsing or other serv1ces. 
IS 

16 
Future plan of action 
ONGC plans to undertake detailed testing of the wells planned for 
drilling for the purpose of assessing the commercial viability of the CDM 
production. Simultaneously, ONGC shall undertake evaluation of the 
blocks likely to be put up for bidding under separate bidding process for 
CBM. ONGC shall also be working to scout for strategic partner for 
exploration and development of CBM in the country on a long term basis. 

Scchon 
No. 
3 
(c) 
(J) 
AM£NOM£NTS TO THE OILFIELDS CR£CULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) 
ACT, 1943 (SJ Of 1943) 
Existin,s Sto:ction ~1on 
No. 
Ddi.nitioll$ 3 
ln this Acl unless there is any 
thing rcpugnam in lhc subjecr Rule 
or extent:-
"rmnernls oils'' include) nl\lural 
gas and petroleum; 
1llc holder or ;i tn•ning lease 
gramed before the comrncnce­
n>cnl of 1hc Oilficl~s (Regulo, 
cion & Dcvelopmcn~) Amend­
ment Act, 1969 shot! nolwirh· 
standing anyrhing contained in 
the instrument of lease 
or in any faw in force at 
tuldt· 
DOIU 
<•·I) 
(c) 
-
PropDKd Amcndmcnl> 
"cxplorarion licence .. means a 
lit:en.se &ronlcd fur !he PutJ'OS<' 
or undertaking explorarion or 
prospecrina openriotU for min· 
eral oil and includes a pros. 
pcct1ng licenst . .. 
"Mineral Oils.. include Pet· 
roltum, OAiuraJ lAS, gos hyd· 
raltt and hydrocarbons u­
lrttctc:d from oUt .shale!$ ... 
R""''ns 
Dcfin11ion 
simplified. 

Sc\.uon 
No. 
--
(2) 
(3) 
SIJcb cornmen.cl:mcn\. pay toY. 
ah)' in respect o! :1ny rninc::cal 
oil maned. quarucd. excavated 
or col!e<:!cd by him [rom lht 
lc3sed area aher such com· 
rnen«menL 9t tbc rotc (ot the 
time be-ing sptdficd 1n 1he 
schc~oluh: in rc~pcct o{ th~ rnin· 
crttl oil 
Secuon 
l"o 
The holder of a mlning. tease 
granted n•' or ~1rtcr the com· 
menccmcnt u[ the Oilhl.:fd.!<. (R 
& D) Amtndmcno A<l. 19119 
5oha\l pnv ro)":.t~l)' in u:.,pcd l'r 
ruty minerai oil uuuciJ 4uar· 
ritcl, cxca,·at..:d 01 ctt11cr1C~c.l by 
hint fa om the lt:~,,cd arc;, 3t th-.: 
1ate for the.: '''uc bc•ns 
~~cltic..l tl\ 1ttc Sch~d'''c tn 
r~rcet t•f that amncr<~l nil 
~ntwith"tandtnt ~n)·thlng n1n 
t.Uncd 11'1 Sub-... cct•un ( l) (a( 
Sub-sccuon \_2). no ror-thY 
sh"" be ray;~b\c 1n ftssxtt of 
-- ----------Reasons rcuposcd 1\mcnc.Jmcnl~ 

nny crude oil. ca~ing head oon­
dei1.S<Jce or narur:al ga$ wh1ch b 
unavoid;~ble lost or h rcrurncd 
ru the rcservon or B. used for 
drilling or other upcralions rc· 
l:aring ro the proJutt1on of pcc­
rol~unl or n:uural g;~s. or both 
(4) The CcnuaJ Govcrnmcn• may 
by nolificatJon in the OtrK.ial 
G:rzc:111:. atucnd the Schedule 
so as 10 enh:mcc ur reduce the 
r.ue a1 which rol·•hy ~hall be 
payable in respect or any 
m1nern! oil Vdth c:tfccc ftom 
such dare as may be specified 
In lhC' notification. 
(S) J( the Central Guvcrnmcm 
wnh a vit:\lo to cncuuragc cx­
rJottlllon in orrshorc nren ... ts 
1l,llldJcd rh111 If ir. ncccs~nry in 
the puhllc m1cres:1 so ro do, it 
may lx: nutlflc111ion in rhc (){ft. 
cia! OtJlc:Uc exempt gcucraJJy, 
either obsolurcly or t;t1hjcc-1 to 
Such I.'OIIdHi«HI~ tl.S lllil)' ~ 
~pccirlc'-' m rhc n01lficouon. 
mlncrul oil puxJucc4J from such 
----

Section 
No. 
12 
E.xlstinJ Secrion 
The C-entral Government may. 
if $3tlsfied that 11 1S In 1he 
publi.c interest su 10 do. tn any 
case. grnnl any mining lease or 
the: working of any mine on 
terms and condi tions di(fcrcnl 
from lhOS.C laid down '" the 
rules made under Scctiun S 
and 6. 
Sec1aon 
No 
Proposed Amendments 
area. from the whule: or pall of 
royally leviable !hereon. 
The: Cenlral Governntent may. 
If Jatisficd that il ls in the: 
public mtcrcst so to do. au­
thorise In any case the granting 
of any c:Jiplorat1on licence m 
minins lca.!,.e or the wurking t>f 
any mine on terms und t:onc:h· 
tlun) difCcrent from thm.<! laid 
4Jown In the rule~ made under 
Section S and 6. 
Reasons 
Prup<>sed 
a<.ltltt ion for 
orr~horc. 
To bnng 
Exp. 
Licence-s 
under lhe 
amb1t or 
thi~ Sec-
lion . 

P£TROI..EUM AND NATURAl. (;AS RUI..ES, 1959 
Rule 
No. 
E.xi~ling Ruk 
l. Odimlion m thc.sc rules. unless the contcXI othcrv•isc 
rc:qu•rCl 
(aa) "conttnem.aJ s.hdf' means 1hc seabed and s.ub-so1l or 
MJbmnnnc arc3s adjaccn1 to lhe coasl uf India 
including ils island bul oulside 1he area of il~ 
1CrritOrial W<J(CtS, to 3 depth of 200 OlCICIS Or bcyvnd 
lhttl limited to where the depth or the .!upcrjoccnt 
water ntlmils of the cxploilalion of nntur-.1 rC!tuurcc\ 
of the arcl'IS. 
Propo><:d Amcndmcnl 
(3iJ) "ler-ritorJol waters••. "contine-ntal shelf''. ''udusive 
economic %Ont" Hmarilime boundaries and contiguous 
tone" shnJI h:w~ rht ~3M~ me~ning ~~:,. a:S$Igncd to them. 
The Tcrruorial W:ucrt. Conuncnl:al Shelf, Exclusive 
Economic Zone and Other M:uitimc Zones Act. 1976. 
N01.E: 'olher martum~ 1.011C'.S' not defined in the Ac·t, as 
such mArltlntt houndDtJes be deli ned. Further, 
coutlguouJ ~one should also h~ indudcd. 
(uh) "Coni he'd mtthnnc'' mc<u\~ gas obtained from 
c:o:ll/lignite scnm~ nnd consisttng prlmnrHy of 
hydrc'IC;.rbun' '" mcth:mc gas 
(oc) "condci\MIIc" mean\ tho~ low vapour 
hydrocurbOn\ nbt~uned frum n:uural gns. 
conden~otiun 1 hat ore tiquid at notmnl 
tcmperaaurc anc.J prcuurc cond1tlons. 
pressure 
1hrough 
surface: 

' a 
' 
r 
<D 
Rule 
No. 
(b) 
(e) 
Existing Rule 
•·crude oil" means petroleum in its natural state 
before it has been refined or otherwise treated 
but from which water and foreign substances 
have bi:cn extratlcd. 
.. gas well" means 
production from which 
any 
is 
well the 
predominant I} 
Proposed Amendment 
(ad) "Hyd~arbon" m~ons an organic clJemical 
(compound) mixtu~ of hydrogen and carbon. 
(ae) "Cas llydrute" means naturally occurring 
solids composed or water molecules forming a rigid 
lattice of cages ••ch containing a molecule of 
natural gas. 
(b) May be deleted as II is provided in the Act 
under section 3 (C) "crude oil" means Petroleum 
in its natural state before it has been refined or 
othctwise treated but from which water and fore· 
ign substances have been extracted. 
(cc) "petroleum exploration license" mc.ans a 
license granted for the purpose of undertaking 
exploration or prospecting operations for mineral 
oil (dd) "frontier orca" means an area which 
owing to logistics or c~nnomic or technological 
consid~rntJons 1S hitherto unexplored or relatively 
less explored as mny be dee~dcd by the Central 
Government from time to lime. 
(e) "!~OS well" means any well the production from 
which is predomonnntly n•tural gns or 

(i) 
natural gas or condensate or both in quantity . 
"narural gas" me"n& gas obraincd from bore­
holes and consrst ing priniarily o f hydrocarbon' 
condensate or both, and includes a coal bed 
merhanc and ,As hydrate w<lls. 
(cc) "gus" means nnrurnl gas. 
(ga) "grid" means an area limired by meridians 
and parallels or larnude expressed in whole num­
bers of degree (I xI) . 
(gb) "&rid-block" mcons an area comaincd bel­
ween meridians and porallcls or larirude lying at 
equal imemals of IS' to each orher wirhin the 
same grid (15 '><15') 
(gc) "Sub-block" means an area conrained between 
meridians and parallels lying nr equal inremnls of 
5 minutes to each other (5'X5') within the same 
grid-block 
(gd) "unit" mean~ an area contained betwee n 
rncridinns and parallels lyong at equal inrcrva l of 1· 
10 each orhcr withi n rhc same "sub-block"(/'><./'). 
(i) "nu rural gas" mcnns gas obtained from bore­
hlrles and consist ing primar ily or hydrocarbons and 
nlhtr uss~>~:inted ~nses and includes coal bed 
mctltune. IIU> hydrar• and (bill does not) Include 
Helium occurring in o~~ocitllinn with such hyd­
rocarbons. 

' 
Rule 
No. 
(gg) 
5. 
(I) 
(2) 
Existmg Rule 
"tcrritori:ll wacers" mctms the belt of sea adjil· 
ecru to the coast nf India includong rts occland 
and extending into the se~ to a dr.<tancc of 6 
nautical miles measures from the appropnatc 
base line 
(irnm of liceflu or lea.oe. 
II license or lease in respec t uf 
( 1) any lan d or mineral unLlcrlying the ocean 
within the territorial wntcrs or contin<!'nlaJ shclr 
of Ind ia and it is ve<tcd in the 
Uruon, shall be granted by tire Cenlral Govern 
mcnt Every license shall lcao;c contam ~uch uf 
the terms, covenant~ and com.f1t1Un\ prcs,ubcd 
by those rules as arc applicable and •uch 
Proposed Amendment 
(ia) ool means crude oil. 
(ib) "oillitlds" may bt dtl<l•d as olrt11dy delined In 
th< Act or 19~8. 
(ic) ''Gas fields" muns any nrta "here any opera­
tion for the purpose or ohtalnlng natural gas is lo 
,,., ur Is being tarried 1111. 
To be onutled 
5 G ron I of license or lease. 
(I) n license or lease "' rc.<pect of 
(I) any land or nuncral underlying the ocean within 
1hc tcrrltorltll wn t cr~ und comincnttt l shelf or 
cxdus.vc economic zouc of rndin vc~h:d in 1hc 
unrnn, sh;oll be grun ted hv the C'cmral 
Govc1 nmc1H 
(2) Fvny l"<n<c and lca\c shroll contOIII such ot 
thl· tcrnh cnvcnnnr~ aud t:Un<.ltnon~ prc!<icnb'"d by 
tho<< rules a< ar< upplr<ablc and ""h aoo11oonal 
term\. ~:uvcnam~ anc.l cnnd11101l~ as mny be. 

additional rerms, covenants and condirions '" 
may be pro,ided in rhe agre~mcnl berwecn lhc 
Central Govcmmcnr and lhc licensee or lhc 
les~ce. 
Provided that where rhc liccn'c or rhc lease has 
been or is 10 be granted by the State Govern 
mcnr, lhc Cenrra l Government shall consult the 
S t at~ Government before ngreeing lo such addt· 
tiona! terms col'cn~nls nnd condiuons . 
(3) The Cenlral Government, if deems Or, rnuy 
from lime to time nollfy ln the official Gazelle 
parllculars nogarding !he basis on which the 
Central Go\ .. ernmcnr may be prepared to con~id­
cr proposals for prospecting or mining opera­
tions In any ~pe~ificd anas. 
provided '" rhc agreement between the Central 
Government and the liccnsc-<." nr the lc~cc . . 
Provided that where the hccn<e or the ka<e has 
been or is to be grontcd hr the State Government. 
!be Cenual Government shall consult the State 
Government before •grcctnr to such additional 
terms covenant~ and condition,, 
(3) The Ltase or Licen<e sh~ ll be granted by the 
Cenl ral and or lhe State Government within 60 
days from the rorelpt of such application in the 
Prl">crlbed form. 
(3) (./}The Centra l Government if deems fir. from 
time to tim e notify 111 the ofroci~l Ga<cllc particu­
lars regarding the bpsis <>n wldch the Centra l 
Government mny be prepared It\ consider propo· 
sols for prospecting or mining ope rat ions in any 
srccificd oren,. 
(·I) (S) In !he cnnt of a discovery of petroleum in a 
llctnscd area, If It Is fttund thai the field extends 
beyond the boundaries ur the orca covered by the 
llcen'<, the llc•nse may apply to the Cen tral 
Guv~rnm~:nl, or whert th~ lict.tnse Is to be or has 
h•cn grouted hy the State Go,·ernment, lo !he Stale 
·~ ·~ 

Rule 
No. 
6 
7(i) 
Existing Rule 
/nilia/ licenSt fir lt/IJt ftt A fee amounting to (i) 
Rs. 10,0001· (Rupees ten thousand only) in the 
case of a license and (ii) Rs. 25.000/· (Rupees 
twenly five thousand only) in the case of a lea.se 
shall be paid to the Central Government or the 
State Government as the case may be by the 
licensee or lessee prior to the formal grant of a 
license or ·a lease . 
Every license shall have the exclusive right to 
carry out in addition to geological and geophy•i· 
cal surveys information drilling and test drilling 
operations for petroleum in the area covered by 
the license shall bave the exclusive. 
Proposed Amendmcnc 
Govornment and the Central Go,·ernment for inclu­
sion or such extended area or the !idd in the 
licensed orea, and the Central Gu>efnment or the 
State Government, a; the case may be, may permit 
or rtfust such tdendl>d area to be induded in tbe 
llcenst. 
6. lmti31 license or lease fcc . A fcc amounting 10 
(i) Rs. 10,000/· (Rupees ten thousand only) in the 
case of a license and (ii) Rs. 25,000/- (Rupees 
twenty five thousand only) in the case of a lease 
shall be paid 10 the Central Government or the 
State Government a5 the case may be, by the 
licensee or lcs.<cc prior to the formal grant of a 
licen$C or a lease. 
7(i) every licenr.ee ~hall have the exclusive right to 
carry out in addition to geolllgical and geophysical 
surveys. information drilling and test drilling oper­
ations for petroleum in the area covered by the 
lieenr.e ond shall have the exclu•ive right to a lease 
over such part of the area covered by the license 
as he may desire. 
N 
0 

(ii) 
tO. 
right to a lease over such part of the land 
covered by the license as he may desire. every 
lessee shall have the exclusive right to conduct 
mining operations "for petroleum and natural gas 
in and on the land demised by such lease 
togetherwith the right to construct and maintain 
in and on such land. such works, buildings. 
plants. waterways. roads. pipelines. darns. reser, 
voirs. tan ks. pumping stations. tramways. rail· 
ways. telephone lines. electric power lines and 
ocher structures and equipment as are necessary 
for the full enjoyment of the lease or for 
fulfilling his obligation under the lease. 
Arta and ltrm of license: The area covered by a 
license shall be specified therein and the terms 
of a license shall in the first instance be valid 
for a period of four years which may be 
extended for two further periods of one yea r 
each. 
(ii) every lessee shall have the exclusive right to 
conduct mining operauons for petroleum in and on 
the area demised by such lease togetherwith the 
right to construct and maintain in and on such orca 
such works. buildmgs. plants. platforms, water · 
ways roads. pipelines. dams. reservoirs. tanks. 
pumping stations. tramways. railways telephone 
lines electric power lines. other structures, equip­
ment and other facilities as are necessary for the 
full enjoyment or the lease or for fulfilling his 
obligations under the lease. 
10. Arta twd ltrmt of lictnu: 
(I) The area covered by a license shall be specified 
therein and the term of a license shall in the first 
instance be for o period of nine years for frontier 
orcas ond seven years fClr other areas which may 
be extended for two further periods of one year 
each: 
Provided that the term of a license granted before 
the commencement of these amended Rules may 
be extended upto a toto! period of nine years: 

R~lc 
No. 
Existtng Rule 
l t Security dtposit, annual license fee and shedding 
of areas 
(2) The licensee shall pay yearly in advance by w:ly 
of license fcc in respect of his license u sum 
ca lculat ed for each square ldlomc tcr or pllrt 
thereof covered by the license at the following 
rates: 
{i) Rs. 8 for the first year of the license; 
{ii) Rs. 40 for the second year of the license; 
(iii) Rs. 200 for the third year of the license; 
{iv) Rs. 400 for the fourth year of the license; 
(v) Rs. 600 for the first and second years of 
renewal. 
Proposed Amendment 
Provided funher that the tcrrn of a license granted 
prior to the commencement of lhes< amended 
Rules in respect of an area m wbich a discovery is 
made may tx: extended upto a total period of 
eleven years. 
{II) Security deposit, annual license fee and shed· 
ding of areas: 
(2) The licensee shall pay yearly irt advance by 
way of license fcc in respect of his license a sum 
calculated for each square kilometer or part 
thereof covered by the license at ihc following 
rates:-
(!) Rs. 8 for the fir;t year of the license; 
{ii) Rs. 40 for the 'ccond year of the license; 
(iii) Rs 200 for the third to ..,vcnth year of the 
license; 
(tv) Rs 40U lor the fourth to ninth year for 
frontier Dr<O' ond fourlb to eighth year for 
ureos olh~r ahan rrontler areas or the license; 
(v) Rs. 600 per year for the tenth year and 
thereaner for frontier and eight yenr and 
th~rean~r for ereas olhe r than frontier area. 

(3) The licensee shall be at liberty to determine th~ 
license or relinquish any pan of the area co­
vered by the license on giving not less than two 
ntonths notice in writing to the Central Govern· 
ment or where the license is to be or has been 
granted by the Stare Governmenr, ro the State 
Government and the Central Government. 
---
(Provided that I~ In th ~ co.se ol a llttnse grallled Ia 
resptcl or an are-a offtrcd through an o~o com. 
petltlve blddln~ sy.r~m uner tht lir$1 day ol Janu· 
ary, 1998 shall be go>rrned by the terms of the 
cuntr-•cl.) 
(3) (i) The relinquishment of a licensed orca shall, 
in as far as 11 may be practicoblc, be by following 
the grid pattern . 
(ii) The licensee may determine the license or 
relinquish any port of the area covered by the 
license by giVing nut lc» than two monrlts no11cc 
in writing to the Central Governrnclll or where the 
license is to be or has been granted by the State 
Government, 10 the Stnte Government and the 
Centra l Government. 
(l'ro••ldcd thut where a liccn«! has b'"'" granted In 
rc;pc,·t or on orca offered on the bnsb <if open 
com(Jcllllvf blddln~ system, the dctermlnallon or 
the rellnqul!lunent •• the case moy be shall be 
>uhJ<·cc co lhc tcrrn> ooul conditions spel'ilied In tit~ 
coni race 5i1:ncd hctiH•cn the liccusee and the 
CcnCr:AI Cuvtrnnu.•ul. 

Rule 
No. 
12 
13 
(2) 
(a) 
Existing Rule 
Arta and Ttrm of a Least Unless agreed 
otherwise the area covered by a lease shall 
ordinarily be 250 sq. kms. and the terms of a 
lease shall ordinarily be 20 year.;. 
Mining lease fees rent :-
On gran 1 of a lease, the lessee 
Shall pay to the Central Government or the 
Stale Government as the case may be for every 
year a fixed yearly dead rent at the following 
rates: 
Rs 12.50 per hectare or part thereof for the first 
100 sq km and Rs. 25 per hectare or part 
thereof for area exceeding the first 100 sq km 
provided tllat the lessee shall be liable to pay 
only the amount but not both , 
Proposed Amendment 
liA Purpose of a license to be specified: 
A license under these rules may be granted for 
prospective or exploration of one or both of the 
following namely :-
(i) petroleum excluding coal bed methane: 
(ii) coal bed methane; 
and the same shall be clearly specified therein. 
12. Area and Term of a Lease 
Unless agreed otherwise the area covered by a 
lease shall ordinarily be 250 sq. kms. and the term 
of a lease shall ordinarily be 20 years which may 
be extended for (two further ptriods of fivt years 
tach) slmllor period or further perlod(s) depending 
upon tho life ot the O;:ld. 
13. Mining lease fees rent' 
(2) On gront of a lcusc, the lessee:· 
(a) Shnll poy tO the Central Government or the 
State Government, as the cose may be for every 
year a fixed yearly dead rent at the following 
rates: 
Rs. 12.50 per hectare or part thereof for the first 
100 sq. km. and Rs. 25 per hectare or pan thereof 
for area exceeding the first 100 sq km provided 
that the lessee 5hall be liable to pay only the dead 
rent or the royalty, whichever is higher in amount 
but not both; 
·~ 
0 

(b) Shall also pay to the Slate Government for 
tbe surface area of tbe land actually used by 
rum for the purpose of the operations conducted 
under the lease, surface rent of such rate, not 
exceeding the land revenue and cess assessed or 
uses:sable on tbe land, as may be specified by 
the State Government with !he approval of the 
CentrJI) Government. 
14. Royalty on p•IToltum and fwnishing of ,./urns 
and particulars: 
(I) (a) Notwithstanding anything in any agreement, a 
lessee shall 
(i) where the lease bas been gramed by the 
Central Government pay to that Government. 
(ii) where the lease has been granted by the 
State Government pay to that Government a 
royalty for the period beginning on the first day 
of April, 1990 and ending on !he 31st day of 
March, 1993 at the rate or four hundred and 
eighty one rupees per metric tonne of crude on 
and casing head condensate and at 10% at the 
value at well head or natura l gas obtained by 
the lessee provided by the Cemral Government 
or as the case may be the State Government 
with the approval of the Central Government 
may direct that such royalty be paid in Pet­
roleum and Natural Gas . 
(b) Shall also pay to the State Government for the 
surface of the land actually used by rum around 
lbe wt/1 or lmWI:~tion for the purpose of the 
operations conducted under the lease, surface rent 
at such rate. not exceeding the land revenue and 
cess assessed or assessable on the land, as may be 
specified by lhe Central Government wilh the 
approval of the Central Government. 
14. Royalty on pelroleum and furnishing of returns and parroculars · 
{I) Norwlthsranding anything contained in any 
agreement, a lessee shall 
(i) where a lease has been granted by the Central 
Governmcnl pay tO that Government. 
(ii) where a lease has been granted by lhe Slate 
Government pay to that Government. A royalty in 
respect or any mineral oil mined, quarried, exca­
vated or collected by him from the leased area at 
rhc rate specified in or notified under the Oilfields 
(Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 from 
rime 10 time. The royalty shall be payable on 
monthly basis and shall be paid by the end of the 
su~cecding month. 
Provided that royalty shall nor be payable in 
respect of any crude oil, condensate, natural gas, 
coni bed methane or gas hydrate which is unavoid· 
ably lost or is returned to the reservoir or is used 
for drilling or other operations relating to the 
producroon of petroleum . 
._, 

Rule 
No. 
Existing Rule 
(') Provided further thai royally shall not be pay· 
•ble in respect of any crude oil, casing head 
condensate or natural gas which is avoidable 
lost or is returned to the reservoir or is used for 
drillin g or other operations relating to the 
production of petroleum or natural gas or both 
17. 
Every lessee shall pay to the State Government 
where the lease has b<:~n granted by the Gov 
crnment royalty lor the period of lease before 
the fst Novemb<:r. 1962 at the rate specified in 
the lease deed. 
Transfer of Assignment: The licensee or the 
lessee shall not assign or transfer his right, title 
and interest in respect or the license or the lease 
or in respect of the land or mineral underlying 
the ocean within the territorial waters or the 
con tinental shelf or India covered by such 
license or lease gr.mtcd by the Cen tral Govern­
ment, without the consent in writing of the 
Ccntr11l Government and in ease of lond co­
vered by a license or lease granted by the State 
Government without the consent in writtng of 
the Central Government being first obtained 
through the State Government. 
Proposed Amendment 
17. Transfer of 1\S!Ignmcnr, The license or the 
lessee shall not assign or trnnsfcr his right Iitle and 
interest in r~spcet of the license or the lease or in 
respect of the laud or mineral underlying the 
occnn within the tcrrnorial watc" or the continen· 
tal shelf or the exclus 1ve cconon11c wne of India 
covered by such license or lease granted by the 
Centra l Government. wi1hout the cons~nl in writ· 
1ng of the Centro I Govcrnml'nt anti in cnsc or land 
covered by a hccnsc or lease granted by the State 
Government without the consent 111 writing of the 
Central Government being fir.t obtained through 
the State Government Th• Centrol Cuvemmtnt 
shall convey Its con>cut "llhln si~t)' d~ys or receipt 
or such oppll<atlou hy th< Ctntr"l Con,rnm<nl. 

19. 
20. 
General Provision. The lic<'nscc or lhc lessee 
shall. 
(a) mamtain in good repairs and condihons all 
apparatus, appliances and wcliJ capable of pro­
ducing pclroleum on the land covered by the 
license or chc lease: 
(I>) execute all prospcccing or minmg opcraroons 
on such land in a proper and workman like 
manner 10 accordance wirb ~urh mcchods and 
pmrcicc as lhc cusromary used 1n modern oil· 
fields practiec and abide by all ms1tuc11ons, 
dcrcc110ns and orders lhal may he given pur· 
suam ro any rule under chapler IV. 
St!>pcnsion of Condirlons of License or Lease : 
(I) Upon wrinen applieac ion being made by I he 
ltccnscc or lessee or where arc lwo or more o( 
I hem by not Jes.< chan one half of cheir number, 
che Ccncrol Government where chc license or 
---- - - --------
19. General Prov1sion The licensee or lhe lessee 
shall· 
(o) mainlain in good repairs and condi1ions all 
app<ralus, appliances and wells <apablc of produc­
mg pclrolcum on chc area covered by lhc license 
or lhc lease ; 
(b) cxcrulc all prospecrcng or mining opcracion on 
Such area 111 a proper nod workman like manner in 
accordance wich such mclhods and pmcricc as arc 
cusromary used in modern oilfield and abide by all 
ln<lruccions dircc11ons and orders thnt may be 
given pursuanc 10 any rule under Chapter IV. 
20, Suspcnsi()n of Condlcions or License or Lease: 
(l) Upon wriucn iipplicalion being made by 1he 
liccu~~c or lessee or where arc lwo or more of 
1hcm by no1 less chnn one hoi( of !heir number, 
lhc C'cnltul Govcr!lmcnc where chc liccn<c of lhc 
------ -

Rule 
No. 
Existing Rule 
the lease has been granted by it or the State 
Government with the prior approval of the 
Central Government where the license or the 
lease has been granted by the State Govern· 
men1 may from time 10 time, if it considers that 
adequate reasons have been furnished, author· 
ise for periods not on any occasion exceeding 
six months, suspension of any or all of the 
terms, covenants or conditions relating to the 
working of the land covered by a license or the 
lease. 
(2) The Central Government or the State Gov­
ernment as the case may be if it authorizes 
suspension as aforesaid, impose such conditions 
as it may tltiok fit for the protection of any 
bore· holes equipment or works on such lands or 
for the protection of any petroleum deposits, 
water or minerals in such land or in any 
adjacent land or for any other purpose whatsov· 
er and the licensee or the lessee shall comply 
with such conditions as if they are incorporated 
m the license or the lease. 
Proposed Amendment 
lease has been granted by il or the Stole Govern · 
menl whh the prior approval of the Central 
Government where the license or the lease has 
been gnnted by the State Government may from 
time to time, if it considers that adequate reasons 
have been furnished authorise for periods not on 
any O<Xasion e.cecdtng six months . Su.\pension of 
any or all of the terms, covenants or conditions 
relating tO the working of the area covered by a 
license or the lease . 
(2) The Central Government or the State Govern· 
ment as the case may be, if it authorized suspen· 
sion as aforesaid. impose such condition as it may 
think fit for the protection of any bore -holes 
equipment or works in such area or for the 
protection of any petroleum deposits, water or 
mtncrals in such area or in any adjacent area or 
for uny other purpose whatsoever and the licensee 
or the lessee shall comply with such conditions as 
if they are incorporated in the license or the lease. 

21. 
22. 
Cancellation of Licenses and leases: 
(1) U tbe licensee or the lessee or his exo<utors, 
administrators or assignees at any time during 
the term of the license or the lease:-
(a) •••••• 
(b) fails to use the !Bnd covered by it bonafide 
for the purpose for while it bas been granted or 
(c) uses such land for a purpose 01her than that 
for which it bas been granted 
Delivery of Premises upon dtt~rminalton of 
license or lease: 
(I) Upon determination of the license or the 
lease under these rules the licensee or the lessee 
shall deliver the land covered by tt and all wells 
on that land in good order and condition. 
21. CanceJhuion of Licenses and Leases: 
(I) I( the licensee or the lessee or bis exec:utors, 
administrators or assignees at any time during the 
term of the license or tbc lease:-
(a) ••••• 
(b) fails to use the area covered by it bonafide for 
the purpose for which it has been gntntcd or 
(c) uses such area for a purpose other than that for 
which it has been granted. 
22. Delivuy of punusu upon dtttrminalion etc. of 
license or least: 
(I) Upon determination or cancellation or relinqu­
ishment in pan or in full of a license the licence.. 
within six months from the date of such determina­
tion or cancellation or relinquishment. or within 
such further time as the Central Government or 
State Government, a~ the case may be may allow 
and on refund of iiS security deposit shall deliver 
the area released on account of the determinalion 
or cancellation or relinquishment, after resto ring it 
in good order and condition in accordance with 
cstnbli<hcd international petroleum prnctices. 

Proposed Amendment 
Rule 
No. ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Exisling Rule 
(2) AI any time widtin six months :titer the 
determination of !he license or the tense under 
these rules or within such further time as 1hc 
Cenual Govemmenl or the State Government 
as the case may be. mny allow the former 
licensee or lessee may subject to lhCSC rules 
remove or dispose of any peuoleum recovered 
during the currency of such license or tease. ond 
all stores. equipment tooh and machinery and 
s<> much of 1he improvements on 1hc land 
covered by the licensee or 1hc lessee as the 
SIUtc Government may pemtil 
(2) If the holder of a mining tense desires not to 
continue mining operatioiU and intends to rclinqu· 
ish the tease area m part or 111 lull. or a tease is to 
be determined. the lessee shall g~ve prior wriuen 
nolicc at least one ycQ$ before the date of 
intended relinquishment or determination as the 
case may be. to the Ccnual Government atoogwith 
an abandonment pion incorporating all action.< and 
$tcps necessary to restore the area in accordance 
with established intcroationGI petroleum procticcs. 
for approval of the Cenlral Government, and ~hall 
deliver 1hc arcu released by such relinquishment or 
determination of tense after restoring it io good 
order and condition in uccordancc with the aban-
(3) 11 such petroleum, s1ores. equipntcnl, tools, 
machinery and improvemcnls arc nol so rc· 
moved or disposed of they may be sold by 
auction by order of the Central Oovernmenl or 
the Slate Government as the cose may be at the 
risk of the former licensee or lessee. The 
proceeds of such sale shall. be held by the 
Central Government, or by the Stale Govern· 
men! as the case may be unlit applied for the 
obta1ned by him. 
donment plan. 
(3) Upon eaneetlati<)O of a m1mng tease under 
these rules. the lessee shall deliver the area 
covered by such lco•c niter restoring it in good 
order and condition 111 accordance wilh an aban· 
donmcnt plnn prepared as per established intema· 
tionol petroleum practices and approved by the 
Ccn~tal Government 

(4) After determination or cancellation or rclinqu. 
ishment of a license or lease, the hold<'r of sucb 
license or lca<e, as the case may "", shall take all 
necessary act1on and steps so as to p<L'vent any 
ha<ards to human life, property, cnvironmcnc 
marine resources or navigation. 
(S) At any time within six monrhs after the 
determination of a license or a lease under these 
rules or with1n such further time a.< lhc Central 
Government or the Slate Governmen1. as the case 
may ""· may allow, lhc former l1censec or lessee 
may, subjccc 10 these rules remove or dispose of 
any petroleum rccoverL'd during lhc currency of 
such license or lease and all Slores cquipmenl lools 
and machinery And M> much of the improvcmenc 
on lhe land covered by the license or the lease as 
1he State Govcrnmcnc may permn. 
(6) Sov• os provided In suh-seclion (I) obove if 
such petroleum, stores, cquiptnenl, 1ools, mach in­
ery and improvcmcms arc not .<o removed or 
disposed of they muy be sold by auc1ion by order 
of the Ccntrnl Govcrnmen1 or lhc Stale Govern· 
mcn1 as lhe case may be at chc risk of the former 
hccnsec or lessee . The proceeds of such sale shall 
he held by the Central Goven1menc, or by the 
Slate Government, as che ca•e may "" unci! 
apphcd for an obluined by the licensee or the Jessee 

Rule 
No. 
25 
Existing Rule 
Fu tic payable by due date: 
(I) All license fees. lease. royahu:s and oth<r 
payments under these rules. shall. rl not paid tr. 
the O:ntral Government or the State 
Government as the case may be within the time 
specified for such payment, be increased by 
10% for each months or portion of a month 
dunng which such fees, royalties or other 
paymen ts remain unpaid 
Direction w prtv<nt wastr The lessee shall 
comp ly with such directions as the Ccntrnl 
Gov ernm ent where the lease has been granted 
by that Government o r where the lease hn~ 
been grant ed by the State Gover nntcnt . as the 
Centra l Government of the State Government 
with the pnor concern nl the Central 
Government may issue rcMricting the u>C of 
Petroleum or Natural Gas for any purpose 
which the Central Government or the State 
Governmcnl may consider 10 be uncoonnnucal 
or conducive 10 wasle 
Proposed Amendment 
23. Ftt tiC. payable by Jut d111f -
ll) All license Ices. lease. royalties and other 
payments under th~e rule> shall. rl nut paid to the 
Central Government or the State Government as 
the case may be w1thin the 11me 'pccifred lor such 
payment (or rcfuncls-f>aymcnu ru l>c m~dc co 
licensee and ha I'C nor been pard, be increased b) 
two per cent lor each month or portion of a month 
during whrctt such fees. royalties or other 
payments rcmnin unpaid 
2S. Dircctiuns ro prevent wustc- T ho lessee shall 
comply with sudt dircct o<m> as the Cen tra l 
Government where the tease has been gran ted lly 
thnt Government or where the le:rsc has been 
grnntcd by the St:rtc Gove rnment . or the S ta te 
Governmen t with the prior consent of the Central 
Governmen t may issue restr icting the usc of 
petroleum or uil or gas or coni bed mcthnne <>r gas 
hydrntt lor any purpo~e wh1ch the Centra l 
Government or the State Government mny 
consider t<l be uncconomrcal or conducive to 
wa"c 

12. 
R.stncrion of Producrion 
The Central Govemmenl may io the intcrcSI of 
the conservation of mineral oils by general or 
spc:ci•l order, reSiict the amount of petroleum 
or natural gas or both that may be produced by 
the lessee in a partkular field 
Control of Operation w pr.-·~nt tscapt of p<l• 
rol~um or access of -,.·our: 
Th~ Central Government may alter rcsonablc 
notice to the lessee 
(b)" assume control of the operatum of an 011 
well or g•s well and adopt such means a< may 
appear tO it necessary or cxrcdicnl 10 ptC\'Cnt 
the access uf water to such well; oJ to the 
pctrolc11m bearing or gas bearin& str3ta or both 
Agency for supervision 
(I) For the purpose of asccnaining whether the 
provisions contained Arbimwan of clispure~: 
Every license or lease shall in Rules 24 to 28 
and 30 nnd any orders. instTuction' and dircc· 
tions issued th~rcunder have been or arc being 
complied with the licensee or the lessee and 
whether the prospecllng or mining opcratillns 
arc being carried out by him Jn accon.lancc with 
these rules, the Central Government may. bv 
notification in lhc official Gazette. consututc a 
suitable agency consisting of such number of 
persoas as th~ Central Go•cmmcnt thrnks fit 
21 . RtJITi(/l(llf of Prudul'twn . 
The Central Govl!tnmcnt m~J"' an the sntcrcst of 
the conservatiOn nf mineral oil< b) ~cncral uJ 
spc:ctal order, restrict the amount of petroleum ot 
oil or gas or cu•l bed methane or g,,< hydrare that 
may be produced by the lcss~e in a p3rticu13r ficl<! 
{and 1=.: <hJII ha•·.: .. a/k our option) . 
29 Cnnrrol uf Oton~riml I<• pr~•·mt tscapt of 
ptuolrum cJT tlt.CtH of .._a,tr 
The Central Government ma)· after rcasonahlc 
nolic-t: to the lc~e . 
(h} a<sumc control ul tho operation .,r an oil well 
or $" well and adopt such mean< .- M3Y lppcar 
to 11 ncccs.s.~ty or expedient w prevent the access 
of water to >uch well, or to the petroleum bcarin~ 
or 011 bearing or ga. bearing or coal ~ methane 
bearing or ~a) h)drutt ~~taring strata 
32. Agency for <UpCtVI<inn 
(1) For the purpi"C or n<ecJtaimng .... hcthcr the 
pnw"10n< contained 111 Rules 24 ttl 28 and JO and 
any ordcf'. nlstructlons and directions issued 
thcrc·undcr have been OJ arc berng complied with 
the liccn~ce ur the lessee ond whether the pros­
pecting or 0\IJIIJ\g operation' nrc being carried out 
by him ill accordance with these rules. the Central 
Government may. by notification in the offit1al 
Galcllc. a11thorizc an agency consisting of such 
number of rcrMlJIS as thl' Central Go,cnuncnt 
th1nk' 111 

Rule 
No. 
33. 
Existing Rule 
be subject 10 the following term, namely:­
Any dispute (including a dispute regarding the 
market price refert~d to in rule 18) between the 
Government and the licensee or the lessee 
regarding:-
( a) Any righl claimed by 1he licensee or the 
lessee under the license or lease or 
(b) Any breach allcg~d to have be~n commoncd 
by the licensee or lessee or any of the term. 
conveyance of the license or lease, or any 
penally proposed 10 be innicted thereof; or 
(c) the fees, royalty or rents payable under the 
license or lhe lease, or 
(d) any other maner or thing connected wolh 
the license or the lea.«:. 
shall be senled by 1wo arbitrators. one 10 be 
nominated by lhc Central Government and the 
other by the licensee or lessee or on case of 
disagreement bclwccn the arbitrators, by an 
umpire appointed by the arbilnuors by wriling 
under their hands before proceeding with arbit· 
ration. The arbilrators or the umpire shall also 
determine which parry shall bear the expenses 
of the arbitration or whether such expenditure 
shall be deviled between 1he 1wo parties ond if 
so, in what proponion 
Proposed i\mcndmcm 
33. Arbotration of disputes. Every license or lease 
shall be subject to the following term namely:-
Any dispute (including a dispute regarding 1hc 
market price referred to in rule 18) between the 
Govcrnmenl and the licensee or the lessee re· 
garding:-
(a) any right claimed by the licensee or the lcs.'cc 
under lhe license or lca<e or 
(b) any breach ulleged 10 have been commuted by 
the licensee or lessee or any of the term, convcn· 
ants or condiuons or the license or the lease. or 
any penalty proposed 10 be onflicted lhcrcof. or 
(c) the fcc~. royalty or rent< payable under thc 
license or 1he lease, or 
(d) ony other muller ur 1hing connected with 1hc 
license or 1he lease 
shall be seulcd through arbitration and concilia· 
rion, proceedings under 1hc provision~ {li the 
Arbilrotion nnd Conc iliation Act, 1996 and the 
rules mude thereunder in so rar as they shall apply 
10 such proceedings . 
.... 
0 

3S. 
The arbitrators or the umpires. as the case 
may be from time to time with the consent of 
all the parties to the contract enlarged the time 
for making the award. Subject as aforesaid. the 
provisions of the Arbitration Act, 1940 and the 
Rules thereunder for the time being in force 
shall applied to the Arbitration procccdongs 
under this clause. 
Provided that in cases where a Production Shar­
ing Contract ha.< been signed between the liunscd 
lessee ond the Central Government the dispute 
shall be settled on accordance with the dispute 
settlem•nt provisions of such Contract. 
Powtr to exempt from oper.ulon or rtrtain Rilles: 
The Ctntral Covemmtnt may by notification 
In the omclol Cazettt, txtmpt either absolutely or 
subject to any speclned condliotion any area of 
voup or area or any class or persons from the 
operation or Rule 6, Rult 10, Rult II (J) (I) (fl) and 
Rule 13(2) (a) & (b) of thest Rules. 

!>AI.If.S I FF..\1 URE.S m· "'EW EXI'LORA T!OS UCE:-osi:-;G I'OUCV 
-Allotment of ~locks "'ill be on an open a.:rcagc <)'tem 10 futur< 
-Compaoncs wolf be able to choose and rropo><: ~crco~c' 
U. Fhcal 
t\\' ""Hktng parcr;;tpJttng int~r~~~ or carrlcJ tnt~rcsc 
fn:c:Jml W ~C:JI i.:fUtJC \liJ amJ naiUrJ1 g:~.; I\' .o~H~ \1~· HI lh~ 
t.lomc!iotlc mJtkcl 
( Ull ~(l\l n.!,O\CJ)' 1.\tth \JI1htmh.~f..l <..'"3rr) lnr\.\;1f 4 pr\l\'1' (.Jil\ 
l.\b..:ral u .. ·rc~~tatiun pl\l\'i<:.il•ns: 
lO(I'''o v..rllc off an lhc \i111h. ~..:.u for ~JI.f'ltlt.rlt~•u 1..'\~h,::H'":' :uh.l 
d~'dopmcul llnlhng 
- Other IJdht tC\ <k;>,cdatcd ~~ 2.~··; , un th:duung h.!l;uh.l' nH.:th<•J 
- C"nrn (.._Hv• :1IJ of los~L~~ pc11nllu.:J {or S '"':n~ ;1fh . .'r '1.nt nl 
~oumm..:r··i.tl prndu~.:uon. 
f\'o c-"" \10 ~rude <•1! l'Ht\du .. IJPn 
Ro;:.Ht~ pavnh.:ll1 1or cruJ~.: oil un .m ~IC1 ~·;tlw.:nr bo~'t' 11 12 ·" •·:, 
f,>r unlan\.t Jrc~S: and l(Ju,, lo1 olf~.,orc JT..:'~"' Rtl\,dt> \,111 n.11111.11 
~-~~ 10'\, for bol!l onlam! ... -..:. oti~horc. 
Tl) cn~:ourgc t.::\plor;ltlon il\ \!"·..:p "Jt .. r Jn::;,, ~C'hlllcl 4111) m 
h.tlh,mt:-lr\' royal!) .__,jll be L·hargc\! ~· h~•lf the r.ltl' :t'i ort ... hnrc for the 
:uq ,~,·~n yc3r:!t .uf'CI commcn~.cm~nt of tun:rr:cr..:ul prt•du(!lltn 
In fr3~1ruc:urc ~tatus to E.xplotatton and Puk!u...ttutt "'lu~.:h 
pro>tdcs for a 5 ~car Ia\ hulitl~) fr, m the d.•tc of 
commencement of production am! 1hcrcafll!t a ~~~~ t:onc:c"'''on 
tn Income Ta' paya!:>lc m the nc<1 5 )"at' 
- Sc,tn·)'t:ar l.lX holida~ for ~onh·Eaf\fcrn r~~10r~ •• flt.:r 1101ar1 of 
commcrctal prOOu\:tion. 

ANNEXU KF.-111 
-­~~olc:<J~;If.f.h~~ol"{l; 
GQ,·Crnm.:nt of tndi;.t 
~linislr) of 
Petroleum & 1'\~tural GJs 
!'lew Ddln-liiMill 
CO:-\FIDEI'TI!\L 
MOST 1~1\IEDI,\TE 
~ 
DIRECTOR TF.LE. ~0 338 !Ml~ 
DO. 1'0 0-11014'1 ·y1-0KG D I\' -------
Dear Shn Chauer)CC. 
Kindly rder to your letter> no n(S)i1)4-Cvm I tl.tlLU ~~~.4 ,,~ ual 
2~ 5 98 reg;~rdtng amendment~ required in the Otl l'~t:ld' 1 Rcgul.•l<•ll\ ,u~tl 
Development) ALl, 1948 and the Petroleum & Natur~l G:.< Ruk<. 1'159 "' 
the h&hl of the New Exploration Ltccnsing Polit) (NELP). 
As desired. 25 nlpies of the nmc (English vcrst<m) on th< P•'P''"'ll 
umcndmcnt 10 the Oilfields (Regulatiun & Development) Au. 194~ 
necessary lor opcrationnliMng the Nev. Explorntion Lkcnsing. Pt>hq & 
phased dismantling ol APM arc enclosed A craft Cabiuct ntH< ""'"''"'"'!! 
the proposals brought out tn the enclosed note hll> been Clftul;llcd I<' 
vartous Ministers for thetr comment<. 
As regards amendments in the r&NG Rules. 1'1511 ncce'-<Of)' IV 
opcrauonahsc the 1'\ELP. the proposal i~ mil unJcr !in;dts;llion 111 the 
Mini<try which will be ~cnt to the R"IY•' S~b!Ta S~crctortot scpamt•·l~ 
Wnh regards. 
Shri Tapan Chatlerj~. 
Dy. Secretary, 
Rajya Sabha Seactanat, 
Parliament House Annexc, 
New Delhi, 
43 
Yours 4iuu.:crch. 
sd/-
(A.K. SAXE!'\,\) 

A NOTE ON PROPOSED AME:-IDJ\IENTS IS THE OILFIELDS 
(REGULATION AND DEVELOP~fE.'in ACT, 1948 
INTRODUCTION 
Royllty in respect of mtncr3l oil (defined as including petroleum and 
natural gas) is payabk under the provisions of section 6A of the Oillields 
(Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 (ORDA). 
1 1 Section 6A of the above Act provtdcs for the scheme for fiXation of 
the r:lle of royalty payable in respect of any mineral oil, as follows: 
"1\i\( I). "The holder of a. mining lca.sc granted before the 
commencement of the •·Oil!iclds (Regulation and Development) 
Amendment Act, 1969, shall not withstanding anything contained 
in the instrument of lease or in any law in force at such 
commencement. pay royalty in respect of any mineral oil mined, 
qu~rried. excavated or collected by him from the leased area after 
such commencement, at the rate for the time being specified in the 
Schedule in respect of the mineral oil. 
(2) The holder of o mtnlflg lease granted on or ofrer the 
commencement of Oil fields (Regulation and Development) Act, 
1969 ~hull pay royalty in respect of any mineral oil mined. 
qunrricd, excavated or collected by him from the leased area at the 
rat~ for the time being specified in the Schedule iu respect of the 
m.neral 011. 
(J) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub·section (1) or sub­
section (2). no royalty shall be payable in rc~pect of any cru~e oil, 
casing head condensate or natural gas which is unavoidably lost or 
is returned to the reservoir or is used for drilling or other 
operations relating to the production ot petroleum or natural gas, 
or both. 
(4) The Central Government may. by notification in the Official 
Cucllc, omend the Schedule so os to enhance or reduce the rate 
M which royalty shall be payable in respect of any mineral with 
effect from such date as may be specified in the notification . 
Provided that the Central Government shall not: 
(a) fix the rate of royalty in respect of any mineral oil so a.s to 
exceed 20% of the sale price of the mmeral oil at the oilfields or 
the oil well·hcad, as the ease n1ay be, or 
(b) tnhanc:e the rate of royalty in respect of any mineral oil more 
than once during any period of three years." 
1.2 Anicle 297 of the Constitution of India, which declares the vesting 

45 
of 1hc mineral resources undcllying lhc ocean in 1hc Union of lodia. read!. 
.IS under 
"297. Th1ngs or value. wuhm 1crmorial waters or conuncnlal shelf am.l 
resources or the cxclush·c cconom•c zone to vest in the: Union· 
(1) All land>. minerals and o1hcr lhings of 'aluc w1dcrl)ing 1hc 
ocean wilhin 1hc l<rruonal walcrs or lhe ron1.ncn1a1 shelf. or lhe 
exclusive economic zone of India shall 'CSI in lhc L'nion and be 
held for the purpose cf lhc Union 
(2) All lhc resources of 1hc cxclugvc zone of lnd•a shall alw 
VCM in the Union and held for the purpose of 1hc Ua10n 
(3) The l&m&IS of 1he 1crri1orial wa1ers. the con1incn1al shcli. lhc 
C\clus~>c economic zone. and 01hcr mari1ime zones of India shall 
be <uch •• may be spc..-ificd. from lime 10 lime. by or under any 
law made b~ P>rliamcnt" 
1.3 l'urlhcr. Rule 5(1) of lhc Pc•lrolcum & KaiUral Gas Rub. 1959 
CPI\GR) provides as follo\\s: 
"S(l) ,, hccnsc or lease 1n &cspcCI oi: 
(i) Any lands or mincrnl underlying 1hc ocean withm 1hc 
tcrri10rinl wutcrs or lhc continen1al shelf of Indio and vcslcd •n 1hc 
Union. shall be granted by the Cemral Government. and 
(li) uny land vcs1ed in the Stale Government shall be granled by 
1hc State Govcrnrocnl with the previous approval of the Ccnaral 
Govcrnmcnl." 
1.4 In accordance with the above provisions. all royally in rc<pccl of 
onshore production o f crude oil is payable 10 1he State Governments. All 
offshore le3.~es arc gr3nted by lhe Central Government as all rights in 
minerals on lhe con1incn1al she lf of India accrue of the Ccn1ra l 
Government Accordingly, royally in res peel of offshore crude is payublc 
:o lhe Ccmral Governmen t 
PRICING OF INDIGENOUS CRUDE OIL: 
2. Pnor to I he 1.4. 98 the system of pricing of indigenous crude oil was 
based on lhe recommendations of Oil Prices Comminee. 1976 ~nd the Oil 
Costs Review Commiuce. 1984. Under 1ba1 sys1em the price of Indigenous 
crude oil was fixed once in 1hrce years on a cost plus formula where •n I he 
oil producing national oil companies (1\0Cs) namely. Oil & NaiUral Gas 
Corpora1ion Ltd. (Ot-:GC) and Oil India Ltd. (OIL) were pa•d for 1he 
crude oil produced by them a price known as the basic price which was 
equal 10 lhe actual opcra1ing cost plus 15% posHax rc1urn on capital 
employed . The aetual amount of OlD cess~ I0}'¥1ty itnd 01hcr loca1 levies 

and t~xcs was also retmburscd to the I'OCs. in addition to the above basic 
price. 
ROYALTY RATES UNDER NELP 
3 The Cabtnet 1n liS mcettng held on 25.2.97 approved the New 
Exploratll>n Ltccn<•ng Policy (NELP) whtch inter alia, pro-.ded the 
following : 
(i) Royalt) rate> for crude o•l shall be @ 12.5"/o for the onland areas 
and !Oo/o for offshore areas. Half of the royalty from the offshore 
areas w1ll be crcdttcd to a hydrocarbon development fund to 
promutc and fund cxplorauon related activities, such as, acquisiuon 
of gcl>l<>g1cal data on poorly explored basins. promotion of 
.n,cstrncnt opportunillcs in the upstream sector. institution 
bu1ld1ng. etc 
(11) To encourage exploratiOn tn deep water and frontier areas, royalty 
may lx: reduced or exempted. To begin with, rophy will be 
charged at half the prcvathng rate for offshore areas for the deep 
water bc)ond •OOm 1sobath for the first 7 years after 
..:ummcnccmcnt oi commcretnl production. 
(111) The NELP tO be implemented straightway for the offshore areas as 
for th" no con~ultallon i5 required with the State Government . 
Jlo~~<cvcr. for the onshore areas. the NELP will be implemented 
ahcr obta11ung the concurrence of the State Government 
(av) Tu process for effecting the necessary changes in the relevant Acts 
and Rules to Implement the NELP. 
OPIN ION OF 1\'1/u LAW 
4 To give dfcct to the provostons or royalty rates already approved by 
the Cnhtnet under NELP on 28.2.97. consultations were held with Wo 
Law and they opmooncd that to give dfcct to the rates of royalty under 
NELP. nn amendment to the ORDA would be required. The legal opinion 
govcn by the M/ o Law is placed at Annexure - !. 
OISMANnlt\G OF THE ADMli'\ISTERED PRICING 
MECHANISM (APM) 
5 The Government has now, w.e.r 1st April, 1998, implemented its 
decision to dasmantle the APM. cont~ined in Ministry of Pelroleum and 
Natural Gas Rcsoluuon dated 21st November. 1997. As per this decisaon, 
cost plus formula for the pricing of domestic crude oil stands withdrawn 
and t:.e crude pncc reccavable by the oil producing nauonal 
oil compantcs has been hnked to the international FOB price of 
crude oil. Accord1ngly ONGC and OIL shall now get a price @ 75%, 
71.5,. •. 80% and 82.5,.. of the international FOB pricc of crude oil for the 
year 198\l-99. IQ<lQ-2000. 200().()1 and 2001-02 respectively This 
price IS inclusive Of Q[Q CCSS and royalty, but exclusive Of sales 
tax. locallcvies and transportation . Consequent upon dismantling of APM 

47 
linking of royally payments to the new pricing mechanism, introduced 
w.c. f 1st April, 1998 is required. 
NEED FOR CARRYING AMENDMENTS TO ORDA 
6. It would be seen from preceding para 3 that under the NELP, royalty 
would be payable at rnore than one rate depending on the location of the 
exploration acreage, viz. for onshore, offshore and deep water areas 
Further, the rates of payable under the NELP would be different from the 
general rate of royally payable in respect of the producing fields. As per 
opinoon govcn by the ~Vo law (Anocxure·l), the present scheme on 
respect of payment of royalty under ORDA docs not pcrmot laying down 
of more than one rate or royalty in the Schedule as required to 
operationalise the 1\'ElP It has, therefore, become necessary to amend 
the ORDA suuably so as to incorporate enabling pro' osions in the Act for 
notifyong dofferent rates of royalty for the presently producing fields and 
rhe onshore, offshore >nd deep water areas to be oifcrcd under I'ELP 
1\S a resull of the dismantl1ng of APM, the rate oi royalty pa)able in 
respect of crude oil, would now, vary every month wuh the change in the 
sale price of crude 011 payable to the oil producing national companocs 
Thus, 10 order to harmonise the scheme of royally payment with the new 
scheme of the pncong of indigcnou~ crudes. Section 6,\ of the Act needs to 
be suitably amended so as to provide for enabling provisions for notif)ing 
a rate of royalty which is based on the methodology agreed wuh the State 
Govcrnntcm but varies on mon1h~y basis with 1hc: price or crude oal. 
AMENDMENTS PROPOSED 
7. In vocw of the above, it is proposed to amend the Oi lfields 
(Regulation and Devclopmc111) Ae1, 1948 so as to bring about the 
following changes: 
(I) Presently, as per sub-section (2) and (4) of Section 6A or the Act, 
on ly one rate of royally can be specified in the Schedule in respect of any 
mineral 011 With a view to give effect to the royalty scheme under 1\ELP. 
11 is now proposed to confer upon the Central Government the cnabhng 
power to amend the Schedule laying down more than one rate of royalty on 
respect of the same mineral oil mined from areas held by different c1assc~ 
of lease holders. This is sought to be achieved by amending sub-scct1on (4) 
of Sec11on 6A 
"(4) The Central Government may, by notification on the Official 
G:ueuc amend the Schedule so as to enhance or reduce the ntcs 
at wh1eh royalty shall be payablo in respect of .1ny mrncral ool "ilh 
effect from such date as may be specified in the notificatiOn and 
drfftrtnt ratts may bt notified itt rtsput of samt mrntral or/ mintd, 
quarrrtd, txcavattd ar calluttd from tht areas htld by drfftrtnt 
clasus a[ mrnmg leases" 
(2) By virtue of clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section {4) of Seclton 

Ill\ o( the A ~t. t.•te o( fl'J ,11l ~ m rc,pc.:t of any nnncral oil cannot. at 
ptc,cnl. be cnh"n<ctl tnuoc than once 1n "'') biocl<. period of 3 years. 
Wnh J \ICW to allu" the royah)' rate \Jr) "ith the ,·ari>~ion in the 
ontcrn.IIIOnJI fOB procc of crude o1l. "'hich is necessitated on accourll of 
the do<m~nthng of the APM. the above relotriction is proposed II> be 
removed b~· om1111ng d•usc (b). from 1he provL<e to sub·section (4) ol 
Scc11on 6A ol the Act TI1c prc...:nt prO\ISO reads as follo"'s and clause 
b) is >•>ught to be deleted. 
" Ptll'~dcd th~l the Ccntr•l Government shall not-
(J) f.x the rate ol coyah) 1n respect o( an) m1ncral oil so as 10 
c"ced 10% of the sale p•ice of the m•ncral oil at the oil!ields or the oil 
"cll·hcad, a> rhc <:OL'e ma\ be. 
(b) enhance rhc rate of ro)ah~ on rcspccr of any mineral oil more 
th~n on.:c during any period of three )cars". 
(3) In 1'191, whole introuucmg the revised methodology for fixing the 
rate 11f royalty wh1ch 1s presently in Ioree, the Government had dec1ded 
to pa) a rate of royally of Rs 48 l per MT of crude oil' casing hc•d 
~onucn,atc for the period 1.~.90 to 31.3.93. b} amcndmg the Oilfields 
(Regulation and Ocvclupment) Act. 1948 For this purpose. a new sub· 
\~c11on (Sl of Section 6A wa~ enae~cd by promulgating Ordinance No. 19 
<>f 1993, whtch was later substituted by the Act 4 of 1993 The ,aid sub· 
'ccuon (5) of Section 6A. rends as under: 
"Notwithstanding anything comaoncd in sub·scction (4) the Centr~l 
Government may, by notificauon 111 the Official Gazette, amend the 
Schedule so a> to enhance thr: rate of royalty payable tn respect of 
any mineral oil, produced during rhc period beginning on the 1.4.90 
and ending on 31.3.93. to 24.52% of the sale price of mineral oil at 
the oilhclds or the oil wcll·hcad. as the case may be." 
In exercise of rhc powers conferred by the above sub·section (5) the 
rate ol royalty on crude oil and well-head condensate was fixed nr 'Rs. 
481/MT. hy i~suong a notification for amending the Schedule to the Act. 
h would be seen from the wording of sub·scction (5) of Section 6A that 
it was ontended to be an onc·t1me measure and it has already served the 
purpose that wu sought to be achieve<!. This •uh·secrlon bas smce 
become redundanl and t<. therefore. now proposed to be dclercd from 
the Act 
(4) One of the fiscal terms approved under the NELP slates that 
royalt~ payable in respcer of deep warer areas shall be charged at hall the 
rate lor the fir>t se•en years aher commencemenr of commercial 
produerion AI prescnr. rhere is no provision in the Ael ro grant any 
•'•emption from 1he paymenr o{ royalty laid down and pa)ablc as per the 
rate specified in rhe S<hcdulc . It ;,, 1bcre!ore, pmposed to confer upon the 
Central Government an cnabhng power to grant exemptions. under cena1n 

4\1 
comlilrou,, from rhc paynll'nl of royally 10 rcspccr of offshore arco$, Thrs 
" prup("cll lo be "h•c,cd by addrn! • new >ub-sccrion (6) rn Sccrion (>A 
of rhc A~r. rcaJing •• under: 
16) If rhc Ccnrral Govcmmcm. wirh a view ro cn.ouragc cxploratron 
in off~horc areas. is satisfied that H ts ncctssary in the pubfl.: antcrc11 
su ''' do, 11 rnay. by notification 10 rhe O!ficml Gucuc, c,\cmpr 
generally, cot her ab~olutcly or subJccr ro such condrti,lns a' may ~ 
)p<:caficd 10 the notific3llon. n-uncral oil produced frum su'h .uca..\ 
from rhc whole or any parr o! rhc royal!) lcv,able rhcreon • 
(:I) Scctron 10 of the Act provides for layrng down of rules iramcd and 
norrfrcauon' IS>ucd under the Acr hcfore each House of Parhamcnr Ntw. 
rhat a new $ub-sewon (n) ot Scwon 6A 1< propo«-d ro be rncorporatcd rn 
1hc Act . authnri'-ang I he Govc rnmcm u' issue notificallon for gr;Jntmg 
cxcmpllon~. 10 part or full, from rhc pa)mcnl of rova111~ in rcspcCI ol 
off,horc ore._, a con~cqucnrial amendmcn1 in Sccrron lO nf rhc Acr " 
bcon& propo<cd "' a> 1o s3y rhar a no1if•cauon Ksucd under 'U~·,celwn (I>) 
or Sccunn 6A "OUid al~o b~ rcqullcd to be l3id bc!c>cc ~ach Hnu<c of 
Pt~rlliJmCnl 
X The above propu,.J, h•>< been concu.rctl 111 by 1hc ~kll<tcv of Low 
A compar.-ui ... c q:ucmcnt ~hn""'1 ns lhl' ~:\,~tm~ provis10m: o( the Act to 
wJuch ;JniCildmcnt' .nc l'~o·ing flH·'Pu'ctl .:tnd th\.' moLliii('d \Cr<.wn .1ftcr 1hc 
prupo,cd ''"'~ ndmc nee;, is pla..:cJ otl t\ unt•xu re-I [ J\. fh.:r t h(.· r;npo~L·d 
amcnllm..:nls have h"·,·n ("f(~,;l'lcd lhC' !itt..::"! ot royalt~· 111 rc~pc:cl u1 ~,;ff:"~htm.• 
urea~ Wi ll be nt>lificu in line wnh •he Jc<:1S10ns of lh.; Ccrnral Guvcrnmcnl 
llowcvt:l. ro1tcs u( roy.thy In rc~rH:t.:t of 0n:-:hore ar<·as will bt..: n,Hifictl Hiler 
nHl\tlllacion' wuh t hl.~ L"Unccrnccl Score GovcrJlmcnt\ 
9 A dr:lh Cuh111c.:t nutc cont:unu1g the uhovc am\!ndmcnl propoo;;.tl<- h.t.~ 
been Ctri.:Uii11CU r .. , the CPmmcnl~ nf rnnt:cmcd Muw .. rriC"\. t\(tt:r ohrJirnns 
C.Abin..:t .1ppru\'tll. ~ tufl 1~ propus.~d to he rrllrndl;~<:d Itt thL (tirrcnt ~cv;;mn 
ot P.ulwmcn1 

Dy. No. ~902/97 
D•partm•nt or Legal AITalrs 
Advice 'A' 
Mtnistry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has sought our advice as to 
"hcther 11 would be legally permissible to issue notice inviting offers 
(!'\lOs) under NELP pending and amendment to the royalty provisions of 
ORDA through an Ord1nance I Bill or this exercise should be done only 
after effecting nece<sary changes in the ORDA. At pp. 12-13/ n, we have 
adv1scd on 2l 12.1997 to make SUitable amendment in ORDA, 1948, it 
more than one rate of royalty is required to be prescribed in the Schedule 
or the OROA It appears that NIOs would not be invited in the name of 
the President of India under Anicle 299 or the Constitution of India and 
the same would be regulated by a law made by the Parliament or by an 
OrdiMnce promulgated by the President of India under Anidc 123 or the 
Constllullon. In the absence of any law. which may be either available to 
the Executive through an Ordinance promulgated by the President or 
mndc by the Parliament. the proposed NIO would be illegal. Therefore, it 
;, not adv1sable to act on the basis of a non-est law. 
JS&LA (Sh. A Sinha) 
Shri Shivarj Singh 
Joint Secretary 
Sdl· 
(SAI'<'TOKH SINGH) 
Deputy Legal Advisor 
31.12.1997 
M1nistry of Petroleum & NG 
Dcptt. of Legal affairs 
Oy. No 4/0 2197 Advice 'A' Section dt. l/1/97 
50 

PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO OIL FIELDS (REGULAnON & DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 1948 
EXTS1TNG PROVISIONS PROPOSED 
------------------------RoyMitles In respte:t or mineral oils. 
6A .(l) The holder of a mining lease granted before 
the l'Ommcncemcnt of the Oilfields (Regulallon & 
Development) Amendment Act, 1969 shall nOl.,.ith­
standing anything contained in the instrwncm of 
lease or in any law in force at such commencement. 
pny royalty on respect of any mineral oil mined , 
quarried, excavated or collected by him from the 
letoscd area after such rommenccmem, at the mtc for 
the time being specified in the Schedule in respect of 
the mineral oil. 
(2) The holder of a mining lease gramed on or 
nfter the commencement of ihe Oilfields (R&D) 
Amendment Act, 1969, shall pay royalty in respect of 
any mineral oil mined, quarried. excavated or col­
lected by him from the leased area at the rate for the 
time being specified in the Schedule in respect of that 
mlnerul oil 
61\.(1) No change 
(2) No change 
Jo 

- ----- ---- -- - -- -- ---
EXISTII\Ci PROVISIO:-:S PROrOSED 
-- --- ---- ----
(3) Notwith>tandmg anythin~ wntamcd 111 Sub- (3) No change 
...:wvn (I) or Sut..-c<toon (2). nu ro}·~lty ~hall be 
p3r.obk on rc>p<:<t ol any auJc val. "''ing he>d 
(Ondcn,atc or nJtur..tl gas wh•<h t\ un.~-.·ouJaNc 1vs1 or 
i\ rcturnc\J 10 1hc rc.)Crvou m i~ uwd fur Urllhng or 
other opcrutiom• rd~ting tu lhc produchon of 
pcrtrolcurn or natural gos. or huth 
(4) l'hc <:collrJI Government nl>} by notifocauon on 
the OHocoul Gutcllc. amcnJ the Schedule so ns to 
enhance or reduce the rate nt whtch royalty ~ball be 
'>ayabtc "' rc~p¢cl uf any mim:ral oil 'With effect trom 
such d;otc a> tmoy be ~p<.·colicd 111 the notificatooo 
ProvidcJ thut the Central Government shall not 
(a) fix the rotc ol royulty in respect o( ~ny minet.ol 
oil $() os to exceed twenty per cent of the '"lc 
pncc ol the mmcral ool at the oolfodds ot the oil 
w~11 hcm.J ot u~ the cu~c mny 0~.:. \)I 
{b) c.:nhJncc lhl' rate of royally in rcsp~ct or any 
nHnCii\1 01l more than nn..:c Junng any rc11od of 
ft~ur ~carJ . 
(4) The Ccolrt~l Govcrnmc1U m~y. by nHIIhc.:.-tion in 
the uHocial gateiiC, amend the !><hc<.lulc so as to 
cn<h:oncc or reduce the rate at whtch ruyJity 'hall l>e 
pay.ohl< m respect of any nunerol ool woth dfcct (rom 
such date as may be spccilccd in the notification and 
dofkrcnt rates may be nu!lficd 111 rc,pcet of ~arne 
mwcra l ocl minc<l. qu:u ried. cxc;cvatcd or collcctctl 
from the ureas covered by o.liffcrcnt classes of mining 
lca$CS. 
Provided that the Central Govccnmcut shall nut fix 
the rate or royalty in rc~pcct or Ill\~ mineral oil so a< 
tu c~cccol twenty per cent of the snlc pticc of the 
moncral ml at chc uilfields or the c11l well hc;~d . as the 
ca'c m:'ly he. 
'.II 
'J 

(5) Nothwithstanding anything contained in sub­
section (4) the Central Government may. by 
notification in the Official Gazenc. amend the 
Schedule so as to enhance the rate of royalty payable 
rn respect of mineral oil. produced during the period 
beg1nning on the 1st day of April, 1990 and ending 
on lhe 31st day of March, 1993. to 24.52 per cent of 
the sale price of mineral oil at oilficlds or the oil 
wellhead, as lhe case may be. 
L-avin& or rules und nolitlcations 
10. Every rule made under this Act and every 
nolificntion issued under sub-section (4) or sub -section 
(6) or sccllon 6A shall be laid as soon as may be after 
it I~ made or issued. before each Hou~c of 
Pnrliament, while it is in session, for a tnlal period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 
111 two or more successive sessions. and if. before lhc 
expiry of the session immediately following the 
(5) to l>c om1t1cd 
(6) If the Ccntr~l Government. wuh a v1cw to 
cocourag<' cxplora11on 111 u(f,hnrc arc••. 1S •amficd 
1h:u it is ncccs.~ory HI the puhhc uucrcst ~, ro do. i1 
may. by nOiificatJ<ln in lhc Orrici•l GnLcuc. exempt 
generally, cnhcr nb~olutcly or ~ubJCCt co such 
condition!\ a,; m:~y be "'f'Cdficd 1n the notific:uion 
nuncral ool prvduccd from .<uch area~ from 1hc whole 
or nny part nf chc ruy;olcy lcv~:>hlc thereon 
Lu\· ln~ uf ruh:o; und uutiOnathtll\ 
HJ. Evt1J y 1 ul~ mmk• UJII.kr thi!l. Acl and every 
nmificatiun iS!\HI.·d uudt•t "illh•M!c.:tlun (4) ur setflcm 6 A 
~lwll ht: luit.l :1~.o \(Hill a_, 11111)' b(,.~ after it I~ mndc or 
b~ucd. ht.•f<uc t:.n;ll lluu~~.· uf r'rnli:"'lll<'lll. IAthik It is 
in 1iiC.\~ion, fur ;J tulal pcr1ml u( tlmty rla)'~ which mny 
he t:<lmpris...·U in unc \\,'~''m~ or in two elf more 
><•cccs<ivc sc~'inn,, nnd II, heforc the expiry of the 
sc~'l011 Jmmc<JJ;tU:Iy (HIIHwlllg th~ SC~"iiUU Of the 
vo w 

;csstoru aforesaid both Houses agree rn makutj! any 
modification m 1he rule or no1ihca1ion m b<uh 
Houses agree lhal 1he rule or nmificanon <houhl nul 
be made or 1ssued. 1hc rule or nu1ifica1ion sh~ll 
1hcrcaf1er have cffccl only in such modiftcd iorm or 
he of no cffccl, 3> the case may be ''' lwwcvcr 1h;11 
any such mod•fica110n or annulment shJll be w•lhoul 
prcjud•cc 10 1hc vahdi1y of anything pre' 1<>usl~ 11<mc 
under 1ha1 rule or nOl1ficanon . 
!M.:~'\tHt1 01 lhC ~Ut."'-"Chi\C 'roi:.\~IUth ~WH',,ajJ, b\lth 
1 "-.Ju~.;.~s agree 10 makan~ .Jn~ tlhlthlh.:.uwn 10 th,· ruk 
or nl.ltifu.::uion or both I hu1~t.:' ·•t:rc:\! 1h:11 th,· tuk· ur 
m>tlficatton shoulc..l nut he mad\.' vr '"'h:J lh<" rul~ '-'r 
notific:uion shall thcrcaft~• h:tH" l'1h .• ,., ,,nh U\ 'u;.:h 
modified form or be of nu cHcd. "'' 1he .,;,,,.,:OM\ ~­
w ho\\c.:ver. that any ~uch nux.hfh.:ottmn ,,r ~lnnulm,·nt 
sh.tll be without prcjudu:c tv thC' ~·.ah,ht~ uf an)'tlung 
prc"iously don(" under 1ho~t ruk ur nutifi&:.Jtiun 
'-" ... 

A.'\:\ EXLRI::.I \ 
R.:j:o.l Oflon:. Jc,·•an Uh.ouiJ. Ttl\\cr·ll. 1!~. Cumuu~ht Corn:.. '\c" 
Dellu·llfKKJI 
Sh Top.on \ h.oll•fJ<C 
fh ~l~:rct.H \. 
June~. lii<J~ 
Cc.mHIIltt-:-: Oil Sllll-i.\fJUt.\lt . .' L::gt,J.lltun rRJJ)~ S:thlt.l). 
P,.rh.nth.'IH !(,,u~~.· Antti.'\1.', 
N Ddlu·l 
'"'' Oil rod.!, (Rc£ul:otonn :ond f)c,d•'P"'''"IJ ,\n l11JS Jnd 1\•~rolcum 
JllJ ""'"'"' (;:" Rule<. IIJ511 - il111h~r ~<>nSidcr:.IIOil b~ 1h~ 
Ct>lllnllll~<' 011 Suburd111n1~ lc!;~>Lll~<>n. lbJ"' !>.obha 
Th" has reference 10 your lcucr 1'\u RS 12(8}9~- Cum-1 uaiCJ 
~~.5 9S un the ;~tx>vc subJ<:Ct Ac. Uc,trcJ. the rcqui"ilc nut~nff;.rmruion 
;uotl a •ct uf hard \.'OJllc> of I he presentation un KELP mndc in Cokulla " 
.:oll:ul,cd 
Thankuog you. 
55 
Yours laolhlull), 
SJ,.. 
(B Bosu) 
Chid Gcologosl. 
OISG 

REPLIES TO Ql'ESTIONS RAISED BY 
SllnOROINATE I ECISLATIO'\ tRAJYA SABRA) 
AND RF.LATED ISSUES 
CO~t~IITTEE ON 
REGARDING NELP 
Q.l \'It·"' ul O!'.CCL & OIL lor a d<sired rpgulator) framr..-ork "llb a 
';,-. tu tn~urln¥ a lc-.1 pla)ln' lidd for the National Oil Companies vis-a· 
\IS th< prholt S«:lor compani.s and th• MNCs. under lht NELP. 
Thrrc ~~ a n~cd to ha,·c a rq~ulatory frame ... ork for Upstream to 
regulate the petroleum op~rauon.' and contract under NELl' should be 
<ubjcet to the thrcw<>ns of the Regulatory body on brooder perspective 
.. hich >hould 3(1 as fac1htator The Regulatory Body should be uniformly 
m;1dc apphcJble to t-:oc·s as well as private sector componics and the 
MKC, . However. a common regulatory body for both do .. nmcam & 
upstr~am "an abo be .;onsidl.!rcU. 
'Jnucr the NELP. ONGC und OIL will operate either on stand alone 
bJ<i~ or 1n assuCIJllun with other companies. The opcrauons w11l be carried 
uut under 1h~ boundary cond1110M provided by the PSC. This would also 
111dudc 1in1c bound minimum work programme. during exploratiOn pha~c. 
d~hucation in ""'" of d1scovcry and development in case of commercial 
di<eovery. For executing such ac11v1ties in time and cost effective manner. 
11 is csscutial that ONGC and OIL arc all wed to take techmcal & 
fmontinl decisions based on thci r best assessment of the information 
available ~~ thut point of time. This would become still more important if 
ONCOC or OIL ore operating in association with other companies who arc 
free to tukc such decisions without bein' subjected to audit at a later date. 
It IS, therefore. cs'cn11al that the regulatory frame work should only 
prov1dc the broad guidelines (in the PSC) wtthin whic.h the decisions may 
be taken. Any deviation should be fully justified. However, auditin& 
subsequent to action. may be dispensed with. 
Q.l Vlc"s of ONGCL & OIL on tht nttd for separation of tht promoter 
and thr regulator under the proposed N~LP dispensation as also on the 
need for an nppcllolt authority for resolution of disputes. 
Govcrnnt~nt being the promoter under the NELP. the Regulatory 
funcuons mat be assigned to some arm of the Government and should 
1nclude the representatives form the Nauonal Oil Compa01cs also. There 
should be a mechanism for making an appeal by the affected pany to the 
decision of the Regulatory Bodv w11h1n the Regulator)· frame work in 
addiuon 10 right of appeal before the High Court. 
The adcal condition wuuld be- to have 5Cparote bodie-s for promotion. 
56 

57 
rcgul<~riun> ~nd nppcol. In the c:"e of KELP. Since chc prumoccr " (jo,c 
11 can al~o :1cl u< rcgul~cor chrough "'"'" nrn1 of Gov1. to lool< afccr chc 
over~ ll 1111crc<r ur ch~ cuuncr) but chc appcll~tc nu•honl) """' tx: "" 
•nucpcndcnc bo<l) Th1~ " r~quou.l ''' ~cncr.ltc a feeling of coniiJcncc an 
up~r;.~tor' 
Q.J Vk"s ur 0:-iG<.:L .t OIL un the proposed setlin~ up ur the 
ll)dr urarbuns Ondupmenl fuud under che ~'ELP. 
The proposal or H~drocarb<>n Dcvdopmcnl Fund under KELP " a 
good ic.fc;l. Stmtl3r \themes :arc m pr;tcu~c in some other cuunuic' Fur 
namplc en Pak"can• Pcc:oloum P<>hn·l'l'l7. Marine Rc<-carch Fcc an<l 
T •~•mng Fcc arc k' acd In om <a<c. kccpmg chc rc<pon<e or th~ 
comp:mtcS tn \IC~. 11 tS 3 ~ood n!ca tu m:untain H~droc.arhun 
Dc•dopmcnl Fund crc>~~d out of a ~rcemngc of rO)Olt) pa)'abk Such 
fumh w1ll hdp the Co\crnmcrn to at:t.~u•rc gcosctcntifu: data m 3JC3' "lu~h 
arc O<ll !>..•ans opcrnccd h\' an) u1l cumpany t>cc;m'c o! d.ua ~ap and 
UI1L'cn;unty Acqut'itlu.tn uf dat~ utthLmg 'iUr.:h fund~ \\Ill mJkr.: the ;nc;l' .. 
hkd} ~llr<~<ll'~ t>y rcdu<mg uu<t.caiu~> for pnrll<~pallon oi ~OC ~nJ 
pnv;Jh: t,)il l.:t,lnlp:'lniC\. The Go\l ma~ l 1k ~ to con~1dcr h) C\IC.:nd tlw. 
propo10o;1l tn t.H'I,hurc MC!1'\ ;.lt"u (tHH .. h:l thl" pn::.;,~nt propu~al 11 Jc(, hmu..:d It' 
<.lfr,lwr.: .~rca.;,) 
Q..& llllp:.u.·t un th\' uvt.•r:.Hiun\ ur ()~CCL s. Ott. durin~ the trOJU\ilinn 
pt.·riud (rnm 11u.· uld n·~ul:Jt~tr~ rc~hm,: In tht' ~Ell'. 
Dt.trlll~ 1hc tr.m:"'ttllln pcr tod !Hun (1kl rc~ul:•tot~ regime Ill !'.:ELP. 111 
~:aM.: th..: anuounccnll."llt o f ~ELP ~~nu ,,ward vf l'th)\.·k~ M..: morlhn.lh:l~ 
c.kl,aycc.L the Hnpact wtll h~ kit 111 respect o f cxplo r;ltv l ~ L..r ~~~ lf,\·11·\ '' 
rcqUifCIIH.'IH uf ~.-·xplorattou ru.:rc: q.!.'-'~ Uunng IXth Ptau .wJ lht.• pn;,.._·,HI~ 
hdd I'FI ' uf ONGC :111<1 OIL !i rill> "'I'~'' ~ an be '""~" <arc 11l lh< 
llllf'ilO,.:I t,; .Ill t'oc..• ('~ Hl\ltlt: f ,1 hi~ 1\1 j 1\tll''U'L'Ll 
Q.5. ~umlnatlun ,,r th l• hlud\' und er tht.· 'linth Pbn . 
h ~~ \ltH.h.•r,m<JJ th .. ll th~ hl~h.:k~ toJ b~: "'fh.'r~J uuc..k" t'-'ELP '"'II lhtl 11~.- ,111 
.J 1\0illlnauon baM~ 1--hH~t-\..'~wCr. UH<.kr APM ;,tppiKJ~ii.lll' l''r 1111.1 ... 1 "~ 1h\.: 
udlllCUICd ~crc~gcs h~vc b~cn ;ubllllllcJ l<>r PEL fur lhL IXch Plan. S<•lll.: 
of th.:~~ h:WC been grlntCd, otlu.:r' ;J(\: Ul lhC pHJI..'l'S~ l)t t't.:-111~ gt.mh:J Jlh'T 
''rullll) b) OGH I MOri"G 