PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE  
LEGISLATION 
HUNDRED AND FIFTY THIRD REPORT 
  
(Presented on December 7, 2004) 
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------- 
CONTENTS 
    1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
    2.INTRODUCTION 
    3.REPORT 
  I. The Coconut Development Board Regulations, 1982 —Implementation of the 
126th Report of the Committee  
  II. The Statutory Order No. 1076 (E) dated the December 15th, 1998 issued under 
the Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory Use in Packaging Commodities) Act, 
1987—Implementation of 127th Report of the Committee 
  III. The Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulations and Control) Rules, 2000 —
Implementation of 138th Report of Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya 
Sabha 
  IV. The Merchant Shipping (Management of Safe Operation of Ships) Rules, 
2000—Implementation of the 143rd Report of the Committee. 
  V. The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Licensing of 
Insurance Agents) Regulations, 2000 —Implementation of 149 th Report of the 
Committee. 
  4.SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS  
  5.MINUTES 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------- 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE 26TH JUNE, 2003) 
   @1.   Shri A. Vijayaraghavan  ___     Chairman 
MEMBERS 
     #2.   Shri Kapil Sibal 
   **3.   Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
     $4.   Dr. A.R. Kidwai 
       5.   Shri G.K. Vasan 
   **6.   Shri B.P. Singhal 
   **7.   Shri Dina Nath Mishra 
       8.   Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  

       9.   Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
***10.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
     11.   Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
     12.   Shri N.K. Premachandran 
   *13.   Shri Drupad Borgohain 
     14.   Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
   #15.   Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh 'Lalan" 
  
 
 
@   Shri A. Vijayaraghavan renominated as Chairman of the Committee on 7.8.2004. 
#    Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent on his election as Member of the 
Lok Sabha on 13.5.2004. 
*    Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent on his retirement from the 
Membership of the Rajya Sabha on 2.4.2004. 
** Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent on his retirement from the 
Membership of Raya Sabha on 4.7.2004. 
***                                    Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent on his 
retirement from the Membership of Rajya Sabha on 29.6.2004. 
$    Ceased to be Membership of the Committee consequent to his appointment as 
Governor of Haryana. 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE 7TH AUGUST, 2004) 
   1.  Shri A. Vijayaraghavan      ___     Chairman 
MEMBERS 
   2.  Shri Nabam Rebia 
   3.  Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
   4.  Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur 
   5.  Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy 
   6.  Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
   7.  Prof. R.B.S. Varma 
   8.  Shri Rudra Narayan Pany  
   9.  Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
10.  Shri N. Jothi 
11.  Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
12.  Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
13.  Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
14.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
15.  Shri R.S. Gavai 
  
SECRETARIAT 
   1.  Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary 
   2.  Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary 
   3.  Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary 
   4.  Shri Narmedeshwar Prasad, Committee Officer   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------- 


INTRODUCTION 
         I, the Chairman of the Committee on Sub ordinate Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this 
Hundred and Fifty-Third Report of the Committee. 
1.2    The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 16 th 
September, 2004. 
1.3    The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various 
Rules/Regualtions and issues, related therewith, along with the comments of the 
Governments received thereon. The observations and recommendations which, i n the 
opinion of the Committee, should be brought to the notice of the House, are contained in 
the succeeding paragraphs of the Report. 
  
NEW DELHI; 
September 16, 2004 
A. VIJAYARAGHAVAN 
Chairman, 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
 Rajya Sabha. 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------- 
REPORT 
I 
THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD REGULATIONS, 1982— 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 126TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
        The Committe e considered the Coconut Development Board Regulations, 1982 
framed under the Coconut Development Board Act, 1979 and made some 
observations/recommendations in its 115 th report presented to the House on 24 th 
November, 1997. The Committee considered impleme ntation of these recommendations 
and presented its 126 th Report to the House on the   23rd December, 1999 and made the 
following observations/ recommendations: 
        “The Committee notes that necessary action has been taken on all recommendations 
of the C ommittee except one relating to Coconut Board Service Regulations. The 
Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the fact that the Ministry of Agriculture 
could not keep its promise of framing the Coconut Board Service Regulations within four 
months as assured to the Committee during its visit to Cochin in January, 1999. The 
Committee hopes that the Coconut Development Board Service Regulations would be 
framed by the Ministry of Agriculture at the earliest under intimation to it.” 
2.     Extracts from th e above report were forwarded to the Ministry of Agriculture on 
the 28th January, 2000. In response, the Ministry of Agriculture vide their communication 
dated the 6th July, 2001 informed as follows:---- 
        “This Ministry has been examining the implic ations of a directive of the Finance 
Ministry issued vide their letter dated the 16 th March, 2000 about the introduction of 
pension scheme and regulation of pension in respect of the employees of the autonomous 
bodies under various Ministries. The guidelin es of the Finance Ministry in this letter 
stipulated that introduction of pension scheme on Government of India pattern to the 
employees of autonomous bodies should not be agreed to as a Rule and any exception in 
this regard should be referred to the Finance Ministry. 

        In view of the above, the draft Service Regulations for the Coconut Development 
Board employees were referred to the Finance Ministry who in turn had asked for certain 
facts to be furnished to them for consideration of the case. The De partment has already 
resubmitted the proposal. Based on the outcome further action will be taken by this 
Ministry in this matter.” 
3.     The Committee again discussed the subject matter with the representatives  
of the Coconut Development Board and the Ministry of Agriculture on the 11th July, 2001 
at Thiruvanthapuram during the course of its study visit. The Committee was informed 
that the stand taken by the Ministry of Finance was in conflict with the provision 
contained in the Coconut Development Board (CDB) Rules (Rule 20) which provides that 
the employees shall be governed by the service conditions including pension as applicable 
to the Central Government Employees of comparable status till separate Regulations 
were framed. It was further stated that su ch a change in service conditions could have 
only prospective effect and should be applicable only to those who came in service after 
the implementation of the decision. The existing employees should have the protection 
available under the CDB Rules. It was, accordingly, submitted before the Committee that 
the legal implications of the stand of the Ministry of Finance vis-a-vis the relevant 
statutory provisions of the CDB Act and Rules need to be examined by the Ministry of 
Law and Justice because, as per t he existing service conditions, the employees of the 
Board were eligible for pension and other benefits and conditions of service similar to the 
Central Government employees. The Chairman, Coconut Development Board was of the 
view that those conditions could not be changed adversely and legal complications could 
arise if the conditions of service relating to pension were changed in a way detrimental to 
the interest of the employees and/or the pensioners of the Board which include employees 
who were transfer red from the erstwhile Directorate of Coconut Development to the 
Board. Relevant extracts from the study note on the above discussions were forwarded to 
the Ministry of Agriculture on the 1st November, 2001. 
4.     The Ministry of Agriculture informed the Committee on the 20 th November, 2001 
that the matter was being taken up with the Ministry of Finance. They had sought certain 
clarifications which were furnished to them and the matter was pending with them. The 
Ministry also sought extension of time up to the 31st December, 2001 which was granted. 
The Action Taken Note received from the Ministry is enclosed (Annexure-I). 
5.     The Ministry of Agriculture vide their communication dated the 25th January, 2002, 
communicated the following advice received from the Ministry of Finance: 
        “The proposal for the protection of the service conditions of the staff and officers is 
listed at Annexure-II (a list consisting of 42 officials only). Issues relating to creation of 
further posts and the service condition s of the staff who were to be appointed in future 
were not raised in the Cabinet Note. Accordingly, the Service Regulations, now proposed, 
may pro vide only for the protection of pensionery benefits in respect of 42 staff and 
officers as listed at Annexure-II. These officers and staff were in position on the date of 
the Cabinet Note i.e., the 15 th November, 1977. Posts created thereafter are not covered 
by specific cabinet approval for extended benefits and, therefore, employees appointed 
subsequently against these posts cannot be covered by pension.” 
6.     The Ministry of Agriculture, however, further informed that the matter was again 
being referred to the Ministry of Finance for protecting the interest of the existin g 
employees at least and in response thereto, the Ministry of Finance had advised them to 
obtain legal opinion from the Ministry of Law and Justice on the point as to whether the 
Coconut Development Board Act/Rules/Regulations were required to be amended i n 
order to implement the decision/advice of the Ministry of Finance. For that purpose, the 

Ministry sought further extension of time upto the 30 th April, 2002 which was duly 
granted. 
7.     The Ministry of Agriculture vide their communications dated the  
29th April, the 30 th July and 24 th October, 2002 informed the Committee about the 
progress of the further consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice and the 
Ministry of Finance in the matter. Action Taken Notes received from them are enclosed 
as Annexures II, III  and IV. The Ministry vide their communication dated the 20 th 
January, 2003 informed the Committee as under : 
        “Ministry of Finance have turned down the proposal vide their Note dated the 11 th 
November, 2002. As this Department strongl y feels about the entitlement of pensionery 
benefits to the Coconut Development. Board employees in view of the existing provisions 
of the Coconut Development Board Act, the matter was once again taken up with the 
Finance Ministry.” 
8.     The Ministry vide their communication dated the 7 th May, 2003  
(Annexure-V) informed that the Finance Ministry had turned down the proposal  
reiterating their earlier stand of not extending equal entitlement of pensionary  
benefits to all the employees of the Coconut Develop ment Board. It was added that the 
Ministry of Agriculture were contemplating their further course of action. 
9.     The Ministry vide their communication dated the 17 th July, 2003 informed  
as under: 
        “The Ministry again has taken up this matter by m eans of D.O. letter from the 
Agriculture Ministry addressed to the Finance Minister dated the 4 th June, 2003. 
However, the Finance Minister in his reply dated the 25 th June, 2003 has informed that 
the Government has taken a conscious policy decision not to  extend pension schemes to 
employees of autonomous institutions of all Ministries and as such the Coconut Board 
when its service regulations are notified for all employees appointed subsequent to the 
creation of the Board as an autonomous body cannot be given pensionary benefits. 
        The matter has legal implications and is, therefore, being examined further in this 
Department.” 
10.   Keeping in view a dead lock like situation, the Committee heard the  
Secretaries of the Ministry of Agriculture (Departme nt of Agriculture and  
Cooperation); Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) and Ministry of Law 
and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) on the 3 rd September, 2003 with a view to 
resolving the issue. 
11.   The Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, apprised the Committee about the efforts so 
far made by that Ministry for framing the Coconut Development Board Service 
Regulations in consultation with the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Law and 
Justice. He stated that the staff regulations have t o be made in terms of Regulation - 17 
of the Coconut Development Board Regulation, 1982. The Finance Secretary deposed 
before the Committee that the service regulations were being finalized and considering 
the legal position and administrative difficulties  the employees recruited up to 
notification of the proposed service regulations would continue to get pension on the 
Government of India pattern and in terms of Government policy subject to the approval 
of the Finance Minister to whom the matter had since been put up. 
12.   The Coconut Development Board Employees (Conditions of Service)  
Regulations, 2003 were ultimately laid before the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha on the 12th and 
8th December, 2003 respectively by the Ministry of Agriculture amending Regulation 4(2) 
of the Coconut Development Board Regulations, 1982. These regulations provided inter 
alia that the pensionary benefits, if any, payable to the persons appointed after the date 

of commencement of these regulations shall be regulated as per the instructions issued by 
the Ministry of Finance from time to time in respect of autonomous bodies under the 
Central Government. 
        The Committee is unhappy to note that the notification of the Coconut Board Service 
Regulations has been delayed for so long despit e specific recommendations of the 
Committee, first in its 115th Report presented on the 24th November, 1997 and thereafter 
reiterated in its 126th Report presented to the House on the 23rd December, 1999. What is 
surprising is the fact that the Ministry of Finance had all along been objecting to allowing 
of the pension scheme on the Government of India pattern to the employees of the 
Coconut Development Board in utter disregard to the provisions of the Coconut 
Development Board Act as well as the regulation s framed thereunder. The Committee 
notes with regret that the Ministry of Agriculture approached the Ministry of Finance a 
number of times, but, every time the proposal was declined on the ground that they had 
taken a policy decision not to extend pension schemes to the employees of the autonomous 
institutions of all Ministries. The Committee is, however, satisfied that the Ministry of 
Finance reviewed their stand while tendering oral e vidence before it on the 3 rd of 
September, 2003 and agreed to concur wit h the proposal of the Ministry of Agriculture 
to allow the benefit of pension on the lines of the Government of India to the existing 
employees of the Coconut Development Board till the notification of the service 
regulations keeping in view the legal posi tion and the administrative difficulties of the 
employees which would have otherwise entailed. The Committee would have appreciated 
if the Ministry of Finance had given this consideration to the matter earlier when the 
Ministry of Agriculture had been appr oaching them repeatedly for clearing of the 
regulations along with the legal opinion which was in their favour. 

ANNEXURE-I 
ENCLOSED WITH M/O AGRICULTURE COMMUNICATION DATED THE 20TH 
NOVEMBER, 2001 
Horticulture Division 
Action Taken Report on the Notification of Coconut Development 
Board employees Service regulations as directed by the Rajya   
Sabha Committee on Sub-ordinate Legislation in their  
126th Report 
        This is about the notification of Service Regulations in respect of Coconut 
Development Board employees. The Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation 
while reviewing the Subordinate Legislation and amendments thereupon suggested 
formulation of Service Regulation for Board employees and notification of the same. The 
Coconut Devel opment Board follows the Rules of the Central Government for all 
purposes e.g., administrative, financial and other matters as provided in Regulation 17 
under Chapter IV of Coconut Development Board Regulations, 1982. 
2.     The Coconut Development Board f ormulated the draft Service Regulations and 
forwarded the draft proposal to the Central Government after obtaining the approval of 
the members of the Board. The proposal was examined by this Department in 
consultation with the various concerned departments of the Central Government namely, 
the Department of Personnel and Training first, and then Ministry of Labour among 
others. Suggestions/Views expressed by the Central Agencies were incorporated in the 
draft and revisions carried out. The Rajya Sabha Commi ttee held discussions with 
Chairman, Coconut Development Board during January, 1999 and reviewed the progress 
in the matter. Also extensive consultations with the Officials of the Coconut Development 
Board were held. The proposal was finally referred to th e Ministry of Law (Legislative 
Department) for vetting of the draft. The Law Ministry before vetting, invited the officials 
of this Department and Coconut Development Board for discussions. On receipt of the 
vetted draft from the Ministry of Law, this Depa rtment was in the process of finalising 
the notification of the draft service regulations. In the meanwhile Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Expenditure vide their letter dated 16th March, 2000 issued new guidelines 
about the introduction of pension sche me and regulation of pension in respect of the 
employees of autonomous bodies under various Ministries. The Finance Ministry in their 
letter dated 16th March, 2000 advised as below: 
        “We have been advising autonomous bodies under various Ministries/ Departments 
of the Government of India to continue to follow the Contributory Provident Fund 
Scheme through the Life Insurance Corporation of India base on voluntary contributions 
by the employees and without any contribution from the Government or the emp loyees 
may join the pension scheme introduced by the Ministry of Labour for the PF 
subscribers. It may please be noted that introduction of pension scheme on GoI pattern 
to the employees of autonomous bodies should not be agreed to as a rule; any exception  
in this regard should be referred to this Department.” 
3.     On receiving the above directions of the Ministry of Finance, the matter pertaining 
to Service Regulations was referred to the Finance Ministry (Department of Expenditure) 
by Internal Finance Division, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation during 
November 2000 for approval to the continuation of the existing pattern of pensionary 
benefits to the employees of the Coconut Development Board so th at the Service 
Regulations could be notified. The Department during the meeting with the Rajya Sabha 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation at Trivendrum held on 11 -7-2001 placed all the 
facts and figures stating the progress of the case before the Committee  and that this 

Department taken up the matter with the Finance Ministry. This Department sought 
extension of time upto 31 st August, 2001 which was granted by the Rajya Sabha 
Committee. 
4.     Finance Ministry have asked clarifications in the first instance about the decision to 
allow pensionary benefits to the CDB employees and whether the same had the approval 
of Finance Ministry earlier. Necessary clarifications were furnished by this Department 
to the Finance Ministry on this issue. Subsequently, the Finance Ministry sought further 
clarifications and documents like Cabinet Note for creation of Coconut Development 
Board and Cabinet approval to the proposal. The requisite information was furnished to 
the Finance Ministry. Again, the Finance Ministry sought clarifications about the 
structural set up and total strength of employees of CDB, number of persons retired since 
1981, etc. 
5.     The Department has been furnishing information and clarifications to the queries 
raised by Finance Ministry in connection w ith this proposal ‘time and again since 
November 2000. Lastly, the file was sent to the Internal Finance Division, Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation on 9th November, 2001 with the necessary clarifications and 
the matter is now pending with them and  further action for notifying the CDB Service 
Regulations would be subject to the approval of Ministry of Finance. 
6.     The matter has been pending with the Finance Ministry. Also this Department 
sought extension of time upto 31st December 2001 vide our letter dated 17th October 2001. 
It is regretted that this Department could not submit an Action Taken Report in time 
after the meeting with the Rajya Sabha Committee in July and the delay may be 
condoned. Our prayer for granting us further extension of time upto 31st December, 2001 
may be placed before the Committee. 
7.     Hon’ble Chairman of the Committee may kindly be apprised of the progress in the 
matter as mentioned above and in case it is felt that oral evidence is still necessary, the 
date and time and venue, may be communicated to this Department. 

ANNEXURE-II 
ENCLOSED WITH M/O AGRICULTURE COMMUNICATION DATED THE 29TH 
APRIL, 2002 
Action Taken Report on the notification of Coconut Development Board employees 
Service Regulations as directed by the Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation in their  
126th Report. 
        The Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation while reviewing the 
Subordinate Legislation and amendments thereupon suggested formulation of Service 
Regulation for Board employees and notification of the same. The Coconut Development 
Board follows the Rules of the Central Government for all purposes e.g., administrative, 
financial and other matters, as provided in Rule 20 of Coconut Development Board Rules, 
1981 and Regulation 17 under Chapter-IV of Coconut Development Board Regulations, 
1982. 
2.     As mentioned in the Action Taken Report forwarded earlier vide our letter dated 
20-11-2001, as well as our Office Memorandum dated 25th January, 2002 the matter was 
being pursued with the Ministry of Finance. The Finance Ministry advised that the 
Service Regulations for the Coconut Development Board employees now proposed for 
notification may provide only for the protection of pensionary benefits in respect of 42 
staff and officers as listed and in position on the date of the Cabinet Note i.e., 15-11-1977. 
Posts created thereafter are not covered by specific Cabinet approval, and, therefore, 
employees appointed subsequently against these posts cannot be covered by pension as 
applicable to Central Government employees. 
3.     This Department considers that existing employees should have protection as 
available under the Coconut Development Board Rule 20 of Coconut Development Board 
Rules, 1981 and Regulation 17 of the Coconut Development Board Regulations, 1982. The 
decision of Ministry of Finance should be effective only from prospective date for the 
officers and staff joining service after the notification of the proposed revised regulations. 
Any revision in service regulations, if t hese are detrimental to the interest of existing 
employees, will lead to numerous court cases. On this Finance Ministry informed that 
their earlier advice essentially meant that rules and regulations should be exactly in line 
with Cabinet approval and ther e is a need to adhere to what has been approved by the 
Cabinet. Accordingly, the Finance Ministry advised this Department to obtain legal 
opinion from Law Ministry as to whether Coconut Development Board Act, Rules and 
Regulations are required to be amende d in order to implement decision/advice of the 
Finance Ministry. The Law Ministry expressed that there does not appear any need to 
amend the Coconut Development Board Act, Rules and Regulations in implementing the 
decision/advice of the Ministry of Finance.  
4.     At present service conditions, etc., of Board’s employees are regulated under Rule 
20 of the Coconut Development Board Rules, 1981 and Regulation 17 of the Coconut 
Development Board Regulations, 1982. The Rule 20 states that conditions of service and 
other facilities and concessions in respect of. all employees appointed by the Board shall 
be regulated in accordance with such rules and regulations, as are for the time being 
applicable to officers and employees of Central Government till separate regulations are 
made by the Board. Similarly, Regulation 17 of the Coconut Development Board 
Regulations, 1982 provides for pay, leave, allowance, pension and retirement benefits, etc. 
and other service conditions in respect  of all employees of the Board to be regulated in 
accordance with rules and regulations as are for the time being applicable to officers and 
employees of the Central Government. This Department felt that as such all the officers 

and staff of Board, includi ng the 42 transferred from Directorate of Coconut 
Development recruited and appointed by the Board under powers drawn from Section 
7(6) of the CDB Act, 1979 are governed by the provisions of the Act, Rules and 
Regulations mentioned above. The Board is, therefore, obliged (Section 20(7) of the Act) 
to protect the service conditions of all the existing staff and officers, at par with Central 
Government employees since their service conditions are governed by the provisions of 
the existing rules and regulations of the Board. Ministry of Agriculture, therefore, again 
referred the case to the Ministry of Finance, The Ministry of Finance re -examined the 
proposal of this Department and decided not to agree to the proposal of Ministry of 
Agriculture to provide pensionary benefits to all existing employees of the Board.  
5.     This Ministry feels that if this decision of Ministry of Finance is implemented, there 
will be numerous court cases as it does not protect the benefits being enjoyed by all the 
existing employees of the Board as provided under Rule 20 of the Coconut Development 
Board Rules, 1981 and Regulation 17 of the Coconut Development Board Regulations, 
1982. The Ministry is, therefore, seeking advice of Ministry of Law whether curtailment 
of pensionary benefits being presently enjoyed by all the existing employees of the Board 
will not amount to contravention of the existing rules and regulations of the Coconut 
Development Board. 

ANNEXURE-III 
ENCLOSED WITH M/O AGRICULTURE COMMUNICATION DATED THE 30TH 
JULY, 2002 
Implementation of Rajya Sabha Committee Recommendations as Contained in its 126th 
Report Regarding Framing of Coconut Development Board Service Regulations—
Latest status position 
        The Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation while revie wing the 
Subordinate Legislation and amendments thereupon suggested formulation of Service 
Regulation for Board employees and notification of the same. The Coconut Development 
Board follows the Rules of the Central Government for all purposes e.g., administrative, 
financial and other matters as provided in Regulation 17 under Chapter -IV of Coconut 
Development Board Regulations, 1982. 
2.     The status of action taken in this regard was earlier communicated to the Rajya 
Sabha Secretariat vide this Department  O.M. No. 14 -27/92-Hort.VI dated 29.04.2002. 
Thereafter, this Ministry with the approval of Secretary (A&C) referred the matter to 
the Ministry of Finance on 4.4.2002 who stated that in view of the advice of the Ministry 
of Law (as mentioned in ATR sent on 29.04.2002) they would not agree to the proposal. 
3.     The matter was again taken up with the Ministry of Law on 13.05.2002 that the 
decision of the Finance Ministry in curtailing the pensionary benefits to some of the 
employees of the Board will amount to contravention of extant rules of the Coconut 
Development Act, Rules and Regulations and lead to avoidable litigation. Ministry of 
Law, however, vide their note dated 04.07.2002 stated that they already expressed  their 
opinion on the legal issues (as mentioned in ATR sent on 29.04.2002) and on policy aspects 
the Ministry of Agriculture may consult Finance Ministry and Department of Personnel 
and Training. 
4.     However, this Ministry feels that the advice of the Law Ministry has not covered the 
relevant issue and, therefore, has again taken up the matter with the Ministry of Law for 
re-examination of the issue. 

ANNEXURE-IV 
ENCLOSED WITH M/O AGRICULTURE COMMUNICATION DATED THE 24TH 
OCTOBER, 2002 
Implementation of Recommendations of Rajya Sabha Committee  as Contained in its 
126th Report Regarding Framing of Coconut Development Board Service Regulations—
Latest status position/ 
Comments/Clarifications 
        This is about the notification of service regulations for the employees of the Coconut 
Development Board as recommended by the Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation. As mentioned in the status note forwarded by this Department’s O.M. No. 
14-27/92-Hort. VI dated 30.07.02, the matter was taken up with the Ministry of Law once 
again since the advice given by them earlier has not covered the relevant issue i.e., grant 
of pensionary benefits to all the Coconut Development Board employees as per the rules 
and regulations and act of the Coconut Development Board. 
        The Law Ministry in their advice furnished in the last week of September 2002 have 
agreed with the observations of this Ministry that the service benefits enjoyed by the 
existing staff of Coconut Development Board as provided in the existing Rules cannot be 
changed and even such change retrospectively through proposed Regulations will lead to 
litigation. 
        This Department has now taken up the matter with the Ministry of Finance to 
reconsider their earlier stand of not granting pensionary benefits to all existing employees 
of the Board. The Ministry of Finance has been, accordingly, requested for approval of 
the service regulations proposed by Department of Agriculture and Cooperation for 
notification. 

ANNEXURE-V 
ENCLOSED WITH M/O AGRICULTURE COMMUNICATION DATED THE 7TH 
MAY, 2003 
Implementation of Recommendations of Rajya Sabha Committee  as Contained in its 
126th Report Regarding Framing of Coconut Development Board Service Regulations—
Latest Status Position/ 
Comments/Clarifications 
        This is about the notification of service regulations for the employees of the Coconut 
Development Board as recommended by the Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation. As mentioned in the status note forwarded by this Department’s O.M. No. 
14-27/92-Hort. VI dated 30.07.02, the matter was taken up with the Ministry of Law once 
again since the advice given by them earlier has not covered the relevant issue i.e., grant 
of pensionary benefits to all the Coconut Development Board employees as per the rul es 
and regulations and act of the Coconut Development Board. 
        The Law Ministry in their advice furnished in the last week of September 2002 have 
agreed with the observations of this Ministry that the service benefits enjoyed by the 
existing staff of Coconut Development Board as provided in the existing Rules can not be 
changed and even such change retrospectively through proposed Regulations will lead to 
litigation. 
        This Department took up the matter with the Ministry of Finance through the 
internal Finance Division of this Department to reconsider their earlier stand of not 
granting pensionary benefits to all existing employees of the Board. However, Ministry of 
Finance turned down the proposal vide their Note dated 11 th November, 2002. As th is 
Department strongly feels about the entitlement of pensionary benefits to the Coconut 
Development Board employees in view of the existing provisions of the Coconut 
Development Board Act, the matter was once again taken up with the Finance Ministry 
by sending a DO letter from Secretary (Agriculture) to Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry 
of Finance on 10 th January, 2003. Once again the Finance Ministry turned down the 
proposal reiterating their earlier stand. 
        The Ministry is contemplating further course of action. 

II 
THE STATUTORY ORDER NO. 1076 (E) DATED THE 
DECEMBER 15, 1998 ISSUED UNDER THE JUTE PACKAGING 
MATERIALS (COMPULSORY USE IN PACKAGING COMMODITIES) 
ACT, 1987 — IMPLEMENTATION OF 127TH REPORTS 
OF THE COMMITTEE 
        The Committee examined the Statutory Order No. 1076 (E) dated the 15th December, 
1998 issued under the Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory Use in Packing 
Commodities) Act, 1987 and included the subject matter in its 127 th Report which was 
presented to the Hou se on the 14 th March, 2000. The Committee in the said report 
observed as under: 
              “4.  The Committee considered the subject matter at its meeting held on 
February 23, 2000. The Committee notes with satisfaction that Government have 
been keeping in mind the interest of the jute farmers, workers and the end users by 
following the provisions of the Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory Use in Packing 
Commodities) Act, 1987. The Committee, however, desires that the problems of the 
jute growers need to be looked into by Government more seriously so that they could 
get a fair return. In the opinion of the Committee, Government need to put in more 
efforts towards diversification and value addition in the Jute Sector so that the jute 
growers as well as the persons engaged in the trade in this sector are encouraged. 
              5.  As regards the constitution of the Standing Advisory Committee, the 
Committee is not in agreement with the position as stated by the Ministry of Textiles. 
The Committee feels that its suggestion to broad base the composition of the Standing 
Advisory Committee has the endorsement of the Apex Court of the country also and, 
therefore, there is all the more a ground to review the composition of the Standing 
Advisory Committee and amend the provisions of the Statutory Order. The Standing 
Advisory Committees might be inviting and hearing views of the concerned 
industries and user sectors while reviewing the mandatory Packaging Order, but in 
the opinion of the Committee representation of concerned industries and user sectors 
in the Standing Advisory Committee would lend better support to the cause.” 
2.     Relevant extracts from the 127 th Report were forwarded to the Ministry of Textiles 
for their comments/clarifications on the 21 st March, 2000. The Ministry on the 11 th 
August, 2000 informed as under: 
        “In accordance to the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court the Standing 
Committee is inviting comments and hearing the views of the concerned industries 
and user sectors after giv ing due notice through recognized office bearers of the 
associations, particularly when the question of review of the mandatory Packaging 
Order is considered. Their views are fully taken into account before taking any 
decision in this regard. The matter may therefore be treated as closed.” 
3.     The Committee at its meeting held on the 16 th May, 2002 considered the subject 
matter and expressed its dissatisfaction over the Ministry’s Action Taken Report in 
pursuance of its recommendation as contained in the  127th Report on the subject. The 
Committee noted that the Ministry had simply reiterated their earlier position and had 
not complied with the Committee’s recommendations to broad base the composition of 
the Standing Advisory Committee. The Committee decided that its recommendations on 
the subject be further reiterated. Accordingly, the Ministry was requested vide this 
Secretariat communication dated the 31st May, 2002 to review the position in the light of 
the Committee’s recommendations/observations and i ntimate the proposed course of 
action. 

4.     In response, the Ministry on the 21st October, 2002 requested for a copy of the Report 
as well as a copy of this Secretariat’s communication dated the 31st May, 2002 which were 
not traceable with them. These documents were duly furnished to the Ministry. 
5.     Thereafter, there was no response from the Ministry despite repeated reminders 
from this Secretariat until a D.O. letter was issued to the Secretary, Ministry of Textiles 
on the 7th July, 2003 requesting for the latest position with regard to the implementation 
of Committee’s pending recommendations. 
6.     The Ministry furnished the Action Taken Note on the 29 th July, 2003 stating as 
under: 
I.     Regarding interest of jute farmers, workers and users enga ged in the trade in the 
Jute Sector 
        “The Minimum Support Price (MSP) are fixed by the Government every year. The 
Minimum Support Price for TD-5 grade of jute growers in Assam had been raised from 
Rs. 810/- per quintal in 2001 -02 to Rs. 850/ - per quintal for the jute year 2002 -03. This 
has further been raised to Rs. 860/- per quintal for the jute year 2003-04. On the basis of 
MSP declared by Government, grade -wise price differentials are fixed by the Jute 
Commissioner for every jute year are being wi dely publicized through radio, television, 
newspapers and other media. 
        The Government of India has taken necessary steps towards diversification and 
value addition in the jute sector. In order to modernize the jute sector, Special Jute 
Development Programme (SJDF) with cent per cent Central Assistance has been 
launched. In addition, financial assistance is also provided under the Technology 
Upgradation Fund Schemes (TUFS). The Government also proposes to launch Jute 
Technology Mission (JTM) for the development of jute industry. For providing incentives 
to exporters, the Duty Entitlement Pass Book (DEPB) Scheme has also been extended to 
the jute sector.” 
II.    Regarding constitution of the Standing Advisory Committee 
        “The recommendation has been noted and will be considered while constituting the 
new Standing Advisory Committee.” 
7.     The reply of the Ministry was found not satisfactory and they were asked vide this 
Secretariat communication dated the 24 th September, 2003 to review the matte r with a 
view to suitably modifying the provisions of rule 3 of the Jute Packaging Materials 
(Compulsory use in Packaging Commodities) Rules, 1987 as well as the relevant 
provisions of the Statutory Order so as to prescribe therein the concerned industries and 
user Sectors to be represented in the Standing Advisory Committee. 
8.     The Ministry vide their communication dated the 18 th December, 2003  
have since informed as under:---- 
        “The Ministry of Textiles has no objection in modifying the provisions of Rule 3 of 
the Jute Packaging Materials Act, 1987 so that the concerned industries and user 
Sectors are to be represented in the Standing Advisory Committee (SAC) after the 
expiry of the tenure of the SAC which was constituted in May, 2001 and will remain 
valid for a period of three years till May, 2004.” 
9.     Committee’s observations/recommendations 
        The Committee expresses its displeasure over the non -serious attitude of the 
Ministry of Textiles in implementing the recommendations of the Committee as contained 
in its 127 th Report as a result of which the Committee had to repeatedly approach the 
Ministry for eliciting a proper response. The Committee is rather shocked that the 
Ministry, in their initial action taken note on the Committ ee’s report, had simply 

reiterated their earlier stand and when they were asked to review the position, they did 
not have even a copy of the Committee’s report. 
        The Committee expects that the Ministry of Textiles would act more responsibly 
while dealing with the recommendations of the Committee. The Committee, however, 
notes that the Ministry of Textiles have ultimately agreed to amend the provisions of Rule 
3 of the Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory Use in Packaging Commodities) Rules, 
1987 in order to provide therein the industries and user sectors to be represented in the 
Standing Advisory Committee in pursuance of its recommendations. 

III 
THE OZONE DEPLETING SUBSTANCES (REGULATION AND CONTROL) 
RULES, 2000—IMPLEMENTATION OF 138TH 
REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE  
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
        The Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000 were 
examined and the Committee in its 138 th Report, which was presented to the House on 
the 14th March, 2002, recommended as follows:- 
        “The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests have agreed to rectify the typographical error in Rule 2 (h) (i) defining the term 
“manufacture” and specifying a time limit in Rule 13 for completing th e process of 
registration, renewal and cancellation as suggested by the Committee. The Committee 
hopes that the Ministry would bring in these changes in the Rules at the earliest.” 
2.     The Ministry of Environment and Forests sought extension of time vide their 
communications dated the 10th September, 2002, 19th December, 2002 and 21st April, 2003 
seeking upto 22 nd December, 2003, 31 st March, 2003 and 30 th June, 2003 respectively, 
which was duly granted. 
3.     The Ministry of Environment and Forests vide their communication dated the 10 th 
September, 2003 forwarded Notification S.O. 996 (E) dated the 29 th August, 2003 
notifying the Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulation and Control) Amendment Rules, 
2003 (Annexure-I). 
        The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Environment and Forests 
have amended Rule 2 (h) (i) which contained a typographic error and added sub rules (8) 
and (9) to Rule 13 specifying a time -limit of 60 days for registration, renewal and 
cancellation of registration as recommended by the Committee. 

ANNEXURE-I 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
NOTIFICATION  
New Delhi, the 27th August 2003 
        S.O. 996(E).—Whereas the Central Government, in exercise of the powers conferred 
by sections 6, 8 and 25 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986), made the 
Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000 vide notification 
number S.O. 670(E) dated the 19th July, 2000; 
        And whereas the said rules have been amended vide notification number S.O.1283 
(E), dated the 31st December, 2001;  
        And whereas the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary and 
expedient in the public interest to amend the said rules in compliance with certain 
recommendations of the Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation; 
        And whereas sub-rule (4) of rule 5 of Environment Protection Rules, 1986 provides 
that, notwithstanding anything contained in sub -rule (3), whenever it appears to the 
Central Government that it is in the public interest  to do so, it may dispense with the 
requirement of notice under clause (a) of sub -rule (3) of rule 5 of Environment 
(Protection) Rules, 1986; 
        And whereas the Central Government is of the opinion that it is in the public interest 
to dispense with the requirement of notice under clause (a) of sub -rule (3) of rule 5 of 
Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 for amending the Ozone Depleting Substances 
(Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000; 
        Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sections 6, 8 and 25 of the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986), read with sub -rule (4) of rule 5 of the 
Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, the Central Government hereby makes th e 
following rules further to amend the Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulation and 
Control) Rules, 2000, namely:-  
1.     (1)    These rules may be called the Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulation and 
Control) Amendment Rules, 2003. 
        (2)    They sha ll come into force on the date of their publication in the Official 
Gazette. 
2.     In the Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000,— 
(a)   in rule 2, in clause (h), in sub-clause (i), for the words “treating or any ozone depleting 
substance”, the words “treating of any ozone depleting substance” shall be subsituted; 
(b)   in rule 13, after sub-rule (7), the following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:- 
“(8)  Every application for registration or renewal of registration under these rules shall 
be disposed of within sixty days from the date of receipt of such complete application by 
the authority specified in column (4) of Schedule V. 
(9)   The concerned registering authority specified in column (4) of  
Schedule-V shall decide the issue of cancellation of any registration granted under these 
rules within sixty days from the date of service of the show cause notice given by him to 
the registration holder.” 
[F.No. l6/l/96-OC] 
R. CHANDRAMOHAN, Jt. Secy. 

Note : ----The Ozone Depleting Subst ances (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000 
were published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary Part -II, Section 3, 
Sub-section (ii) vide notification number S.O. 670(E) dated the 19 th July, 
2000 and subsequently amended vide notification number S.O. 1283  (E), 
dated the 31st December, 2001. 

IV 
THE MERCHANT SHIPPING (MANAGEMENT FOR SAFE OPERATION 
OF SHIPS) RULES, 2000—IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 
143RD REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
        The Committee examined the Merchant Shipping (Management for Safe Operation 
of Ships) Rules, 2000 framed under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 in its 143 rd Report 
presented to the House on the 21st November, 2002 and recommended as under: 
        “2.    The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Shipping have 
agreed to take action as follows based upon the suggestion on Committee’s behalf: 
        (i)     Prescribing minimum level of the officer for issuing Safety Management 
Certificate on behalf of the Central Government of India by amending rule 2(u); 
        (ii)     amending rule 3(1) by re-writing the para so as to provide that the system is a 
part of the Code; 
        (iii)    indicating mandatory rules and regulations mentioned in rule  
3(b)(i); 
        (iv)    deleting the words “International Safety Management” in rule 3(l)(b)(ii) so as 
to provide that applicable codes, guidelines and standards recommended by the 
Organisation, the Central Government, Classification Societies and Maritime 
industry organisations are taken into account; and 
        (v)    joining sub-rule (a) of rule 4 with rule 4. 
        The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Shipping would carry out the amendments 
expeditiously with intimation to it.” 
2.     Relevant extracts from the 143rd Report were forwarded to the Ministry of Shipping 
on the 8 th January, 2003 for necessary action. The Ministry vide their communication 
dated the 5 th February, 2003 intimated their acceptance of the Committee’s 
recommendations and informed that necessary action to implement the same was in 
progress. 
3.     Thereafter, the Ministry vide their communication dated the 25 th March, 
2003 furnished a copy of the draft amendment notification amending the  
Merchant Shipping (Management for Safe Operation of Ships) Rules, 2000,  
seeking therein, confirmation  to the proposed amendments with regard to the 
requirement of the Committee with reference to its 143 rd Report. The Ministry on 3 rd 
April, 2003 sought extension of time for timely issuing of the notification. In response, the 
Ministry was advised vide this Secretariat communication dated the 29 th April, 2003 to 
proceed further for notifying the proposed amendments in the Merchant Shipping 
(Management for Safe Operation of Ships) Rules, 2000 without waiting for the 
Committee’s clearance. The Ministry’s atten tion was, however, invited to the 
Committee’s suggestion on rule 3(l)(b)(ii) regarding criteria for verification which had 
been accepted by them but had not been incorporated in the proposed draft. The Ministry 
were accordingly, asked to look into the matter. 
4.     The Ministry of Shipping vide their communication dated the 16 th July, 
2003 furnished a copy of the Gazette notification G.S.R. 196 dated the  
10th May, 2003 publishing the Merchant Shipping (Management for Safe Operation of 
Ships) Amendment Rules, 2003. Relevant extracts enclosed (Annexure-I). 
5.     The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry has carried out and notified 
all the amendments as per its suggestions. 

ANNEXURE-I 
NOTIFICATION 
OF  
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING 
(Shipping Wing) 
New Delhi, the 28th April, 2003 
        G.S.R. 196.—In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 457 of the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958), the Central Government hereby makes t he following 
rules further to amend the Merchant Shipping (Management for the Safe Operation of 
Ships) Rules, 2000. 
        1.     (1)   These rules may be called the Merchant Shipping (Management for the 
Safe Operation of Ships) Amendment Rules, 2003. 
               (2)   They shall come into force from the date of their publication in the official 
gazette. 
        2.     In the said rules, in rule 2, clause (k) and (u) may be replaced as follows:— 
        “Rule 2 (k): “Document of Compliance” means a C ertificate of Compliance issued 
by an officer authorised by the Director General of Shipping, who is not below the rank 
of Deputy Chief Surveyor with Government of India 
        Rule 2 (u):  “Safety Management Certificate” means a Certificate issued by an officer 
authorised by the Director General of Shipping, who is not below the rank of Deputy 
Chief Surveyor with Government of India to a ship which signifies that the company and 
its shipboard management operate in accordance with the Safety Management System”. 
        3.     In the said rules, Rule 3 (1) may be replaced as follows:— 
               "Rule 3 : Criteria for verification 
        (1)   The Central Government shall verify compliance by the company with the 
requirements of the International Safety  Management Code by determining that the 
Safety Management Systems ensures that the following objectives are achieved, 
namely:— 
        (i)    There is compliance with mandatory Rules and regulations concerning safety 
and pollution prevention gazetted unde r provisions of Merchant Shipping Act, 
1958; and 
        (ii)    The applicable Codes, guidelines and standards recommended by the 
Organisation, the Central Government, Classification Societies and maritime 
industry organisation are taken into account." 
        4.     In the said rules, in rule 4, clause (a) may be merged with  
Rule 4, as follows :— 
        “Rule 4 : Safety Management System Requirements—Every company shall develop, 
implement and maintain a Safety Management System approved by the Governmen t 
which shall inter-alia include safety and environmental protec tion policy which shall 
explicitly establish the commitment of the company to achieve the following objectives, 
namely— 
        (i)    ensuring safety at sea, prevention of human injury or loss of life, and avoidance 
of damage to the environment, in particular to the marine environment and to 
property; 
        (ii)    providing safe practices in ship operation and a safe working environment;  
        (iii)   establishing safeguards against all identified risks; and 

        (iv)   improving safety management skills of personnel ashore and on board ships, 
including preparing for emergencies related both to safety and environment 
protection.” 
5. *** *** *** 
6. *** *** *** 
7. *** *** *** 
8. *** *** *** 
9. *** *** *** 
10. *** *** *** 
11. *** *** *** 
12. *** *** *** 
  
        Note : The Principal rules were published in the Gazette of India, vide notification 
No. G.S.R. 432 (E) dated the 12th May, 2000 in part-II, Section 3, Sub-Section 
(i). 

V 
THE INSURANCE REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT  
AUTHORITY (LICENSING OF INSURANCE AGENTS)  
REGULATIONS, 2000 — IMPLEMENTATION  
OF 149TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
        The Committee had examined the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
(Licensing of Insurance Agents) Regulations, 2000 framed under the Insurance Act, 1938. 
The matter was reported to the House by the Committee on the 19th August, 2003 vide its 
149th Report which was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance (Insurance Division) on the 
29th August, 2003 for furnishing the action taken note thereon. 
2.     The Ministry of Finance (Insurance Division) furnished the action taken note on the 
recommendations of the Committee on the 19th September, 2003 as follows:----- 
        Recommendation (i) : That a time limit of three months for grant/renewal of licence 
under Regulation-2 should be incorporated in the Regulations. 
        Action Taken :  The Ministry have inserted regulatory Regulations providing as 
under 
        “The designated person shall grant or renew the licence within a period of three 
months from the date of application.” 
        Recommendation (ii) : That the reasons for the delay in grant/renewal of licence and 
the likely time for completing the process in regulation 3 (2) should be intimated to the 
applicant. 
        Action Taken  : The Ministry have inserted regulatory Regulations providing as 
under: 
        “The designated person shall, if the consideration of the application is likely to get 
delayed within 60 days of the receipt of application, inform the applicant the reasons 
for such a delay, and the likely time it would take to do so”. 
        Recommendation (iii) : That whenever an application is rejected, the reasons should 
be informed to the applicant. 
        Action Taken  : T he Ministry in their action taken note stated that the IRDA 
(Licensing of Insurance Agents) Regulations, 2000 already cover this recommendation 
under rule 3(3) which provides as under: 
“If the designated person refuses to grant or renew a license under this Regulation, 
he shall give the reasons therefor to the applicant”. 
        The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance, Insurance 
Division, have notified amendments in the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority (Licensing of Insurance Agents) Regulations, 2000 as recommended by it. 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------- 

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
I 
THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD REGULATIONS, 1982—
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 126TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
        The Committee is unhappy to note that the notification of the Coconut Board Service 
Regulations has been delayed for so long despit e specific recommendations of the 
Committee, first in its 115th Report presented on the 24th November, 1997 and thereafter 
reiterated in its 126th Report presented to the House on the 23rd December, 1999. What is 
surprising is the fact that the Ministry of Finance had all along been objecting to allowing 
of the pension scheme on the Government of India pattern to the employees of the 
Coconut Development Board in utter disregard to the provisions of the Coconut 
Development Board Act as well as the regulation s framed thereunder. The Committee 
notes with regret that the Ministry of Agriculture approached the Ministry of Finance a 
number of times, but, every time the proposal was declined on the ground that they had 
taken a policy decision not to extend pension schemes to the employees of the autonomous 
institutions of all Ministries. The Committee is, however, satisfied that the Ministry of 
Finance reviewed their stand while tendering oral evidence before it on the 3 rd of 
September, 2003 and agreed to concur wit h the proposal of the Ministry of Agriculture 
to allow the benefit of pension on the lines of the Government of India to the existing 
employees of the Coconut Development Board till the notification of the service 
regulations keeping in view the legal posi tion and the administrative difficulties of the 
employees which would have otherwise entailed. The Committee would have appreciated 
if the Ministry of Finance had given this consideration to the matter earlier when the 
Ministry of Agriculture had been appr oaching them repeatedly for clearing of the 
regulations alongwith the legal opinion which was in their favour. 
II 
THE STATUTORY ORDER NO. 1076 (E) DATED DECEMBER 15, 1998 
ISSUED UNDER THE JUTE PACKAGING MATERIALS (COMPULSORY 
USE IN PACKAGING COMMODITIES) ACT, 1987—IMPLEMENTATION 
OF 127TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
        The Committee expresses its displeasure over the non -serious attitude of the 
Ministry of Textiles in implementing the recommendations of the Committee as contained 
in its 127 th Report as a re sult of which the Committee had to repeatedly approach the 
Ministry for eliciting a proper response. The Committee is rather shocked that the 
Ministry, in their initial action taken note on the Committee’s report, had simply 
reiterated their earlier stand and when they were asked to review the position, they did 
not have even a copy of the Committee’s report. 
        The Committee expects that the Ministry of Textiles would act more responsibly 
while dealing with the recommendations of the Committee. The Co mmittee, however, 
notes that the Ministry of Textiles have ultimately agreed to amend the provisions of Rule 
3 of the Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory Use in Packaging Commodities) Rules, 
1987 in order to provide therein the industries and user sectors  to be represented in the 
Standing Advisory Committee in pursuance of its recommendations. 
III 
THE OZONE DEPLETING SUBSTANCES (REGULATIONS & CONTROL) 
RULES, 2000—IMPLEMENTIATON OF 138TH REPORT OF COMMITTEE 

ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
        The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Environment & Forests 
have amended Rule 2 (h) (i) which contained a typographic error and added sub rules (8) 
and (9) to Rule 13 specifying a time limit of 60 days for registration, renewal and 
cancellation of registration as recommended by the Committee. 
IV 
THE MERCHANT SHIPPING (MANAGEMENT OF SAFE OPERATION 
OF SHIPS) RULES, 2000— IMPLEMENTATION OF 143RD REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
        The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have carried out and 
notified all the amendments as per its suggestions. 
V 
THE INSURANCE REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
(LICENSING OF INSURANCE AGENTS) REGULATIONS, 2000— 
IMPLEMENTATION OF 149TH REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance, Insurance 
Division, have notified amendments in the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority (Licensing of Insurance Agents) Regulations, 2000 as recommended by it. 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------- 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
        The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 16 th September, 2004 in Room 
No. 126-C (Chairman's Room), Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.    Shri A. Vijayaraghavan  ------  Chairman 
2.    Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
3.    Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur 
4.    Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
5.    Prof. R.B.S. Varma 
6.    Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
7.    Shri N. Jothi 
8.    Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
9.    Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
10.   Shri R.S. Gavai 
SECRETARIAT 
1.    Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary 
2.    Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary 
3.    Shri Narmadeshwar, Committee Officer 
2.     The meeting began with the consideration of the Committee’s 153 rd Report. While 
considering the first item regarding implementation of Committee’s recommendations on 
the Coconut Development Board Regulations, 1982, the Committee desired to know 
whether the pensionary benefits available to the employees of the Board under the new 
regulations would be the same as are available to the existing employees. It was clarified 
that under the new regulations, the employees of the Coconut Board shall either be 

governed by the instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance from time to time in 
respect of the Autonomous Bodies under the Central Government or they will have the 
option to go for the new pension scheme meant for the Central Government Employees. 
2.1   The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the next item in the draft 
report regarding Statutory Order No. 1076(E) dated the 15 th December, 1998 and 
expressed its displeasure at the casual approach of the Ministry of Textiles in 
implementing its recommendations. The Committee desired that the sentiments 
expressed by the Committee may be incorporated in the draft item and paras 9 and 10 
thereof be modified, accordingly. 
2.2   The Committee adopted its draft 153 rd Report subject, however, to the 
observations/suggestions as above. 
3. *** *** *** 
4. *** *** *** 
5.     The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 4.15 P.M. 
*** Matter not 
related to th subject. 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------- 
