  
           COM-I 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
  
HUNDRED AND FORTY THIRD  REPORT 
 
The coffee board general provident fund rules, 1965, The merchant shipping 
(management of safe operation of ships)rules, 2000, The agriculture & processed food 
products export development authority regulation, 1999 and Jawaharlal Nehru port 
trust employees (pay ad allowances) regulation, 1997.  
  
(Presented on November 21, 2002) 
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
November,2002/Kartika 1924 (Saka) 
  
http://parliamentof india.nic.in 
Email: rsc1sub@sansad.nic.in 
  
 
C O N  T  E  N  T  S 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                            
INTRODUCTION                                                                                   
  
REPORT 
  
I           THE COFFEE BOARD GENERAL PROVIDENT                             
             FUND RULES, 1965.  
  
II         THE MERCHANT SHIPPING (MANAGEMENT                              
            OF SAFE OPERATION OF SHIPS)RULES, 2000.                     
  
III        THE AGRICULTURE & PROCESSED FOOD                                  
            PRODUCTS EXPORT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
            REGULATION, 1999             
  
IV        JAWAHARLAL NEHRU PORT TRUST EMPLOYEES                    


            (PAY AD ALLOWANCES) REGULATION, 1997              
             
V         SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS                                                  
             
VI        MINUTES                                                                                              
                         
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE 30TH MAY, 2002) 
  
             
1.    Shri A. Vijaya Raghavan                Chairman 
Shri M.V. Rajashekaran 
Shri Kapil Sibal  
Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
Dr. A. R. Kidwai 
Shri Dilip Singh Judev 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh ‘Lalan’ 
Shri  B.P. Singhal 
Shri  Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
Shri  S. Sivasubramanian 
Shri  Janeshwar  Mishra 
Shri  Drupad Borgohain 
Shri V.Maitreyan 
Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
Shri N.K. Premachandran 
SECRETARIAT 
1.         Shri  N.C. Joshi,  Joint Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Committee Officer 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
            I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this 
Hundred and Forty  Third  Report of the Committee. 
. 
The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on  August  12, 
2002 
  
1.3       The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various 
Rules/Regulations and the issues, related therewith, alongwith Government’s comments 
received thereon.  The observations and recommendations which, in the opinion of the 
Committee, should be brought to the notice of the House, are contained in the 
succeeding paragraphs of the Report. 
  
NEW DELHI 
August 12, 2002 
A. VIJAYA RAGHAVAN 
Chairman 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
 Rajya Sabha 
  

  
 
REPORT 
  
I 
  
The Coffee Board General Provident Fund Rules, 1965 
  
            The Committee examined the Coffee Board General Provident Fund Rules, 1965 
and certain points were referred to the Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department 
of Commerce) on June 21, 1999 for their comments/clarifications.  The subject matter 
was taken up for discussion with the representatives of the Coffee Board and the 
Ministry of Commerce & Industry at Bangalore on June 28, 1999.  The points referred 
and the comments/clarifications of the Ministry of Commerce & Industry alongwith the 
Committee’s observation are reproduced below. 
  
1.         Point referred 
  
Whether these Rules have been laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha; if so, the details 
thereof, if not the reasons therefore? 
  
            Ministry’s Comments: 
  
These Rules would definitely have been laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha.  However, 
since these Rules were framed 34 years ago, it is very difficult to locate records to 
authenticate our claim. 
            Committee’s Observation 
  
The Committee expressed its concern over the non-availability of dates of laying of the 
rules on the Table of the Houses of Parliament.  The representatives assured to revert 
back to Committee on the issue at their earliest. 
  
2.         Point  referred 
Rule 2(1)(g) 
  
            “Family means” 
  
In the case of a male subscriber, the wife or wives and children of  a  subscriber  and 
the  widow, or widows, and  
children of the deceased son of a subscriber:  provided that if a subscriber proves that 
his wife has been judicially separated from him or has ceased under the customary law 
of the community to which  she belongs to be entitled  
to maintenance she shall henceforth be deemed to be no longer a member of the 
subscriber’s family in matter to which these rules relate unless the subscriber 
subsequently intimates in writing to the Accounts Officer that she shall continue to be so 
regarded; 
  
In the case of female subscriber, the husband and children of a subscriber and the 
widow or widows and children of a deceased son of a subscriber: provided that if a 
subscriber by notice in writing to the Accounts Officer expresses her desire to exclude 
her husband from her family, the husband shall henceforth be deemed to be no longer a 

member of the subscriber’s family in matter to which these rules relate unless the 
subscriber subsequently cancels such notice in writing: 
  
            Provisions in sub-clauses (i) & (ii) of clause (g) of sub-rules (1) of Rule 2 
prescribe different procedures in case of male and female employees of the Coffee 
Board for exclusion of spouse from the subscribers family. 
  
What is the justification for prescribing different procedures; whether Government 
have any objections in prescribing a uniform procedure for both male and female 
employees? 
 Ministry’s Comments 
  
            Since Coffee Board has adopted the Central Government General Provident 
Fund (Central Service) Rules, 1960 for the employees of the Coffee Board, the definition 
of family will be the same as the Central Government Employees.  Ministry of 
Commerce or Coffee Board are not competent to make any change  in the definition of 
family as these are based on  the  rules  framed  by  the   Government   of  India  in  the  
Department of Personnel which are applicable to all Central Government Employees. 
  
Committee’s Observation 
  
The Committee noted the reply. 
  
3.         Point referred 
            Rule 8(1) 
  
                        Conditions of subscriptions  
                         
“A subscriber shall subscribe monthly to the Fund except during  the period when he is 
under suspension;  
Provided that a subscriber may at his option, not subscribe during any period of leave, 
other than leave on average pay or earned leave of less than one month or 30 days 
duration, as the case may be;”   
  
As per the above proviso a subscriber may not subscribe to the Fund if he is on earned 
leave of a duration of more than 30 days or on some other leave.  What is the 
justification of keeping such a provision?  There is no such provision in the General 
Provident Fund rules applicable to Central Government Employees. 
Ministry’s Comments: 
  
            Though the provision was incorporated in the Coffee Board General Provident 
Fund Rules, 1965, in practice these provisions are not given effect to. 
  
            In fact Rule 28 of the Coffee Board General Provident Fund Rules, 1965, very 
clearly states that: 
  
“Notwithstanding the above provision, if the Central Government notify any change in 
the rate of subscription or modify  the  rules  and  procedures relating to advances  
and withdrawals in the General Provident Fund (Central Service) Rules, 1960, such 
change shall be made applicable to the servant of the Board also.” 
  

            With the aid of this enabling provision in the CBGPF Rules, 1965, the Board has 
been adopting all the changes made in the   Central PF Rules through the issue of 
relevant circulars.   The Board strictly follows the provisions of the General Provident 
Fund (Central Service) Rules, 1960. 
  
            Committee’s Observations 
  
The Committee was not satisfied with the Ministry’s reply and observed that when the 
proviso to Rule 8(1) has not been given effect to there is no justification for having such 
a provision in the Rule.  This proviso, therefore, should have been omitted from the 
Rules. 
  
4.         Point referred 
            Rule 9(1)(b) 
  
            Rates of subscription 
             
“The amount of subscription shall be fixed by the subscriber himself, subject to the 
following conditions, namely- 
  
It may be any sum, so expressed not less than 6 per cent of his emoluments and not 
more than his total emoluments; 
  
Provided that in the case of a subscriber who has previously been subscribing to the 
Board’s Contributory Provident Fund at the higher rate of 8 1/3  per cent, it may by 
any sum, so expressed, not less than 8 1/3 per cent, of his emoluments and not more 
than his total emoluments; 
  
Provided further that in case of class IV employees the minimum rate of subscription 
shall be Rs.4/- a month in the case of those drawing a pay of less than Rs.75/- a month 
and Rs.5/- a month in the case of others.” 
  
            The minimum amounts mentioned in the second proviso for class IV and other 
employees of the Board is very less.  Perhaps, these figures are based upon very old pay 
scale.  Whether the Ministry would inform when these limits were fixed; whether these 
limits are not due for revision and if so, by when these would be revised? 
             
            Ministry’s Comments: 
  
            It is submitted that the minimum subscription towards PF contribution by the 
Board employees has been fixed at the rate of 6% of the basic pay drawn by the 
respective officer/officials.  This procedure/practice has been in force in accordance 
with the General Provident Fund Rules and in accordance with the Rules 28 of Coffee 
Board General Provident Fund Rules. 
  
            Committee’s Observation 
  
The Committee was not satisfied with the reply and observed that when the second 
proviso to Rule 9(1) had not been given effect to there was no justification for having 
such a provision in the Rule.  This proviso, therefore, should be omitted from the Rules. 
  
5.         Point referred 

        Rule 9(4) 
             
Rates of subscription 
  
                        XXX                            XXX                   XXX                          
                        XXX                            XXX                   XXX                                     XXX       
         XXX                    XXX                             
                         
“The amount of subscription so fixed may by enhanced or reduced once at any time 
during the course of a year;” 
                         
            According to the rule the amount of subscription may be enhanced or reduced 
once at any time during the course of a year. 
  
As per Rule 9(4) of the General Provident Fund (Central Service) Rules, 1960, the 
amount of subscription once fixed can be enhanced twice during the course of the 
year.  Whether there is any objection to amend the rule accordingly? 
  
Ministry’s Comments: 
  
            The Board is permitting the subscribers to enhance the subscription towards PF 
twice in a financial year and once in a year of reduction of  subscription.  The necessary 
modifications have not been formally included in the CBGPF Rules, 1965, only because 
the Rules have not been re-printed.  The subscription will never be allowed below 6% of 
the basis pay of the respective employees. 
  
            Committee’s Observation 
  
            The Committee was not satisfied with the reply and observed that necessary 
formal modifications in the Coffee Board rules have to be carried out to allow the 
subscribers to enhance the subscription towards Provident Fund twice in a year.  The 
Committee further observed that mere reprinting of these rules was not the solution. 
  
6.         Point referred 
Rule 13(1)(b) 
  
Advance from the Fund  
  
The Chairman or any other officer of the Board, not below the rank of an Assistant 
Coffee Marketing Officer, authorised by the Chairman, may sanction the payment to 
any subscriber if an advance consisting of a sum of whole rupees and  not exceeding 
in  amount  three months pay or  
half the amount standing to his credit in the Fund whichever is less, for one or more of 
the following purposes: 
  
XXX                XXX                  XXX                                                  
to meet the cost of higher education, including where necessary, the travelling expenses 
of the subscriber or any person actually dependent on him in the following cases, 
namely. 
  
(i)         for education outside India for an academic, technical, professional or 
vocational course beyond the High School stage: and 

  
for any medical, engineering or the technical or specialised   courses in India beyond the 
High School stage provide that the course of study is for not less than  three years. 
  
            What is the objective for prescribing that a course of study should not be of less 
than three years. Whether the Ministry have any objection to delete the words 
“provided that the course of study is not less than three years” as many of the technical 
courses are expensive and are of lesser duration.  (Question also applies to rule 
16(1)(a)). 
  
            Ministry’s Comments: 
  
            The provision of “not less than three years” is being followed as per Rule 12 (b) 
(ii) of the Central GPF Rules which also prescribes this minimum requirement of 
time.  For all purposes, the Board follows only the Central PF Rule.  The Coffee Board 
does not have the authority to alter this, as this is a decision,  which can be taken only 
by the Union Government. 
             
            This answer holds good for Rule 16(1)(a) also. 
             
            Committee’s Observation 
  
The Committee noted the reply 
  
Point referred 
Rule 16 
  
Withdrawals from the Fund 
  
“Subject to conditions specified herein, withdrawals may be sanctioned by the chairman 
at any time after the completion of twenty years of service (including broken periods of 
service, if any) of a subscriber or within ten years before the date of retirement on 
superannuating, whichever is earlier, from the amount standing for his credit in the 
fund, for one or more of the following purposes, namely”- 
  
            For the Central Government Employees’ there has been a modification in the 
condition for withdrawal wherein they have been allowed to withdraw after completing 
15 years of service.  Coffee Board is still carrying the condition of 20 years of service in 
this regard.  What is the justification that a provision which is for the benefit of the 
Employees and which has been introduced in the Central Government in year 1995 has 
not been incorporated in these regulation so far? 
  
Ministry’s Comments: 
  
            From 1995 and onwards withdrawal from the respective PF accounts are being 
allowed to those employees who have completed 15 years service.   Prior to 1995, final 
withdrawal used to be allowed to such of the employees who had completed 20 years 
service. 
             
            Committee’s Observation 
             

            The Committee observed that although the Coffee is extending all the benefit 
that are available in the General Provident Fund (Central Service) Rules applicable to 
the Central Government Employees yet they have not amended these  rules for the 
purpose.  The Committee desired that corresponding amendments be made in the rules. 
  
Point referred 
  
            In the case of GPF Rules applicable to Central Government Employees there has 
been relaxation in the grant of advances as well as withdrawal for purpose of various 
consumers durables.  Whether the Ministry have taken any action for incorporating 
similar provisions in these regulations if so, the details thereof, if not the reasons 
therefore? 
  
Ministry’s Comments: 
  
            PF advance/withdrawals are allowed to purchase consumer durables in 
accordance with the directions of the Government. 
  
            Committee’s Observation 
  
            The Committee observed in general that in relation to several matters, the Coffee 
Board has been implementing the existing provisions of the General Provident Fund 
Rules applicable in Government of India without formal amendments in their 
rules.  The Committee did not approve this dispensation and observed that Coffee 
Board should follow the Central Government rules by making consequent changes in 
their rules  which would be a proper course of action. 
  
The Relevant extracts from the study note (Annexure-I) on the Committee’s visit to 
Bangalore etc., from June 27 to July 3, 1999 were forwarded to the Ministry on 
September 21, 1999 for necessary action.  The Ministry vide their O. M. dated 
November 19, 1999 informed that Coffee Board  has  accepted the 
Committee’s  suggestion for inserting a  
new clause in the Coffee Rules 1955 to the effect that employee of Board shall be 
governed by General Provident Fund (Central Service) Rule 1960 instead of having a 
separate set of rules and the process of making necessary amendment to the Coffee 
Rules for inserting a new clause had been initiated by the Ministry. 
  
3.         Thereafter, the Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Department of Commerce 
vide their O. M. dated July 24, 2000 intimated as under. 
  
                        XXX                         XXX                           XXX                             
  
“The proposal for making necessary amendment to the Coffee Rules, 1955 for inserting 
a new clause was taken up with the Legislative Department However, Legislative 
Department is not agreeable to the proposal and has advised this Department for 
updating the existing Coffee Board’s General Provident Fund Rules, 
1965.  Accordingly, the process for amending the existing GPF Rules of the Board is 
under way.” 
  
4.         After some reminders and interim replies, the Ministry of Commerce & Industry 
vide their O. M. dated April 17, 2001 forwarded a copy of the Coffee Board General 

Provident Fund (Amendment) Rules, 2001(Annexure-II) carrying out the amendment in 
the rules as per the Committee’s suggestion. 
5.         The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have carried out 
necessary amendment in the rules in pursuance to the deliberations with the latter. The 
Committee notes Ministry’s comments on Rule 2(1)(g) regarding definition of the term 
“family” and on rule 13(1)(b) regarding withdrawal of advance from Fund.  As regards 
the date of laying of the rules on the Table of the House the Committee notes with regret 
that the Ministry have failed to gather the desired information.  The Ministry should 
strive for a better  record management system in order to avoid such instances.   
The Committee, however, notes that the Ministry have laid the rules again on the 20th 
March, 2001 in order to cover up the prevailing uncertainty.  The Committee is also 
satisfied to note that the Ministry have agreed to its suggestions and, accordingly, 
notified amendments in Rules 8(1) regarding conditions and rate of subscriptions, in 
Rule 9(1)(b) regarding rates of subscription by omitting its second proviso, in Rule 9(4) 
regarding enhancement and reduction in the amount of subscription during a calendar 
year, in Rule-16 regarding withdrawal from the Fund and the purposes for which 
withdrawal is allowed by making them consistent with the corresponding provisions of 
the GPF Rules applied to Central Government employees.   
 
ANNEXURE-I 
(Vide para 2 page 10) 
  
THE COFFEE BOARD GENERAL PROVIDENT FUND  
RULES, 1965 
  
            The Committee held discussion with the representatives of the Coffee Board and 
the Ministry of Commerce on the Coffee Board General Provident Fund Rules, 1965 at 
11.45 a.m. on 28th June, 1999 at Bangalore. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
Miss Saroj Khaparde                Chairperson 
Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani 
Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai 
Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah 
Prof. A. Lakshmisagar 
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
1.         Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S.K. Tripathi, Committee Officer 
  
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE COFFEE BOARD 
  
1.         Shri S.V. Ranganath, Chairman 
2.         Shri Ashok David, Secretary 
Smt. Sharda Subramanian, Director of Finance 
Dr. R. Naidu, Director of Research 
  
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE 
  

            Shri Prabhat Singh, Under Secretary 
  
            At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the representatives and introduced 
Members of the Committee.  The Chairperson also gave a brief account of the 
functioning of the Committee and purpose of its visit.  Thereafter, the floor was given to 
Chairman, Coffee Board who initiated the presentation with an introduction of his team 
of Officers.  The Committee was informed that Coffee plantation in India was at present 
providing livelihood to about 1.4 lakh growers and direct employment to around 5 lakhs 
people.  The Chairman, Coffee Board informed that  75% of Coffee grown in India was 
exported and in the year 1998-99 foreign exchange of the value of Rs. 1700 crores was 
earned.  In Coffee cultivation, India stood third after vietnam and Costa Rica.  The 
Committee also came to know that Indian research in Coffee cultivation is recognised 
world over as India has produced a variety of Coffee seeds. 
  
            The Committee thereafter took up the agenda for the day as follows: 
  
Question 1 
  
            The Committee expressed its concern over the non-availability of dates of laying 
of the rules on the Table of the Houses of Parliament.  The representatives assured to 
revert back to Committee on the issue at their earliest. 
  
Question 2 (Rule 2 (1) (g)) 
  
            The Committee noted the reply 
  
Question 3 (Rule 8 (1)) 
  
The Committee was not satisfied with the reply and observed that when the proviso to 
Rule 8(1) has not been given effect to there is no justification for having such a 
provision in the Rule.  This proviso, therefore, should have been omitted from the 
Rules. 
  
Question 4 (Rule 9 (1) (b)) 
  
            The Committee was not satisfied with  the reply and observed that when the 
second proviso to Rule 9 (1) had not been given effect to there was no justification for 
having such a provision in the Rule.  This proviso, therefore, should be omitted from the 
Rules. 
  
            Question 5 (Rule 9 (4)) 
  
The Committee was not satisfied with the reply and observed that necessary formal 
modifications in the Coffee Board  rules have to be carried out to allow the subscribers 
to enhance the subscription towards Provident Fund twice in a year.  The Committee 
further observed that  mere reprinting of these rules was not the solution. 
  
            Question 6 (Rule 13 (1) (b)) 
  
            The Committee noted the reply. 
  
            Question 7 (Rule 16) and Question 8 

  
            The Committee observed that although the Coffee Board is extending all the 
benefit that are available in the General Provident Fund applicable to Central 
Government Employees yet they have not amended these rules for the purpose.  The 
Committee desired that corresponding amendments be made in the rules. 
  
            The Committee observed in general  that in relation to several matters the Coffee 
Board is implementing the existing  provisions of the General Provident Fund Rules 
applicable in Government of India without formal amendments in their rules.  The 
committee did not approve this preposition  and observed that Coffee Board might 
follow the Central Government rules by  making consequent changes in their rules 
which would be a proper course of action. 
  
            The meeting concluded with a vote of thanks. 
  
  
ANNEXURE-II 
(Vide para 4 page 10) 
  
(DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE) 
  
NOTIFICATION 
  
New Delhi, the 14th February, 2001 
  
G.S.R. 120- In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 48 of the Coffee Act, 1942 
(VII of 1942), the Central Government makes the following rules further to amend the 
Coffee Board General Provident Fund Rules, 1965, namely:- 
  
(a) These rules may be called the Coffee Board General Provident Fund (Amendment) 
Rules, 2001. 
  
They  shall come into force on the date of their publication in the official Gazette. 
  
In the Coffee Board General Provident Fund Rules, 1965- (i) in rule 2, for clauses (g) 
and (h), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:- 
  
“(g)  ‘family’ means,- 
  
in the case of a male subscriber, the wife or wives, parents, children, minor brother, 
unmarried sisters, deceased son’s widow and children and where no parents of the 
subscriber is alive, a paternal grandparent: 
  
            Provided that if a subscriber proves that his wife has been judicially separated 
from him or has ceased under the customary law of the community, to which she 
belongs to be entitled to maintenance she shall henceforth be deemed to be no  longer a 
member of the subscriber family in matters to which these rules relate unless the 
subscriber subsequently intimates, in writing to the Accounts Officer that she shall 
continue to be so regarded; 
  

in the case of a female subscriber, the husband, parents, children, minor brothers, 
unmarried sisters, deceased son’s widow and children and where no parents of the 
subscriber is alive, a paternal grandparent: 
  
            Provided that if a subscriber by notice in writing to the Accounts Officer 
expresses her desire to exclude her husband from her family, the husband shall 
henceforth be deemed to be no longer a member of the subscriber’s family in matters to 
which these rules relate, unless the subscriber subsequently cancels such notice in 
writing. 
  
NOTE-‘Child’ means a legitimate child and includes an adopted child where adoption is 
recognised by the personal law governing the subscriber of a ward under the Guardians 
and Wards Act, 1890 (8 of 1890), who lives with the servant and is treated as a member 
of the family and to whom the Board servant has, through a special will, given the same 
status as that of natural born child.” 
  
“Leave” means any variety of leave recognised by the Fundamental-Rules or the Civil 
Service Regulations or the Revised Leave Rules, 1933”; 
  
for rule 3, the following rule shall be substituted, namely:- 
  
“3 Constitution of the Fund- (1) The fund shall be maintained in rupees. 
  
(2)        All sums paid into the Fund under these rules shall be credited in the books of 
Board to an account named “The  General Provident Fund”. Sums of which payment 
has not been taken within six months  after they become payable under these rules shall 
be transferred to “Deposits” at the end of the year and treated under the rules relating 
to deposits.” 
for rule 5, the following rule shall be substituted, namely:- 
  
“5.Conditions of Eligibility- All temporary servants of the Board after a 
continuous  service of one year, all re-employed pensioners (other than those eligible for 
admission to the Contributory Provident Fund) and all permanent Board Servants shall 
subscribe to the Fund. 
  
Re-employed pensioners may at their option, subscribe to the Central Provident Fund. 
  
NOTE:1  Apprentices & probationers shall be treated as temporary Board servants for 
purpose of this rule. 
  
NOTE: 2 A temporary Board’s servant who completes one year continuous  service 
during the middle of a month shall subscribe to the Fund from the subsequent month. 
  
NOTE: 3 Temporary Board servants (including Apprentices and Probationers)  who 
have been appointed against regular vacancies and are likely to continue for more than 
a year may subscribe to the General Provident Fund any  time before completion of one 
year service.” 
  
in rule 6- 
  
in sub-rule (5), clause (c) shall be omitted; 
  

after sub-rule 7, the following note shall be inserted, namely:- 
  
  
“NOTE-In this rule, unless the context  otherwise  requires “person” or “persons” shall 
include a company or association or body of individuals, whether incorporated or 
not.  It shall also include a Fund such the Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund or any 
Charitable or  other Trust or Fund to which nomination may be made through the 
Secretary or other executive of the said funds or Trust authorized to receive payments.” 
for the rule 7, the following rule shall be substituted, namely:- 
“7. Subscribers Account:  An account shall be  opened in the name of each subscriber in 
which shall be shown:’ 
  
his subscriptions; 
  
interest, as provided by Rule 12, on subscriptions; 
  
advances and withdrawals from the Fund.” 
  
in rule 8 
  
for sub-rules, (1) and (2), the following sub rules shall be substituted, namely:- 
  
“(1) A subscriber shall subscribe monthly to the fund except during the period when he 
is under suspension: 
  
            Provided that a subscriber may, at his option,  not subscribe during leave which 
either does not carry any leave salary or carries leave salary causal to or less than half 
pay or half average pay: 
  
            Provided further that a subscriber or reinstatement after a period passed under 
suspension shall be allowed the option of paying in one lump sum or in 
installments  any  pay not exceeding the maximum amount of  arrear 
subscriptions  payable for the subscriber. 
  
NOTE 1- The holder of a seasonal post in an establishment need not subscribe to  the 
Fund, during the period of  his unemployment. 
  
NOTE 2- A subscriber need not subscribe during  the period treated as die non. 
  
2          The subscriber shall intimate his election not to subscribe during the leave 
referred to  in the first proviso in rub-rule (1) in the following    
  
if he is an officer who draws his own bills, by making no deduction on account of 
subscription in his first pay bill drawn after proceeding on leave; 
  
if he is not an officer who draws his own pay bills, by written communication to the 
Head of  his Office before he proceeds on leave. 
  
Failure to make due and timely intimation shall be deemed to constitute as election to 
subscribe. 
  
The option of a subscriber intimated under this sub-rule shall be final.”; 

  
sub-rule (4) shall  be omitted; 
  
in rule 9the second proviso to clause (b) of sub-rule (1) shall be omitted; 
  
for the sub-rule (4), the following shall be substituted,  namely- 
  
“(4)  The amount of subscription so fixed may be 
  
reduced once at any time during the course of the year; 
  
enhanced twice during the curse of the year; or 
  
reduced and enhanced as aforesaid: 
  
Provided that when the amount of subscription is so reduced, it  shall be less than the 
minimum prescribed in sub-rule (1): 
Provided further that if a subscriber is on leave without pay or leave on half-pay or 
half-average pay for a part of a calendar month and he has  elected not to subscribe 
during such leave,  the amount of subscription payable shall be proportionate to 
the  number of days spent on duty including leave, if any, other than those referred to 
above.” 
  
(viii)in rule 11, after sub-rule 3, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
  
“Provided that subscribers whose deposits in the fund carry no interest shall not be 
required to pay any interest.” 
  
in rule 12- 
  
for  the sub-rule (1), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:- 
  
“(1)  Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (5), Board shall pay to the credit of 
the  account of a subscriber interest as such rate as may be determined for each 
year  according to the method of calculation prescribed from time to time by the 
Government of India: 
  
            Provided that, if the rate of interest determined for a year is less than 4 per cent, 
all subscribers to the Fund in the year preceding that for which the rate has for the first 
time fixed at less that 4 per cent, shall be allowed interest at 4 per cent: 
  
            Provided  further that a subscriber who was previously subscribing to any other 
provident fund of the Central Government and whose subscription, together with 
interest thereon, have been transferred to his credit in his Fund under Rule 22, shall 
also be allowed interest at 4 per cent , if he had been receiving that rate of interest 
under the rules of such other Fund under a provision similar to that of the first proviso 
to this rule.” 
  
in sub-rule (3) after second proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
  

“Provided also that where the emoluments for a month are drawn and disbursed on the 
last working day of the same month the date of deposit shall in the case of recovery of 
his subscriptions, be deemed to be the first day of the succeeding month.”; 
  
in sub-rule (4) after the proviso, the following shall be inserted, namely:- 
  
“Provided further that where a subscriber on deputation to a body corporate, owned or 
controlled by the Government or an autonomous organisation registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) is subsequently absorbed in such body 
corporate or organisation with effect from a retrospective date for the  purpose of 
calculating the interest due on the fund accumulation of the subscriber the date of issue 
of the orders regarding absorption shall be deemed to be the date on which the amount 
to the credit of the subscriber became payable subject however  to the condition that the 
amount recovered as subscription during the period commencing from the date of 
absorption and ending with the date of issue of orders of absorption shall be deemed to 
be subscription to the Fund only for the purpose of awarding interest under this sub-
rule. 
  
NOTE:- Payment of interest on the Fund balance beyond a period of 6 months,   may be 
authorised by the Chairman or any officer authorised by the Chairman, after he has 
personally satisfied himself that the delay in payment was occasioned by circumstances 
beyond the control of the subscriber or the person  to whom such payment was to be 
made, and in every such case the administrative delay involved in the matter shall be 
fully investigated and action, if any required, taken.”; 
  
for sub-rule (5), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:- 
 “(5) Interest shall not be credited to the account of a subscriber if he informs the 
Accounts Officer that he does not wish to receive it; but if he subsequently asks for 
interest, it shall be credited with effect from the first day of the year in which he asks 
for it. 
  
(6)        The interest on amounts which under sub-rule (3) of Rule 11, Rule 18 or  19 are 
replaced to the credit of the subscriber in the Fund, shall be calculated at such rates as 
may be successively prescribed under sub-rule (1) of this rule and so far as may be in 
the manner described in this rule. 
  
(7)        In case a subscriber is found to have drawn from the Fund an amount in excess 
of the amount standing to  his credit on the date of the drawal the over drawn amount, 
irrespective of whether  the overdrawal occurred in the course of an advance or a 
withdrawal or the final payment from the fund, shall be repaid by  him with interest 
thereon in one lump sum or in default, be ordered to be recovered by deduction in one 
lump sum  from  the emoluments of the subscriber.  If the total amount to be recovered 
is more than half of the subscriber’s emoluments,  recoveries shall be made in monthly 
installments of moieties of his emoluments till the entire amount together with interest, 
is recovered.  For this sub-rule the rate of interest to be charged on overdrawn amount 
would be two and half per cent over and above the normal rate on Provident Fund 
balance under sub-rule (1).  The interest realised  on the overdrawn amount shall be 
credited to Board’s account  under a distinct sub-head ‘Interest  on overdrawls from 
Provident Fund’.” 
  
for rule 13, the following rule shall be substituted, namely:- 
  

“13 Advance from the Fund: 
  
The Chairman or any other  Officer of the Board authorized by the Chairman may 
sanction the payment  to  any  subscriber  of  an advance consisting of a sum of whole 
rupees and not exceeding in amount three months’ pay or half the amount standing to 
his credit in the fund, whichever is less, for one or more of the following purposes:- 
  
to pay expenses in connection with the illness confinement or a disability including 
where necessary the travelling expenses of the subscriber and members of his family or 
any person actually dependent on him. 
  
(b) to meet cost of higher education, including where necessary, the travelling expenses 
of the subscriber and members of the family or any person actually dependent on him 
in the following cases, namely: 
  
for education outside  India for academic, technical, professional or vocational course 
beyond High School stage; and  
  
for any medical, engineering or other technical specialized course in India beyond the 
High School stage, provided that the course of study is for not less than three years; 
  
(c) to pay obligatory expenses on a scale appropriate to the subscribers status which by 
customary usage the subscriber has to incur in connection with betrothal  or marriages, 
funerals or other ceremonies; 
  
to meet the cost of legal proceedings instituted by or against the  subscriber, any 
member of his family of any person actually dependent upon him, the advance in this 
case being available in addition to any advance admissible for the same purpose from 
any other Boards source; 
  
 to meet the cost of the subscriber’s defence where he engages a legal practitioner to 
defend himself in an enquiry in respect of any alleged official misconduct on his part; to 
purchase consumer durable such as TV, VCR/VCP washing machines, cooking range, 
geysers and computers. 
  
(2)        The Chairman  may in special circumstances, sanction the payment of any 
subscriber of an advance if he is satisfied that the subscriber concerned requires the 
advance for reasons other than those mentioned in sub rule (1). 
  
(3)        An advances shall not, except for special reasons to be recorded in writing, be 
granted to any subscriber in excess of the limit laid down in sub rule (1) or until 
repayment of the last installment of any previous advance. 
  
(4)        When an advance is sanctioned under sub-rule (2) before repayment of last 
installment of any previous advance is completed the balance of any previous advance 
not recovered shall be added to the advance so sanction and the installments for 
recovery shall be fixed with reference to the consolidated amount. 
  
(5)        After sanctioning the advance, the amount shall be drawn on an authorization 
from the Accounts Officer in case where the application for final payment had been 
forwarded to the Accounts Officer under clause (ii) of sub rule (3) of Rule 21. 
  

NOTE: 1 For the purpose of this rule, pay includes dearness pay where    admissible. 
  
NOTE: 2  The   Officers  authorised  to  sanction  advances  under  this  rule  are  
specified in Schedule No. II. 
  
NOTE :3  A subscriber shall  be  permitted  to  take an advance once in every six 
months under item (b) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 13.” in rule 14,- 
  
for sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:- 
  
            “(2)      Recovery shall be made in the manner prescribed in Rule 11 for the 
realisation of subscriptions and shall commence with the issue of pay for the month 
following the one in which the advance was drawn. Recovery shall not be made, except 
with the subscribers consent while he is in receipt of subsistence grant or is on leave for 
ten days or more in a calendar month which either does not carry any leave salary or 
carries leave salary equal to or less than half pay or half average pay, as the case may 
be.  The recovery may be postponed, on the subscriber’s written request  by the 
sanctioning authority during recovery of an advance of pay granted to the subscriber.” 
  
or sub-rules (4) and (5), the following sub-rules shall be substituted, namely:- 
  
“(4) Recoveries made under this rule shall be credited as they are made to the 
subscriber’s account in the fund. 
  
(5) If an advance has been granted to a subscriber and drawn by him and the advance is 
subsequently disallowed before repayment is completed, the whole or balance of the 
amount withdrawn shall forthwith be repaid by the subscriber to the Fund, or in 
default, be ordered by the Accounts Officer to be recovered by  deduction from the 
emoluments of the subscriber in a lump sum or in monthly installments not exceeding 
twelve as may be directed by the  authority competent to sanction an advance for the 
grant of which, special reasons are required under sub-rule (2) of Rule 13. 
  
Provided that before such advance is disallowed the subscriber shall be given an 
opportunity to  explain  to the sanctioning authority in writing and within fifteen days 
of the receipt of the communication why the repayment shall not be enforced and if an 
explanation is submitted by the subscriber within the said period of fifteen days, it shall 
be referred to the Chairman for decision; and if no explanation within the said period is 
submitted by him, the repayment of the advance shall be enforced in the manner 
prescribed in this sub-rule”. 
  
sub-rule (6) shall be omitted; 
  
for the rule 15, following rule shall be substituted namely:- 
  
“15. Wrongful use of Advance: 
  
Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, if the sanctioning authority has 
reason to doubt that money drawn as an advance from the Fund under Rule 13 has 
been utilized for a purpose other than that for which sanction was given to the drawal 
of  the money, he shall communicate to the subscriber the reasons of his doubt and 
require him to explain in writing and within fifteen days of the receipt of such whether 
the advance has been utilized for the purpose for which sanction as given to the drawal 

of the money. If the sanctioning authority is not satisfied with the  explanation furnished 
by the subscriber within the said period of fifteen days, the sanctioning authority shall 
direct the subscriber to repay the amount in question to the fund forthwith or, in 
default, order the amount to be recovered by deduction in one sum from the 
emoluments of the subscriber even if he be on leave.  If, however, the total amount to be 
repaid be more than half the subscriber’s emoluments, recoveries shall  be made in 
monthly instalments of moieties of his emoluments  till the entire amount is repaid by 
him. 
  
NOTE:-  The term “emoluments” in the rule does not include subsistence grant.” 
for rule 16,  the following rule shall be substituted, namely:- 
  
“16 Withdrawals from the Fund: 
  
Subject to the conditions specified therein, withdrawals may be sanctioned by the 
Chairman or sanctioning authority, at any time- 
  
after the completion of fifteen years of service (including broken periods of service, if 
any) of a subscriber or within ten years before the date of his retirement on 
superannuation, whichever is earlier, from the amount standing to his credit in the 
Fund, for one or more of the following purposes, namely:- 
  
meeting the cost of higher education, including where necessary, the travelling expenses 
of the subscriber or any child of the subscriber in the flowing cases, namely:- 
  
for education outside India for academic, technical, professional or vocational course 
beyond the High school stage; and  
  
for any medical, engineering or other technical or specialized course in India beyond the 
High School stage; 
  
meeting the expenditure in connection with the betrothal/marriage of the subscriber or 
his sons or his daughters, and any other female relation actually dependent on him; 
  
meeting the expenses in connection with the illness, including where necessary travelling 
expenses, of the subscriber and members of his family or any person actually dependent 
on him; 
  
 meeting the cost/of consumer durables such as TV,VCR/VCP, washing machines, 
cooking range, geysers and computers. 
 (B) During the service of a subscriber from the amount standing to his credit in the 
Fund for one or more of the following purposes, namely:- 
  
Building or acquiring a suitable house or ready built flat for his residence including the 
cost of the site or any payment towards allotment of a plot or flat by any Authority, 
State Housing or a House Building Society; 
  
Repaying an outstanding amount on account of loan expressly taken for building or 
acquiring a suitable house or ready-built flat for his residence; 
  
Purchasing a house site for building a house thereon for his residence or repaying any 
outstanding amount on account of loan expressly taken for this purpose; 

  
Reconstructing or making additions or alterations to a house or a flat already owned or 
acquired by a subscriber; 
  
Renovating, additions or alterations or upkeep of the ancestral house or a house built 
with the assistance or loan from Board; 
  
Constructing a  house on a site purchased under Clause (c). 
  
(C) within twelve months before the date of subscriber’s  retirement on superannuation 
from the amount standing to the credit in the fund, without linking to any purpose. 
  
(D) (i) once during the course of a financial year, an amount equivalent to one year’s 
subscription paid for by the subscriber towards the Group Insurance Scheme for the 
Central Government employees on self-financing and contributory basis. 
  
NOTE: 1.A subscriber who has availed himself of an advance under the Scheme 
of    the  Ministry  of   Works  and  Housing  for  the   grant   of advance of 
house  building purpose, or has been allowed any assistance in this regard from any 
other Board source, shall be eligible for the grant of final withdrawal  under sub clauses 
(a), (c), (d) and (f) of Clause (B) for the purposes specified therein and also for the 
purpose of repayment of any loan taken under the aforesaid scheme subject to the limit 
specified in the proviso to sub-rule (1) of Rule 17. 
  
If a subscriber has an ancestral house, or built a house at a place other than the place of 
his duty with  the assistance of a loan taken from the Government  he shall be eligible 
for the grant of a final withdrawal under sub-clauses (a), (c) and (f) of Clause (B) for 
purchase of a house site or for construction of another house or for acquiring a ready 
built flat at the place of his duty. 
  
NOTE: 2 Withdrawal under sub-clauses (a), (d), (e), or (f) of Clause (B) shall be 
sanctioned only after a subscriber has submitted a plan of the house to be constructed 
or of the additions or alterations to be made, duly approved by the local municipal body 
of the area where the site or house is situated and only in cases where the plan is 
actually got to be approved. 
  
NOTE: 3-The amount of withdrawal sanctioned under sub-clause (b) of Clause (B) 
shall  not exceed ¾ of the balance on date of application together with the amount of 
previous withdrawal under sub-clause (a) reduced by the amount of previous 
withdrawal.  The formula to be followed is : ¾ of the balance as on date plus amount of 
previous withdrawal (s) for the house in question minus the amount of the previous 
withdrawal (s). 
  
NOTE:4 Withdrawal under sub-clause (a) or (d) of Clause (B) shall also be allowed 
where the house-site or house is in the name of wife or husband provided she or he is 
the first nominee to receive Provident Fund money in the nomination made by the 
subscriber. 
  
NOTE: 5  Only one withdrawal shall be allowed for the same purpose under 
this   rule.  But  marriage  or  education  of  different  children  or illness on different 
occasions or a further addition or alteration to a house or flat covered by a fresh plan 
duly approved by the local Municipal Body of the area where the house or flat is 

situated shall not be treated as the same purpose.  Withdrawal for meeting the cost of 
education of a child may be allowed on annual basis till the concerned child continues to 
pursue the technical or professional course.  Second or subsequent withdrawal under 
sub clause (a) or (f) of Clause (B) for completion of the same house shall be allowed up 
to the limit laid down under Note 3. 
  
NOTE: 6   A withdrawal under this rule shall not be sanctioned if an advance under 
Rule 13 is being sanctioned for the same purpose and at the same time. 
  
Whenever a subscriber is in a position to satisfy the competent authority about the 
amounts standing to his credit in the General Provident Fund Account with reference to 
the latest advance statement   of General Provident Fund Account together with the 
evidence or subsequent contribution, the competent authority may itself sanction 
withdrawal within the prescribed limits, as in the case of a refundable advance.  In 
doing so, the competent authority shall take into account any withdrawal or  refundable 
advance already sanctioned by it in favour of the subscriber.  Where, however, the 
subscriber is not in a position to satisfy the competent authority about the amount 
standing to his credit or where there is any doubt about the admissibility of the 
withdrawal applied for, a reference may be made to the Accounts Officer by the 
competent authority for ascertaining the amount standing to the credit of the subscriber 
with a view to enable the competent authority to determine the admissibility of the 
amount of withdrawal.  The sanction for the withdrawal should prominently indicate 
the General Provident Fund Account Number and the Accounts Officer maintaining the 
accounts and a copy of the sanction should invariably be endorsed to that Account 
Officer.  The sanctioning authority shall be responsible to ensure that an 
acknowledgement is obtained from the Accounts Officer that the sanction for 
withdrawal has been noted in the ledger account of subscriber.  In 
case  the  Account  Officer reports that the withdrawal as sanctioned is in excess of the 
amount to the credit of the subscriber or otherwise inadmissible the sum withdrawal by 
the subscriber shall forthwith  be repaid in one lump sum by the subscriber to the Fund 
and in default of such repayment it shall be ordered by the sanctioning authority to be 
recovered from his emoluments either in a lump sum or in such number of monthly 
installments as may be determined by the Chairman. 
  
After sanctioning the withdrawal the amount shall be drawn on an authorisation from 
the Accounts Officer in cases where the application for final payment had been 
forwarded to the Accounts Officer under Clause (ii) of sub-rule (3) of Rule 21.” 
  
for rule 17, the following rule shall be substituted,     namely:- 
  
“17 Conditions for Withdrawal: 
  
Any sum withdrawn  by a subscriber at any one time for one or more of the purposes 
specified in Rule 16 from the amount standing to his credit in the Fund shall not 
ordinarily exceed one half of such amount or six months’ pay, whichever is less.  The 
sanctioning authority may, however, sanction the withdrawal of an amount in excess of 
this limit up to ¾ of the balance at his credit in the Fund having due regard to (i) object 
for which the withdrawal is being made, (ii) status of the subscriber, and (iii) the 
amount to credit in the Fund in case of withdrawal under Clause (A) and up to 90% of 
balance at credit in cases of withdrawals under Clause (B) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 
16.  Provided that in no case the maximum amount of withdrawal for purposes specified 
in Clause (B) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 16 shall exceed the maximum limit prescribed from 

time to time under Rule 2(a) and 3(b) of the Scheme of the Ministry of Works and 
Housing for the grant of advances for house building purposes. 
  
Provided that in the case of a subscriber who has availed himself of an advance under 
the scheme  of  the Ministry  of  Works, Housing and Supply for the grant of advances 
for house building purposes or has been allowed any assistance in this regard from any 
other Government source, the sum withdrawal under this sub-rule with the amount of 
advance taken under the aforesaid scheme  or the assistance taken from any other 
Government source shall not exceed Rs. 75,000 or five years pay, whichever is less. 
  
Provided further that in the case of a subscriber who has availed himself of an advance 
under the Scheme of the Ministry  of  Works and Housing for the grant of advances for 
house building purposes, or has been allowed any assistance in this regard from any 
other Board’s  source, the sum withdrawn under this sub-rule  together with the 
amount of advance taken under the aforesaid Scheme or the assistance taken from any 
other Board source shall  not  exceed the maximum limit prescribed from time to time 
under Rule 2 (a) and 3 (b) of the aforesaid Scheme. 
  
Provided also that the withdrawal admissible under Rule 16 (1) (C) shall not exceed 
90% of the amount standing to the credit of the subscriber in the fund. 
  
NOTE:1   A withdrawal to a subscriber under sub-clause (a) of clause (A) of sub-rule 
(1) of Rule 16, may be permitted annually so long as the concerned child of the 
subscriber continues to  pursue the course. 
  
NOTE: 2- In cases where a subscriber has to pay in instalments for a site of a house or 
flat purchased or a house or flat constructed through any Development Authority or a 
State Housing or a House building Co-operative Society, he shall be permitted to make 
a withdrawal as and when he is called upon to make a  payment in any instalment. 
Every such payment shall be treated as a payment for separate purposes of sub rule (1) 
of Rule 17. 
  
A subscriber who has been permitted to withdraw money from the Fund under rule 16 
shall satisfy the sanctioning authority within a reasonable period as may   be specified 
by that authority that the money has been utilized for the purpose for which it was 
withdrawn, and if he fails to do so, the whole of  the sum so withdrawn, or so much 
thereof as has no  applied for the purpose for which it was withdrawn shall forthwith be 
repaid in one lump-sum together with interest thereon at the date determined under 
rule 12 by the subscriber to the Fund, and in default to such payment, it shall be 
ordered by the sanctioning authority to be recovered from his emoluments either  in a 
lump-sum or in such number of monthly instalments, as may be determined by the 
chairman.  
  
Provided that, before repayment of a withdrawal is enforced under the sub-rule, the 
subscriber shall be given an opportunity to explain in writing and within  fifteen days of 
the receipt of the communication why the repayment shall not be enforced, and if the 
sanctioning authority is not satisfied with the explanation or no explanation is submitted 
by the subscriber within the said period of fifteen days, the sanctioning authority shall 
enforce the repayment in the manner prescribed in this sub-rule. 
  
(a) A subscriber who has been permitted under sub-clause (a), sub-clause (b) or sub-
clause (c) of (B) of sub-rule (!) of Rule 16 to withdraw money from the amount standing 

to his credit in the fund, shall not part with the possession of the house built or acquired 
or house site purchased  with the money so withdrawn, whether by way of sale, 
mortgage (other than mortgage to the Board, gift, exchange or otherwise, without 
the  previous permission of the Chairman. 
  
Provided that such permission shall not be necessary for- 
  
the house or house site being   leased  for any term not exceeding three years, or 
  
its being mortgaged in favour of  Housing Board, Nationalized Banks, the Life 
Insurance Corporation owned or controlled by the Central Government which 
advances, loan for the construction of a new house or for making additions or alteration 
to an existing house. 
The subscriber shall submit a declaration not later than the 31st  day of December of 
every year  as to whether the house or the house-site, as the case may be, continues to be 
in his possession or has been mortgaged, otherwise transferred or let out as aforesaid 
and shall, if so required, produce before the sanctioning authority on or before the date 
specified by that authority in that behalf, the original sale, mortgage or lease deed and 
also the documents on which his title to the property is based. 
  
If, at any time before his retirement, the subscriber parts with the possession of the 
house or house-site without obtaining the previous permission of the Chairman, he shall 
forthwith repay the sum so withdrawn by him in a lumps to the Fund, and in default of 
such repayment, the sanctioning authority shall, after giving the subscriber a 
reasonable opportunity of making a representation in the matter, cause the said sum to 
be recovered from the emoluments of the subscriber either  in a lump sum or in such 
number of monthly instalments as may be determined by it. 
  
NOTE-A  subscriber who has taken loan form Board in lieu thereof mortgaged the 
house or house-site to the Board shall be required to furnish the declaration  to the 
following effect, namely:- 
  
“I do hereby certify that the house or house site for the construction of which or for  the 
acquisition of which I have taken a final withdrawal from the Provident Fund continues 
to be in my possession but stands mortgaged to Board.” 
  
for rule 17 A, the following shall be substituted namely:- 
  
“17-A Conversion of an Advance in the withdrawal: 
  
            A subscriber who has already drawn or may draw in future an advance under 
Rule 13 for any of the purposes specified in sub-rule (1) of rule 16 may convert, at his 
discretion by written request addressed to  
  
the Accounts Officer through the sanctioning authority, the balance outstanding against 
it into a final withdrawal on his satisfying the condition laid down in Rules 16 and 17. 
  
NOTE: 1. The Head of Officer may be asked  by the Accounts Officer to stop recoveries 
from the pay bills when the application for such conversion is forwarded to the 
Accounts Officer by that authority. 
  

NOTE: 2-  For the purpose of sub-rule (1) of Rule 17 the amount of subscription with 
interest thereon standing to the credit of the subscriber in the account at the time  of 
conversion plus the outstanding amount of advance shall be taken as the balance.  Each 
withdrawal shall be treated as a separate one and the same principal shall apply in the 
event of more than one conversion.” 
  
for rule 18, the following rule shall be substituted, namely:- 
“18 Final withdrawal of accumulations in  the  Fund: 
  
When a subscriber quits  the service, the amount standing to his credit in the Fund shall 
become payable to him: 
  
            Provided that a subscriber, who has been dismissed from the service and is 
subsequently reinstated in the service shall, if required to do so by the Board, repay any 
amount paid to him from the Fund in pursuance of this rule, with interest thereon  at 
the rate provided in rule 12 in the manner provided in the proviso  to rule 19.  The 
amount so repaid shall be credited to his account in the Fund. 
  
Explanation1.- A subscriber, other than the one who is appointed on contract or one 
who has retired from service and is subsequently re-employed with or without a break 
in service, shall not be deemed to quit  the service, when he is transferred without any 
break in service to a new post under a State Government or in another department of 
the Central Government (in which  he  is governed by another set of Provident Fund 
Rules) and without retaining any connections with his former post.  In such case, the 
subscription together with interest thereon shall  be transferred:- to his account in the 
other Fund in accordance with the rules of the Fund, if the new post is in another 
department of he Central Government, or 
  
to a new account under the State Government concerned if the new post is under a State 
Government  and the State Government  consents, by general or special order, to such 
transfer of his subscriptions and interest. 
  
NOTE: Transfers shall include cases of resignation from service in order to take up 
appointment in another Department of the  Central Government or under the State 
Government without any break and with proper permission of the Chairman.  In cases 
where there has been a break in service it shall be limited to the joining time allowed on 
transfer to a different station. 
  
Explanation II- When a subscriber, other than one who is appointed on contract or one 
who has retired from service  and is subsequently re-employed, is transferred without 
any break, to the service under a body corporate owned or controlled by Government 
or an autonomous organisation, registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, 
the amount of subscriptions, together with interest thereon, shall  not be paid to him but 
shall be transferred with the consent of that body, to his  new Provident Fund account 
under that  body. 
  
Transfers shall include cases or resignation from service in order to take up 
appointment under a body corporate owned or controlled by Government or an 
autonomous organisation, registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 without 
any break and with proper permission of the Board.  The time taken to join the new 
post shall not be treated as  a break in service, if it, does not exceed the joining time 
admissible to a Board servant on transfer from one post to  another: 

  
Provided that the amount of subscription together with interest thereon, of a subscriber 
opting for service under Public Enterprise may, if he so 
desires,  be  transferred  to  his  new   Provident  Fund  Account under the enterprise if 
the concerned Enterprise also agrees to such a transfer.  If, however, the subscriber 
does not desire the transfer or the concerned Enterprise does nor operate a Provident 
Fund, the amount aforesaid shall be refunded to the subscriber.” 
In rule 21 for the sub rules (2) and (3), the following sub rules shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
  
“(2) If the person to whom under these rules, any amount or policy, is to be paid, 
assigned or reassigned or delivered, is a lunatic for whose estate a manager has been 
appointed in this behalf under the Indian Lunacy Act, 1912 the payment or 
reassignment or delivery shall be made to such manager and not to the lunatic: 
  
Provided that where no manager has been appointed and the person to whom the sum is 
payable is certified by a Magistrate to be lunatic, the payment shall under the orders of 
the Collector be made in terms of sub section (1) of Section 95 of the Indian Lunacy Act, 
1912 to the person having charge of such lunatic and the Accounts Officer shall pay 
only the amount which he thinks fit to the person having charge of the lunatic and the 
surplus if any, or such part thereof, as he thinks fit, shall be paid for the maintenance of 
such members of the lunatic’s family as are dependent on him for maintenance. 
  
Payments of the amount withdrawn shall be made in India only.  The persons to whom 
the amounts are payable shall make their own arrangements to receive payments in 
India.  The following procedure shall be adopted for claiming payment by a subscriber, 
namely:- 
  
The Head of Office/Department shall forward the details of the subscriber retiring or 
quitting service to the Accounts Officer indicating the recoveries effected against the 
advances which are still current and the number of instalments yet to be recovered and 
also indicate the withdrawals, if any taken by the subscriber after the period covered by 
the last statement of the subscribers account sent by the Account Officer. 
  
The Accounts Officer shall, after verification with the ledger account, issue a authority 
for the amount payable to the subscriber at least a month before the date of 
superannuation but payable on the date of superannuation. 
  
The authority mentioned in Clause (iii) will constitute the first instalment of 
payment.  A second authority for payment will be issued as soon as possible after 
superannuation.  This will relate to the contribution made by the subscriber subsequent 
to the amount mentioned in the details forwarded  by the Head of Office/Department 
under Clause (ii) plus the refund of instalments against advance which ever current at 
the time of the submission of details by the Head of Office. 
  
After forwarding the details referred to the Clause (ii) for final payment of the Accounts 
Officer, advance withdrawal may be sanctioned but the amount of advance/withdrawal 
shall be drawn on an authorisation from the Accounts Officer concerned who shall 
arrange this as soon as the formal sanction of sanctioning authority is received  by him. 
  

NOTE- When the amount standing to the credit of a subscriber has become payable 
under  Rule 18, 19 or 20 the Accounts Officer shall authorize prompt payment  of the 
amount in the manner indicated in sub-rule (3).” 
  
for rule 22, the following rule shall be substituted, namely:- 
  
“22. Procedure on transfer to Board’s service of a person from the service under a body 
corporate owned or controlled by Government: 
            If a Board servant admitted to the benefit to the Fund was 
previously  a  subscriber  to  any  Provident  Fund  of  a  body corporate  
owned of controlled by the Central Government or a State Government, or an 
organisation registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 the amount of 
subscriptions, together with interest thereon, standing to his credit in such other fund 
on the date of transfer shall be transferred to his credit in the Fund. 
 
II 
  
The Merchant Shipping (Management of Safe Operation of Ships) Rules, 2000 
             
            The Merchant Shipping (Management for the Safe Operation of Ships) Rules, 
2000 framed under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 were examined and certain points 
were referred to the Ministry of Shipping for their comments/clarifications on 
December 22, 2000. The Ministry vide their communication dated February 6, 2001 had 
furnished their comments. The points referred to the Ministry and the 
comments/clarifications received thereon are as under:  
  
Point referred. 
  
The Rules have been framed under Section 457 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 
1958.  What are the reasons that Government did not have any set of rules on the 
subject for over 4 decades & in what manner Government had been regulating this area 
of activity; what factors necessitated Government to frame the said Rules, now? 
  
            Ministry’s reply 
  
            Safe operation of ships and pollution prevention (International Safety 
Management Code) vide IMO Resolution No. A 741(18) dated May 1994 was made 
mandatory by Chapter IX of SOLAS  Convention, and has come into force from 1st July 
1998 depending on the type and tonnage of ships.  This code applies to passenger ships, 
tankers, gas carriers and bulk carriers and high speed crafts not later than1st July 
1998.  
  
            This code shall apply to other cargo ships and mobile offshore crafts not later 
than 1st July 2002.  The purpose of this Code is to provide international standard for the 
safe management and operation of ships and for pollution prevention.  These aspects 
are already covered under parts IX & XIA of the Merchant Shipping Act and 
various  Certificates  were prescribed  for  various activities.   The same activities are 
now proposed to be conducted in a different form to enhance better management. 
  
II.        Point  referred 
  
 Rule 2  (j) (u) 

  
In these  rules, unless the context otherwise requires:- 
  
(j) “Designated person”  means a person ashore with direct access to the highest level of 
management charged with the responsibility and the authority to monitor the safety and 
pollution aspects of the operation of each ship. 
  
“Safety Management Certificate” means a Certificate issued by Director General of 
Shipping or any officer authorised by him in this behalf to a ship which signifies that the 
Company and its shipboard management operate in accordance with the ‘Safety 
Management System. 
  
The definition of  “Designated person”  as given in the sub rule (j) is incomplete. It gives 
great deal of power & responsibility to the “Designated  person’ without actually  giving 
the designation /post to him.  The definition may be modified by prescribing specific 
designation/qualification of the designated person. What are the functions assigned to 
the ‘Designated person’ and under what provisions  of Act/Rules these have been 
enumerated.  
  
            Further this person has no functions to perform with respect to any of the 
provisions of these rules.  So much so that the words ‘Designated Person’ have not been 
used anywhere else but in the definition. What may the reasons be for defining a term 
which has not been used in the provisions of the rules.   
  
(ii) In Sub rule (u) the Director General of Shipping has been 
authorized  to  delegate  the  power  to  issue  the  ‘Safety  Management Certificate’  to 
any officer.  Whether Government have any objection to prescribe the minimum level 
of  such officer? 
  
Ministry’s reply 
  
Rule 2 (j) it is agreed that the designated person has not been reflected anywhere in the 
rule, However, it is a very important component as far as ISM Code is concerned with 
respect to individual shipping companies.  The Designated Person has not been given 
any great deal of power or responsibility but has been given direct access to the highest 
level of  Management like  an  M.D. or Chief Executive.  He is the person to be 
contacted and not to M.D. or C.E.  This is given in the guidance to Government 
auditors. 
  
Rule 2(u)No. Government does not have nay objection to prescribe minimum  level of 
officers who is going to issue this Safety Management Certificate (SMC) on behalf of 
Government of India.  We propose “the minimum level of such officers should be with a 
marine engineering or nautical background and with relevant sea going experience as a 
certified ship officer including ISM Lead Auditors qualifications.” 
  
III.       Point referred 
  
Rule 3(1) (b)(ii) Criteria for verification 
  
(1)        The Central Government shall verify compliance by the company with the 
requirements of the International Safety Management Code by determining that- 
  

(a)        Company’s Safety Management System conforms with the requirements of 
international Safety Management Code; and  
  
The Safety Management Systems ensures that the following objectives are achieved, 
namely: 
There is compliance with mandatory Rules and regulation and  
  
The applicable International Safety Management Code, guidelines and Standards 
recommended by the Organisation, the Central Government, Classification Societies 
and maritime industry organisation are taken into account. 
  
            It appears that Rule 3(1) (a) is obvious in view of Rule 3(1) and does not require 
repartition.  Rule 3(b)(ii) is overlapping with Rule 3(1)(a).  Also what are the 
Mandatory Rules and regulations mentioned in Rule 3(b)(i) may be specified.  
  
What are ‘classification societies’ and what are their functions. 
  
Whether separate guidelines/standards are recommended by the Organisation, the 
Central Government, classification societies & maritime industry organisation, 
individually, to the company or  specific guidelines/standards have been chalked out 
taking into consideration the recommendations of the above organisations and 
approved by the Central Government; what is the actual procedure being followed? 
  
            Ministry’s reply  
  
(1)        (a)   We propose to rewrite this para as follows: 
  
The system is a part of the Code 
  
Rule 3(1)(b)    We do not agree to the contention that Rule 3 (b)(ii) is overlapping with 
Rule 3(1)(a).   Our original text 3(b)(ii) read: “Applicable codes, guidelines, and 
standards recommended by the organization, Central Government, Classification 
Societies and Maritime industry organizations are taken into account”.  However 
during vetting  by  the  Law Ministry this particular word “International Safety 
Management” has been included.  But we do not have any objection in removing this 
particular word “International Safety Management” as the intention is to include the 
practices prevailing prior to implementation of the Code. 
  
Rule 3(b)(i) The rules and regulation mentioned in 3b(i) are the rules and regulations 
concerning safety and pollution prevention gazetted under provisions of Merchant 
Shipping Act such as – (a) Safety Construction Rules (b) Safety Equipment  Rules (c) 
Safety Radio Rules (d) Load Line Rules etc. 
  
The Classification societies are autonomous bodies formed mainly in developed 
countries.  There is such a society whose branches are operating in India also.  They 
have been authorized to carry out some of the statutory functions on  behalf of the 
Central Government.  The  functions of these societies commenced with helping the 
insurance companies to identify good ships.  Eventually their role has been to assist the 
shipping companies to certify their ships as sea worthy.  Many of these are more that 
150 years old and have vast experience in ship construction and repairs.  Separate 
Guidelines are periodically published by IMO, Central Government, Classification 

societies, maritime industry organizations for the shipping companies.  Such guidelines 
do not require any approval of the Central Government. 
  
IV        Point referred 
  
            Rule 4  Safety Management System Requirements; 
  
Every company shall develop, implement and maintain a Safety management System 
approved by the Government which shall inter-alia include;- 
  
Safety and environmental protection policy which shall explicitly establish the 
commitment of the company to achieve the following objectives:-ensuring safety at sea, 
prevention of human injury or loss of life, and avoidance of damage to the environment, 
in particular to the marine environment and to property. 
  
providing safe practices in ship operation and a safe working environment; 
  
establishing safeguards against all identified risks; and  
  
improving safety management skills of personnel ashore and on board ships, including 
preparing for emergencies related both to safety and environment protection. 
  
The word ‘Government’ in the rule should be ‘Central Government’ as has been used 
elsewhere in the rules. 
  
There appears to be some error in the rule as it mentions about sub-rule (a) but there is 
no sub-rule (b)  in that case  sub rule (a) can be joined with rule 4 or otherwise, the rule 
is incomplete.  Is it not a printing mistake? 
  
            Ministry’s reply 
  
            We agree that sub Rule (a) can be joined with Rule (4) and may be read as 
follows: 
  
            Safety Management System Requirements- Every company shall develop, 
implement and maintain the Safety Management System approved by Central 
Government which shall inter alia include: 
  
            Safety and environment protection policy which shall explicitly establish the 
commitment of the company to achieve the following objectives, namely: (i),(ii), (iii) & 
(iv). 
  
            The original text read as above.  However at the instance of the law Ministry it 
was revised. 
Point referred 
  
Rule 5 (6) 
  
The Central Government may withdraw the Document of compliance if- 
  
corrective actions is not completed within the stipulated time; 
  

a periodical verification is not asked for; 
  
(c)        Amendments to International Safety Management code are not taken into 
account; 
  
(d)        there is evidence of a major non-conformity; 
  
(e)        substantial modification to the Safety Management System is not  notified to 
Central Government and verified by the Auditor. 
  
Whether the company is given an opportunity of being heard before withdrawing the 
Document of Compliance; if so whether there is any objection in incorporating the same 
in the rules itself. 
  
            Ministry’s reply 
  
            These are requirements of the ISM Code.  The code itself does not provide clause 
for appeal. However such withdrawal is always associated with audit by a team of 
auditors and there is ample opportunity to be heard and to take corrective actions. 
  
VI        Point referred 
             
            Rule 5 (6) and Rule 5 (14) 
  
            The rules do not provide for appeal by the company against withdrawal 
of  Document  by the  Central Government under  rule 5 (6)  
or appeal against invalidation by the Central Government  of the Safety Management 
Certificate.  Whether the Government have any objection in prescribing in the rule 
itself provisions for appeal against Rule 5 (6) and  5 (14).  Should a time period not be 
prescribed for revalidation/certification. 
             
            Ministry’s reply 
             
Rule 5(14) There is no specific time period for revalidation or certification but the 
company can offer their safety management system for reassessment anytime 
subsequent to withdrawal of Certificate.  On satisfactory completion of the audit the 
certificate will be reissued.  Since India is a party to SOLAS Convention and ISM Code 
is a part of this convention, any unilateral action against appeal will render the ship un-
sea worthy in another country since the evidences can be verified by any auditor of that 
country. 
  
Point referred 
  
Rule 5 (10)  (C) Document of  Compliance and Safety Management Certificate:  
  
The issue of a Safety Management Certificate shall be subject to- 
                        (a)        xxx                   xxx                   xxx 
                        (b)        xxx                   xxx                   xxx 
  
the maintenance of valid statutory certificates 

            What are the valid statutory certificates which a ship/company is required to 
maintain for issue of a Safety Management Certificate?   Whether these may be 
mentioned in the rule, itself? 
  
            Ministry’s reply 
  
            The number of statutory certificates a ship is supposed to have are innumerable 
and it  will  not  be appropriate to specify these certificates  
in the rule. Individual shipping companies are aware about the certificates that 
individual ships are supposed to carry depending on type of ships area of operation etc. 
  
VIII     Point referred 
  
               Rule 6 (2) 
  
An interim Safety Management Certificate shall be issued for a period of not more than 
six months by the Central Government to facilitate initial implementation of the 
International Safety Management Code in the following cases namely:- 
  
to new ships on delivery, or  
  
when a Company takes on the responsibility for the operation of a ship which is new to 
the Company 
  
Provided that in exceptional circumstances after representation by the company, 
the  validity  of the Interim Safety Management Certificate may he extended for a 
further period not exceeding six months. 
  
In exceptional circumstances the validity of the Interim Safety Management Certificate 
may be extended for another 6 months;  what are the exceptional circumstances 
contemplated and whether Government have any objection in indicating the type of 
circumstances  that could be treated as exceptional by adding an explanation? 
            Ministry reply 
  
            Exceptional circumstances cannot be defined specifically in the rule.  It is subject 
to only ships at a particular instance as to what are the difficulties the ship owner is 
facing-sighting one example like, “no auditor is available in certain port for audit etc.” 
Based on that it is decided by the Government as to what is the gravity of the 
exceptional circumstances. 
  
IX        Point referred 
  
Rule 7 Issuance of Safety Management Certificate by “Recognised Organisation” 
  
The Central Government may duly authorise a recognised organisation to issue on its 
behalf the Safety Management Certificate for a period of five months at the completion 
of an International Safety Management Code audit to cover the  period until a full term 
certificate is issued by the Central Government. 
  
The Safety Management Certificate my be issued provided no major non-conformities 
remain and the Auditor formally recommends certification of the ship. 
  

What is the rational behind authorising a recognized  organization to issue a safety 
management certificate for  5 month before  a full term certificate is issued by the 
Central Government. 
  
A Safety Management Certificate can be issued provided “ no major conformity” 
remains; the term “major conformity” is vague; whether Ministry has any object in 
prescribing what such major conformity could  be? 
Ministry’s reply 
  
            A ship may be audited at a port for off from the Directorate General of Shipping 
who are the issuing authority of the Certificate.  Any delay may affect the sailing of the 
ship. In order to facilitate the sailing of the ship, this power is given to the local office 
auditors to issue interim certificate up to a period of five months only. 
  
            Major Non Conformity is defined in Rule 2(o). It is not possible to prescribe the 
list of major non conformities that can happen in the Safety Management System.  The 
auditor has to judge whether the Non-conformity is a major or not based on his 
experience, competence and judgment.  
  
X         Point referred 
  
            Rule 8 The Certification Process: 
  
The rule does not specify any time limit for issue of a Document of Compliance for a 
Company and Safety Management Certificate to a ship by the Central 
Government.  Whether it is possible to prescribe some time limit  for these purposes. 
  
Ministry’s reply 
  
            These Certificates are to be issued immediately otherwise the company and the 
ship will be out of business.  Introduction of any period will adversely affect the sailing 
of the ship. 
  
XI        Point referred 
  
The formats given at the end of the Rules relating to Interim Safety Management 
Certificate, Interim Document of Compliance, Document of Compliance, Endorsement 
for Annual Verification etc., may be appropriately linked to the text of the Rules by 
giving the rule no. etc. under which they have to be applied in each of the formats.   
Ministry’s reply 
  
            Yes, it will be introduced. 
  
2.         The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Shipping have agreed 
to take action as follows based upon the suggestions on  Committee’s behalf: 
  
Prescribing minimum level of the Officers for issuing Safety Management Certificate on 
behalf of the Central Government of India by amending rule  2(u) ;  
  
amending rule 3(1)  by re-writing the para so as to provide that the system is a part of 
the Code; 
  

indicating mandatory rules and regulations mentioned in rule 3(b)(i) ; 
  
deleting the words “International Safety Management” in rule 3(1)(b)(ii) so as to 
provide that applicable codes, guidelines, and standards recommended by the 
Organization, Central Government, Classification Societies and Maritime industry 
organizations are taken into account”, and; 
  
joining sub rule (a) of rule 4 with rule 4.  
  
            The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Shipping would carry out the above 
amendments  expeditiously  with intimation to it. 
 
III 
  
 The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority 
Regulations, 1999 
  
            The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Exports Development Authority 
Regulations, 1999 framed under the Section 33 of the Agricultural and Processed Food 
Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 were examined and a questionnaire 
was forwarded to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry on August 4, 2000 for their 
comments/clarifications. 
  
The Ministry of Commerce and Industry vide their communication dated August 28, 
2000 sought extension of time upto September 30,  2000 for furnishing comments which 
was granted.   The points referred, the comments received from the Ministry vide their 
communication dated September 26, 2000 and Committee’s observation thereon are as 
under: 
  
1.         Point referred  
  
            The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority 
Regulations, 1999 are in suppression of Regulations of 1986. What are the 
reasons/circumstances under which the entire set of regulations had to be substituted by 
a new one; and what are the changes? 
  
Comments 
  
            The earlier Regulations covered only few aspects of the Authority’s 
functioning.  It was felt that the new Regulations with a greater clarity to cover other 
aspects of the functioning of the Authority be introduced.  Hence, the old Regulations 
had to be substituted by a new one.  The Regulations, 1999 under reference include the 
following aspects which were not covered by the old Regulations: 
Formation of Executive Committee and Product Committee (s) 
  
Appointment, functions and powers of Executive Committee and Product Committee. 
  
Powers of Authority (s). 
  
Procedure for meetings of the Committee (s). 
  
Method of Recruitment, conditions of service etc. 

  
Finance, budget and accounts of the Authority. 
  
Delegation of Authority 
  
Committee’s observations 
  
Committee noted the reply 
  
Point Referred  : Regulation 5 
  
Power of Central Government to call meetings: Notwithstanding anything contained in 
these regulations, the Central Government may, at any time, call. 
  
Contents of regulation 5 as appearing in the Gazette of India publishing the Regulations 
are incomplete as it ends up abruptly with the words “Central Government may at any 
time call.” The missing portion needs to be completed. 
Comments 
  
            This is due to printing error by the Press in the English text of the 
Regulations.  The complete sentence reads as follows: “Notwithstanding anything 
contained in these regulations, the Central Government may, at any time call a meeting 
of the Authority.”  
However, in the Hindi version, copy of which is enclosed, the same has been printed 
correctly.  Suitable correction will be made. 
  
Committee’s observations 
  
Committee noted the reply 
  
Point referred Regulation 7 
  
Quorum – (1) No business shall be transacted at a meeting of the Authority unless there 
are present at such meeting at least eight members, including the Chairman. 
  
The total membership of the Authority is 40. Normally, quorum in case of such bodies is 
1/3rd of the total membership.  Keeping in view the fact that the members of the 
Authority are a diverse group representing various interests, whether Ministry have 
any objection in fixing a higher quorum, (as against a quorum of 8 members at present) 
say 1/3rd of total membership so that the meetings of the Authority are more 
meaningful?. 
  
Comments 
  
The attendance in the Authority meetings in the past has been between four and twenty 
three. Considering the above and the suggestion of the Committee, a quorum of 1/4th of 
the total membership (i.e. 10 members as against 8 at present) could be considered. 
  
Committee’s observations 
  

The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have agreed to Committee’s 
suggestion on Regulation 7 and the Ministry have raised the minimum strength of the 
quorum from 8 Members to 10 Members in the total 40 membership of the Authority. 
Point referred : Regulations 10 and 26 
  
10.  Voting: (1) Every question brought before a meeting of the Authority  shall be 
decided by a  majority of the members present and voting. 
  
(2) In the case of an equality of votes, the Chairman or the member presiding over such 
meeting shall have a second or casting vote. 
  
26. Presiding officer of meeting (1) The Chairman shall preside over the meetings of a 
Committee, and in the absence of the Chairman, a person elected by the members of the 
Committee from amongst the members present shall preside over such meetings. 
(2) All question which may come up for decision before a meeting of any Committee 
shall be decided by a majority of the  members thereof present and voting at such 
meeting and in the event of an equality of votes, the person presiding over such  meeting 
shall have a second or casting vote. 
  
            What is the justification for allowing the Chairman or the Member presiding in 
a meeting of the Authority or the Committee to cast a second or casting vote.  Normally, 
the procedure in case of such meetings is that the Chairman or the Presiding Officer 
does not vote in the first place and he casts his vote only in case of a tie.  In other words, 
the Chairman or the Presiding Officer is allowed only one vote that is a casting 
vote.  Whether Ministry have any objection in modifying the provisions? 
  
Comments 
  
There is merit in the observation of the Committee which will require deeper analysis 
when matched against the merits of the existing system. 
Committee’s observations 
  
The Ministry have agreed to consider for modification of this provision on the basis of 
merits in the existing system regarding ‘second or casting vote’ by the Chairman or the 
member presiding in a meeting of the Authority on the Committee under Regulations 
10 and 26. 
  
Point referred : Regulation 11(2)  
  
Business by circulation: 
              
 xxx                  xxx                   xxx                   xxx        
  
(2) Any proposal or resolution circulated under sub-regulation (1) and approved by the 
majority of the members who have recorded their views in writing shall be a effectual 
and binding as if such proposal or resolution were decided by the majority of the 
members at a meeting. 
  
Provided atleast eight members of the Authority have approved the proposal or 
resolution. 
  

Provided further when a proposal or resolution is referred to members by circulation 
any eight members may require that the  proposal or resolution be referred to the 
members at a meeting of the Authority. 
  
In regulation 11(2) the word “effectual” does not seem to be appropriate. Should it not 
be “effective” instead? 
  
Comments 
  
Effectual and effective are synonyms. According to Webster Dictionary, effectual 
‘suggests the decisive accomplishment of a result or fulfillment of  an intention and 
effective emphasizes the actual production of an  effect when in use or in force’. In the 
context of Regulation 11(2) it is submitted for consideration of the Committee that the 
existing term may be retained.  However, the article ‘a’ preceding the word ‘effectual’ is 
a printing error and could be deleted. 
  
Committee’s observations 
  
The Committee noted that under regulation 11(2) the Ministry have agreed to delete the 
word’ effectual’ since it was a printing error as observed by the Committee. 
  
Point referred : Regulation 14  
  
Appointment of Committees:-The Authority shall at its first meeting to be held during 
the first quarter of every financial year by resolution appoint the following Committees, 
namely:- 
  
An Executive Committee 
  
A Committee hereinafter referred to as Product Committee for each   of the following 
product group which shall hold office for a period of one year from the date of their 
formation: 
  
Fresh and Processed Fruits and Vegetables and other processed and miscellaneous 
products. 
  
Animal Products 
  
Floriculture, Seeds and Cereals 
  
The Executive Committee shall consist of:- 
  
The Chairman, who shall be the ex-officio chairman thereof: 
  
Director of Agricultural and Processed Food Products 
Export       Development  Authority (APEDA). 
Director/Deputy Secretary incharge of Export Promotion (Agriculture) Division in the 
Ministry of Commerce. 
  
Director Deputy Secretary (Finance) in the Ministry of    
              Commerce. 
  

The Secretary and 
  
Five other members to be elected by members of the Authority from amongst 
themselves, in such manner as may be laid down by the Authority. 
The product Committee for each of the product group shall consist of :- 
  
The Chairman who shall be the ex-officio Chairman thereof. 
  
Director of Agricultural and Processed Food Products  Export  
Development Authority. 
  
The Secretary or an officer of the Agricultural and Processed Food Export 
Development Authority concerned with the  product group nominated by the 
Chairman. 
  
Five members to be elected by the members of the Authority from amongst themselves 
in such manner as may be laid down by the Authority. 
  
Whether the Authority has laid down the manner in which 5 Members from among the 
members of the Authority are to be elected for the Executive Committee as well as the 
Product Committee as provided in Regulation 14? What is the procedure that has been 
laid down by the Authority in this regard? 
  
Comments 
  
            The Authority has not laid down any specific rules in this regard.  However, 
the   following  procedure is  being    adopted:  Five members 
59 
  
from among the Members of the Authority are elected each for the Executive 
Committee as well as the Product Committee by the Authority at the first Meeting of 
the Authority by consensus keeping in view the experience of Members in various 
product groups and their willingness and availability. 
  
Committee’s observations 
  
            Committee noted the reply 
  
Point referred : Regulation 15(2) 
  
            Powers of the Executive Committee and Product Committee(s) – Each of the 
Committees of the Authority shall have all the powers of the Authority itself and every 
decision taken by any of the Committee shall be treated as a decision of the Authority, 
provided that every decision of each of the Committee of a policy nature or having 
financial implications of Rs. 5 lakhs or above by way of an outgo of the funds of the 
Authority or of the Government shall be communicated to all the members of the 
Authority, and implementation thereof shall be withheld if eight or more members 
object to the decision within 14 days of the date of issue of the intimation of the decision 
to them. 
  

The words “of a policy nature” appearing in the regulation are not specific.  Whether 
Government; have any objection in appending an explanation for the purpose of 
defining the term ‘policy nature’? 
  
Secondly, the period of 14 days given to the members for raising objections on any 
decision of the Committee has been made to reckon from the date of issue of the 
intimation of the decision of the Committee to them.  Should it not be linked with the 
date of the meeting so that objections, if any, are raised timely? 
  
Comments 
  
The suggestion for defining the term ‘of a policy nature’ has been taken note of and 
would be considered. 
  
As a measure of abundant caution, adequate time is given to all members to learn about 
the decision by way of intimation and react to the same within 14 days from the day of 
intimation.  It is quite possible that all 40 members of the Authority may not be privy to 
a decision 14 days from the day of the meeting unless minutes are made available 
immediately after the decisions are taken. 
  
Committee’s observations 
  
The Committee noted that under regulation 15(2) the Ministry have agreed to consider 
the term ‘of a policy nature’ as suggested by the Committee but regard to second point 
the period of 14 days for intimation of the decision to Members under Regulation 15(2) 
the Ministry have not accepted the Committees suggestion and the reply furnished by 
them is not very convincing. 
  
Point referred 
  
Regulation 16 
  
Power of Authority to review and revise:-The Authority shall have the right and power 
to review, after, and to or amend any decision of any Committee at any Special or 
Ordinary Meeting of the Authority, subject to the condition that contracts already 
entered or executed or portions of the decisions under review already implemented shall 
not be subject to alteration or amendment or review by the Authority. 
  
The Authority has been empowered to review the decision of the Committee, but 
whatever action that has already been taken on the decision of the Committee has been 
saved under the regulation.  Whether Government have any objection to prescribe time 
limit within which this review can be done by Authority so as to avoid complications 
regarding cancellation of works.  
  
Comments 
  
            The suggestion has been noted and will be appropriately considered. 
Committee’s observations 
  
The Committee noted that under regulation 16 the Ministry have accepted the 
suggestion of the Committee to prescribe time limit within which the review can be done 
by Authority so as to avoid complications regarding cancellation of works. 

  
Point referred 
  
Regulation 28(8) 
  
“Every person appointed to a post under the Authority shall be on probation as per 
provisions thereto specified in the Recruitment Rules to be notified separately with the 
approval of the Central Government”. 
  
Whether the recruitment rules contemplated under regulation 28(8) for the purpose of 
filling up posts under the Authority have been notified with the approval of the Central 
Government; if so, the details thereof. 
  
Comments 
  
            The draft Recruitment rules of APEDA was sent to the Legislative Department 
on 16th June 2000 for vetting.  The same has been received from that Department on 
12th September 2000 with the suggestion for incorporating certain modifications.  After 
examination of the suggestions of the Legislative Department, it will be sent to that 
Department for vetting.  After the legislative Department had vetted, immediate action 
will be taken to notify the Rules and then laid on the Table of both the Houses of 
Parliament. 
  
Committee’s observations 
  
Committee noted the reply 
Point referred 
  
Regulation 28(9)(b) 
  
All appointments to the post carrying the scale of pay, the maximum of which is not less 
than Rs. 13,500/- shall be made by the Central Government as per the instructions 
issued in this behalf from time to  time either through deputation of suitable officer 
from Central/State Governments  or through direct recruitment. 
  
Whether the recruitment rules contemplated under regulation 28(8) cover filling up of 
Group ‘A’ posts and, if so, what is the justification for having a separate provision 
prescribing the manner in which Group ‘A’ posts in the Authority may be filled up; 
what is the justification for giving final authority to the Central Government for 
deciding the manner in which any Group ‘A’ posts in the Authority may be filled up? 
Comments 
  
The Recruitment Rules to be notified will cover filling up of Group ‘A’ posts also.  The 
provision made in the Regulation is of general nature and the detailed method of 
recruitment’s, scales of pay, qualifications, etc. have been prescribed in the proposed 
Recruitment Rules. 
  
Section 32 sub-section (2)(d) and Section 33 sub-section (2)(b) of the Agricultural and 
Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 vests the Central 
Government with such Authority. 
             
            Committee’s observations 

  
Committee noted the reply 
  
Point referred 
  
Regulation 28(9)(f) 
  
The Authority may contract services, as deemed fit.  No contract 
appointments   of   more   than 6 months   duration and/or  having basic monthly 
remuneration of Rs. 1800/-or more shall be made without prior approval of the Central 
Government. 
  
            Whether the functional requirements of the Authority are being met 
satisfactorily in view of the powers conferred upon it to allow contract appointments on 
remuneration up to Rs.1800/-per month? Secondly,  what  does  the words ‘basic 
monthly remuneration”  
signify; generally, remuneration is the total payment receivable by a person for services 
rendered and it is not clear what objective is sought to be achieved for qualifying 
remuneration by using the word ‘basic’? Should, the limits ofremuneration up to which 
contract appointments could be given be not definite? 
  
Comments 
  
The amount of Rs.1800/-mentioned in Regulation 28(9)(f) has since been amended to be 
Rs. 6000/- vide Notification No. APEDA/SEC/GEN/30 dated 5th May 2000.  The amount 
of Rs.6000/- mentioned here is the limit of total remuneration upto which contract 
appointments could be made by the Authority.  The amount of Rs.6000/- is the total 
payment receivable by a person for services rendered.  The word ‘basic’ could be 
deleted. 
  
Committee’s observations 
  
The Committee noted that under Regulation 28(9)(f) the Ministry have agreed to delete 
the word ‘basic’ as observed by the Committee. 
  
The Committee  notes the comments of the Ministry on point no. 1,2,6,9, & 10. The 
Committee is satisfied that the Ministry have agreed to its suggestions on regulations 7 
(point-3) for raising minimum strength of the quorum from 8 to 10 Members, 
regulation 10 and 26 (point-4) for modifying the existing provision of “second or casting 
vote” available to the Chairman or the presiding Officer, regulation-11(2) (point-5) for 
deleting the word “effectual” which was a printing mistake, Regulation 15(2) (point-7) 
for defining the words “of a policy nature”, regulation-16 (point-8) for providing a time 
limit within which the Authority can review the decision of the Committee and 
regulation-28(9) (F) (point-11) by substituting the words “basic monthly remuneration” 
with  the words “monthly remuneration”.  
  
The Committee recommends to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry to carry out 
the above amendments in the regulations expeditiously under intimation to it. 
 
  
IV 
  

Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Employees (Pay and Allowances)     Regulation, 1997-
Implementation of 79th Report of the Committee 
  
The Committee had examined the Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Employees (Pay and 
Allowances)Regulations, 1997 and made certain observations/recommendations as 
contained in its 126th Report which was presented to the House on December 23, 
1999.  The recommendations made by the Committee are as follows: 
  
“The Committee expresses satisfaction that the Ministry of Surface Transport had 
agreed to amend regulations 4, 19(1) and 24 as per its suggestions.  As regards 
regulation 2(19) the Committee decided that the regulation may be retained in its 
existing form.  The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Surface Transport will notify 
the amendments to regulation 4, 19(1) and 24 expeditiously under intimation to it.” 
  
The extracts from the Report were forwarded to the Ministry of Shipping (then 
Ministry of Surface Transport) on January 28, 2000 for implementation.  The Ministry 
of Shipping vide their O.M. dated 28.7.2000  forwarded a copy  of the notification No. 
G.S.R. 724 (E) dated 27.10.1999 containing the amendment in respect of Regulation  4 
and 19(1).   The  proposal to amend the regulation 24 was, however, stated to be  under 
process.  
After a couple of reminders the Ministry of Shipping vide their O.M. dated 27.6.2001 
forwarded a copy of the notification No. G.S.R. 443 (E) dated 21.6. 2001 containing 
amendment to the regulation 24 also. 
  
4.         The Committee expresses its satisfaction that the Ministry have amended 
regulation 4 (1) (a) (i) by deleting the words, “or rupees twenty five only, whichever is 
more”, regulation 19 by deleting sub-regulation 2 and its proviso regarding crediting of 
fee and honorarium to the General Account of Port  and  regulation 24 by rewording 
the provisions of sub-regulation 2(ii). 
 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
  
I 
  
The Coffee Board General Provident Fund Rules, 1965 
  
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have carried out 
necessary amendment in the rules in pursuance to the deliberations with the latter. The 
Committee notes Ministry’s comments on Rule 2(1)(g) regarding definition of the term 
“family” and on rule 13(1)(b) regarding withdrawal of advance from Fund.  As regards 
the date of laying of the rules on the Table of the House the Committee notes with regret 
that the Ministry have failed to gather the desired information.  The Ministry should 
strive for a better  record management system in order to avoid such instances.  The 
Committee, however, notes that the Ministry have laid the rules again on the 20th 
March, 2001 in order to cover up the prevailing uncertainty.  The Committee is also 
satisfied to note that the Ministry have agreed to its suggestions and, accordingly, 
notified amendments in Rules 8(1) regarding conditions and rate of subscriptions, in 
Rule 9(1)(b) regarding rates of subscription by omitting its second proviso, in Rule 9(4) 
regarding enhancement and reduction in the amount of subscription during a calendar 
year, in Rule-16 regarding withdrawal from the Fund and the purposes for which 
withdrawal is allowed by making them consistent with the corresponding provisions of 
the GPF Rules applied to Central Government employees.   

II 
  
The Merchant Shipping (Management of Safe Operation of Ships) Rules, 2000 
  
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Shipping have agreed 
to take action as follows based upon the suggestions on  Committee’s behalf: 
  
 Prescribing minimum level of the Officers for issuing   Safety Management Certificate 
on behalf of the Central Government of India  by amending rule  2(u) ;  
  
amending rule 3(1)  by re-writing the para so as to provide that the system is a part of 
the Code; 
  
indicating mandatory rules and regulations mentioned in rule 3(b)(i) ;  
  
deleting the words “International Safety Management” in rule 3(1)(b)(ii) so as to 
provide that applicable codes, guidelines, and standards recommended by the 
Organization, Central Government, Classification Societies and Maritime industry 
organizations are taken into account”, and; 
  
joining sub rule (a) of rule 4 with rule 4.  
  
             The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Shipping would carry out the above 
amendments  expeditiously  with intimation to it. 
  
III 
  
The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority 
Regulations, 1999 
  
The Committee  notes the comments of the Ministry on point no. 1,2,6,9, & 10. The 
Committee is satisfied that the Ministry have agreed to its suggestions on regulations 7 
(point-3) for raising minimum strength of the quorum from 8 to 10 Members, 
regulation 10 and 26 (point-4) for modifying the existing provision of “second or casting 
vote” available to the Chairman or the presiding Officer, regulation-11(2) (point-5) for 
deleting the word “effectual” which was a printing mistake, Regulation 15(2) (point-7) 
for defining the  words “of a policy  
nature”, regulation-16 (point-8) for providing a time limit within which the Authority 
can review the decision of the Committee and regulation-28(9) (F) (point-11) by 
substituting the words “basic monthly remuneration” with  the words “monthly 
remuneration”.  
  
The Committee recommends to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry to carry out 
the above amendments in the regulations expeditiously under intimation to it. 
  
IV 
  
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Employees (Pay and Allowances) Regulation, 1997 
  
The Committee expresses its satisfaction that the Ministry have amended regulation 4 
(1) (a) (i) by deleting the words, “or rupees twenty five only, whichever is more”, 
regulation 19 by deleting sub-regulation 2 and its proviso regarding crediting of fee and 

honorarium to the General Account of Port  and  regulation 24 by rewording the 
provisions of sub-regulation 2(ii)  
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA. 
  
III 
  
Third Meeting 
  
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday the 12th August, 2002 in Room No. 
126-C (Chairman’s Room) Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
Shri A. Vijayaraghavan          Chairman 
Shri .M. V. Rajasekharan 
Shri Kapil Sibal 
Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
Shri B.P. Singhal 
Shri Ravula Chandra Sekhar Reddy 
Shri Drupad Borgohain 
Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
Shri N.K. Premachandran 
SECRETARIAT 
  
            1.         Shri S. Vijay Kumar, Joint Secretary 
            2.         Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary 
            3.         Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary 
            4.         Shri Mahesh C. Tiwari, Committee Officer 
  
  
The Committee considered its draft 143rd and 144th reports.  While considering an item 
contained in its draft 143rd Report on Agriculture and Processed Food Products Export 
Development Authority Regulation, 1999 the Committee felt that the Ministry’s reply 
on the question of authorizing  the  Chairman to cast  a  second or casting vote under 
regulations 10 and 26 was not clear as to whether the Committee’s suggestion was 
acceptable to them.  The Committee decided to seek a clarification from the Ministry on 
this point. 
  
The Committee, however, adopted both the reports subject, however, to the above 
observations and decided to present them during the ensuing Winter Session of Rajya 
Sabha. 
  
The Committee, thereafter, decided to meet on September 4, 2002 to consider its 
pending business.  
    
4.         The meeting adjourned at 3.45 p.m. 
 