 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
December 
TWO HUNDRED AND TWEN 
 
Rules and Regulations framed under the 
Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental 
1 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE  ON SUBORDINATE LEGIS LATION 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December , 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED AND TWEN TIETH REPORT 
Rules and Regulations framed under the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with 
Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999 
LATION  
 REPORT NO. 
220  
National Trust for Welfare of Persons with 
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999  

2 
 
C O N T E N T S 
      
        PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
 
(i) 
2.  INTRODUCTION  
 
(ii)  
3. REPORT  
 
 
 
 
4. 
CONCLUSION 
 
 
5. ANNEXURE 
  
6. *MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be enclosed later 
 
 
  

3 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   15 th  September, 2014) 
 
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy   Chairman  
2. Shri  M.P. Achuthan  
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
5. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
6. Shri Kalpataru Das 
7. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
8. Shri S. Muthukaruppan 
9. Shri K. Parasaran 
10. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
11. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
12. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh 
13. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
14. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
15. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
 S
ECRETARIAT  
 
1.  Shri N.K.Singh , Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
3.   Shri R.S. Rawat, Joint Director 
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint  Director  
5. Shri  R.P. Shukla, Deputy Director  
6.   Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director  
 
  

4 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been authorized by 
the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf, thi s Two Hundred and Twentieth Report of the 
Committee.  
 
2.  The Committee examined the matters that came up  while scrutinizing the 
Rules and 
Regulations framed under the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, 
Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1 999 and issues relating to them along with 
the comments received from the Government. 
 
3.   The observations and recommendations of the Co mmittee are contained in the Report.  
 
4.  The Committee considered and adopted the draft Re port in its meeting held on the 17 
th      
December, 2014  
 
Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy                                                                                                                
Chairman 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
                                                                                                                                       Rajya Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI  
December 18, 2014 
  

5 
 
 
Report  
on  
The Framing of Rules & Regulations under  
the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation 
and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999  
 
 
Introduction 
 
1.  The National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Auti sm, Cerebral Palsy, Mental 
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999 (Commonly known as National Trust Act, 1999) 
was enacted on 30 
th  December, 1999. The Sections 34 & 35 of this Act p rovide for framing 
Rules and Regulations by the concerned Ministry as subordinate legislation.  As per its mandate, 
the Committee amongst others, scrutinizes the rules /regulations so made and reports to the 
Parliament its findings.  The Committee found that following rules and regulations have been 
prepared.   
 
(i)  National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental 
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Rules, 2000 (notified on 26 th  July, 2000; and  
 
(ii)  National Trust Regulations, 2001 (notified on  3 rd  August, 2001).  
 
Mandate of the Act  
 
(ii)  The Act is a progressive piece of legislation which  seeks to achieve the following 
objectives: 
 
1.  to enable and empower Persons with Disabilities (Pw Ds) to live as independently 
and as fully as possible within and as close to the community to which they belong; 
2.  to strengthen facilities to provide support to PwDs to live within their own families; 
3.  to extend support to registered organizations to pr ovide need based services during 
period of crisis in the family of PwDs; 
4.  to deal with problems of PwDs who do not have family support; 
5.  to promote measures for the care and protection of PwDs in the event of death of 
their parent or guardian; 

6 
 
6.  to evolve procedures for the appointment of guardia ns and trustees for PwDs 
requiring such protection; 
7.  to facilitate the realization of equal opportunitie s, protection of rights and full 
participation of PwDs; and  
8.  to do any other act which is incidental to the aforesaid objects. 
 
 Shortcomings noticed in the Rules/Regulations 
  
(iii)  In view of the importance of this Act, it was decid ed to undertake these Rules & 
Regulations for examination.  The Committee during the course of examining/scrutinizing the 
Rules and Regulations framed under the National Tru st Act, 1999, noticed that these Rules & 
Regulations were not in the proper form as there we re several inexplicable discrepancies and 
gaps between the Act and the Rules/Regulations fram ed thereunder, both in letter and spirit.   
The Committee noticed the following: 
  
(i)   Not all the aspects provided in the Act had b een covered in the Rules and 
Regulations; 
(ii)   The provisions contained in the Rules and Re gulations were very sketchy and 
lacked necessary details; 
(iii)   At some places, both in the Rules and Regul ations, the provisions of the Act had 
been reproduced verbatim without specifying required details; 
(iv)   Certain powers have been abrogated under Rul es/Regulations that are not 
provided by the Act; 
(v)   No guidelines, rules and regulations are ther e in respect of registration, selection 
and grant/fund disbursal to various organizations working in the field. 
  
Oral Evidence of the Ministry 
 
4. The Committee thereafter, summoned the Secretary , Department of Disability Affairs, 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment and the Ch airperson and CEO of the National Trust 
on 13 
th  May, 2014 for oral evidence. During the discussion , the Committee expressed serious 
reservations on the lack of comprehensive Rules/ Re gulations under the Act.  So many aspects 
where specific provisions were required to be made,  were left open ended.  For example, 

7 
 
Recruitment Rules for officials of the National Trust have yet not been framed.  When asked, the 
Ministry stated that files relating to this exercis e were untraceable.  The Committee was at a loss 
to know that the  draft Recruitment Rules were fram ed and approved by the Board but were 
never notified. Similarly, Recruitment Rules spelli ng out the qualifications, experience and other 
details for the post of Chairman, National Trust ha ve also not been framed. Issue regarding 
appointment of 'short term Consultants' was also ra ised.  The Committee wanted to know under 
which Section of the Act, short-term Consultants we re being appointed.  Neither the Secretary of 
the Ministry nor the Chairperson of the National Tr ust was able to give any legally 
convincing/tenable reason for doing so.  Similarly,  the Ministry was asked about the guidelines, 
if any for providing grants/funds to the intended c ategory of person and organizations and also 
about the guidelines regarding appointing Boards' Members.   
 
5. Responding to queries raised by the Committee, t he Secretary stated that the Ministry 
was not aware of these gaps in Rules/Regulations an d that it came to know only after the 
Committee Secretariat wrote them about it.  She ass ured that she will do as directed by the 
Committee in this regard.  After 2006, she said, fi les are missing and attempts are being made to 
reconstruct them and do the needful in "shortest possible time".   
 
6. Reacting to the prolonged continuance in office of the National Trust Chairperson and the 
Ministry's inability to find a successor, Secretary  clarified that the Section 3 (4)(a) of the Act 
which empowers the Central Government to appoint Ch airperson of the Trust does not contain any 
explicit provision for framing of Rules regarding s election of Chairperson unlike some other Acts.  
In the absence of explicit provision in the Act, Re cruitment Rules for selection of Chairperson 
have not been notified by the Ministry.  
 
7. The Committee is not convinced by this clarificatio n of the Ministry and is of the 
opinion that for the sake of transparency and clari ty, the rules, regulations, etc.  should 
have been framed even if the Act did not mention ab out it specifically.  The Committee 
does not accept the contention of the Ministry that  Section 3(4)(a) provided the areas of 
expertise of persons who could be considered for se lection to the post of Chairperson.  The 
Committee is of the view that provisions of an Act are generic in nature and it is not 

8 
 
possible to provide for every possible detail there in, otherwise, where was the need for 
delegated legislation to be done by the Ministries?   It is the Ministry which has to see that 
all the necessary processes/procedures and requirem ents for implementing the provisions 
of the Act are laid down to maximum possible extent  for the sake of clarity, transparency 
and accountability under intimation to Parliament.  Therefore, it was the responsibility of 
the Ministry to see that proper rules giving detail s of the basic qualifications including 
educational qualifications, essential as well as de sirable, number of years of experience, 
theoretical as well as practical, along with the pr ocedure for appointment of the 
Chairperson, National Trust with definite time-line have been framed. The Committee also 
took note of the fact that twice the request for ex tension of Chairperson, National Trust 
was sent to the Appointment Committee of the Cabine t (ACC), which had also raised 
serious objection regarding repeated attempt by the Ministry seeking extension to the same 
person at the post of Chairperson, National Trust f or almost one decade. Although 
attempts were made to recruit Chairperson but the m anner in which qualifications, etc. 
were being fixed and tweaked one after another and including M.Ed. and B.Ed. as 
qualifications for Chairperson, leave serious doubt s in one's mind.  One apprehension 
could be that the process of recruitment was being delayed deliberately on one pretext or 
the other so many times basically to allow the same  person to continue in the post as the 
Act said that same incumbent would continue till a next person was selected.  This 
apprehension in the mind of the Committee was recon firmed by the following observations 
of  DoPT sent to the Department of Social Justice & Empowerment: 
 
“…… to urgently examine whether the eligibility criteri a for the post are too restrictive 
given the fact that even after open advertisement a nd receipt of as many as 97 
applications not one person could be located who fu lfilled the prescribed educational 
qualification and experience” 
 
8. The Committee takes note of the following points : 
(a)  On the one hand the Ministry states that the Act does not provide for the framing of rules 
specifying the eligibility criteria in relation to educational qualifications and experience 

9 
 
for the post of Chairman of the National Trust, but  then detailed qualifications were 
published in the advertisement for the post of Chairperson, National Trust.  
 
(b)  Not finding any one suitable out of as many as 97 a pplicants and not having criteria for 
constituting Search/Selection Committee. 
 
(c)  Reasons for publishing a third advertisement for the post of Chairperson when the Search 
cum Selection Committee had found two eligible cand idates for the said post.  In the 
given situation, one could have been selected and r ecommended for appointment.  After 
all who, they were looking for? 
 
9. In the Committee’s view, such a situation came u p primarily because of the absence 
of Rules relating to qualification, procedure of re cruitment etc. of the Chairperson.  Due to 
absence of guidelines, etc. in this regard, the Com mittee feels that one person had managed 
to occupy the ‘post’ for close to a decade although  Act fixed its tenure for only three years.  
The Committee does not accept this argument of the Ministry that the National Trust being 
an autonomous body, it had nothing much to do in th is regard.  It is basically the 
responsibility of the Ministry to have seen that co mprehensive and all inclusive 
Rules/Regulations have been framed in consultation with Ministry of Law. 
 
10. It may be pointed out that despite the assuranc e given by the Secretary of the 
Ministry during her oral evidence to fill the gaps/ discrepancies in the existing Rules and 
Regulations , this Committee did not hear anything from the Ministry even after seven 
months.  However, the Committee has learnt that aft er it took up the issue with the 
Ministry, the existing Chairperson of the Trust has  resigned and the CEO of the Trust has 
been asked to leave.  Another curious aspect in thi s regard is that the Chairperson 
submitted her resignation on 1 
st  October, 2014.  But instead of taking a decision o n her 
resignation, she was given an extension upto 31 st  December, 2014 through an Office Order 
dated 22 nd  October, 2014.  Surprisingly, her resignation submitted on 1 st  October, 2014 was 
accepted through an Office Order dated 24 th  October, 2014 i.e.  two days after granting her 
extension. The Committee would like to be informed about the grounds on which the 

10 
 
Chairperson had resigned and the CEO was asked to l eave and granting her extension 
after she resigned, particularly when the Committee  was seized of the issue mentioned in 
this Report relating to the working of the National Trust.           
 
11. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the M inistry should, without any 
further delay, frame guidelines with details regard ing the basic qualifications including 
educational qualifications and experience along wit h the procedure for appointment of the 
Chairperson, National Trust.  
 
12. As regards the appointment/selection of Board M embers and their tenure, the Ministry 
informed that as per Section 3(4)(b) of the Nationa l Trust Act, 1999, 9 persons are to be 
appointed as Members from amongst Registered Organi zations, out of which 3 Members each 
shall be from Voluntary Organizations; Associations  of parents of persons with autism, cerebral 
palsy , mental retardation and multiple disability and Association of PwDs as per the procedure 
prescribed in Rules. The other Members of the Trust  are to be nominated from various 
Ministries/ Departments by the Government and from associations of trade, commerce and 
industry by the Board in terms of Section 3(4)(c) a nd (d) of the Act.  Further, the procedure for 
election of Members (for 9 Members in terms of Sect ion 3(4)(b) for the Act) has been prescribed 
under Rule 3 of the National Trust Rules, 2000. The re is no provision to debar a person from re-
election or re-nomination. The Ministry also stated  that since the National Trust is an 
autonomous organization, it is not involved in its day-today activities.      
13. The Committee notes the comments of the Ministr y and is of the considered view that 
regarding selection/nomination of Board Members exc ept ex-officio members, there should be 
some guidelines and procedure apart from the proced ure of election enshrined in Rule 3 of the 
National Trust Rules, with a view to ensure wider r epresentation to the organizations working in 
the field and to avoid only a few being able to get  them nominated/elected continuously.  It 
should have same cap in this regard and eligibility  restrictions for anyone indulging in 
unwarranted activities.   
 

11 
 
14. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the  Ministry should frame Rules 
clarifying the procedure for selection of the Board  Members other than ex-officio and the 
said Rules should incorporate the views of the Comm ittee regarding re-nomination and 
removal of Members.  
15.  Regarding appointment of short-term Consultant s, the Committee observed that while  
Regulations 4(4) & 4(5) provided for appointment of  short term consultants, the Parent Act did 
not provide, directly or indirectly, for such a cla ss of consultants to be appointed .  Even if such 
provision  was made (which is illegal), again no guidelines/ rules were laid down for engaging the 
so called 'short term consultants'.  As a result, p ersons were engaged under this category at one’s 
whims and fancies.  Thus, the entire exercise was d esigned in a manner leaving enough scope to 
be misused.   
16. The Committee expresses serious reservations on  this issue and recommends that 
the Ministry should re-examine the said Regulations and also have it vetted by the Ministry 
of Law & Justice for ironing out any such discrepan cies in the subordinate legislation 
framed by the National Trust/ Ministry.  
17. Regulation 7(1) & 8(1 & 2) of the Board of Trust Regulations, 2001 lays down Procedure 
for Grant of Registration and Procedure of Evaluati on of Registered Organization for 
Participation in Trust’s Scheme and Programmes.  The Committee observed that Section 12(4) of 
the Act empowers the Board to grant registration to  applicants or reject such applications.  For 
the purpose, Trust has to frame and  notify Regulat ions providing minimum standards for 
registration as provided for under Section 35 of th e Act.  The Committee is surprised that 
instead of framing the Regulations on  minimum stan dards for registration, it has further 
delegated the power to the Board under Regulation 7  (1) , which is against the spirit of the 
Act. 
18. In another instance, the Committee again found that Sections 19 and 35(g) of the Act lays 
down provision for framing of Regulations on the pr ocedure for evaluation of registered 
organizations for participation in the Trust’s Sche me and programmes.  The Act further says that 
the Regulations may also provide for guidelines to monitor and evaluate the activities of the 
registered organizations receiving financial assist ance from the Trust.  The Committee takes 

12 
 
serious note of the fact that instead of framing pr oper criteria for participation in the 
Trust’s Schemes and Programmes and explaining/ deta iling the mechanism for evaluation 
and monitoring in Regulations itself, it has again further delegated the responsibility to the 
Board.   
19. Taking a serious view in the matter, the Commit tee recommends that the Ministry 
should seriously go through the Regulations framed and ensure that such further 
delegation of power, which is against the spirit of   the Act is avoided.  The Committee 
further recommends that the Ministry should refrain  from reproducing the provisions 
from the Act in the Regulations and wants that Regu lation 7(1) and 8(1) & (2) may be 
redrafted specifying the required details.    
20. Another fact that came to the Committee's notic e related to the legal status of the 
"ARUNIM" by the National Trust.  This Trust was cre ated in 2008 for marketing of goods and 
services of various NGOs registered with National T rust and other working with persons with 
disabilities.   Large numbers of grants were being released to this organization by the National 
Trust for their future expenditure.  The ARUNIM is said not to be following any Government 
rules, regulations, guidelines of the National Trus t and several audit objections were raised on 
the release of funds or advances given to it from N ational Trust Account.  Interestingly, the 
ARUNIM never considered it as a part of National Tr ust and therefore, resisted any 
watch/control over its funds and working.  Even the  Ministry was aware of this irregularity 
committed both in its creation as well as funding.   
21. The Committee takes this very seriously and fee ls that this is another off-shoot of 
the lack of distinct rules, regulations, etc. for r unning the National Trust and it also 
reinforces the Committee's apprehensions that such a situation was suitable to the vested 
interest and they had conveniently forgotten to lay  down rules and regulations for 
introducing proper command and control in the worki ng of the Trust.     The Committee 
would like to have a Report on the ARUNIM delineati ng its legal status and as well as the 
legality of the funds released to this organization  so far and the Ministry's response 
thereon. 
 

13 
 
CONCLUSION 
22. The Committee is pained to find that sensitivit y shown by Parliament to have made 
a pioneering law to provide much needed help and su ccour to the most vulnerable and 
needy sections of our society is being dealt in the  most insensitive and callous manner.  The 
manner in which this law is being implemented leave s much to be desired.  The absence of 
specific guidelines, rules, regulations, etc. on various aspects for enforcing the Act as per its 
letter and spirit, has bred to secrecy, scope for discretion and hence lack of transparency in 
the working of National Trust.  Thus, the Ministry due to reasons best known to it, failed to 
perform its responsibility as an administrative con troller as it did not carefully see that all 
the Guidelines, Rules and Regulations have been fra med.  More serious thing is that the 
Ministry, it appears, did not consult Legislative D epartment in vetting the Rules, 
Regulations as is usually done by all the Ministrie s.  Had it been done so, much of the 
problems pointed out by the Committee now may not have arisen at all.   
23. The Committee re-emphasizes that the Ministry s hould expedite framing the 
Recruitment Rules not only for the post of Chairman , National Trust but also for the 
officers and employees of the National Trust at the  earliest.  The Committee is of the view 
that this process can be completed in a fixed time schedule given that much ground work 
on the educational qualifications and experience re quired for the said post has already 
been done with help of DOPT.  Even the suggestions of the DoPT have not been properly 
ingrained into the existing criteria.  Further, not ifying the Rules would give the candidates 
an opportunity to know the requirements for the req uisite post apart from giving publicity 
to the working of the National Trust. 
 
24. The Committee recommends that the Ministry shou ld re-visit the Rules/  
Regulations framed under the National Trust for Wel fare of Persons with Autism, 
Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Dis abilities Act, 1999 and re-examine 
them in the light of the observations made by the C ommittee in the preceding paragraphs 
and effect necessary modifications as needed. 
 

14 
 
25 . The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may look into the possibility 
of increasing the Corpus Fund of the National Trust . In Committee’s view, lack of 
adequate funding should not be a limiting factor fo r the working of the National Trust for 
fulfilling its mandate.  Increased corpus is needed  urgently keeping in view the enhanced 
coverage of the schemes being operated by the National Trust.  
 
 26 .  The Committee is hopeful that the Ministry would ca rry out the recommendations 
of the Committee expeditiously under intimation to it. The Committee would further like to 
impress upon the Ministry that proper monitoring an d inspection are essential for the 
proper and effective implementation of Rules and Re gulations, and, stresses upon the 
Ministry to strengthen its enforcement mechanism to  ensure that the objectives of the 
Order are achieved.   
 