          C O S L  
  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
HUNDRED AND EIGHTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
                                  (Presented on 26th April, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                              NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2010/ Vaishaka,  1932  (Saka) 
188 


C O N T E N T S 
      
        PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION  OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
(ii) 
3. REPORT: 
I.     The State Emblem of India (Regulation of Use)  
        Rules, 2007 
 
II.    The Public Liability Insurance Rules, 1991 
 
1 - 5 
 
 
6 – 26 
 
4. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
106 -110 
5. MINUTES* 
 
 
   
 
.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be enclosed later 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
 LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   THE   24th SEPTEMBER 2009) 
 
 
 
1. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla  Chairperson 
2. Shri Motilal Vora     
3. Shri Ishwar Singh 
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
5. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
6. Shri Balvant alias Bal Apte  
7. Shrimati Maya Singh 
8. Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta 
9. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
10. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
11. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
12. Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
13. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
14. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
15. Shri Kumar Deepak Das   
 
    
 
S
ECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K.Singh, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
3. Shri Sameer Suryapani,  Deputy Director 
4. Shri  R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director 
5. Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director 
 
     
 
 (i) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairperson of the Committ ee on Subordinate Legislation, having 
been authorized by the Committee to pres ent the Report on its  behalf, do hereby 
present this One Hundred and Eighty-Eighth Report of the Committee. 
 
 1.2     The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 
22
nd April, 2010 
 
1.3 The matter examined by the Committee arose in the scrutiny of the State 
Emblem of India (Regulation of Use)  Rules, 2007 and the Public Liability 
Insurance Rules, 1991 and issues relating to them  along with the comments 
received from the Government.  The observations and recommendations of the 
Committee are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.  
 
.  
 
 
 
DR. (SHRIMATI) NAJMA A. HEPTULLA                     
                   
Chairperson 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
                                                                                                              Rajya Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI 
22nd April, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
The Public Liability Insurance Rules, 1991 
 
 The Central Government framed the P ublic Liability Insurance Rules, 1991 
(Annexure I)  under the  Public Liabi lity Insurance Act, 1991  (Annexure II) 
which is the first of its kind as it provides for an insurance policy to give an 
immediate relief to general public on th e principle of ‘NO FAULT LIABILITY’. 
With this objective, the Rules establis h a regime of prevention and providing 
immediate relief to the victims resulting fr om activities related to the handling of 
hazardous substances and makes owners legally liable for compensating any 
damage caused by them. Under  the rules,  the owner is required to assess the 
hazards of the installation take all preventi ve measures to minimize the risk and to 
reduce the extent of damage. The owners as well as authorities are required to be in 
total preparedness to fight any emergency at their installations.The Rules came into 
force on 15
th May, 1991. 
 
2. The first set of Rules, 'The Public  Liability Insurance Rules, 1991' have 
since gone through three amendments. The fi rst amendment to the Rules called the 
 Public Liability In surance (Amendment) Rules, 1991 was published & 
came into force on 20
th September, 1991 (Annexure III). The second amendment 
to these Rules  known as the Public Liability Insurance (Amendment) Rules, 1992 
came into force on 6
th February, 1992 (Annexure IV). The third amendment of 
these Rules known the Public Liability Insurance (Amendment) Rules, 1993 came 
into force on 23rd April, 1993 (Annexure V). 
3. The following aspects have been elaborated in the rules:- 
i) Procedure for claims for relief 
ii) Powers of the Collector 
iii) Application form for compensation 
iv) Procedure and manner of giving directions 
v) Form of  Notice 

vi) Extent of Liability of the Insurance 
 
 
The General Insurance Corporation (GIC ) is the insurer under the Act and 
has floated policies to this effect. It is  the responsibility of  the GIC to collect 
premium and money for the ERF. 
 
4. The Public Liability (Insurance) Rules, 1991 were examined and a 
questionnaire was forwarded to the Ministry of Environment & Forests on 12
th 
May, 1999 for furnishing their comments thereon. The comments received from the 
Ministry of Environment & Forests (Annexure VI)  were considered and taken up 
by the Committee subsequently. 
 
5. The Committee was informed that the rules have been laid on the Table of 
both the Houses of Parliament and if yes, the details in that regard, the Ministry 
informed in its written reply  that, 
"Three sets of rules and an amendment ha ve so far been notified under PLI Act 
dated May 1, 1991, September 20, 1991, February 5, 1992 and April 23, 1993, 
respectively. A notification dated 24
th March, 1992 and two notifications, one 
delegating powers under Section 9, 10, 11 and 12 and another authorization of 
powers under Section 13 and 18 were notifie d. All the notifications have been 
tabled in both the Houses of Parliament within the stipulated period."  
 
6.  Upon the query that whether all th e rules contemplated under the Public 
Liability Insurance Act have been framed, if yes, the details thereof and what are 
the rules/schemes that are required to be  framed under the said Act, the Ministry 
informed in its written reply  that, 
"So far following 4 sets of rules have been notified under the PLI Act: 
 
S.No. Date on 
which rules 
Details 

notified 
1. 1.5.91 Rules regarding applicati on for relief, documentation 
required powers of Collect or and establishment and 
administration of fund. (Rules 1 to 7) 
2. 20.9.91 Rules regarding procedure to adopted for issue of 
directions and manner of giving notice (Rules 8 & 9) 
3 6.2.92 Rules regarding extent of liability and contribution of 
the owner to the ERF (Rules 10 & 11) 
4. 23.4.93 Amendments to Rules 2, 6, 10 and 11" 
 
 
7.  On the issue  that any claim application shall be accompanied by a certificate 
about the date of birth or age of victim as per Rule 4 (iii) it was enquired what 
happens in case of person who does not have  any date of birth certificate? Whether 
Government have any objection to provide for alternate proof of age in the sub-rule 
keeping in view the fact that everybody ma y not have birth ce rtificate? In this 
regard it was informed in the written reply  that,  
"A certificate about the date of birth or age of victim is required to be submitted, 
however, any documentary proof of age could be tendered. This is required as the 
Collector has to verify age during grant of relief on account of loss of wages due to 
temporary partial disability of a fixed  amount of Rs.1,000 per month up to a 
maximum of 3 months. Additionally, a certi ficate of the employer regarding loss of 
wages is also required to be submitted (Rules dated May 1, 1991)." 
 
8. The Ministry in its written repl y has informed that a maximum of 
Rs.6,000/- depending on the actual damage can  be granted for any damage to 
private property as per the Act. Docume ntary proof is required to be produced 
which is verified by the Collector. The Ministry accepted the Committee's 
suggestion that if required an authority comp etent in this behalf for the same could 
be prescribed by the Collector. The Committee is in agreement with the view of the 

Ministry  that as the coll ector is vested with the pow ers of a Civil Court under the 
Act, procedure as contained in the Civil Procedure Code has to be followed. 
 
 
 
 
9.  The Ministry has agreed to the su ggestion made by the Committee  that a 
nominal charge based on charges applicable to issue of copies from documents kept 
in the record room of the Collectorate could be prescribed by the Collector. 
 
10.  Upon the query that Section 7A(3) of the Act envisages a scheme for 
administering the Environmental Relief Fund. Whether any such scheme has been 
notified? If so, the details in this regard, the Ministry commented that, 
"A scheme for administering the Environmen t Relief Fund (ERF) in the form of an 
amendment to the PLI Rules has been drafted. A Note for the Committee of 
Secretaries (COS) has also been drafte d for approval of an amendment to the 
General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1992. The COS Note envisages 
that the GIC would be the administrative authority to administer the ERF, however, 
this requires amendment of the 1972 Act as operator of a fund like the ERF is not 
envisaged as functions of the GIC and its  subsidiaries. On approval of the COS 
note the amendments already approved by the Advisory Committee will be 
notified." 
 
11. The Committee sought comments on Section 21 of the Act which empowers 
the Central Government to constitute an Advisory Committee on matters relating to 
insurance. Whether any such Committee has ever been constituted so far? If so 
what are the terms and conditions of rules? Further the term “Advisory Committee” 
has been defined in the Public Liability Insurance Rules, 1991 but the same has not 
been anywhere in the rules. What is the purpose of defining it in the rules? In this 
regard the Ministry in its written reply has stated that, 

"An Advisory Committee as envisaged unde r Section 21 of this Act was first 
constituted on 11th June, 1991. The Advisory Committee has been reconstituted on 
21.12.92, 13.9.96 and 10.01.97.. The following are the terms of reference of the 
Committee: 
1. Validity period, policy and premium amounts for insurance; 
2. Drawing up methodology for payment of insurance claims; 
3. Execution of the insurance scheme; 
4. Drawing up and execution of the Environment Relief Fund Scheme and 
payment of relief under the Scheme; and  
5. Amendments & policy changes, if required. 
The first set of rules entitled, “The P ublic Liability Insurance Rules, 1991" 
were notified on May 1, 1991. All definitions used in the Rules are defined in Rule 
2. All other rules notified subsequently where additional rules that were required to 
be prescribed. It was envisaged that the Advisory Committee would draft rules and 
procedure for conduct of its business which would need to be notified." 
 
12. The Committee discussed the matter w ith the representati ves of the State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh along with the representatives of  the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests and State Government of Andhra Pradesh on 7
th January, 
2000 at Hyderabad. A study note was prepared (Annexure VII ). 
 
13. During the course of the presentations as well as discussion, the following 
disabilities in  enforcing the provisions of  the Public Liability (Insurance) Act and 
the rules  and its effectiveness were brought to the notice of the Committee:- 
(i) The quantity limits prescribed under the Act in respect of the various 
hazardous substances need to be scraped for adequate coverage of the 
various units and as well as the tran sporters. Some of the industries take 
the plea that the threshold quantities are not exceeding and therefore 
they do not take the policy. There is no mechanism to check whether the 
limit is exceeding or not because whatever the units are taking as 

insurance the same are taken as corr ect by the authorities. There are no 
powers with the authorities to carry out any check in this regard. 
(ii) Under the Public Liability (Insurance) Act, an Environment Relief Fund 
has been created for the purpose of  payment of compensation beyond 
the insured amount and occupier is re quired to contribut e to this fund 
equal to the annual premium of the policy. But, the GIC Act needs to be 
amended because the GIC does not have the powers to hold the funds of 
this type. The Central Ministry of Environment and Forests has, 
however, taken steps and a note has been put up to the Committee of 
Secretaries for amendment of the Bu siness Act of GIC to enable the 
latter to handle the ERF. 
(iii) The list of chemicals covered under the Act which, at pesent is 179 
needs to be expanded to 689 and the list should form part of the Act.  
(iv) The existing period of 5 years for su bmission of an application for relief 
is too long for the Collectors to wait.  
(v) At present only 149 industries of la rge and small size fall under the 
PLIA. Out of these, 34 industries ar e presently closed and Government 
is not aware whether their policy ha s expired or not. The remaining 115 
industries have been taking the policie s. In actuality, the PLIA covers a 
very small portion of safety consciousness. It covers only 179 
substances which, are under very normal use. In fact the Act is like a 
drop in the ocean of safety manageme nt in the State. On the contrary, 
the other legislation on the subjec t of environment protection like the 
Environment Protection Act, the Acts  for Prevention of Air and Water 
Pollution and the Rules and Regulations framed thereunder are more 
effective. The Pollution Control Boards are much more effective 
agencies as the Rules clearly menti on about their role and the action, 
which can be taken by them. Secti on 33A of the Water Act and Section 
31A of the Air Act empowers issue of threat of closer of an industry in 
which case the response from the industry is very prompt.  

(vi) There is a tremendous amount of risk in the movement of hazardous 
substances. The Motor Vehicle Act is  not strong enough to control the 
movement of such material. Government of Andhra Pradesh has, 
however, given directions under Sec tion 5 of the Act to confiscate 
vehicle which are carrying effluent illegally. Central Government can 
consider strengthening of the Motor Vehicle Act for the whole country.  
(vii) The PLIA pertaining relief to the individual only but, there is damage to 
the environment also when accident takes place. The legislation is silent 
about this. The agencies of Gove rnment should get involved in the 
repair of such damages also and th e insurance cover should extent to 
such damage to environment as well.  
(viii) There was also a reference to the technical competence of the Collectors 
for handling applications for re lief and deciding the amount of 
compensation. Although the collectors were not facing any serious 
difficulties in deciding such cases but the view was that some technical 
assistance would definitely be helpful in speedy disposal of such cases. 
(ix) The Environment Protection Act does not have an implementing agency 
as on date. According to the repres entatives of the Government of 
Andhra Pradesh, the State Pollution Control Board should be the agency 
to implement the Environment Protection Act as well as the Public 
Liability (Insurance) Act and the Rule s etc. framed thereunder. Further, 
there were multiplicity of agencies  involved in the implementation of 
the provisions of law like the CCOE, the Chief Inspector of Factories, 
the OISD, the Central Board, all doing the same kind of job. In fact, it 
would be desirable that the entire re sponsibility is vested in the State 
Pollution Control Board and all the agencies should report to them they 
being technical expert.  
 
14. The Committee desired to know the brief public grievances that are 
formally received in a year and how many of them are being processed and 
redressed. The Committee was then assured of the supply of the said information . 

 
15.  The Committee disagrees with the Mi nistry explanation on question on the 
issue that any claim application shall be accompanied by a certificate about the date 
of birth or age of victim as per Rule 4 (iii).  The Committee was informed that birth 
certificate was generally available and ther e had been no problem on this account.  
But they however, agreed to revise the rule suitably so as to include other types of 
evidence also for ascertaining the age of the applicant. 
 
 
16. The Committee felt during the course of discussion the need for further 
examination of the subject matter during its visit to Calcutta.  Subsequently, the 
Committee proceeded on its study visit to Calcutta and had discussions with the 
representatives of the Depa rtment of Environment and Forests, Government of 
West Bengal, West Bengal Pollution Cont rol Board along with the representatives 
of the Union Ministry of Environm ent and Forests on 20.01.2000.  The study note 
was prepared (Annexure VIII). 
 
17. During the discussion the Committee was informed inter alia as follows: 
i)  The District Collector shall have all the power of Civil Court for taking 
evidence, enforcing attendance of witnesses, for making an award, 
determining the amount of relief etc. 
ii) The Act provides for a list of  179 chemicals and 3 categories of 
flammable gases with quantities th ereof which every owner handling 
therein shall take an insurance policy.  The Committee was informed 
that this list of chemicals and qu antity limit prescribed therefor, is 
required to be updated and should vary from place to place and time to 
time. 
iii)  The scope of the regulation needed to be expanded to include all highly 
toxic compounds.  Besides, concept of prescribing threshold quantities 
is required to be revised or scrapped.   

iv)  An Environmental Relief Fund wa s created under the Act for utilizing 
the same in case of emergency where claimed amount was more than 
the insured amount and the owner was unable to readily pay beyond that 
amount as also on policies beyond Rs  5 crores.  All owners were 
required to pay an amount equal to premium of policy to that fund. 
v)  The State Pollution Control Board grants ‘Consent to Establish’ (NOC) 
for new industries and ‘Consent to Op erate’ for existing industries.  
There were 8940 industries under the c onsent administration.  In order 
to provide a single window service to  a large number of small scale 
industries with less pollution poten tial.  The Board had, recently, 
delegated powers of granting the ‘Consent to Establish’ for all 
categories except some ‘super red categories and ‘consent to operate’ 
green categories to General Managers of the District I ndustries Centers.  
This also facilitated the Board to focus on grossly polluting industries.  
Thus, the Board was vigorously monitoring 201 such grossly polluting 
industries. 
vi) The State Department of Environment and Forests had conducted 
workshop for spreading awareness among the District. Collectors.  In all 
41 industries were initially identifie d in the State which fall under the 
purview of the Act.  Now, this list had been updated upto 65 industries.   
vii)  The Committee was apprised that 5 years time limit had been provided 
under that Act for claiming relief.  There was a suggestion that once the 
claim had been made, there should be time limit, say one year, for 
awarding the relief.  It was also  suggested that the methodology for 
arriving at short term and long term  damage to public health, property 
and environment and the methods of  ascribing these impacts to the 
incident should be clearly enunciated and funds for such studies might 
be allocated from the proposed Environmental Relief Fund.  
Alternatively, the entire cost may be borne by the industry. 
 

18. With a view to have more feedb ack on the subject, the matter was again 
discussed at Chennai during the visit of the Committee to Chennai with the 
representatives of Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board and the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests on the Act on 13 th July, 2001.  A study note was prepared 
(Annexure IX). 
 
19. While having discussion on the definition of the word “accident” it was 
observed by the Committee that accident  did not always means something which 
had happened suddenly it could be with th e continuous passage of time.  A view 
was expressed whether the pr ovision of the Act/Rules could be made to cover 
continuous injuries.  To this the represen tatives of the Central Ministry submitted 
that the scheme of the Act/ Rules did not allow such an interpretation of the word 
‘accident’.  It was further submitted that the word insurance in the Act envisage 
sudden accident. 
 
20. During discussions in Chennai the Committee observed that there was no 
provision in the Act/Rules which look afte r the remedial asp ect of the damage 
caused to the property/land by continuous ha ndling of hazardous substance.  The 
Committee observed that there was urgent need to bring a comprehensive Act to 
cover the remedial aspect of hazardous subs tance.  To that the representative of the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests responded th at the remedial aspect could be 
covered once National Environment Tribunal Act, was implemented by the Centre. 
 
21. Subsequently, on enquiring about th e provision of transportation of 
hazardous substance in the Motor Vehi cles Act, 1988, the Committee came to 
know that the provisions are not exhaustive in na ture leaving a scope for the State 
Government for leniency in the matter. 
 
22. The representatives of the Insurance Companies deposed before the 
Committee in Chennai that ge nerally industries are reluctant to take policy because 

of financial constraint.  At times they  did not also review the policy.  The 
Committee desired that there had to be strict monitoring of Pollution Control Board 
on such industries. 
 
23. During the course of the presenta tion and discussion in Chennai the 
following suggestions were received: 
 
(i) provision of Public Liability Insu rance Act/Rules may be extended to 
Hazardous Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989. 
 
(ii) (a) need to amend Public Liability Insurance Act to give more 
responsibilities to Factory inspecto rate as that authority is more 
conversant on the aspects of safety accident and hazardous 
management concern with handling hazardous chemicals. 
(b) factories inspectorate may also be given responsibility for off site 
emergency plans for storage and warehouses. 
 
  (iii)      list of Hazardous substances may be expanded. 
 
(iv) u/s 9,10,11, and 12 of the Public Liability Insurance (PLI) Act powers 
should be delegated to State. 
 
24. A questionnaire was handed over to the representative of the State 
Government and Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board for sending their comments 
on the points raised in the questionnaire. The comments/replies were forwarded 
vide letter dated 30.07.2001 (Annexure X).  
 
 
25. The Committee wanted to know about the mechanism the State 
Government is adopting for identificati on of units handling hazardous chemicals 
above the prescribed limits under the Rules. In this regard it was stated in the 
written replies that, 
  
"All industries in Tamil Nadu are required to obtain th e consent of the Tamil Nadu 
Pollution Control Board under Section 21 of  the Air (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1981 and under Section 25/26 of Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1974 for utilizing st acks/outlets for discharging treated 

emissions/effluents. In case  of the existing units the quantity of chemicals handled 
by the units as raw materials are verified  based on the products manufactured. The 
material balance is checked. In the case the said chemical is listed in Part 1 of the 
Table of the Public Liability Insurance Ac t, 1991 or in case it satisfies the criteria 
specified for flammable substance specified in Part II, the concerned industry is 
requested to take a policy under Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991. In case of 
new units the products to be manufactured  and the raw material requirement in 
verified to identify the us e of production of Hazardous substance listed in the 
Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991. 
 
Necessary condition is imposed in the consent order to the effect that all hazardous 
chemicals listed under the Public Liability  Insurance Act, 1 991 is handled with a 
valid Public Liability Insurance Policy." 
 
 
26. Upon the query whether the existing pr escribed limit for chemicals requires 
to be amended for adequate coverage of various units as well as transporters, the 
State Government  stated in its written replies that, 
 "(a) ............. It is felt that the number of chemicals listed in the Table of Public 
Liability Insurance Act, 1991 may be increased and threshold limit may be 
specified to cover few more toxic chemical s which as been appended to the list of 
chemicals in schedule I of the Manufac ture, Storage and Import of Hazardous 
Chemicals Rules, 1989 as amended in 2000. 
 The Part II of the table may be ex tended to cover the 5 categories of 
flammable substances listed in schedule 3 of  Manufacture, Storage and Import of 
Hazardous Chemicals Rules, 1989 as amended in 2000. 
(b)  The threshold limit specified in Part  II of the Table of Public Liability 
Insurance Act, 1991 is 15 tonne for flammable gases, 1000 tonne for highly 
flammable liquid and 25 T  for flammable liquids. However, to cover tankers 
transporting these chemicals it is felt t hat the Committee may consider bringing 
down the threshold limit as follows:- 
 

 (i) Flammable gases  5 Tonne 
 (ii) Flammable Liquids  10 Tonne 
 (iii) Highly flammable liquids 5 Tonne" 
 
 
 
27. Upon the query whether the State G overnment proposes any addition or  
deletion in the list of chemicals covered under the Act/Rules, it was commented in 
the written replies  that, 
" the number of chemicals listed for coverage  under Public Liability Insurance Act, 
1991 may be increased by studying the toxi c characteristics of the 684 Hazardous 
Chemicals listed in sche dule I of the Manufactur e, Storage and Import of 
Hazardous Chemicals Rules, 1989 as amended in 2000. 
 Units handling metals and metallic compounds of metals such as cobalt and 
nickel above a limit of 1 tonne are covered under the Acts. Metal as such are not 
hazardous but metal powders are hazar dous and possess pyrolytic properties. 
Hence the Committee may consider to recommend the following hazardous 
substance for coverage under Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991. 
a) Aluminum Powder 
b) Magnesium Powder 
c) Tungsten Powder 
d) White, Yellow and Red phosphorous" 
 
 
 
28. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that a period of five 
years for submission of application for relief under the rule is on higher side, 
information was sought on whether the State Government proposes any 
modification in this regard. In this regard it was stated in the written replies that, 
 
"All accidents involving fla mmable or corrosive hazardous  chemicals could either 
have immediate effect, but the effect of chemicals possessing eco-toxic effects could 
be felt only over a period of time after the accident has occurred. Hence, the period 
of 5 years appears to be a reasonable time frame." 
 

29. Upon the query whether the provisions of the rule are adequate for 
confiscation of vehicles transporting h azardous chemicals, if not, what amendment 
the State Government proposes in the Motor Vehicle Act/Rules, etc., it was 
informed in the written replies that, 
 
"The Section 11 of the Public Liability Insurance Act has made provisions for 
persons authorized by the State Gover nment to seize vehicles transporting 
hazardous chemicals in contravention to the provisions of Public Liability 
Insurance Act, 1991. The Section 11.2 addresses the issue of dealing with larger 
consignments which is impracticable to se ize. However, the seizing of vehicles has 
to be carried out in coordination with the Transport Commissioners and Regional 
Transport Officers. Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 may be amended to specify 
the role for Transport Departmen,. Transport Commissioners and the Regional 
Transport officials in dealing with surface transport of hazardous chemicals. 
The Motor Vehicles Act/Rules may be amende d to ensure that all consignments of 
hazardous chemicals are transported by r oad only with a valid  Public Liability 
Insurance Policy." 
 
 
30. As the existing rules do not cover damage to the environment, the 
Committee wanted to know the State Gove rnment response in this regard.  
Accordingly, it was informed that, 
"As the Public Liability Insurance Ac t, 1991 is focused towards providing 
immediate relief to Public who may be affe cted by an accident on the principle of 
no fault liability the purpose of the Act may be restricted to coverage of accidents 
which occur while handling hazardous substance. 
The aspect of providing compensation on the principle of no faults for death, injury 
and to environment due to an accident is covered under Section 3 of National 
Environment Tribunal Act, 1995. 
To exercise the powers conferred under the provisions of the National Environment 
Tribunal Act, 1991, the Central Government by  notification is required to establish 

a tribunal. It is suggested that the National Environment Tribunal  may be 
established early to deal with issues concerning damage to environment." 
 
31. The Committee wanted to know as th e Collectors are directly responsible 
for implementation of this rule, whether they are fully equipped in this regard if not 
what are your suggestions?  It was informed that, 
 
"The Collectors are better equipped to deal with matters in volving revenue and 
administration authorities, towards establishi ng the identity of the person affected 
by the accident, assessing the extent of damage to agricultural land private 
property. However, the District Collectors would require technical assistance from 
authorities such as Inspectorate of Factories and State Pollution Board for 
identification of units handling hazardous substance and to assess the adequacy of 
safety requirements." 
 
32. Under the existing rules, for the purpos e of making a claim, birth certificate 
is required as proof of age.  Since a birth certificate is not available with every one, 
the Committee wanted to know what are th e views of the State Government with 
regard to alternative proof pertaining to age.  It was stated in this regard that, 
 
"In the absence of  a birth certificate, it is  suggested that the pe rson affected by an 
accident may obtain a certificate re garding age from the local village 
administrative officer, revenue inspector or from a notary public." 
 
33. In addition replies to partic ulars sought by the Committee on 
implementation of Public Liability Insu rance Act, 1991 during the discussion held 
on 13-7-2001 are as follows (Annexure XI): 
 
I Whether any awareness programmes conducted in pollution prone 
Areas about relief measures? 
 
 "The ETI (Environmental Training Institute) of Tamil Nadu Pollution 
Control Board has conducted training programmes on Hazardous Waste 

Management, Hazardous Chemicals Management and on Public Liability Insurance 
for industries located in Manali, C uddalore, Ranipet and Hosur Industrial 
Complexes. Industrial Asso ciations and few NGOs al so attended the programme. 
Several training programmes on proper treatm ent and disposal of effluents and on 
environmental problem concerned with bl eaching and dyeing units were conducted 
at Karur and Tirupur. In these programmes  the aspects of relief measures were 
covered as a part of training. Besides thes e, training courses are conducted in the 
ETI of Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Bo ard, regarding implementation of Water 
(Prevention & Control of Pollution) Ac t and Air (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act. The course also covers details on legal provisions available for 
mitigating pollution and on procedures  for filing cases. NGOs are regular 
participants in these courses organize d by Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board. 
The Environmental Training Institute of  Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board has 
conducted training programs on Public Liab ility Insurance Act, 1991. As per the 
suggestion of the Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Tamil Nadu 
Pollution Control Board will take necessary  steps to carryout exclusive awareness 
programme in Pollution prone areas in co -ordination with the local NGOs on relief 
measures." 
 
 
II What are the measures taken by Pollution Control Board to prevent 
tannery pollution? 
 
 "Due to the persistent efforts taken by Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board 
tanneries have provided Physico-Chemi cal and biological treatment units. The 
Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board is m onitoring the performance of Effluent 
Treatment Plants installed by tannerie s..........The Tamil Nadu Pollution Control 
Board is also ensuring that the tanner ies are implementing the cleaner technology 
options suggested by UNIDO to bring down the level of Total Dissolved Solids in 
the effluent......Further, renewal of cons ent order under Water (Prevention & 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 is considered only to those tann eries which have 
achieved a total dissolved solids limit of 7500 or below with a condition that 

proposal with time schedule for impleme nting reverse osmosis plant shall be 
furnished within 3 months and to implement the same within a period of one year."  
 
 
III Details of Action Taken as per Court Orders regarding Tannery 
Pollution. 
 
 "The Vellore Citizens Welfare Forum,  Vellore had filed a WP (Civil) No. 
914/91 in Honorable Supreme Court of India. .............The WP (Civil) No. 914/91 
has been renumbered as WP 13433 of 1996 in the High Court of Madras. The 
Honorable green bench in its orders dated 16-10-1996 and 12-12-1996 has passed 
the following orders in case of Tanneries  located away from prohibited area and 
tanneries located within one kilometer from specific water sources mentioned in 
G.O.Ms. No.213, E&F Dept. dated 30-3-1989 within prohibited area respectively. 
The tanneries, which have setup Ef fluent Treatment Plants either 
individually or jointly are directed to a pproach the Board for the issue of consents. 
The consents will be issued after inspect ion to these units to check whether the 
Effluent Treatment Plants or Common E ffluent Treatment Plants are setup. The 
issue of consent is with a condition that the functi oning of Effluent Treatment 
Plants or Common Effluent Treatment Plan t must be stabilized within a period of 
three months failing which the consent is liable to be with drawn and the units are 
liable to be closed. 
To implement the Honorable Supreme Court directives, the Central 
Government have constituted an authority namely “Loss of Ecology (P&PC) 
Authority for the State of Tamil Nadu”  under section 3(3) of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986. The District Co llector, Vellore has also formed an 
Environment Protection Fund from the amount of Rs. 10,000/- each remitted by 
tanneries of Vellore District. The district Collector, Vellore, has sealed the units, 
which have not remitted Rs. 10,000/-." 
 
 
IV Delegation of Powers under Section 6,7,8,9,10 regarding power of entry 
search etc. 

 
 "In the Gazette Notification S. O.No. 282 (E), dated 19-3-1993 MOEF, 
Government of India has delegated the State Pollution Control Board with powers 
relating to section 13  and section 18 of the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 as 
specified below:- 
Section 13  - Power to make applicati on to court restraining owners from 
handling hazardous substance. 
Section 18  - Power to take cognizance of  offence and issue notice in Form II 
under clause b of section 18 of the said Act. 
 Though powers vested under section 9C (Power to call for information) 
Section 10 (Power of entry and inspection)  are not delegated to State Pollution 
Control Boards, the Boards have powers for entry and inspection conferred to it 
under the provisions of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, and 
Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981." 
 
 
V Vehicles Carrying Hazardous Chemicals should use yellow light. 
 
 "To prevent traffic accidents and to ensure safety during transportation of 
hazardous goods, it is suggested that vehi cle carrying/transporting hazardous goods 
should have an identity, so that other moto rists using the road are made aware of 
such transportation. Hence, such vehicles transporting dangerous goods should be 
fixed with flash yellow lights, similar to  the blue light fixed in an ambulance. 
Amendments are required to be made in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1986/Motor 
Vehicles Rules, 1988 which is administered by the Ministry of Surface Transport." 
 
VI National Environment Tribunal Act has to be enforced by setting 
tribunals under the act. 
 
 "........The National Environmental Tri bunal Act, 1995 was enacted with the 
objective to provide for strict liability for damages arising out of any accident 
occurring while handling a ny hazardous substance and for establishment of a 
National Environment Tribunal for effectiv e and expeditious disposal of cases 
arising from such accidents to award comp ensation death of, or, injury to persons 

and damages property and the environmen t effected by such accidents and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto........ 
The Ministry of Environment and Fo rests, Government of India is 
considering setting up of a National  Environment Protection Authority which 
could, inter-alia, be entrusted with the functions of the National Environmental 
Tribunal." 
 
 
 
 
General observations and recommendations of the Committee 
34. Considering the  tardy implementati on of the Rules and  having analysed 
the relevant inputs and inte ractions with the Union Mi nistry of Environment & 
Forests and the representatives of the select State Governments, the Committee 
observes the following: 
 
35. The Committee  notes that under the ex isting rules, for the purpose of 
making a claim, birth certificate is re quired as proof of age. Since a birth 
certificate is not available with every one, the Committee suggests that  
alternative proof pertaining to age such  as certificate regar ding age from the 
local village administrative officer, revenue inspector or from a notary public 
must be accepted for the purpose.   
 
36.  The Committee suggests that  proper maintenance of  public grievances 
that are formally received in a year  and how many of them are being 
processed and redressed should be main tained by the State Governments and 
their status must be evaluated regularly till final disposal. 
 
37.  The Committee recommends that effect ive steps must be taken for the  
scheme for administering the Environm ental Relief Fund as envisaged under 
Section 7A(3) of the Act and should be notified for necessary actions. 

 
38.  The Committee  recommends that as envisaged in Section 21 of the Act 
which empowers the Central Governme nt to constitute an Advisory 
Committee on matters relating to insura nce and  which would draft rules and 
procedure for conduct of its business whic h would need to be notified  must 
function swiftly and monitor efficiently.  
 
39. The Committee notes that the quant ity limits prescribed under the Act 
in respect of the various hazardous substances need to be scraped for adequate 
coverage of the various units and as well as the transporters. Some of the 
industries take the plea that the thres hold quantities are not exceeding and 
therefore they do not take the policy. The Committee recommends that the 
threshold limit with regard to quantities of hazardous substances as 
prescribed at present must be reevalua ted and  a competent Authority must  
be entrusted with the powers to keep  a check on the evasion from taking 
insurance policies by some industries by formulating an effective mechanism.  
 
40. The Committee recommends that necessa ry action must be taken on a 
priority basis so that the  Environmen t Relief Fund created for the purpose of 
payment of compensation beyond the insured amount can be handled in an 
efficient manner. 
 
41.  The Committee suggests that the Mo tor Vehicles Act must be made 
very strong with regard to control the movement of hazardous substances as 
there is a tremendous amount of risk  in these movements and provisions 
should be  exhaustive in nature so as not leaving a scope for the State 
Government for leniency in the matter. 
  
42. The Committee notes that relief  is  given to the indi vidual only but, 
there is damage to the environment also  when accident takes place. There was 
no provision in the Act/Rules which l ook after the remedial aspect of the 

damage caused to the property/land by  continuous handling of hazardous 
substance. The legislation is silent abou t this  and as such  steps should be 
taken so that the insurance cover extent s to such damage to environment as 
well and suggests that there is a urgent need to bring a comprehensive Act to 
cover the remedial aspect of hazardous substance.   
 
43.  The Committee recommends that th e list of chemicals covered under 
the Act needs to be expanded and the list should form part of the Act.  
 
44.  The Committee suggests that the exis ting period for submission of an 
application for relief is too long for th e Collectors to wait and steps must be 
taken to  fix a  more appropriate time period for effective implementation of 
the Rules, separately for hazardous chem icals having immediate effect and   
chemicals possessing eco-toxic effects which is felt over a longer period of time. 
Once the claim had been made, there should  be time limit, say one year, for 
awarding the relief.   
 
45. The Committee suggests that the me thodology for arriving at short 
term and long term damage to public health, property and environment and 
the methods of ascribing these impacts to the incident should be clearly 
enunciated and funds for such studies mi ght be allocated from the proposed 
Environmental Relief Fund,  alternatively, the entire cost may be borne by the 
industry. 
 
46.  The Committee observes that genera lly industries are reluctant to take 
policy because of financial constraint a nd that  at times they did not also 
review the policy.  The Committee desires that there had to be strict 
monitoring of Pollution Control Board on such industries. 
 

47. The Committee suggests that the provision of Public Liability 
Insurance Act/Rules may be extended to Hazardous Wastes (Management and 
Handling) Rules, 1989. 
 
 48. The Committee suggests that necessary  amendments should be made to 
the  Public Liability Insurance Act to give more responsibilities to Factory 
inspectorate as that authority is more conversant on the aspects of safety 
accident and hazardous management  concern with handling hazardous 
chemicals and  factories inspectorate ma y also be given res ponsibility for off 
site emergency plans for storage and warehouses. 
 
49.  The Committee recommends that training programmes should be 
conducted on Hazardous Waste Ma nagement, Hazardous Chemicals 
Management and on Public Liability Insurance for  various industries, 
industrial associations and NGOs. 
 
50.    The Committee further suggests that steps must be taken to ensure that 
the tanneries are implementing the cl eaner technology options suggested by 
UNIDO to bring down the level of Total Dissolved Solids in the effluents. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
State Emblem of India (Regulation of Use) Rules, 2007 
 
 The State Emblem of India (Regulation of Use) Rules, 2007  (Annexure I) have 
been framed under State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Act, 2005  
(Annexure II). The said Rules have been framed to regulate the use of the State Emblem 
of India in official seals, on stationery, vehicles and public buildings and for various other 
purposes. 
 
2. Due to the importance of the Rules the Committee decided to take up for 
examination of the said Rules and a questionnaire on it was forwarded to the Ministry of 
Home Affairs on 21 st April, 2009.  The Ministry of Home Affairs furnished their 
comments/clarifications on the points raised in the questionnaire vide their OM dated 17 th 
July, 2009 (Annexure III). The points raised by the Committee and the comments of the 
Ministry are reproduced below: 
 
(1) Sub-Rule 4 of Rule 10:   
 Sub-Rule 4 of Rule 10 states that stationery including letter heads, visiting cards 
and greeting cards with emblem printed or  embossed on  it shall not bear words like 
Advocate, Editor, Chartered Accountant  with the name of the person authorized to use 
the emblem under these rules on the stationery. 
 
 The Committee was of the opinion that instead of making mention of few 
professions, it would be appropriate to state that ‘no professional qualification or priv ate 
profession shall be mentioned with the name wherein emblem is also embossed or printed 
on a stationery item’. 
 
 In response the Ministry agreed with the suggestion of the Committee that instead 
of making mention of few professions, it may be appropriate to state that ‘no professional 
qualification or private profession shall be mentioned with the name wherein emblem is 
also embossed or printed on a stationery item’. 

  
 
(2) Explanation to Schedule-I 
 
 In t he “Explanation” below the Schedule -I the term ‘officer’ is def ined as a 
gazetted officer of Central Government or the State Government/U nion Territory  
Administration only. 
 
 The committee was of the strong view that the offi cers of the Parliament of India 
and Judiciary should have been taken into account while defining officers. The 
Committee, accordingly sought to know as to whether the Government had any objection 
in amending the above provision. 
 
 In response the Minis try stated that as indicated  in Schedule -I the office and 
officers of the Parliament and Judiciary are entitled to use the State Emblem . However to 
further clarify the issue the Ministry has agreed to modify the ‘Explanation’ to Schedule-I 
as follows:- 
“Explanation-for the purpose of this Schedule, 
the expression ‘office r’ shall mean a gazetted 
officer”’. 
  
(3)       Schedule-II: Part I 
 The Committee wanted to know the reasons why the spare car of the Vice -
President of India has not been included in the list in Schedule II. 
 
 In response the Ministry stated that the use of the insignia of the State Emblem on 
the spare car has been allowed exclusively in the case of the spare car following the car 
of the President. It is not considered necessary to allow the use  of the State Emblem on 
the spare car following the cars of other VVIPs. 
 
 The Committee was not satisfied with reply given by the Ministry and drew 
attention to sub-clause 3 of Article 65 of the Constitution of India which reads as follow:- 

  
 
“The Vice Pre sident shall, during and in respect of the period 
while he is so acting as, or discharging the functions of, President, 
have all the powers and immunities of the President and be entitled 
to such emoluments, allowances and privileges as  may be 
determined b y Parliament  by l aw and, until provision in that 
behalf is so made, such emoluments allowances and privileges as 
are specified in the Second Schedule” 
 
 The Committee felt that the logic of providing a spare car to Hon’ble Vice 
President is to ensure that he is always sitted in appropriate vehicle befitting his 
constitutional status. In case, the main vehicle fails the spare car will be used by the 
Hon’ble Vice President which is exclusively meant for him. Therefore, making 
distinction between the spare car  of Hon’ble President and Hon’ble Vice President of 
India without having any valid reason therefore seems inappropriate.  
 
(4) Schedule-III 
 
 Schedule III provides for the use of National Emblem for other purposes and inter 
alia mentions about the official  publication of Executive organ i.e. Central Ministries 
only. 
 
 The Committee in this regard wanted to know the reasons why the Emblem 
should not be used in the official publications of all the offices specified in Schedule I 
including the offices of Parliament of India and Judiciary.  
 
 The Ministry in its reply informed the Committee that part (iii) and (iv) under 
Schedule III state that the Emblem can be used in official publications of the 
Government; and films and documentaries produced by the Governme nt. The intention is 
that the term ‘Government’ includes all the offices mentioned in Schedule I, including the 
Parliament, Judiciary, Election Commission, UPSC, etc. However, since the Committee 
had drawn specific attention to the point, the Ministry agreed to modify the ‘Explanation’ 
under Schedule III which defines the term ‘Government’ by the following:- 

  
 
‘For the purpose of this Schedule, the “Government”  includes the 
Central Government, State Governments, U nion Territory 
Administrations and other offices mentioned in ‘Schedule I’ 
 
(5) The Committee further sought clarification as to whether the Commissions 
established under the Constitution can use the National Emblem. 
 
 The Ministry in its reply clarified that as per point (xv) and (xvi) under Schedul e I 
the National Emblem can be used by Com mission and authorities consti tuted or 
established by an Act of Parliament, the Central Government/State Government/Union 
Territory. Thus a provision is already there for the use of the State Emblem by other 
Commissions constituted under the provisions of the Constitution.  
 
3 The Committee considered the replies of the Ministry of Home Affairs to the 
points forwarded to them. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry 
in pursuance to its suggestions have agreed to take action as follows: 
 
(i) In Rule 10 (4), to state that no professional qualification or private 
profession shall be mentioned with the  persons name where State  
Emblem is also embossed or printed on a stationery item.  
(ii) In E xplanation to Schedul e-I, stating that for the purpose of this 
Schedule, the expression ‘officer’ shall mean a gazetted officer. In the 
existing rules, ‘officer’ is de fined as a gazetted officer of the Central 
Government or the State Government/  Union Territory  Administration 
only.  
(iii) In E xplanation to Schedule III, to state that for the purpose of this 
Schedule, the ‘Government’ includes the Central Government, State 
Government, Union territory Administration and other offices mentioned 
in Schedule I. 
 

  
The Committee is hopeful  that the Ministry would carry ou t the above 
amendments, expeditiously, under intimation to it. However, the Committee is 
not satisfied with the explanation furnished  by the Ministry  for excluding the 
spare car of the Hon’ble Vice President in the list in Sc hedule II. The Committee 
therefore, strongly recommends, that in view of  his constitutional privilege that 
he enjoys, the Rules be suitably amended to allow the use of the State Emblem in 
the spare car of the Hon’ble Vice President.  