Com 1-I 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITT!]JB ON SUBORDINATB 
LEGISLATION 
TWELFTH REPORT 
(Presented on the 30th March, 1972) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 197:a 

• 
• 
CO~TEt\TS 
r. COMPOS IT!• >:-: Ol' CO.\I'IITTI!E 
2, REPORT-
r. Introduction 
II. The Monopolies and Rcstricuve Trade Practices 
(Information) Rul~s, 1971 (l;SR 607 of 1971) 
IIT, The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Pracuces 
(Amenc.lmenc) Rules, 1971 (GSR 672 of 1971) . 
1 v, The Conuacc Labour (Kegulation and Abolition) 
Central Rules, 1971 (GSR 191 of 1971) 
J. t\!'!'ENDIX-
PAR.\ ~o~. PAGES 
(i) 
I-~ 
s-n I-) 
I2-I6 3-4 
17-33 s-8 
9-IS 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION 
CHAIRMAN 
1. Shri Jaisukhlal Hathi 
MEMBERS 
::!. Shri M. Anandam 
3. Shri T. V. Anandan 
4. Shri Sriman Prafulla Goswami 
5. Shri U. K. Lakshmana Gowda 
6. Sbri Syed Hussain 
7. Shri B. V. Abdulla Koya 
8. Shri Nawal Kishore 
9. Shri Mulka Govinda Reddy 
10. Shri Dwijendralal Sen Gupta 
11. Shri N. K. Shejwalkar 
12. Shri Awadheshwar Prasad Sinha 
13. Shri Swaisingh Sisodia 
14. Shri T. K. Srinivasan 
IS. Shri ~hyam Lal Yadav. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri M. S. Panigrahi, Deputy Secretary. 
Shri Sudarshan Agarwal, Deputy Secretary. 
Shri M. K. Jain, Under Secretary. 
ii 
• I 

REPORT 
I 
INTRODUCTION 
L the Ch::tirman of the Committee 0n Subordinate Legislation, as autho­
ri.,ed by the Committee, present on its bchaif the Iwclfrh Report of the 
Committee. 
2. Subsequenl to the presentation of its Eleventh Report, 232 'orders• 
were examined. Tht! Committee held 5 sittings and considered and adop­
ted the Report at its sitting held on 28th March, 1972· 
3. During the course of examination of various 'orders' the Committee 
also heard the representatives of the Department of Company Affairs and 
the Ministry cf Labour, Employment and Rehabilitation (Department of 
Labour and Employment) , at its sittings held on the 9th November. 1971, 
anJ 9th February. 1972. respectively . 
4. Observations of the Committee on matters arising out of the exa­
mination of tnc 'orders' \\hich, in the opinion of the Committee. should be 
brought to the notice of the House. together with the recommendations of 
the Comm!ttee thereon. arc contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the 
Report. 
II 
THE MONOPOUES AND RFSTRlCTIVE TRADf' 'PRACTICES 
(INFORMATION) RULES, 1971 (GSR 607 OF 1971) 
5. Rule 2 of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices (Informa­
tion) 1971. provides as follows·-
''2. Information to be furnished to the Central Government.­
( 1) Whenever any undertaking is called upon, under ser.tion 43 of the 
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practi<::es Act, 1969, to furnish to 
the Central Governm~nt information c0ncerning the activitie<> carried 
on by it. the connection between it and any other undertaking or any 
other matter, such undertaking shall furnish the information called for 
at such intervals and within such time as may be specified by that Gov-
ernment. 
(2) Where any such undertaking is called upon to furnish to the 
Central Government information with regard to all or any of the fol­
lowing matters. namely. its organisation, business, cost of production,. 

2 
conduct, trade practice or management, such information shall be 
furnished in the form specified in the Schedule to these rules or in 
such part thereof as may be appropriate in relation to the informa­
tion called for by that Government." 
6. Sections 43 and 67 (2) (b) of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade 
;practi<:es Act, 1969, under which these Rules have been made, provide as 
foUows:--
"43. Power to call for information.-Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Central 
Government may, by a general or special order, call upon any under­
taking to furnish to that Government periodically or as and when re­
quired any information concerning the activities carried on by the 
undettaking, the connection between it and any other undertaking, in­
cluding wch other information relating to its organisation, business, 
cost of production, conduct, trade practice or management, as may be 
prescribed to enable that Government to carry out the purposes of 
this Act." 
"67. Power to make rules.-(1) The Central Government may. by 
tlotification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the pur­
poses of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow­
ing matters, namely:-
(a) * * * * * * * * * 
(b) the particulars to be furnished under this Act and the 
form and manner in which and the intervals within which they 
may he furnished." 
7. It was observed that-
(l) whereas section 43 prov1ded that the information might be 
asked only on matterc.; specified therein, sub-rule (1) of the Rule re­
quired information to be furnished "on any other matter" also. Be­
sides being too general the words appeared to widen the scope of the 
provisions of section 43; 
(2) sub-rule (I) requires that the information called for should 
be furnis~ed "at such intervals and \\ ithin such time as may be speci­
fied" by the Central Government Section 67 (2) (b) of the Act, how­
e\cr, provided that the intervals wi·Jun which the information should 
be furnished should be prescribed by rules. In view of this provision 
the rule did nGt appear to be in conformity with the Act. 

3 
8. The above mentioned two points were 
Department of Company Afiairs for comments. 
'J)artment stated as follows:-
therefore referred to the 
On the first point, the De-
"This Department is of view that the expression 'any other 
matter' in Rule 2(1) of the aforesaid Rules does 11ot widen the scope of 
section 43 of the Act, under which this rule is issued as tbe said ex­
pr~ssiun refers only to matte1s specified in that section i.e. information 
relating to organisation, business, cost of production, etc. of the under­
takin,g. The provision therefore, is in conformity with section 43 of 
the M.R.T.P. Act, 1969." 
9. The Committee was not convinced with the above reply of the De­
partment of Company Afiairs. It, therefore, heard the representatives of 
the Departmenl of Company Affairs for further clarification at its sitting 
held on 9th N ovcmber, 1971. After considering the views expressed by 
the representatives of the Department concerned, the Committee suggests 
that for the words "or any other matter" occurring in sub-rule ( 1) of rule 2 
of the Rules under consideration, the matters on which information could 
be called, as enumerated in section 43 of the Monopolies and Restrictive 
Trade Practices Act, 1969, should be spe<:ificd in the Rule itself. 
10. The Committee notes that the representatives of the Department 
have agreed to the suggestion. 
11. A!' regards the second point about specifying in the rule itself the 
intervals ~nd the time within which the information should be furnished, 
the Committee notes from the reply of the Department that Government 
are taking steps to amend the rule accordingly. 
m 
THE MONOPOLIES AND RESTRICTIVE TRADE PRACTICES 
{AMENDMENT) RULES, 1971 (GSR 672 OF 1971). 
12. Rule 4A of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Rules, 
1970, provides ns follows:-
"4A. Publication of general notice relating to notice under sec­
tion 21 or application under section 22 or 23.-( 1) Before giving a 
notice under sub-section (I) of section 21 or making an application 
under sub-~ection (2) of section 22 or s·ub-section (2), or sub-section 
(4), of ~ection 23, there shall be issued, by or on behalf of the person 
giving the notice or making the application, as the case may be, a 
general notice to the members of the public indicating therein the sub­
stance of the notice which is proposed to be given under sub-section (1}. 

4 
of section 21 or the application \\ hich is proposed to be made under 
section 22 or section 23, as the case may be, and stating therein that 
any person interested in the mattct m.ty, if he so desires, intimate to 
the Ct-ntral Government jn the Department of Company Affairs within 
fourteen days frorr ... e date of publication ot such general notice, his 
views •vith re~ard to the proposal, contained in the notice or in the ap­
plicaOun, and also the nature of his interest therein . . ~ 
(2) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the pen .. on 
interested in the matter was prevented by sulficient cause for intima­
ting his views within the said period of fourteen days, permit such 
person to intimate his views within a further period not exceeding 
fourteen dnys. 
(3) Every publication referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be made at 
least once in a journal relating to trade in lndia and at least once in an 
English daily newspaper circulating in the whole, or substantially the 
whole, of India. 
(4) Copies of every such publication together with a certificate 
by the person making such publication as to the date of publication 
thereof shall be attached to the notice or application, as the case may 
be.'' 
13. It was fdt that the publication of the general notice referred to in 
sub-rule (3) of rule 4A of the Rules mentioned above should not be res­
tricted only to an English daily newspaper but the notice should be publish­
ed in a larger number ot newspapers including regional language .papers for 
the information of a \\ider section of the public. 
14. The Committee notes that the representatives of the Department 
of Company Affairs who appe.tred before it at its sitting held on 9th Nov­
ember, i 971 ~tated that Government intended to provide for the publica­
tion of the notice in regional language newspapers also. 
15. During the evidence of the representatives of the Department of Com~ 
pany Affairs, it was also suggested that besides the applicant, Government 
should publish the notice . so that wider publicity was given to the notice. 
The represent<•tives of the Department stated as follows:-
"We have also in mind prescribing some particulars to be men­
tioned in the advertisement. It should not be merely that an applica­
tion has been made for expansion. It should give some more details 
on the lines of the advertisements of the Monopolies Commission 
when it take up enquiries-what the application really connotes, whal 
the broad features of the proposal are etc. etc." 
16. The Committee notes the assurance of the Department. 

 

5 
IV 
THJ:::. CO:STRACT LABOUR (REGULATIO~ AI\D ABOLITI01';) 
('E!_\TRAL RULES, 1971 tGSR 191 OF 19'"'1). 
17. 'I he above mentioned Rules have been framed by the Central Gov­
ernment in exercise of the powers conferred by section 35 of the Contract 
Labour (Rcgu!ation nnd Abolition) Act, llJ70. 
18. The Committee examined th~.: representatives of the : ~'nistry of 
Labour, Employment and Rehabilitation (Department o ~ l abour and Em­
ploym"nt) on 9th F<.:bruary, 1972, on the points arising ( !. of the Rules. 
The points raised together with the Committee'' coml-, ·nts ther,:nn are 
contained in tl1e succeeding paragraphs. 
19. Rille 5.-This rule provides as follows:-
"Resignation.-A member of the !Joard, not being an ex­
officio member, may resign his office by a Jetter in writmg addressed 
to the Central Government and on such resignation being accepted by 
that Government, his onice shall fall vacant on the date on which such 
resignation is accepted.'' 
20. The n:le. however, does not specify the time limit within whi-ch the 
resignation of a member of the Central Advisory Contract Labour Board 
constituted under section 3 of the Act, JS to be accepted by the Central GO\­
emment. It was felt that in the absence of any such time limit having 
been prescribed in this rule, a member of the Board may be put to incon· 
venience m certain circumstances and as such some time limit, say of a 
month, should be; spec1fied in the rule for the acceptance of the resignation 
of a member of the Board. 
21. The point was accordingly taken up with the Ministry of Labour, 
Employment and Rehabilitation (Department of Labour and Employment). 
The Ministry, in reply, stated as follows:-
"It provides for resignation by a member of the Board of his 
office. The resignation takes effect only on acceptance of the same by 
the Government. This is on the same lines as Section 11 of the Em­
ployees' State Insurance Act, 1948 and Paragraph 6 of the Employees• 
Provident Fund Scheme, 1952. The Department is not in favour ot 
ftxing any time for the Government to accept the resignation as the 
Gowrnmt'nt has also to take a decision for filling in the vacancy and 
that does take some time. The Government's acceptance, however, 

 

' 
6 
is likely to be communicated to the member in a reasonable time and, 
therefore, it is felt that no undue inconvenience is likely to be caused 
to the member." 
22. The Committee, however notes that in the course of the evidence, 
the representat.ves of the concerned Ministry have agreed to amend the rule 
to provide for a time limit of thirty day<; ,.,·ithin which the resignation would 
be accepted. 
23. Rule 16.-This rule provides for the constitution of the Committees 
of the Board, reads as follows:-
"Committees of the Board-
(1) (i) The Board may constitute such Committee and for such 
purpose or purposes as it may think fit. 
( Ji) While constituting the Committee the Board may nomi­
nate one of its members to be the Chairman of the Committee. 
(2) The Committee shall meet at such times and places as the 
Chairman of the said Committee may decide and the Committee shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transanction of busi­
ness at its meeting as it may decide upon. 
(3) The provisions of rule 11 shall apply to the Member of the 
Committee for attending the meetings of the Committee as they apply 
to the members of the Board." 
24. Section 5(2) read with section 35(2) (b) of the Act however, pro­
vides that the procedure etc. of any Committee of the Board shall be such 
~s may be prescribed by Rules. It was, therefore, felt that rule 16(2) was 
not in conformity with the aforesaid provision of the Act. 
25. The Ministry of Labour, Employment and Rehabilitation, to whom 
the matter was referred, stated as follows:-
"It will be observed that sub-section ( 1) of section 5 of the Con­
tract labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 provides that the 
Central Board. or the State Board, as the case may be, may constitute 
such Committee and for such purpose or purposes as it may think fit. 
It will be appreciated that it is difficult to prescribe the procedure 
which a Committee may rollow unless the nature and character of the 
Co;11mittec and the purpose for which it is constituted is known. It 
\'viii ft•rther be seen that sub-section (2) requires not only the proce­
dure to be prescribed but also requires that the Committee constituted 
under ~ ub-S(;Ction (2) shall meet at such times and places as may be 
• 

 

7 
prescribed. Obviously the Committee is to choose the time and place 
of its m~etings. It was thought that it will be better to leave the Com­
mittee to devise its own procedure also, till we gain some C'tpcricnce." 
26. It may be mentioned in this connection that the difficulties pointed 
ou~ by the r-..1inistry are not insurmountable. For instance, the usual proce­
dure of a Committee in the matters of quorum, decisions, notices, agenda, 
business, voting, etc. could be pn:scribed by rules. In fact such is the 
practice obtaining in almost all statutory committees. (See Chapter Ill of the 
.Coffee Rules, 1955; Chapter III of the Cardamom Rules, 1966, in which 
procedure of committees is provided.) 
27. The Committee notes that the representatives of the Ministry have, 
in the course ot their evidence before the Committee, agreed to provide 
for matters of procedure etc., in the Rules instead of leaving them to be 
c.lecided by the Board. 
28. Rule 23.-This rule provides as follows:­
"Rejusal to grant licence-
( 1) On receipt of the application. and as soon as possible 
thereatter, the licensing officer shall make such enquiry as he considers 
necessary to satisfy himself about the eligibility of the applicant for a 
licence. 
(2) (i) Where the licensing officer is of opinion that the licence 
should not be granted, he shall, after affording reasonable opportunity 
to the applicant to be heard, make an order rejecting the application. 
( ii) The order shall record the reasons for the refusal and 
:>hall be communicated to the applicant.'" 
29. It was felt that the licensing officer should not only consider the eli­
gibility of the applicant but also make an investigation in respect of the 
location of the establishment, the nature of process, operation of work for 
which contract labour is to be employed and such other particulars as arc 
or may be prescribed by rules as contemplated in section 13(1) of the Act. 
The Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act is an important piece 
of labour kgi<lation and in order that the interests of workers are well­
protected the Committee feels th,\t the licensing officer should thoroughly go 
into the facts and particular<; disclosed in the application before granting 
a licence to employ contract labour. 
30 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the rule should be 
modified to thai effect. The Committee notes that the representatives of the 
Ministry have in the course of their evidence before the Committee agreed 
to clarify the rule accordingly. 

 

8 
31. Chapter V.-Thts Chapter provides for measures for the welfare 
and health of contract labour. l3ut neither the Act nor the Rules :;pecifica­
lly provide for inspection by the Inspecting staff to ensure whether these 
mca"ures have been implemented properly and fully Sec6on 28 ~ 2) (c) 
of the Act provides that an Inspector may exercise such other powers as 
may be prescribed. 1t was therefore felt that th1s prov:swn could effec­
tively and appropriately be utilised for imposing a statutory obligation and 
duty on the inspecting staff to rcpor t periodically to the appropriate autho­
rity about the tmplemcntation of the health and welfare measures in an es­
tablishment and that specific provision could be made to that effect in this 
Chapter 
32. The suggestion was therefore referred to the Ministry concerned. 
The ~\1inist1 y·s reac ion thereto is as follows.-
''The position is that Sect ton 2S( l) empowers the Government to 
appoint Jpsrec iors for the purposes of the Act. While doing so, the 
local limits of T nspectors will be specified within which they shall ex­
ercise tlwir power' under this Act. 
While inspecting the establishments, the Inspectors so appointed 
will St!e ·he extent of enforccm~.:nt of the proYi,ions of the Act and the 
Rules , i:·duamg tho c relatmg to the extent of compliance of provi­
sion~> concernin e the h ... .., Jth and welfare measures in an {'Stab i<.hment. 
Admmistratire in.~ !I .. ciiVIIS exist for periodical inspections and reports 
to a•JPropriate authoritiec;. Thic; is the normal practice followed in 
respect of inspections under other enactments also. It, therefore, 
does not appear necessary to make any further provision as suggested." 
33. The Committee feels that it will be appropriate if some cf the ad­
ministrative instructions of a vital nature in regard to periodical inspections 
etc. could be incorporated in the Rules. The representatives of the Ministry 
assured the Committee that necessary amendments in this behalf would be 
made in the Rules in lhe light of the experience gained in the working of 
the Rules. The Committee notes the Ministry's assurance. 
~- • • s-
JATSUKHLAL HATHJ, 
Chainnan, 
Committee on Subordinate Legis/arion. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 28th March. 1972. 

 

APPENDIX 
Mf~UTES OF THE SllTI'\GS OF THE COMM ITTEE 
IV 
rOU RTH MEETING* 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M on Tuesday, the 9th November, 1971. 
Presen t 
1. Shri Jaisukhlal Hathi Chairman 
M EMBERS 
2. ~hri Sriman Prafulla Goswami 
3. Shri Sycd Hussain 
-L Shri Nawal Kishorc 
5. Slui Mulka Go'>mda Reddy 
G. Shri Dwijendralal S..:n Gupta 
.., Shn "' K Shejwalkar 
8. S'1ri Awadhcshwar Prasad Smha 
9. Shri Shyam Lal Yadav 
Src RE !'ARIA T 
Shri M.. S. Panigrahi, Deputy Secretary 
~:hri M. K. Jain, U nder Secretary 
WI TNESSES 
Sh;·i R. Prasad, Secretary, Department of Co!llpany Affairs 
Shri G. A. Shah, Joint Secretary (Law). Department of Company 
Affairs. 
•:.!·nutes of first three meetings of the Committee have been included in 
the EleYenth Report of the Commi' tee. 
9 

 

10 
(i) Memorandum No. 14 of 1971 1egarding the Monopolies and Restlic­
til·e 1rade Practices (lnjormacion)Rules, 1971 (GSR 607 of 1971) 
2. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the Deprt­
ment of Company Affairs on the points contained in the Memorandum. 
The Committee suggested that for the words "or any other matter'' occur­
ring in !.ub-rulc (1) of rule 2 of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Prac­
tices t Information) Rules, 1971, the detailed matters on which information 
could be called as enumerated in section 43 of the Monopolies and Restric­
tive Trade Practices Act, 1969 should be specified. The representatives 
of the Department agreed to the suggestion. 
The Committee also noted that the Department of Company Aftairs 
have agreed to specify the time or interval within which information should 
be furnished in sub-rule (l) of the Rules itself instead of leaving it to be 
specified by Government. 
(ii) Memorandum No. 15 of 1971 regarding the Monopolies and Restric­
tive 1rade Practices (Amendment) Rules, 1971 (GSR 672 of 1971) 
3. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the De­
partment of Company Affairs on the points arising out of the Memoran­
dum. The Committee suggested that besides a trade journal and an Eng­
lish daily newspaper, the notice or application under section 21 or 22 or 23 
of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 should also be 
published in a regional language newspaper for the information of a wider 
section of the public. The representatives of the Department informed the 
Committee that this matter is already under their consideration. 
The Committee however deferred its final decision on the Memorandum 
and decided to give time to members to peruse the decisions of the Privy 
Council and the Supreme Court which had been cited by the Department 
in support of their contention that the rule-making power may be derived 
from the provision of the Act which enables the Government to "carry out 
the purposes of the A<:t." 
4. The Committee decided to meet again some time during the en­
suing session of the Rajya Sabha for finalising its decision on Memorandum 
No. 15 of 1971 and authorised the Chairman to fix a date for the purpose. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 p.m. 

 

11 
v 
FIFTH MEETII\G 
The Committee met at 11.30 a.m. on Friday. the 17th December, 
1971. 
Present 
1. Shri Jaisukhlal Hathi-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
2. Sbri M. Anandam 
3. Shri T. V. Anandan 
4. Shri Nawal Kishorc 
5. Shri A\',:adheshwar Prasad Sinha 
6. Shri Sawaisingh Sisodia 
7. Shri Shyam La! Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri M. S. Panigrahi, Deputy Secretary 
Shri M. K. Jain, Under Secretary 
Memorandum No. 15 of 1911 regarding the Monopolies and Restrictive 
Trade Practices (Amendrnent) Rules, 1971 ( GSR 672 of 19/l) 
2. The Committee reconsidered the question whether the m:~u~~ s pro­
vided for in the Rules mentioned above were within the rule-making power 
of the Government and decided that in view of the decisions of the Privy 
Council and the Supreme Court to the effect that the rule-making power 
may be derived from the provision of the Act which enables the Gc;>Vern­
ment to ''carry out the purposes of the Act," the matter may be dropped. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 11.55 p.m. to meet again at 3.30 
p.m. on Monday, the 24th January. 1972. 
l 

 

12 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Commilt..:.! met at .l.30 P. :l.t. on Monday. the 24th January, 197'2. 
Present 
1. Sbn Jaisukhlal Hathi-Chairman. 
Mc.\tUt:Rs 
2. Shri T. V. Anandan 
3. Shri Sriman Prafulla Goswami 
4. Shri Syed Hussain 
5. Shri Nawal Kishorc 
6. Shri Mulka Govinda Reddy 
7. Shri Dwijendralnl Sen Gupta 
8. Shri N. K. Shcjwalkar 
9. Shri Awadheshwar Prasad Sinha 
10 Shri S-.vaisingh Stsodia 
11. Shri Shyam Lal Yadav 
5 \RJ I \RIH 
S!tri \1. S. Panigrahi, Deputy S.:crctary 
Shr Sudar~ han Aoar wal, Deouty Secretary 
.\te•110rmuium /l.'o. I of 1972 regardim: the Contruct Labour ( Rer:l'tc.tion 
and Abolition) Ccmral Rule~. 1971 (GSR 191 of 1971) 
2. The Committee discussed the points arising out of the above-men­
tioned memorandum and decided t0 hear the views af the Secretary of the 
Ministry of Labour. Emp!oyml.!nt and R~.:habili ation (Department of L.bour 
and Employml?nt) before tak111g a final decillion on the said memorandum. 
Memorcmdum No. 16 of 1971 regarding lr;:islation on the lines of the U.K. 
Statutory I mtmments Act. 1946. 
3. The Co.nmittec decided that in view of the fact that the Model laying 
Formula recomm::nded lw the Committee hao:; already been agreed to by 
the Commi.tc..: Cln S..!.•Orutnatc t. c ::, t ~ l ttion of the Lok Sabha and accepted 
by the Mmi<-!r:~ ol I aw anLl Justice. the maacr need not be pursued further. 
4. The Com, 11ttee then adjourned at 4.10 p.m. to meet again at 3.30 
p.m. on Wedm:~d.1~. the 9t'l Febnwry, 1972 to hear the views of the Secre­
t:1ry of the Mint try of Labour . En>ploymcnt ::md Rehabilitation (Depart­
ment of Labour and Employment) on :-..kmorandum No I of 1972 . 
• 
" 

 

13 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 9th February, 
1972. 
Present 
1. Shri Jaisukhlal Hathi-Citairman 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri M. Anandam 
3. Shri T. V. Anandan 
4. Shri Sriman Prafulla Goswami 
5. Shri Syed Hussain 
6. Shri 1\awal Kishore 
7. Silri N. K. Shejwalkar 
8. Shri :\wadheswar Prasad Sinha 
9. Shri Swaisin.gh Sisodia 
10. Shri Shyam Lal Yadav 
SLCREl ARIAT 
Shri Sudarshan Agarwal, Deputy Secretary 
Shri M. K. Jain, Under Secretary 
WITNESSES 
Representatatives of tlw Ministry of J.abour, Employment and Rehabilita­
tion (Department of tabour and Employment) 
Shri P: M. Nayak, Secretary 
Shri Vidya Prakash. Deputy Secretary 
Memorandum No. 1 of 1972 regarding the Contract Labour (Regulation 
and Abolition) Rules , 1971 (G.S.R. 191 of 1971) 
The Committee heard the evidence tendered by the representatives of 
the Ministry of Labour, Employment and Rehabilitation (Department of 
Labour and Employment) on the points contained in the memorandum 
mentioned above. 
1 

 

14 
A verbatim 1 ecord of the evidence was kept. 
Rule 5.-The rule does not specify the time limit within which the 
resignation of a member of the Central Advisory Contract Labour Board 
is to be accepted by the Central Government. It was felt that a time 
limit of thirty day~ within which the resignation should be accepted should 
be specified in the Rule to avoid hardship to a resigning member. The 
Committee noted that the representatives of the Ministry of Labour, 
Employment anJ Rehabilitation agreed to amend the rule accordingly. 
Rule 16.-The rule docs not prescribe any procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at the meetings of the Central Advisory Contract 
Labour Board, as required under section 5 (2) read with section 35 (2) (b) 
of the Control Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970. The Com­
mittee noted that the representatives of the Ministry of Labour, Employ­
ment and Rehabilitation agreed to make such provi::.ion in the Rules. 
Rule 23.-This rule, i11ter alia, provides that the Licensing officer shall 
make such enquiry as he considers necessary to satisfy himself about the 
eligibility of the applicant for a lict.:n..:c. The Committee felt that the Li­
censing Ofticer should not only considcr the eligibility of the applicant but 
also make an investigation in respect of other matters, as provided u,s. 
13(1). The Committee noted that the representatives of the Ministry agreed 
to clarify the ruie accordingly. 
Chapter V.-This Chapter provides for measures for the welfare and 
health of contract labour. It was observed that the rules did not specifi­
cally provide for inspection by the Inspecting Stan· to ensure implementa­
tion of such mcasures. The Committee felt that some of the administra­
tive instructions in regard to inspection could be incorporated in the Rules. 
The represenialives of the concerned Ministry assured the Committee that 
necessary amendments in this behalf will be made in the Rules in the light 
of the expericnc<.. gained in thc worl-ing of the Rules. The Committee noted 
the Ministry's assurance. 
3. The rommittec authorised the Chairman to fix the date of its next 
meeting sometime during thc next Session of the Rajya Sabba. 
The Committee adjomncd at 4.10 P.W. 
J 

 

j 
• 
1' 
vm 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on 1 uesday, the 28th March, 1972. 
* 
"' 
Present 
1. Shri Jaisukhlal Hathi-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri f. V. Anandan 
3. Shri Syed Hussain 
4. Shri B. v. Abdulla Koya 
5. Shri Nawal Kishore 
6. Shri Mulka Govinda Reddy 
7. Shri N. K. Shejwalkar 
S. Shri Awadheshwar Prasad Sinha 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sudarshan Agarwal, Deputy Secretary 
Shri M. K. Jain, Under Secretary 
• ... • • • • • 
* 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Twelfth Report. 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman or in his absen<:e Shri 
' Nawal Kishore to present the Twelfth Report to the House. 
5. The Chairman informed the Committee that the Report would be 
presented to the House on the 30th March , 1972. 
6. The Committee placed on record its deep appreciation of the ser­
Vtc•'l' renc'ered by Slui Sriman Prafulla Goswani, a member of the Com­
mittee who would be retiring from the membership of the Rajya Sabha on 
the 2nd April, 1972. 
7. The Committee authorised tl1e Chairman to fix the date of the next 
meeting of the Committee. 
R. The Committee adjourned at 4.35 P.M. 
"'Paragraph 2 pertains to a matter not dealt with in this Report. 
GMGIPND - RS 1-1803 R.S.-10-5-72-500. 