Parliament of India
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Committee on SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
128th REPORT
( Presented to the House on14.03.2000)
CONTENTS
1. Composition of the Committee 
2. REPORT
I Introduction 
II Industrial Development Bank of India General Regulation 1964-Implementation of 105th Report of
the
    Committee.
III Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 Implementation of 118th
        Report of the Committee.
IV State Bank of India Officers’ Service Rules.
V State Bank of Mysore Officers’ Service Regulations, 1979.
VI Summary of Recommendations. 
VII MINUTES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on the 13th August, 1998)
1. Miss Saroj Khaparde¾ Chairperson
2. Shri Satyanarayana Dronamraju
3. Shri Radhakishan Malaviya
4. Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt
5. Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani
6. Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat
7. Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
8. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
9. Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah
10. Prof. A. Lakshmisagar
*11. Shri Munavvar Hasan
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

1. Shri N. Thalavai Sundaram
**13. Shri Sukh Dev Singh Libra
1. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
2. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
Secretariat
 
 
1. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary
3. Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
 
 
_________________________________________________________
* Nominated on 22.11.99 against the vacancy caused on account of demise of Shri Ish Dutt Yadav.
** Nominated on 27.12.99 against the vacancy on account of resignation by Shri Sukh Dev Singh Dhindsa.
 
 
(i)
REPORT
I
INTRODUCTION
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been authorized by the
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Hundred and Twenty Eighth
Report of the Committee.
1.2 The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on 8.3.2000.
3. The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various
Rules/Regulations and the issues related therewith alongwith the Government’s comments
received thereon the observations and recommendations which, in the opinion of the
Committee, should be brought to the notice of the House, are contained in the succeeding
paragraphs of the Report.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
 
 
 
 
Miss. Saroj Khaparde
Chairman,
New Delhi Committee on Subordinate Legislation,
March 8, 2000 Rajya Sabha
2
II
THE INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BANK
OF INDIA GENERAL REGULATIONS,
1964 - IMPLEMENTATION OF
COMMITTEES’ RECOMMENDATIONS
AS CONTAINED IN ITS 105TH REPORT
The subject "Industrial Development Bank of India General Regulations, 1964" was included in the
105th Report of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, presented to the House on the 15th March,
1995.
2. The operative part of the said report is as follows:
13. "The Committee does not accept the contention of the Ministry that framing of
Regulations as required under Section 37 (of the Industrial Development Bank of India
Act, 1964) is only discretionary and not obligatory and strongly recommends that all the
Regulations in regard to Staff Rules (Duties, Conduct, Salaries and Allowances) as
required under Section 37 be framed immediately."
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

3.14 In this connection the Committee draws the attention of the Ministry to its recommendations
contained in Paras 2.9 to 2.14 of the 102nd Report which read as under:-
9. However, the Committee takes serious view of the fact that whenever Ministries are
pressed hard for framing of rules/regulations under the Acts of Parliament, they come
forward with the plea that no necessity has been felt for framing them and they are not
mandatory under the Acts. The provisions in this regard are merely enabling in nature.
10. The Committee feels that the purpose of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation is
defeated if the rules are not framed by the Ministries and administration is run through
executive instructions.
3
2.11 The Committee is, therefore, of the considered view that the provision relating to making of rules
and regulations in the Acts of Parliament should be made mandatory so as to leave no room for Different interpretations by the
Ministries.
2.12 The Committee, accordingly, recommends strongly that the Ministry of Law should initiate immediate action to bring forward a
comprehensive legislation so as to make the rule making provision mandatory in all the existing and future enactment’s by substituting
the word ‘may’ by the word ‘shall’ in the relevant clause (s).
2.13 In this connection, the Committee is in agreement with the following recommendations made by the Committee on Home Affairs
in its Eighth Report on the Specified Areas (Issue of Identity Cards to Residents) Bill, 1993, presented to Parliament on the 17th
March, 1994:-
Clause 23
"The Clause deals with making of rules by the Central Government for carrying out the provisions in the Bill. The
Committee is of the considered view that the present wording of sub-clauses (1) and (2) may at times give rise to
different interpretations as to whether the making of rules under this clause is mandatory or not. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the word ‘may’ in sub-clauses (1) and (2) be substituted by ‘shall’ to leave no scope for
different interpretations in regard to making of rules expeditiously."
The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken by the Ministry of Law in this regard".
2. An extract from the 105th Report of the Committee was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Law, Justice &
Company Affairs on the 20th March, 1995, for taking follow up action.
 
 
 
4
3. The Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs (Legislative Department) vide their communication dated the 8th September,
1995 furnished a detailed note on the recommendations of the Committee (Annexure). In their note the Legislative Department
inter alia stated that the hitherto practice of using the word "may" in rule making was more appropriate for the following
reasons:-
i. the needed objective of flexibility in matter of use of power by the executive;
ii. international practice in this regard particularly in common law countries;
iii. it being based upon Indian precedents (Constitution of India and other Legislation’s ) over a long period.
2. The Legislative Department in their comments further observed that according to the extant arrangement under the
Allocation of Business Rules, 1961, the Administrative Ministries/Departments were responsible for drafting, notifying
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

and ultimately bringing the Subordinate Legislation in print form. Legislative Department was only concerned with the
vetting thereof. In view of that, it would also be desirable to have the comments of the various Departments/Ministries.
3. The Legislative Department forwarded a copy of their note to all the Departments/Ministries for offering their
comments, if any, directly to this Secretariat. Subsequently, this Secretariat also addressed a communication to all the
Ministries/Departments in this regard. A response was received from the following Ministries:
i. Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment.
ii. Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production and Supplies)
iii. Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs
iv. Ministry of Surface Transport
v. Ministry of Labour
vi. Ministry of Finance (Department of Company Affairs)
vii. Ministry of Communications (Department of Post)
viii. Ministry of Water Resources
5
ix. Ministry of Civil Supplies, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution
x. Ministry of Rural Areas and Employment
xi. Department of Ocean Development
xii. Ministry of Science & Technology (Department of Biotechnology)
xiii. Ministry of Power
xiv. Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Co-operation)
2. All the above Ministries except the Ministry of Surface Transport and Power, endorsed the view of the Legislative
Department. The Ministry of Surface Transport have, however, stated that:
"The appropriateness of the word ‘may’ or ‘shall’ while framing rules depends on the nature of the proviso for which it
is being made applicable. For instance, there are many provisions in the Motor Vehicles Act, where it becomes
necessary to use the word ‘shall’ and not the word ‘may’ to provide an appropriate meaning to that particular Act.
Hence the use of the word ‘may’ or ‘shall’ depends on the nature of the proviso itself."
The Ministry of Power submitted as follows:
The Ministry is in agreement with the recommendation of the Committee that the word ‘may’ appearing in sub-section
4B (I) and (c) (i) of Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 be substituted by word ‘shall’ to leave no scope for different
interpretations in regard to making of rules and regulations expeditiously. Similarly the word ‘may’ appearing in
Section 78(I) and 79 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 may also be substituted by the word ‘shall’. The word ‘may’
appearing in Section 37 (I ) of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 may also be substituted by the word ‘shall’.
2. The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on May 20, 1999 and decided in the first instance to hear the oral
evidence
6
of the representatives of the Ministry of Law (Legislative Department) as well as the Ministry of Finance (Banking Division)
on the subject.
3. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs and
Secretary, Banking Division, Ministry of Finance alongwith the representatives of IDBI in the mater at its meeting held on
August 13, 1999. During the course of the oral evidence, the Secretary, Legislative Department shared the anxiety of the
Committee over the fact that the power, that is vested in the Executive in regard to various enactments, is not just reduced to a
‘redundancy’. Giving a background of the formats in the process of legislative drafting, the Committee was informed that all
legislation had certain standard forms and clauses like short title, commencement, etc., and that in the end, there was a very
important clause viz. the rule making clause. It was a summarizing clause. Everything that is mentioned ‘as prescribed’ in the
various sections in an Act is summarized in the rule making section. Therefore, the executive is under an obligation to make
rules. Of course, some leeway has been given by using the word ‘may’, if in a particular area, Government does not want to
make rules or they want to make some in-depth study and require some more time and Government may not make rules in that
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

area. The Secretary, Legislative Department, however, endorsed the Committee’s recommendations that the executive should
frame the subordinate legislation at the earliest. Commenting upon the Committee’s earlier recommendations that rules should
be framed within six months, he said "why six months, why not immediately". The Secretary further added that the moment an
Act is brought into force, the rules can also come into force along with that. In fact the "rules should be ready along with
coming into force of the legislation itself". The Committee’s recommendations that rules should be in place within 6 months
was in fact a concession.
6.1 During the course of discussion, a question was raised by the Committee, whether it was possible to have two separate type of
delegations in the same Act, i.e., one using the word ‘shall’ thereby making it mandatory for the executive to frame rules and the other
by using the word ‘may’ where the executive could exercise its discretion. The Secretary, Legislative Department, while responding to
the
7
Committee’s query stated that such a segregation would be a delicate and difficult job. In his opinion, using the word ‘shall’ was very
very risky and it might create difficulties.
6.2 The Secretary, Banking Division, in his presentation before the Committee, agreed that there were certain matters in respect of
which no discretion should be given to the administration and the word ‘shall’ should be used in place of ‘may’ so that the
administration carries out the purposes as laid down in a particular legislation. But, he further went on to state that the expression
normally used everywhere was ‘may’ which in reality meant ‘shall’ wherever necessary and the administrative instructions were also,
in his opinion, defined laws which were notified. These administrative instructions could not be changed at will or could be arbitrary.
He further went on to state that section 37 of the IDBI Act enumerated 21 matters on which regulations were contemplated. Out of
these 21 matters, IDBI had made regulations in respect of 14 provisions. It is not that IDBI will not have regulations for other 7
provisions ever. The situation is not like that, but, they would make regulations on those provisions when there is a real need to do so.
IDBI is of the opinion that there is no necessity to make subordinate legislation on the remaining provisions. For example, official
business of the Bank is one such subject but, as the rules on this subject keep on changing and the official norms these days were
getting more and more difficult, it was not felt proper to make rigid regulations in that regard. If the regulations on such subjects were
rigid, the organization would not be able to carry on its business, the Secretary, Banking Division felt. He further added that the
process of amendment also was very ticklish and time consuming.
6.3 On the question of IDBI preferring to frame rules under Section 26(1) rather than going on for statutory regulations under Section
37(2)(i), the Secretary, Banking Division responded that the Committee is empowered to scrutinize "any action, any rule made, any
instructions issued in pursuance of the powers given under any Act’. The rules framed under Section 26 (1) read with Section 5 were
also liable for Committee’s scrutiny just like the regulations under Section 37. The Secretary, Legislative Department, however,
reserved his
8
opinion on the point stating that he would furnish a note to the Committee after examination.
 
 
7.0 The Committee is not convinced with the argument put forth before it that the word ‘may’ under certain circumstances
connotes ‘shall and, therefore, it was appropriate to use the word ‘may’. In the opinion of the Committee, rules must be
framed wherever they are contemplated under an Act and there should be a least scope of discretion with the executive so far
as the question of framing or not of subordinate legislation was concerned. The Committee, during the course of the discussion
with the Secretary, Legislative Department, had mooted an idea that a legislation could contain separate rule making clauses
one using the word ‘may’ and the other using the word ‘shall’ but, the reaction of the Secretary, Legislative Department to this
was not in the affirmative basically on the ground that such a segregation would be a very delicate and difficult job and use of
the word "shall" would be very very risky and it may create difficulties. The Committee does not find the explanation very
convincing. It does not see any problem in clearly specifying that such and such areas shall be regulated by rules and
regulations. In such a case, there is hardly any justification for using the word may. In case, however, there are certain areas
where it is desired to give a discretion to the executive in the matter of framing rules and regulations, the act may carry the
word ‘may’. As regards the framing of rules under the IDBI Act, the Committee is unhappy to find that subordinate legislation
contemplated under the Act have not yet been framed particularly the staff Rules (Duties, Conduct Salary and Allowance) as
referred under section 37(2) of the Act. The explanation that the bank has not found the necessity for that is not acceptable to
the Committee. In the opinion of the Committee, any legislation of Government should be precise, in so far as the areas where
subordinate legislation is required. In case any subordinate legislation is contemplated in any provision of the Act, it should
definitely be framed. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that Government should undertake a review in the matter in
9
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

consultation with the Attorney General of the country, and position may be reported to the Committee within a period of 3
months.
7.1 The Committee is not convinced with the view put forth by the Secretary, Banking Division that it did not matter much
whether a subordinate legislation was framed under Section 37(2)(i) or Section 26(1) of the Act. The Committee finds that the
Ministry of Finance have acted in a similar manner in the case of RBI Act and NABARD Act 1981 also. The Committee
decides to take up this issue separately.
10
Annexure
(Vide para 4-page-4)
Vide Ministry of Law O.M. No.3(1)/95-L-1dated September 8,1995.
Subject: The Industrial Development Bank of India General Regulations, 1964-
Implementation of 105th Report of the Committee.
Will the Rajya Sabha Secretariat refer to their O.M. No. RS.12(2)/95-Com-I dated the 20th March, 1995 forwarding therewith an
extract from the 105th Report of the Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation on the above subject. In the aforesaid extract
the Committee have drawn the attention of the Ministry of Finance to the recommendations contained in paras 2.9 to 2.14 of the 102nd
Report of the Committee in which the Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation have expressed their agreement with the
following recommendations made by the Committee on Home Affairs in its Eighth Report on the Specified Areas (Issue of Identity
Cards to Residents) Bill, 1993, presented to Parliament on the 17th March, 1994:-
"Clause 23
The clause deals with making of rules by the Central Government for carrying out the provisions in the Bill. The Committee is of he
considered view that the present wording of sub-clauses (1) and (2) may at time give rise to different interpretations as to whether the
making of rules under this clause is mandatory or not. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the word ‘may’ in sub-clauses (1)
and (2) be substituted by ‘shall’ to leave no scope for different interpretations in regard to making of rules expeditiously."
The Committee have also desired to know the action taken by the Ministry of Law in this regard.
This matter has been examined in this Department at a great length. A clause relating to making of rules by the Central
11
Government for carrying out the provisions in a Bill is provided to empower the Central Government to make Subordinate
Legislation. The reason for providing such clause is obvious. The problems of modern Government are so complex and multifarious
that provisions for their immediate solutions for emergent situations cannot always be foreseeable and hence cannot be provided in the
legislation by the Parliament. The Executive, therefore, is empowered and entrusted with the task of making legislation under the rule
making power conferred on it by the Parliament. The principle of delegating power is now well settled that such delegation is a
constituent element of the legislation and in most of the legislations in modern times when the laws are framed to meet the challenges
of the complex socio-economic and welfare problems, the provision for delegated legislation has become necessary to delegate to the
executive the subsidiary and ancillary functions to frame rules, issue notifications and issue orders for carrying out the purposes of
legislations. The permissible extent and nature of such delegation is also well settled. When Parliament lay down the legislative policy,
it also lay down guidelines or safeguards to be followed by the executive while making rules for carrying out the purposes of the
statute. It leaves such exercise of power to the discretion of the executive to frame the rules for the following reasons, namely:-
a. It is easy to provide broad guidelines or safeguards to be followed while framing the rules under an Act but it is very difficult
to determine the circumstances, conditions and appropriate time for framing such rules under the Act. If the word "shall" is
used in place of the word "may" in the rule making clause, it makes the provision a water tight compartment and exclusively
mandatory. While providing such provision it would be essential for Parliament to determine comprehensively the
circumstances and conditions in which the executive is to frame the rules. In such a situation, the executive will have no
discretion and it shall have no sufficient time to apply its mind to consider and determine as to whether the rules framed will
be sufficient to meet the particular circumstances and conditions. Undoubtedly, this task is very cumbersome and complex
which cannot be taken up in principal legislation in its totality.
12
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

(b) It is a traditional practice of manking legislation that the general principles are determined in the principal legislation and particular
problems relating to technical knowledge and expertise are generally left to be provided by rules and the executive obviously gets
sufficient discretion and time. Such discretion is not available to executive if the word "shall" is used in place of the word "may" in a
rule making provision.
( c) In framing the subordinate legislation pertaining to practical needs involving economic controls and fiscal problems, a high degree
of application of mind and the knowledge in these fields are required. In exceptional circumstances, debates and consultations with the
expert bodies are also essential to determine the local problems and circumstances relating to special treatment required to be given to
a local problem. For this exercise, the executive needs sufficient time and discretion which cannot be available if the word "shall" is
used in place of the word "may" in a rule making provision.
(d ) It is well understood that when power to make rules is delegated to the executive, it latently entrust upon the executive a
responsibility to determine the particular issue to properly meet the complex problems and to frame the suitable rules to regulate
procedure and incidental matters efficiently. For this reason, the rule making power should be delegated with sufficient discretion left
to the executive.
(e) Modern legislation requires far more details that overburdened Parliament can afford the strain of providing the matters of detail in
the present day legislation. In order to bring a complex legislative scheme into full working operation, consultation with affected
interests is required. This can best be done after Parliament has passed the legislation in which general principles and scheme of
legislation are contained. Then after knowing such principles and schemes, the executive consults and examines the affected interests
to frame Subordinate Legislation thereunder. This exercise undoubtedly takes time and requires the application of mind. Discretion to
the executive to frame subordinate legislation at an appropriate time is therefore needed. The use of the word "may" is, therefore, more
13
appropriate than the suggested use of the word "shall" while framing the rule making power in the main legislation.
(f) In some legislative schemes incidental details of the overall legislative schemes are also involved which may be of experimental
nature. The delegated legislation are the easy means of adjusting the scheme without further recourse to Parliament and for
understanding those experimental details and to weight their practical values the executive needs time and sufficient discretion to
bring such schemes to full working operations through Subordinate Legislation. For this reason, it is more appropriate to use the word
"may" instead of the word "shall" while providing rule making provision in main legislation.
g. In some legislation it is useful to vest the executive with wide and flexible legislative powers to deal with an emergency by
framing the Subordinate Legislation. If the word "shall" is used in the rule making provision, the delegation becomes rigid and
the flexibility of the delegated legislative powers to executive turns stringent.
h. In some situation the power to make delegated legislation may be exercised by the executive from time to time as occasion
requires. To adjust the suitability of the occasion for framing delegated legislation the executive needs discretion. It may be
done only by use of the word "may" instead of the word "shall" in enabling provision in the Act.
2. In India, in almost all legislations the word "may" has been used in the rule making provisions. The position in another countries are
as below:-
a. In Australia, in most of the legislations the word "may" has been used in the provisions of delegated legislation. Section 8 of
the Maintenance Orders (Commonwealth Officers) Act, 1966 (No.59 of 1966), where the power of framing the regulations has
been delegated to the Governor General, reads as under:-
14
"8. The Governor General may make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act, prescribing all matters required or permitted
by this Act to be prescribed, or necessary or convenient to be prescribed for carrying out or giving effect to this Act, and, in
particular…….".
In section 30 of the Therapeutic Goods Act, 1966 (no.29 of 1966) the similar formulation has been adopted which reads as
under:-
"30. The Governor General may make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act, prescribing all matters which by this Act are
required or permitted to be prescribed, or which are necessary or convenient to the prescribed for carrying out or giving effect
to this Act, and, in particular……….".
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

b. In a British enactment i.e. the Poor Law Act, 1930, in section 136(1) of this Act the word "shall" has been used in the
following manner:-
"For executing the powers given to him by this Act, the Minister shall make such rules, orders and regulations as he may think fit
for………….". (This has been incorporated in the said Act by the amendment through Poor Law Amendment Act, 1934).
In the above instance, the manner in which the words "shall" and "may" have been used in the same provision gives prominence to the
word "may" over the word "shall".
3. It is a settled principle of law that the meaning of the word "may" used in the statutes does not always involve a discretion. In many
circumstances, it has been interpreted by the Courts to convey the mandatory force and it has been interpreted such as the word "may"
has been used to convey the meaning of the word "shall". In the case of State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Jogendra Singh AIR 1963 SC. 1618
the Supreme Court has observed that the word "may" generally does not mean "must" or "shall". But it is well settled that the word
"may" is capable of meaning "must" or "shall" in the light of the context. Where a discretion is conferred upon a public authority
15
coupled with obligation, the word "may" which denotes discretion should be construed to mean a command. Sometimes, Legislature
uses the word "may" out of deferance to the high status of the authority on whom the power and the obligation also observed in the
State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Manbodhan Lal Srivastava AIR 1957 SC 912 that the use of word "shall" in a statute, though generally taken
in a mandatory sense, does not necessarily mean that in every case it shall have that effect that is to say, that unless the words of the
statute are punctiliously followed, the proceeding or the outcome of the proceeding would be invalid. On the other hand, it is not
always correct to say that where the word "may" has been used, the statute is only permissible or directory in the sense that non
compliance with those provisions will not proceeding invalid.
Similarly, in some context the word "shall" may be interpreted like the word "may". This principle has been well clarified in York and
North Middlreland Railway V.R.(1853) 1 E & B 178, 203, 858.
4. It is also pertinent to mention here that in law, it is tradition of long standing to use the word "may" while conferring the power of
legislation whether it is power to frame the principal legislation or the Subordinate Legislation. Such example may also be see under
article 245 of the Constitution where the wordings are as below:-
"245(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make laws for the whole or any part of the
territory of India, and the legislature of a State may make laws for the whole or any part of the State".
It is obvious that in Constitution of India the word "may" has been used while conferring the power of law making on the Parliament
of India. The use of the word "may" also be seen in the Constitution of India in so many articles and Schedules where the principal
law making power or the power to make Subordinate Legislation are conferred on the legislature of the States, Supreme Court, High
Court or some other authority in the Constitution. The word "may" has been used in every Act of Parliament and of its predecessor
legislature
16
invariably while conferring the power of framing Subordinate Legislation to the executive.
5. In view of the above, this Department is of the view that the hitherto practice of using the word "may" in rule making details is
more appropriate for the following reasons:- (i) the needed objective of flexibility in matter of use of power by the executive.
ii. International practice in this regard particularly in common law countries;
iii. It being based upon Indian precedents (Constitution of India and other legislation) over a long period.
However, according to the extant arrangement under the Allocation of Business Rules, 1961. the administrative
Ministries/Departments are responsible for drafting, notifying and ultimately bringing the subordinate legislation in print form.
Legislative Department is only concerned with the vetting thereof. In view of that, it shall also be desirable to have the comments of
the various Departments/Ministries. We, in the meantime, are sending a copy of this O.M. to all the Departments/Ministries of the
Government of India concerned with the framing of subordinate legislation under different enactments for offering their comments, if
any, directly to the Committee on Subordinate Legislation.
This issues with the approval of the Secretary.
17
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

III
The Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 - implementation of Committee’s recommendations
as contained in its 118th Report.
 
 
The Committee examined the Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial Institution Act, 1993 and the Rules framed there-under.
The matter was reported to the House by the Committee on June 12, 1998 in its 118th report which was forwarded to the Ministry of
Finance (Banking Division) with the request to furnish the action taken on its recommendations within a period of two months.
2. On July 23, 1998, the Ministry of Finance informed that the Reserve Bank of India had set up a Working Group to review the
functioning of the Debts Recovery Tribunals and before offering any comments on the recommendations made by the Committee, the
Ministry would like to go through the views of the Working Group in this regard.
3. The Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) furnished their action taken note on the recommendations of the Committee on 17th
August 1999 as follows: -
Recommendation: 4.4 (a) Debts Recovery Tribunals and Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal should be restructured on the lines of
Revenue Courts/Special Courts with codified rules and procedure like code of civil procedure and be liberated from the deemed
judicial status to a full fledged judicial authority exclusively for the purpose of recovery of debts with adequate infrastructure so as to
make the systems meaningful, effective and deterrent.
Action taken Keeping in view the opinion of the Working Group, no action appears necessary on this issue.(para 2.32 of Annexure-I)
18
Recommendation: 4.4 (b) In order to make the debt recovery mechanism effective, meaningful and deterrent, summary powers
should be given to Recovery Officers. Like the Income Tax Officer or the Customs Officer, he should have magisterial powers
including the attachment power.
Action taken Accepted. A Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha to implement it.
Recommendation : 4.4.(c) The geographical jurisdiction of each of the existing Tribunal is very vast. There is an urgent need to have
separate Tribunals for large States so that the burden of cases in the existing tribunals is lessened.
Action Taken Accepted. A Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha to implement it.
Recommendation: 4.4.(d) Recovery Officers should not have more than 300 cases at a time. Accordingly, more number of Tribunals
and under each Tribunal more number of Recovery officers should be appointed to ensure speedy recovery of bank dues. The
Recovery Officer should be provided with the assistants to act as his representatives to effect the orders passed/to be passed by him
under the provision of Income-Tax Act, to recover the bank dues.
Action taken Accepted. A bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha to implement it.
Recommendation: 4.4 (e) Under Section 1(4) of the Act, the Central Government may notify that the provision of the Act shall also
apply to cases of not less than Rs.2 lakhs thereby widening the definition of debts to include the liability of any person to the Bank or
Financial Institution and should also specifically include any Debt secured by mortgage, hypothecation, pledge etc. or otherwise.
Action taken Keeping in view the opinion of the Working Group, no action appears necessary on this issue.(para 2.34 of Annexure-I)
19
Recommendation: 4.4.(f) The defendants are generally avoiding to participate in the proceedings before the Tribunal which leads to
ex-party orders being passed by it. However, at the state of certificate proceedings, they appear before the Tribunal and pray for setting
aside the ex-party order on flimsy grounds. There should be a provision in the Act/Rules to the effect that if the Tribunal is satisfied
and decides to set aside the ex-party order, then that order would be subject to payment of 50% of the certificate amount.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

Action taken Keeping in view the opinion of the Working Group, no action appears necessary on this issue.(para 2.35 of Annexure-I)
Recommendation: 4.4 (g) Provision should be incorporated in the Act/Rules empowering the Tribunals to notify the names of
defaulters in the newspapers after the decrees have been passed.
Action taken This suggestion requires amendment to the rules and it will be considered in the next stage.(para 2.36 of Annexure-I)
 
 
3.1 The Ministry further informed that the Bill, introduced in the Lok Sabha to implement the suggestions of the Committee, had
lapsed due to dissolution of the 12th Lok Sabha.
3.2 The Ministry also informed that in order to implement the suggestions made by the Committee and the Reserve Bank of India
Working Group, it was proposed to bring out a comprehensive amendment to the Debt Recovery Tribunal Act and action would be
taken after the formation of the new Lok Sabha.
4.0 The Committee considered the subject matter at its meeting held on October 15, 1999 and expressed its dissatisfaction over the
reply given by the Ministry with regard to recommendations contained in para 4.4 (a), 4.4 (e) and 4.4 (f) of its 118th report. The
Committee desired that a copy of the report of the Working Group of the Reserve Bank of India may be procured and the same may be
examined keeping
20
in view the recommendations of the Committee. The report of the Working Group of the Reserve Bank of India was received from the
Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) vide their O.M. dated 27th October 1999 (Annexure).
5.0 The Committee considered the subject matter at its meeting held on 1st March 2000. The Committee notes with satisfaction
that its recommendations vide paras 4.4(b) (d) and (g) have found favour with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee hopes
that the legislation incorporating the Committee’s suggestions will be got passed through Parliament by the Ministry of
Finance during the on-going Budget Session. As regards the Committee’s recommendation as contained in para 4.4(g), it notes
with satisfaction the comments of Ministry of Finance that the suggestion which requires amendment to the rules would be
considered in the next stage. The Committee, in this context, recommends further that the new rules should also empower the
Tribunal to notify the defaulters names even on the website of the DRT /Bank /Financial Institution.
6. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the comments of the Ministry of Finance as also the recommendations
of the Working Group of the Reserve Bank of India with regard to paras 4.4(a), (e) and (f) of the 118th report of the
Committee. On the Committee’s recommendation vide para 4.4(a) for restructuring of Debt Recovery Tribunals and Debt
Recovery Appellate Tribunals on the lines of the Revenue Courts and Special Courts with codified rules, the Committee notes
the observation of the Working Group of the Reserve Bank of India in the matter viz. that no specific advantage is foreseen by
effecting such a change. The Committee decides not to pursue this recommendation further. The Committee also agrees with
the suggestion of the Working Group of the Reserve Bank of India on its recommendation as contained in para 4.4(f)
regarding authorization of the Tribunals under the Act/Rules to order deposit of 50% of the certificate amount while setting
aside an ex-party order. The Committee agrees that such issues should be better left at the discretion of the Presiding Officer
of the Debt Recovery Tribunal.
21
7. The Committee, thereafter, reviewed its recommendation as contained in para 4.4(e) regarding lowering of the fiscal limit
from Rs. 10 lakhs to Rs. 2 lakhs for the purpose of bringing more cases within the cognizance of the Debt Recovery Tribunals
(DRT). The Committee notes that the Working Group of the Reserve Bank of India also supports the proposal for reduction in
the fiscal limit from Rs. 10 lakhs to Rs. 2 lakhs but, prior to that, they in the first instance want more DRTs so that there are
not overburdened with abnormally large number of cases. The Committee feels that setting up of more DRTs is in fact the
need of the hour and Government should take prompt steps in this regard. The Committee accordingly reiterates its earlier
recommendations for reduction in the fiscal limit from Rs. 10 lakhs to Rs. 2 lakhs so that more number of cases of recovery
due to banks and the financial institutions are covered by the DRTs.
22
Annexure
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

(Vide para 4-page-20)
Extracts from the Report of working Group of RBI.
2.31 The Working Group deliberated on the 118th Report of the Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation on
the Recovery of Debts due to the Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 (the Committee). In para 4.2 of the
Report, the Committee has directed the Ministry of Finance, Banking Division, to closely interact with the
management of all banks and financial institutions and representatives of all India Banks Federation/Association and
employees unions. In the opinion of the Working Group, the involvement of association/unions is very important and
they have very vital role to play in recovery proceedings. The Working Group, therefore, recommends to the
Government of India to actively interact with the unions/ federations for the expeditious recovery proceedings.
2.32 As regards the suggestion made by the Committee in para 4.4(a) of the Report that the DRT and DRTs could be re-
structured on the lines of Revenue Courts, Special Courts with codified rules and procedure and liberated from the
deemed judicial status, in the opinion of the working Group, there is no need to make any structural change in the
status of the DRTs or DRATs. While appreciating the suggestion made by the Committee, the Working Group does not
find any specific advantage in making change in the structure of the tribunals as the purpose for establishing the DRTs
can be achieved with same force without being subjected to the rigour of the codified procedure and law . In para 2.28
of the Report, the Working Group has already recommended the penal provision for non-compliance with the order by
the tribunal. This will make DRTs and DRATs more effective and deterrent.
33. The suggestion made by the Committee in para 4.4(b) is that, the Ros should be given magisterial power including the
23
power of attachment of the property. While the powers of ordinary attachment and sale of movable and immovable
property of the defendant already exist in Section 25(a) of the. Act. In the opinion of the Working Group, the recovery
proceedings being in the nature of civil proceedings, it would not be proper to confer magisterial or other coercive
powers on the ROs.
2.34 In para 4.4(e) the suggestion made by the Committee is that the Central Government may notify that the
provisions of the Act shall also apply to the cases of not less than Rs.2 lakh and also widening the definition of "Debt"
to include the liability of any person to the banks and financial institutions and should also specifically include any
debt secured by mortgage, hypothecation, pledge, etc. The Working Group is of the opinion that having regard to the
infrastructure constraints and large number of court cases which have been transferred to the DRTs under Section 31 of
the Act, there is acute pressure on the DRTs, resulting in inordinate delay in disposal of applications pending before
them. Once recommendations made by the working group to appoint more DRTs is accepted by the Government and
the number of pending cases before them come down the Government may consider lowering the present limit of
Rs.10 lakh in terms of section 1(4) of the Act, so that more cases of recovery of bank dues are covered by the DRTs. As
regards the suggestion to wider in the definition of "debt" to include debts secured by mortgage hypothecation, etc. the
working Group finds that the expression ‘debt’ as defined in Section 2(g) of the Act, already includes dues from any
person whether secured or unsecured, subsisting and legally recoverable on the date of application. Since the secured
debt is already included in the definition of "debt" it is not necessary to specifically mention debts secured by mortgage
hypothecation, pledge or otherwise in the definition of the "debt".
34. In Para 4.4.(f) the Committee has observed that the defendants are generally avoiding participation in the proceedings
before
24
the tribunal, leading to ex-part orders, but at the stage of certificate proceedings, they appear before the tribunal and
pray for the setting aside ex-part order on flimsy grounds. The Committee has, therefore, proposed that there should be
provison in the Act/Rules that if the tribunal is satisfied and decides to set aside ex-part order, then the order should be
made subject to payment of 50% of the certificate amount. The Working Group in para 2.14 of the Report, has
recommended that it should be the duty of the applicant bank/financial institution to ensure that the due service is
effected on the borrower. Once the lending banks/institutions take interest in effecting service of notices on their
borrowers, the borrower is unlikely to remain absent from the proceedings and in spite of the proper service on him, he
chooses not to participate in the proceedings and the ex-part order is passed by the tribunal, the tribunals should avoid
entertaining requests for setting aside such ex-part orders unless very cogent reasons are shown by the
borrower/defendant why he could not participate in the proceedings on the notified date. In such a case in the opinion
of the Working Group it should be left to the discretion of the PO of DRTs to decide whether to set aside such ex-part
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

order and if so subject to what terms. However, it will not be proper to curtail the discretion of the PO by providing
payment of 50%of the certificate amount for setting aside such ex-part order.
36. The last suggestion made by the Committee in para 4.4(g) is to empower the tribunal to notify the names of the
defaulters after the decrees have been passed. In the opinion of the Working Group, the suggestion is welcome one and
we recommend accordingly. However such notification of names of defaulters should be done only after the period
prescribed for filing appeal has elapsed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25
IV
State Bank of India Officers Service Rules
The Committee took up examination of the State Bank of India Officers Service Rules, 1975 framed in exercise of powers conferred
under section 43(1) of the State Bank Act,1955. some points arising out of examination of the said rules were referred to the Ministry
of Finance(Banking Division). Comments thereon were received from the Ministry. The Committee had discussions on these points in
the light of the comments with the representatives of the State Bank of India as well as the Ministry of Finance at Mumbai on
September 21, 1995. The relevant provisions of the rules, the points referred, the comments of the State Bank of India, the
observations of the Committee thereon and the subsequent comments of the Ministry dated May 18, 1998 are as follows:-
(i) Rule 8
"The competent authority may require an officer to officiate in a higher grade in a temporary or permanent vacancy."
Point Referred:
 
Whether any guidelines have been issued to the competent authority justifying his requirement allowing an officer to officiate in a
higher grade?
S.B.I.’s Comments
Guidelines are issued from time to time for the guidance of competent authaority for permitting officiating in higher grades (copy of
such guidelines is enclosed). We advise that normally officiating is allowed to the next senior person at a branch so that smooth flow
of work is not disturbed on account of the permanent incumbent proceeding on leave or transfer. Officers who are facing disciplinary
proceedings are not permitted to officate in senior capacities.
26
Committee’s Observations (21-09-1995)
The Committee was not convinced with the reply given by the Bank and recommended that Rule 8 may be amended incorporating
therein that "officers who are facing disciplinary proceedings are not permitted to officiate in senior capacities" and Committee
apprised of the amendment within a month.
Ministry’s Comments (18-05-1998)
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

It is submitted that the disciplinary proceedings can be in respect of proposed major penalties and/or proposed minor penalties. It is
possible that disciplinary proceedings may not lead to any punishment if the officer is not found guilty. It is also submitted that
officiating for a short period in a higher capacity does not amount to promotion to a higher post. Further, in some of the branches, it
could cause disruption in the functioning of a branch where one of the officers is involved in the disciplinary proceedings and the
other is on leave. Hence, the Banking Division feels that the proposed amendment would make the rule very rigid. Thus, the Banking
Division does not agree with the SBI and RBI on grounds of desired flexibility.
(ii) Rule 13(3)
"The Committee may after giving an opportunity to the officer concerned to make his representation in the matter
make an order and the decision in such order shall be final.
Provided that the Executive Committee may of its own motion review any such decision and where it reviews any such
decision, it shall give an opportunity to the officer concerned to make his representation in the matter."
 
 
 
 
 
27
Point Referred:
Under which conditions the executive Committee may of its own motion review any decision of the Committee
constituted by the Chairman of the Bank? Whether any guidelines have been issued in this regard? Whether it is done
regularly or in exceptional cases?
S.B.I.’s Comments:
This Rule was framed in the year 1979 to take care of certain exceptional cases arising out of rationalization of pay structure in the
banking industry including State Bank of India on the recommendations of the Pillai Committee. In view of the fact that the Pillai
Committee Recommendations brought about drastic changes in the pay structure of various Banks, including State Bank of India, it
was inevitable that variety of anomalies cropped up. This provision in Rules was made to cope with these anomalies. Thereafter, there
has been no need to adopt this procedure because the subsequent wage settlements took into account the anomalies that might arise on
account of fitment of pay from previous pay structure to revised pay structure. Isolated cases of appeal against fitment are dealt with
by the Bank at administrative officers.
Committee’s Observations: (21.09.1995)
In the present scenario the rule 13(3) has become redundant. The Committee, therefore, was of the view that the provision may be
deleted expeditiously under intimation to the Committee.
Ministry Comments (18.05.98)
The Government accepts the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee.
 
 
 
 
28
(iii) Rule 15(3)
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

Point Referred:
i. This provision gives blanket power to the competent authority to decide the period of probation, which may be
misused against an officer. Whether the Ministry have issued any guidelines to the competent authority, if so, the
details thereof?
(ii) The proviso creates disparity among the Bank Officers and directly affects the spirit of equality enshrined under
Article 1 of the Indian Constitution. Whether the Ministry have any objection in specifying the conditions under which
the period of probation may be reduced or dispensed with?
S.B.I.s Comments
In this connection we request a reference to under noted Rule in the State Bank of India Officers’ Service Rules
All appointments in, and promotions to, the Officers’ grades shall be made by the competent authority in accordance with the policy or
guidelines, if any, laid down in this behalf by the Central Board or the Executive Committee.
It may be seen that policy for making appointment which also includes decision on the period an officer has to remain on probation is
laid down by the Board of the Bank. Hence the competent authority, who is usually an executive of the Bank, does not deiced at
variance with the policy framed by the Board of the Bank. There is no possibility of competent authority misusing the power unless
the probation has to be extended on the grounds of unsatisfactory performance.
We submit that the competent authority designated under this proviso is the Executive Committee of the Central Board of the Bank,
29
which is the highest policy making body in the Bank. There is no likelihood of any disparity.
Committee’s Observations (21-09-1995)
The Committee noted the position explained by the Bank that the policy for making appointments is laid down by their Board which
includes decision on the period of probation and the competent authority usually does not act at variance with the policy while
deciding the period of probation. The Committee however observed that the position explained by the Bank should be made part of the
rule 15(3) by amending the same. The Bank agreed to the proposal.
Ministry’s Comments (18.05.1998)
The matter has been examined and it has been observed that the existing provisions may continue because it is necessary that period of
probation may be different for different categories. It may also very depending upon the source of their recruitment, experience
possessed by the officer etc. Further the suggestion of the Committee to specifically provide for the competent authority in the Rules is
the matter which should be left to the bank. Ordinarily the competent authorities are separately notified by the administrative order
depending upon operational requirements and convenience. Hence it is felt that Rule 15(3) may remain in its present form.
(iv) Rule 20(1)
"An officer shall not leave or discontinue his service in the Bank without first giving a notice in writing of his intention
to leave or discontinue the service or resign. The period of notice required shall be three months and shall be submitted
to the competent authority.
Provided that a Probation any Officer who has entered the service of the Bank as such shall not be entitled to give
notice or leave the service of the bank until the expiration of the stipulated period of probation and any breach of this
proviso
30
shall entitle the Bank to proceed in accordance with the Provisions of sub-rule (3) of rule 14.
Provided further that the competent authority may at its discretion permit an officer to resign without notice or forfeiture of security
deposit or payment of three months emoluments in lieu of notice or reduce the period of notice.
Point Referred:
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

What criteria are kept in mind by the competent authority in exercising the discretion for permitting an officer to resign without
notice?
 
 
S.B.I’s Comments
Notice period has been provided at the time of submitting resignation/retirement to enable the Bank to verify as to whether the
concerned official has any vigilance/disciplinary enquiry against him, any liability towards the Bank and also to give enough time to
the Bank to identify a suitable replacement for him. Considering that our offices are spread all over the country and an officer has to
work at different branches during his career, it does take 2 to 3 months to collect the information and place before the competent
authority for a decision. Accordingly, as per our guidelines, normally notice period is not waived for the reason that it takes 2 to 3
months to arrange for the above clearances. However, where the official proceeds to join a Government service or a Public Sector
Company or clearance has been received in good time, and other formalities have been completed, the competent authority may waive
fully or partially the notice period.
Committee’s Observations (21.09.1995)
The Committee was satisfied with the reply given the Bank.
 
 
31
Rule 20(3)
"The Bank reserves the right to terminate by an order of the Appointing Authority the service of an officer without
notice or notice money in lieu thereof on his being certified by the Bank’s Medical Officer(s) to be permanently
incapacitated for further continuous service in the Bank.
Point Referred:
 
Instead of relying on the advice of Medical Officer(s), the Bank should constitute a Medical Board for this purpose. Whether the
Ministry have any objection in substituting the expression ‘ Bank’s Medical Board’ for ‘Bank’s Medical Officer(s)?
 
 
 
 
 
 
S.B.I’s Comments:
 
 
We shall examine the feasibility of amending the Service Rules.
Committee’s Observations (21.09.95)
The Committee noted the reply given by the Bank and desired that it be apprised of the right of the exercise on substituting the words
"Medical Officer(s) with "Bank Medical Board".
Ministry Comments (18.05.98)
The Government accepts the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee.
(v) Rule 24(4)
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

"Visiting and consulting charges are reimbursable, on such scales as may be laid down by the Bank from time to time
for
32
various centres. Travlling expenses incurred by the doctor or the officer in this regard are however, not reimbursable."
Point Referred:
What criteria are kept in mind by the Bank for laying down different scales for various centers for reimbursement of visiting and
consulting charges? Whether any uniform pattern is followed in this regard; if so, the details thereof?
S.B.I’s Comments:
We have issued instructions to our Local Head Offices to fix the visiting and consultation charges, taking into account the local
conditions within the area of their operation. These rates are reviewed periodically and adjusted where necessary. The Standardised
charges in this regard are advised by the Central Office of the Bank.
 
 
 
 
Committee’s Observations (21.09.95)
The Committee was satisfied with the reply of the Bank.
 
 
2. The Committee considered the subject matter in the light of the comments of the Ministry at Calcutta on May 19, 1998 and some
more points were also raised arising out of further examination of the rules. The points raised at the Calcutta meeting alongwith the
comments of the State Bank of India thereon are as follows:-
(i) Observation of the Committee
As per the long title, the SBI Officers Service Rules (SBIOSR) have been framed by the Central Board of the Bank in exercise of
powers conferred by Section 43(1) of the SBI Act, 1955, But, that Section of the Act does not confer power on the Bank to frame
Rules in
33
that regard. Actually Section 49(1) of the Act confer the Rule making power upon the Central Government.
Framing of rules/regulations is part of the exercise of power delegated by legislature to a subordinate authority. As such, the House
must be informed of such exercise of power of subordinated legislation in the present case, Section 43(1) of the Act does not contain
any laying
provision and most probably the SBIOSR might not have been laid on the Table of the House which amounts to by-passing the
authority and scrutiny of the House and the Committee on Subordinate Legislation Please clarify the position.
Comments of the Bank
State Bank of India (Supervising Staff) Service Rules and State Bank of India Officers (Determination of terms and conditions of
service) order 1979 made in 1975 and 1979 respectively were in existence before 1992 when State Bank of India Officers’ Service
Rules came into existence. The title was taken from the existing Rules. These are not Rules as such but are orders which determine the
terms and conditions of appointment and service of the officers. SBI is vested with the power to make such orders/provisions in terms
of Section 43(1) of the SBI Act, 1955. The word Rules in the title has been retained only for convenience sake if the Committee has
objection to the title "State Bank of India Officers" Service Rules" given to the Rules we can amend it to read as State Bank of India
Officers’ Service Order.
(ii) Observation of the Committee
Four recommendations were made in November 1995. Apprise the Committee of details of action taken in chronological order.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

As per the paper circulated to the Committee on 18.5.98, SBI had sent their responses on the four suggestions of the Committee, to the
Banking Division in January, 1996 for approval. Where there is no mandatory requirement in Section 43(1) why the same had to be
sent to the Ministry for approval thus adding to the delay?
34
Comments of the Bank
Our recommendation on suggestions made by the Committee in November 1995 were sent to Govt. of India Ministry of Finance,
Department of Economic Affairs (Banking Division) vide our letter No.CDO/ADM/24730 dated the 5th January 1996 for their
approval.
Bank has been traditionally following the practice of seeking approval of Govt. of India in making/amending the terms and conditions
of service governing the Officers/Employees. Accordingly responses to suggestions made by the Committee in November 1995 were
sent to Government of India for their approval.
(iii) Observation of the Committee
Incorporating an exclusion clause in the relevant provision of Rule 3(1)(K) will not serve the purpose. Reference should also be make
to the spouse employed in some other Bank, Government Dept. or PSU. This has already been agreed to in case OSRs of nationalized
banks will the SBI management react?
 
 
 
 
Comments of the Bank
As commented earlier, the purpose of this clause is to exclude the spouse of the officer working in the Bank for the purpose of various
benefits as has been make available under Rules which might have been made available to the spouse also under Rules/Service
conditions applicable to him. As the benefits available in other nationalized Banks/Government Department or PSU may be different
from our Bank inclusion of reference of spouse employed in some other Bank, Government Deptt. or PSU may create anomaly. We
therefore propose no to include such reference Please also refer to minutes of the meeting sent vide our letter no.
CDO/PM/16/SPL/1183 dated the 26th May 1998, to Dy. Secretary, Govt. of India Ministry of Finance, Dept. of Economic Affairs
(Banking Division)
35
(iv) Observation of the Committee
Suggested amendment may be carried out in the definition clause to include the definition of "Perquisites"
Comments of the Bank
After observing usual formalities, we shall amend the Rule.
(v) Observation of the Committee
In Rule 19(1) delete the words "at its discretion" and "at the discretion of the Executive Committee" respectively appearing in the first
and the third provisio substitute them by for reasons to be recorded in writing"
Comments of the Bank
After observing usual formalities we shall amend the Rule.
(vi) Observation of the Committee
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

Upon a Plain reading of Rule 38 the confusion still remains in spite of the Bank’s reply to the Questionnaire. Why not redraft this
provision as per the discussions with nationalized Banks, IBA and M/O Finance?
Comments of the Bank
We agree with the suggestion of the Committee. We shall redraft the Rule.
(vii) Observation of the Committee
Reply of the Bank of the Questionnaire on Rule 64(1)(b) is not satisfactory. Please clarify the words "other grounds"
36
Comments of the Bank
"Other grounds’ mean some other grounds besides personal law. It means that Bank may permit an officer to enter into a marriage as is
referred to in the Clause (a) and (b) of Rule 64(1), provided there are some other grounds in addition to personal law. It may include
infertility or any other compelling circumstances.
(viii) Observation of the Committee
In Rule 67, after the words "for any good and sufficient reason" add the words" to be recorded in writing".
Comments of the Bank
After observing usual formalities we shall amend the Rule.
(ix) Observation of the Committee
Rule 68(A) (2) is silent about the revocation of suspension order in case the detained employee is released on being found to have
been put into custody on frivolous or unsubstantiated charges. Whether this is done immediately and with retrospective effect?
Comments of the Bank
Such cases will be dealt with under Rule 86 A 8(i) which provides as under:
Where the Appointing Authority holds that the officer has been fully exonerated or that the suspension was unjustifiable, the officer
shall be granted the full pay to which he would have been entitled, had he not been so suspended, together with any allowance of
which he would have been entitled, had he not been so suspended, together with any allowance of which he was in receipt
immediately prior to his suspension or may have been sanctioned subsequently and made
37
applicable to all officers. The period of absence from duty in such a case shall, for all purpose, be treated as period spent on duty.
In this regard, we also refer to Rule 68 A (s) (a) & (b) which reads as under:
(a) An order of suspension made under this rule shall contained to remain in force.
3. In pursuance to the discussion with the Committee at Calcutta, the State Bank of India furnished the following note on powers of
the Central Board of SBI to frame rules under Section 43(1) of the State Bank of India Act, 1955 and seeking of approval of the
Central Government in the matter:-
We have advised as under in the matter to Govt. of India, Ministry of Finance, Dept. of Economic Affairs ( Banking Div) vide our
letter no. CGO/PM/16/SPL/1183 dated the 26th May 1998.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

The Committee has observed that it is not necessary for the Bank to approach the Government for making amendments to the State
Bank of India Officers Service Rules (SBIOSR) as the same has been framed under Section 43(1) of the SBI Act, 1955. As the Bank is
traditionally following the practice of seeking approval of Government of India in making/ amending Rules we shall be glad to be
advised whether in view of the Committee’s observation Bank can henceforth make and amend State bank of India Officers Service
Rules under Section 43(1) of the SBI Act, 1955 without seeking approval of the Government.
We shall further process in the matter on receiving the advice from the Government of India.
38
4. The Committee considered the subject matter at its meeting held on September 18, 1998 and notes the comments of State Bank of
India on the points relating to rules 43(1), 3(1)(k), 64(1)(b) and 68(A)(2). The Committee had earlier agreed to SBI’s view point in
relation to rules 20(1) and 24(4). The Committee further noted that its views on points arising out of examination of rules 13(3) and
20(3) have been accepted by the Ministry of Finance and Rules 19(1), 38 and 67 have been accepted by State Bank of India. The
Committee desired that the necessary amendments to rules 13(3), 19(1), 20(1), 20(3), 24(4), 38, 67 may be carried out expeditiously.
5. As per the status report on discussions with the Committee held at Calcutta on 19.5.1999 (Annexure-I), the Committee was
informed that the Bank had already adopted the amendment to Rules 13(3) and 20(3) as suggested by the Committee and approved by
the Ministry of Finance. On the issue whether the Bank could make amendments to SBIOSR under Section 43(1) of the Act 1955
without seeking Govt.’s approval, the Committee was informed that as the bipartite settlements as well as Industry level agreement for
officers relating to service conditions of the officers/employees applicable to public sector banks were applicable on State Bank of
India also, it would be desirable that State Bank of India should seek the concurrence of the Government before making any
amendment in the rules in order to maintain consistency in the service conditions of officers/employees of the State Bank of India and
other public sector banks.
6. The Committee was further informed as per the status report that SBI has sought in principal clearance/approval of the Government
for amending rules 3(1)(u), 19(1), 38, 67 and 72 in the lines of the suggestions of the Committee.
2. Comments were again received from the Ministry of Finance/State Bank of India (Annexure-II) on the eve of Committee’s
discussion at Mumbai on the 16th February, 2000 on the two outstanding suggestions of the Committee on Rules 8 and 15(3),
39
8. The Committee had detailed discussion on the rules. Regarding provision of Rule 8 requiring an officer to officiate in a
higher grade, the State Bank of India gave a detailed reasoning for retaining the rule in its present form in view of the
practical difficulties that would come in the normal functioning of those branches where there were only two officers. The
Committee was further informed that officiating for a short period in a higher capacity would not involve any major decisions
as also would not amount to promotion to higher grade. The Committee agreed to their views and decided not to pursue the
matter further but observed that the officers facing major penalty/charges should not be allowed to officiate in a higher grade
where alternative arrangement was available. Besides, in the opinion of the Committee all efforts should be made to provide
alternative arrangement at the earliest and an officer facing major penalty/charges should not be allowed to officiate in the
higher grade for a longer period. In relation to rule 15(3) regarding reduction or dispensation of period of probation by the
competent authority, the Committee was given to understand that the Executive Committee of the Central Board of Bank,
which was the highest policy making body in the bank, was the competent authority vested with the powers under the rules.
Therefore, there was no likelihood of misuse of powers. The Committee agreed to retain the rule in its present form.
9. The Committee considered the subject matter at its meeting held on the 1st March 2000 and endorsed the observations it
had made in relation to rules 8 and 15(3) during the course of its deliberations with the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance as well as the SBI at Mumbai on the 16th February 2000. The Committee hopes that Ministry of Finance shall take
further necessary action in the matter promptly. The Committee further hopes that the proposed amendment in rules 3(1)(u),
19(1), 38, 67 and 72 on the lines of the Committee’s suggestions shall be carried out expeditiously.
 
 
40
Annexure-I
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

(Vide para 5-page-38)
STATUS REPORT DISCUSSIONS HELD ON 19.5. 1998 AT CALCUTTA ON SBI OFFICERS, SERVICE RULES.
We give below the details of the recommendations/Observations made by the committee at their meeting with the management of the
SBI held on 19.5.1998 and present status thereof:
g. As approved by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Banking Division), vide the letter F. No. 7/4/5/95-
IR dated the 18th May 1998 which was placed before the Committee at the meeting, Bank has adopted amendments to rule
13(3) and 20(3) on the lines it were suggested by the Committee.
(ii) The Committee had directed the Bank to seek clarification from the Government as to whether the Bank could make
amendments to SBIOSR under Section 43(1) of the Act, 1955 without seeking the approval of the Government.
In our discussions with the Government, we have been given to understand that it feels that as the bipartite settlements as well
as Industry level agreement for Officers relating to service conditions of the Officers/Employees applicable to public sector
Banks are applicable on State Bank of India also, it is desirable that State Bank of India may seek the concurrence of the
Government before making any amendment in the rules in order to maintain consistency in the service conditions of
Officers/Employees of the State Bank of India and other public sector Banks.
h. In view of the observations made by the Committee in the questionnaire/supplementary questionnaire after the meeting held on
the 19th May 1998, the Bank has sought in principle clearance/approval of the Government for amending under noted rules:
41
a. A new Rule 3(I) (u) to be incorporated as under: "Perquisites" means the various facilities that have been specified in
chapter VI.
(b) In Rule 19 (1) words "at its discretion" and "at the discretion of the executive Committee" appearing respectively in
1st and IIIrd proviso, to be substituted by "for reasons to be recorded in writing"
( c) Rule 38 to be redrafted as under:
(1) An officer on retirement from the Bank’s service shall be eligible to be paid a sum equivalent to the emolument of
any period of privilege leave that he had accumulated.
a. Where an officer dies while in service, there shall be payable to his legal representative sums which would have been
payable to the officer if he had encashed the privilege leave, that he had accumulated at the time of his death.
b. In all cases other than those specified at (1) & (2) all leave accumulated by the officer shall lapse once an officer ceases
to be in the Service of the Bank.
i. In Rule 67, after the words "for any good and sufficient reason" the words "to be recorded in writing" be added.
e. In Rule 72 the word "Managing Director" to be substituted by the words "The Committee consisting of two
Managing Directors & Deputy Managing & Director"
The matter is under consideration of the Government. We have been given to understand that since any amendment in
the Service Rules of State Bank of India will have repercussions on other public sector banks, Government has referred
the matter to RBI/IBA for their views.
42
 
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

Annexure-II
(Vide para 7-page-38)
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION DISCUSSION WITH THE MANAGEMENT OF SBI ON SBI
OFFICERS SERVICE RULES 16TH FEBRUARY 2000.
RULE IN SBIOSR
RULE 8
The competent authority may require an officer to officiate in a higher grade in a temporary or permanent vacancy.
OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee recommended that Rule 8 may be amended to include that officers who are facing disciplinary proceedings are not
permitted to officiate in senior capacity.
COMMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT/BANK
The suggested amendment was referred to the Government. The Government has examined the same. It is of the view that there may
be instances where the officer facing disciplinary proceedings may be required to officiate in a higher capacity in the absence of any
other officer in the Branch and hence acceptance of the recommendations to modify the rule may become impediment in the
functioning of the Bank branches. It is also possible that disciplinary proceedings may not lead to any punishment if the officer
concerned is absolved of the charges and found not to be guilty. In these circumstances, the Government feels that the proposed
amendment may be avoided.
The Bank is in agreement with the observations of the government. There are several small branches of the Bank which are manned by
one or two officers. At such branches if the Branch Manager is suddenly incapacitated and there is no officer other than the officer
facing
43
disciplinary proceedings, the Bank will have no option but to close that Branch till alternate arrangement is made. Further as observed
by the Government it is also possible that Disciplinary Proceedings may not
 
 
lead to any punishment. Officiating for a short period in a higher capacity does not involve major decisions and also does not amount
to promotion to higher grade. We, therefore, request the Committee to review the position and not to insist for the change in the Rule.
RULE 15(3)
Any other person appointed to any grade including the Junior Management Grade shall be on probation for such period as may be
decided by the competent authority.
PROVISO TO THE RULE:
Provided that the competent authority may, in the case of any officer, reduce or dispense with the period of probation under this rule.
OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
This provision gives blanket power to the competent authority to decide the period of probation, which may be misused against an
officer.
1. The proviso creates disparity among the Bank Officers and directly affects the spirit of equality enshrined under article 14 of
the Indian Constitution.
With reference to the Bank’s clarification that the policy for making appointments is laid down by their Board which
includes decision on the period of probation and the competent authority usually does not act at variance with the
policy while deciding the period of probation, the Committee observed that the position explained by the Bank should
be made part of the rule 15(3) by amending the same.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

44
COMMENTS OF SBI
In this connection we request a reference to under noted Rule in the SBI Officers’ Service Rule:
"Rule 14(1):
All appointments in, and promotions to, the Officers’ grades shall be made by the competent authority in accordance with the policy or
guidelines, if any, laid down in this behalf by the Central Board or the Executive Committee."
It may be seen that policy for making appointment which also includes decision on the period an officer has to remain on probation is
laid down by the Board of the Bank. Hence the competent authority, who is usually an executive of the Bank, does not decide at
variance with the policy framed by the Board of the Bank. There is no possibility of competent authority misusing the power.
We submit that the Executive Committee of the Central Board of the Bank , which is the highest policy making body in the Bank is
the competent authority vested with powers under the proviso. Therefore, there is no likelyhood of misuse of powers.
We had taken up the matter with the Government. The Government is of the view that the instructions contained in Rule 15(3) do not
effect the spirit of equality enshrined in the Constitution. Equality granted under the constitution amounts to equal treatment of
persons similarly placed. The period of probation can be different for different categories and it can also be different for different
categories of persons appointed to the same grade, but from different sources and having different period of experience. Further,
Government feels that such matters should be left to the Bank and not rigidly spelt out in any rule. We, therefore, request to the
Committee to review the matter and not to insist for the amendment.
45
V
State Bank of Mysore Officers’ Service Regulations, 1979
The State Bank of Mysore Officers’ Service Regulations, 1979 were examined and a questionnaire was forwarded to the Ministry of
Finance (Banking Division) on the State Bank of Mysore Officers’ Service Regulations, 1979 for their comments on March 13, 1996.
The subject matter was taken up for discussions with the representatives of the State Bank of Mysore alongwith the Ministry of
Finance at Bangalore on the 22nd March, 1996. The details of the discussion the Committee had are as follows:
 
 
i. Regulation-3
The Committee felt that a plain reading of the definition of ‘family’ gave the impression that lif the spouse of the officer was working
in the Bank, he/she was not the spouse of the officer at all. The Committee also pointed out that the spouse may not be an employee of
the Bank but of some other Bank or Government, Department or Public Sector Undertaking. In this regard, the Committee desired that
this anomaly may be removed from the definition.
The Committee noted the reply of the Bank that the definition was intended to exclude other service benefits relating to leave fare
concession, payment of house rent allowances. The representatives of the Bank stated that the suggestion of the Committee that the
spouse employed in some other Bank or Government Department or Public Sector Undertaking should also be included in the
definition of family as given in the Regulation, could be examined.
The Committee pointed out that there seemed to be little difference in para (f) defining "Emoluments" and para (m) defining "Salary".
46
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

Further, the term "Perquisites" had not been defined anywhere but the entire Chapter VI of the Regulation pertains to it.
The Committee noted the explanation given by the Bank to its query. The Committee also noted the reply of the Bank that the
aggregate of pay and dearness allowance was the "Salary" and that apart form salary the officer was entitled to certain other
allowances which were payable depending on the place of posting and that the aggregate of the salary and allowances was the
emoluments.
It was then stated that the definition of the term "Perquisites" would be looked into in consultation with the State Bank of India.
The Committee sought to know the meaning of the word "Fitted"as referred to in para (k) relating to the definition of the term
"Officer". The Committee noted the reply of the Bank that with the implementation of the Pillai Committee recommendations, new
grades and scales of pay had been provided for and that the staff working as on the date of implementation were fitted in the new
grade as per regulation 7 of the Officers’ Service Regulation. The Committee also noted the reply of the Bank that the terms "Fitted"
"Promoted" or "appointed" used subsequently in the regulation refer to specialist or technical person so fitted or promoted or
appointed to whom these regulations were made applicable
i. Regulation 7: Proviso
The Committee observed that the term "such other persons" appearing in the proviso to Regulation 7 was not clear. The
Committee also sought to know the composition of the Committee appointed by the Board or the Executive Committee
and whether such Committee had ever been constituted and whether any remedy was available to the person aggrieved
by the decision of the Committee.
The Committee noted the reply that this provision was relevant only at the time of implementation of the Regulations.
 
 
47
ii. Regulation 8 (3)
The Committee felt that from a plain reading of the Regulation the justification for fixing different dates for eligibility
of Officers to the next increment was not clear.
The Committee noted the reply of the Bank that keeping in view the seniority of the officers concerned who had earned
their increments earlier, the officers in service, prior to the appointed date i.e. 1st October, 1979, working in different
grades, were fitted into another grade as provided for in Schedule-II of the Regulations and that this provision was also
relevant at the time of implementation of the Regulations.
iii. Regulation 13(3)
The Committee sought to know the conditions under which the board may review of its own motion any decision of
the Committee constituted by the Board itself. The Committee further sought to know the guidelines issued in this
regard and whether it was done regularly or in exceptional cases.
The Committee noted the explanation given by the Bank to its query. The Committee also noted the reply of the Bank
that an officer aggrieved on his fitment in the new scale/grade could prefer his appeal and that these provisions were
relevant at the time of implementation of the Regulations.
iv. Regulation 15(3)
The Committee pointed out that this regulation gave blanket power to the competent authority to decide the period of probation, which
may be misused against any officer. The Committee felt that this created disparity amongst the Bank officers and directly affects the
spirit of equality enshrined under Article 14 of the constitution. In this regard, the Committee desired that the conditions under which
the period of probation may be reduced or dispensed with may be specified in the Regulations itself.
48
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

The Committee noted the reply of the Bank that this was an enabling provision and that it may not be desirable/necessary at all times
to rigidly fix up the period of probation and this was relevant in case of certain category of officers possessing specialized skills and
knowledge.
The Committee then observed that the discriminatory aspect relating to the period of probation was contrary to Article, 14 of the
Constitution. The Committee then directed that the clause relating to reduction in the probation period in case of specialist cadre
appointments, appointments as in the field of computers may be provided for in the regulation itself.
The Chairman of the Bank and the representative of Ministry of Finance agreed to re-examine the provision as suggested by the
Committee.
(vi) Regulation 16 (1)
The Committee sought to know the criteria that the officer had satisfactorily completed the training and the basis of the "opinion of the
competent authority". The Committee further sought to know as to whether the assessment report was of the institutions that had
imparted training to the officers or of the team imparting in service training in the Bank. The Committee further sought to know as to
whether the officer was required to pass a written test or an oral test in a language other than his mother tongue and whether this
provision was being resorted to.
The Committee noted the reply of the Bank that the assessment and performance of the officer would be the basis in forming the
opinion of the competent authority relating to the satisfactory completion of the probation/training in the Bank and that so far no
officer has been deputed outside the Bank to an institution to get training during the probation period.
49
The Bank further viewed that this was to make the officer familiar with the local language, other than his mother tongue and that this
was only an enabling provision and had not been invoked. The Bank thus felt that getting the opinion for confirmation from outside
agency was not necessitated.
The Committee directed that the word "Junior Management Grade may be" as appearing in the regulation should be substituted by the
word "Junior Management Grade shall be". The management of the Bank and the Ministry of Finance agreed to examine the same.
(vii) Regulation 19 (1)
The Committee pointed out that the grounds on which the Bank may extend the period of service of an officer who has attained the
age of 58 years or has completed 30 years of service may be specified in the regulation itself. The Committee further observed that the
grounds on which the Executive Committee may, at its own discretion, retire an officer on or at any time after the completion of 50
years of age or after the completion of 25 years of total service had not been indicated.
The Committee noted the reply of the Bank that the age of retirement for officers who joined the Bank on or after 19.07.1969 was 58
years. However, those who joined before 19.07.1969 may be given extension in service upto 60 years and that the Bank, may,
however, consider early retirement of an officer under this regulation, whose performance/health had deteriorated to the extent of
impairing his efficiency or for any other reasons.
The Committee further noted the reply of the Bank that Government had already advised the Banks to modify the proviso to
Regulation 19 to include the words "public interest" and that the amendment when carried out will make the regulation in line with the
FR/SR Rules applicable to government employees.
The Committee then observed that there was a need to retain the clause "attainment of the age of 58 years" instead of "completion of
30 years service".
50
The State Bank of Mysore assured to examine the regulation in the light of the observations made by the Committee.
(viii) Regulation 20 (2)
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

The Committee sought to know the circumstances in which an officer could be permitted to resign without notice on forfeiture of
security deposit or payment in lieu of notice or reduce the period of notice. In this regard, the Committee felt that the same may be
incorporated in the Regulations itself.
The Committee noted the reply of the Bank that the circumstances under which the requirements of notice period could be reduced or
waived largely depended on the officer’s service record and the need to make alternate arrangements etc.
(ix) Regulation 29
The Committee sought to know the justification of this Regulation and felt that the terms "entertainment" and "clubs and professional
institutions" should have been defined in the Regulations. In this regard the Committee suggested that the provision be made more
clear.
The Committee noted the reply of the Bank that the purpose of providing reimbursement of fee for membership of clubs and
professional institutions was to have more contact/liaison with business and other personalities who would be helpful in developing
the business of the Bank and that type of clubs and professional institutes may be decided by the Board or Executive Committee from
time to time and hence the same was not defined.
The Committee further noted the reply of the Bank that the term "entertainment" necessarily would mean entertaining the
customer/other cliente with a view to improving and maintaining the Bank’s business.
 
 
51
x. Regulation 36
The Committee pointed out that the Regulation gave an impression that the female employees were entitled to take maternity leave on
four occasions, not exceeding 12 months period during the entire period of service which was against the Government policy on
family planning. In this regard, the Committee felt that some sort of modification was required.
The Committee noted the reply of the Bank that the regulation itself provided that the maternity leave could be granted during
miscarriage of abortion and to that extent, the regulation was not against the government policy.
The Committee observed that the issue of the maternity leave was yet to be properly taken up by most of the Banks. The Committee
directed that the regulation may be redrafted, keeping in mind that the female employees would not be put to any
disadvantage/harassment.
(xi) Regulation 38
The Committee pointed out that the words shall lapse on the death of the officer or if he ceases to be in the service of the Bank ‘and ‘
shall be eligible to be paid a sum equivalent to the emoluments of any period of privilege leave that he has accumulated’ were
inherently contradictory in nature.
The Committee noted the reply of the Bank that under regulation 31, there were seven kinds of leave to which an officer was eligible
and that all these leave lapse on the death of an officer except the privilege leave which could be accumulated and enchased. The
Committee further noted the reply of the bank that Proviso to the Regulation provided that when an officer died in service, his legal
representatives shall be paid amounts equivalent to employees accumulated privilege leave.
52
The Committee observed that the regulation was not drafted properly and required redrafting , with a view to making clear and free of
contradictions to which the Bank/Ministry of Finance agreed.
xii. Regulation 39
The Committee pointed out that the regulation gave an impression that an officer who was on leave with his family at a distant
place from the place of duty, in case of recall to duty, returned back to the station where he was availing leave with his family,
was eligible to be paid the actual expenses incurred by him and the members of his family which should not be in practice.
The Committee pointed out that this regulation may be amended suitably.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

The Committee noted the reply of the Bank that this regulation had been provided only to facilitate the officer to complete any
of the jobs unattended to during the period of leave. The provision was used very sparingly only when the need of the officer
on duty was felt absolutely necessary.
xiii. Regulation 41
The Committee pointed out that since the AC sleeper had been bifurcated into 2 tier and 3 tier categories in most of the trains,
this sub-regulation may be amended to specify the AC sleeper class according to the entitlement of the Junior and Middle
Management Grade officers, respectively.
The Committee noted the reply of Bank that any officer provided in this regulation was entitled to travel either by first class or
air-conditioned sleeper class by train and that these matters were usually decided at the industry level by way of negotiations
between IBA and Officers’ Association/Workmen Unions as "residual issues" of the Officers Regulations/Bipartite wage
Settlement.
 
 
53
xiv. Regulation 75
The Committee pointed out that the power to implement the Regulations, should not vest in the Managing Director alone because that
would lead to arbitrariness and instead, the powers including appellate power, wherever necessary, should lie with the Chairman and
ultimately the Board. In this regard, the Committee felt that amendment to the regulation was necessary.
The Committee noted the reply of the Bank that as per Regulation 41 (2) (a) and (b) of the Subsidiary Banks General Regulations,
1959, the Managing Director had powers to exercise the functions delegated to him by the Board. The provisions of the Officers
Service Regulations were made by the Board. Also the power to give directions was only in the matter where clarifications may be
necessary. Since the Managing Director functions subject to the control of the Board, there was no arbitrariness.
The discussions ended with mutual vote of thanks.
 
 
54
2. During the discussion at Bangalore, the Committee noted the comments of the State Bank of Mysore on the definition of the words
"emoluments" (regulation 3(f) Officer (regulation 3(k)) and ‘salary’ (regulation 3(m), proviso to regulation 7, regulation 8(3), 13(3),
20(2), 29, 39, 41 and 75. The Committee had however suggested amendments to regulation 3(h), definition of the word "perquisites",
regulations 15(3), 16(1), 19(1), 36 and 38. The above extract of the discussion was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance in April, 1997
for furnishing the action taken note on the observations/recommendations made by the Committee. However no action taken note was
forthcoming from the Ministry.
3. The Committee again discussed the subject matter with the representatives of the State Bank of Mysore and the Ministry of Finance
on the 1st July 1999 at Ooty where the Committee took a serious view of the inordinate delay on the part of the Ministry of Finance in
furnishing the action taken note on the Committee’s recommendations on regulation 3(k), definition of the word "perquisite",
regulations 15(3), 16(1), 19(1), 36 and 38 of the State Bank of Mysore Officers’ Service Regulations, 1979. However, the action
initiated by the Ministry on the recommendations of the Committee based on the discussion held earlier at Bangalore in 1996 were
supplied at Ooty (Annexure-I). The Committee was also informed that with a view to giving effect to the suggestions of the
Committee a proposal containing the amendments in the relevant regulations had been forwarded by State Bank of Mysore to the
Ministry who had then forwarded the same to the State Bank of India, Central Office for their comments/approval. The Committee
there after decided to take up the matter directly with the State Bank of India. Relevant extracts from the study note on the discussions
held at Ooty were forwarded to the Ministry of Finance in September, 1999 for furnishing the action taken note on the suggestions of
the Committee.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

4. The subject matter as per the decision of the Committee was again taken up for discussion with State Bank of India, State Bank of
Mysore and the Ministry of Finance on February 16, 2000 at Mumbai. The final comments of the State Bank of Mysore on the
regulations on
55
which the committee had suggested amendments are enclosed (Annexure-II).
5. The Committee during the course of the discussion at Mumbai did not agree with the replies of the State Bank of Mysore on
definition of the word ‘perquisite’, regulation 19 (1), and 38. The Committee desired that these regulations should be amended
as per the suggestions of the Committee on the lines of similar regulations of the State Bank of India. The Committee, however,
reviewed its earlier suggestions on regulations 3 (h), 15 (3), 16 (1) and 36 and noted the Comments of the Bank. As regards
regulation 36 the Committee felt that the Ministry of Finance/ Bank should find out the feasibility to rationalize the provisions
relating to maternity leave as per the provisions available in the Central Government Rules.
6. The Committee discussed the subject at its meeting held on March 1, 2000. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of
Finance/The State Bank of Mysore should take immediate steps to amend regulations 3 (definition of the word perquisites), 19
(1), 38 as desired by it.
56
Annexure-I
(Vide para 3-page-54)
OFFICERS SERVICE REGULATIONS FOR WHICH AMENDMENTS AS REQUIRED BY RAJYA SABHA COMMITTEE
HAS BEEN SUGGESTED AND MINISTRY’S REPLIES
 
Questions Rajya Sabha
Committee’s
Suggestions made at
the visit on 22ND
March 1996 at
Mysore
Ministry’s
Suggestions/Replies
for warded to S.B.I.,
Central Office for
their comments/action
1. Regulation 3-
Definitions:
1(1) Para (h)
defines the term
"family" and
states that the
term "family"
means and
includes spouse
of the officer (if
the spouse is not
an employee of
the Bank). The
intention of this
portion appears
to be that if the
spouse of the
Officer is an
 
 
 
 
Definition of "family"
gave the impression
that if the spouse of
the officer was
working in the Bank,
he/she was not was
not the spouse of the
officer at all. The
Committee also
pointed out that the
spouse may not be an
employee of the Bank
but some other Bank
or Government
department or Public
 
 
 
 
We feel that suggestion
is well made and merits
consideration. The
definition may be
slightly amended. The
amended definition
would read "Family"
means and includes
spouse of the Officer
(provided however,
such spouse is not
working as an
employee of the Bank
or Government
department or Public
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

employee of the
Bank, he or she
will not get the
benefits provided
by these
regulations
which are
otherwise made
available to the
spouse wholly
dependent on the
officer. It
appears that the
brackets and
words (if the
spouse is not an 
 
 
employee of the
(Bank) are not
required here as
they create
confusion
because:-
(a) If it is seen
from the
grammatical
construction and
arid literal
confines it
appears that if
the spouse is
working in the
Bank he or she is
not the spouse of
the officer at all;
and
(b) the spouse
may not be an
employee of the
Bank but of
some other Bank
or Government
Department or
Public Sector
Undertaking.
Whether the
Ministry will
react and
remove the
anomaly in the
definition?
Sector undertaking, In
this regard, the
Committee desired 
57
that this anomaly may
be removed from the
definition.
 
 
The representative of
the Bank stated that
the suggestion of the
Committee that the
spouse employed in
some other Bank or
Government
Departments or
Public Sector
Undertaking should
also be included in
the definition of
family as given in the
regulation, could be
examined.
The Committee
pointed out that there
seemed to be little
difference in para (6)
defining
"emoluments" and
para (m) defining
"salary". Further, the
term "perquisites"
had not been defined
anywhere but the
entire chapter VI of
the Regulation
pertains to it.
58
The Committee noted
the explanations
given by the Bank to
its query. The
Committee also noted
the reply of the Bank
that the aggregate of
pay and dearness
allowance was the
"Salary" and that
apart from the Salary,
the officer was
entitled to certain
other allowances
which were payable
depending on the
place of posting and
Sector Undertaking
Bank) and the children,
parents, brothers and
sisters of the officer
wholly 
 
 
dependent on the
officer but shall not
include the legally 
separated spouse.
We shall be glad if the 
definition of perquisites
is advised to us.
However, we have
drafted a definition
which may be
considered. "Perquisites
means and includes
house rent allowance,
city compensatory
allowance, discomfort
allowance, hill
allowance or any other
allowance which does
not form part of the
salary payable."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

1(2) Para (f)
defines
"emoluments"
para (k) defines
"pay" and para
(m) defines
"salary". There
seems little
difference in
paras (f) and (m)
and the entire
chapter-VI of the
Regulations
pertains to
"perquisites"
but the 
 
 
term has not
been defined any
where. The
Ministry may
like to react in
this regard.
1(3) para (j)
defines the term
"officer"
wherein the
word "fitted"
has been
referred twice. It
is not clear what
"fitted" means.
Will the Ministry
clarify and make
it clear in the
definition itself?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the aggregate of
the salary and
allowances was the
emoluments.
It was then stated that
the definition of the
term "perquisites"
would be looked into
in consultation with
the State Bank of
India.
 
 
The Committee then
observed that the
discriminatory 
59
aspect relating to 
the period of
probation was
contrary to article 14
of the constitution.
The Committee then
directed that the
clause relating to
reduction in the
probation period in
case of specialist
cadre appointments,
appointments as in
the field of computers
may be provided for
in the regulation
itself.
The Chairman of the
Bank and the
representatives of
Ministry of Finance
agreed to re-examine
the provisions as
suggestion by the
Committee.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Regulation 15
(3)
This sub-
regulation
provides that
any other person
appointed to 
 
 
any grade
including junior
management 
grade shall be on
probation for
such period as
may be decided
by the competent
authority and
the proviso states
that the
competent
authority may, in
the case of any
officer reduce of
dispenser with
the period of
probation.
2(1) This
provision gives
blanket power to
the competent
authority to
decide the period
of probation,
60
The Committee
directed that the word
"Junior Management
Grade may be" as
appearing in the
regulation should be
substituted by the
word "Junior
Management Grade
shall be" The
Management of the
Bank and the
Ministry of Finance
agreed to examine the
same. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A clause by way of a
proviso can be added.
The clause 
 
 
may read as "Provided
further 
that the competent
authority shall form an
opinion relating to
reduction considering
the individuals merit
regarding any special
qualification/experience
that would be in the
Bank’s interest. Such
opinion shall be in
writing and also shall
be final.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

which may be
misused against
any officer,
whether the
Ministry have
issued any
guidelines to the
Bank in this
regard. If so, the
details there of? 
2(2) The proviso
creates disparity
among the Bank
Officers and
directly affects
the spirit of
equality
enshrined under
Article 14 of the
Indian
Constitution.
Whether the
Ministry have
any objection in
 
 
specifying the
conditions under
which the period
of probation may
be reduced or
dispensed with.
3. Regulation
16(1):
This sub-
regulation
provides that a
probationary
officer shall be
confirmed in the
service of the
Bank if, in the
opinion of the
competent
authority, 
the officer has
satisfactorily
completed the
training in any
institution to
which the officer
61
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

may have been
deputed for
training and the
in-service
training in the
Bank and the
proviso to the
sub-regulation
provides that an
officer directly
recruited to the
Junior
Management
grade may be
required also to
pass a test in a
language other
than his mother
tongue. 
What will be
criteria to
judge that the
officer has
satisfactorily
completed the
training 
 
 
and what will be
the basis of the
"opinion" of the
competent
authority?
Whether it will
be the
assessment
report of the
institution that
has imparted
training to the
officer or the
assessment
report of the
team imparting
in-service
training in the
Bank. The
regulation is not
clear, Whether
the Ministry
would like to 
The Committee then
observed that there
was a need to 
62
retain the clause 
attainment of the age
of 58 years" instead
of "completion of 30
years service"
The State Bank of
Mysore assured to
examine the
regulation in the light
of the observations
made by the
Committee.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The passing of a test in
respect of an officer
recruited in Junior
Management Grade
shall be made
mandatory.
Amendment to state
that "Junior
Management Grade
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

make it more
comprehensive
to remove these
anomalies? 
Similarly the
provision to the
regulation is also
not clear.
Whether the
officer has to
pass a written
test or an oral
test in a
language other
than his mother
language ?
Whether this
provision is
being reported
to? Ministry will
clarify this
aspect in the
regulation itself?
4. Regulation
19(1):
This sub-
regulation
provides that an
officer shall
retire from the 
 
 
service of the
Bank on 
attainting the
age of fifty eight
years or upon
the completion of
thirty years of
service,
whichever curt
first. However,
the proviso
provides that the
competent
authority, may at
its discretion
extend the
period of service
of such an officer
should such
63
shall" instead of "Junior
Management Grade
may".
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We feel there is no
justification in retiring
a person only because 
 
 
he has completed 30 
years of service. Hence,
the words or upon the
completion of thirty
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

extension be
deemed
desirable in the
interests of the
Bank. 
The second
proviso provides
that an officer
may at the
discretion of the
executive
Committee, be
retired from the
Bank’s service
after he has
attained 50 years
of age as the case
may be, by
giving him three
months notice in
writing or pay in
lieu thereof.
4(1) It is not
clear in
the regulation as
to the grounds
on which the
Bank may
extend the
period of Service
of an officer who
has 
 
 
 
 
attained the age
of 58 years or
has completed 30
years service
whether there is
any objection in
specifying the
same in the
regulation itself?
4(2) The grounds
on which the
Executive
Committee may,
at its own
discretion, retire
The Committee
observed that the
issue of maternity
leave was yet to be
properly taken up by
most of the Banks.
The Committee
directed that the
regulation may be re-
drafted, keeping in
mind that the female
employees would not 
64
be put to any
disadvantage 
/harassment.
 
 
years of service
whichever occurs first"
in Regulation 19(1)
may be deleted. So also
the words "or has
completed thirty years
of the service as the
case may be "occurring
in first proviso to
Regulation 19 (1) may
also be deleted. we are
of the 
view that the
requirement that
extension should be
deemed desirable in the
interest of the Bank is
adequate and there is no
necessity to include the
term public interest as
suggested. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

an officer on or
at any time after
the completion of
50 years of age
or after the
completion of 25
years of total
service 
has not been
indicated. Where
there is any
objection in
specifying the
same in the
regulation itself?
1. 5.
Regulation
36.
This Regulation
provides that
leave upto a
period of 3
months at a time
may be granted
by way of
maternity leave
including in
respect of 
postnatal period
of at the time of
miscarriage or
abortion, so
however, that no
more than 12
months of such 
 
 
leave shall be
available during
the entire period
of service of the
officer. 
The Regulation
gives an
impression that
the female
employees were
entitled to take
maternity leave
on four
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As suggested, the
regulation should be in
conformity with the
Government policy on
family planning. We
recommend that after
the birth of two
children, the female
employee should not be
entitled for 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

occasions, not
exceeding 12
months period
during the entire
period of service
which is against
the Government
policy on family
planning.
Whether the
Ministry 
has any
suggestion in
modifying the
same.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65
 
 
The Committee
pointed out that the
words "shall lapse on
the death of the
officer or if he cases
to be in the service of
the Bank" and "shall
be eligible to be paid
a sum equivalent to
the emoluments of
any period of
privilege leave that he
has accumulated"
were inherently
contradictory in
nature.
The Committee noted
the reply of the Bank
that under regulation
31, there was seven
kinds of leave to
which an officer was
eligible 
maternity leave as a 
 
 
matter of right.
Discretion may 
however be given to the
management to
sanction maternity
leave on special
circumstances. The
following proviso may
be added to the
regulation. "Provided
however, the employee
shall not be entitled for
maternity leave after
the birth of two
children.
"Provided further that
the competent authority
may for special reasons
grant maternity leave
even after the birth of
two children like
untimely death,
permanent incapacity of
the child already born,
miscarriage/termination
of pregnancy according
to law. The discretion to
grant such leave shall
be subject to the
maximum period of 12
months during the
entire period of service
of the officer 
 
 
as mentioned/in the
regulation."
We are, however, of the
opinion that a similar
provision must also be
incorporated in the
Award/ Bipartite
settlements.
 
 
We may modify the
regulation 38 to read
All leave except
privilege leave shall be
ceases to be in the
service of the Bank,
provided that where an
officer payable to his
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. Regulation 38:
The Regulation
begins with the
words "all leave
shall lapse on the
death of the
officer" and the
proviso sates
that where an
officer retires
from the Bank’s
service he shall
be eligible to be
paid a sum
equivalent to the
emoluments of
any period of
privilege leave
that he had
accumulated.
The words "shall
lapse on the
death of the 
officer of if he
ceases to be in
the service of the
Bank" and
"shall be eligible
to be paid a sum
equivalent to the
emoluments of
any period of
privilege 
 
66
and that all these
leave lapse on the
death of an officer
except the privilege
leave which could be
accumulated and
encashed. The
Committee further 
noted the reply of the
Bank that proviso to
the Regulation
provided that when an
officer died in
service, his legal
representatives shall
be paid amounts
equivalent to
employees
accumulated privilege
leave.
The Committee
observed that the
regulation was not
drafted properly and
required redrafting,
with a view to
making it clear and
free of contradictions
to which the
Bank./Ministry of
Finance agreed.
legal representatives
sums which would have
been payable to the
officer if he had availed
of the privilege leave,
that he had
accumulated at the time
of his death. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
 
 
 
 
leave that he had
accumulated"
are inherently
contradictory in
nature. Whether
the Ministry
have any
objection in
modifying the
Regulations
accordingly? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67
Annexure-II
(Vide para 4-page-55)
STATE BANK OF MYSORE OFFICERS’ SERVICE REGULATIONS FOR WHICH AMENDMENTS HAVE BEEN
SUGGESTED BY COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION RAJYA SAHBA.
Rule in State Bank of
Mysore Officers’ Service
Rules (SBMOSR)
Committee’s
Suggestions
/Comments
State Bank of
Mysore views
/Comments
1. Regulation No. 3(h) :
"family" means
and includes spouse
of the officer ( if the
spouse is not an
employee of the
Bank) and the
children, parents,
brothers and sisters
of the officer wholly
 
 
 
 
(a) Definition of
"family" gave the
impression that if
the spouse of the
officer was working
 
 
 
 
(a) The
intention of
this provision
is that if the
spouse of the
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

dependent on the
officer but shall not
include the legally
separated spouse:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the Bank, he/she
was not the spouse
of the officer at all.
The Committee also
pointed out that the
spouse may not be
an employee of the
Bank but of some
other Bank or
Government
Department or
Public Sector
Undertaking. In this
regard, the
Committee desired
that this anomaly 
68
may be removed
from the definition.
(b) The Committee 
stated that the
definition of 
"perquisites" may be
looked into in
consultation of State
Bank of India.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Committee
observed that the
discriminatory
aspect relating to the
period of probation
was contrary to
officer is an
employee of
the Bank, he or
she will not get
the benefits
provided by
the 
Bank under
these Rules,
which are
otherwise
made available
to the spouse
dependent on
the officer.
This clause has
been any
dispute so far.
We are
therefore not in
favour of
changing the
definition of
family as given
in 
 
 
Rule 3 (h).
 
 
(b) There is no
need to define
the term 
"perquisites"
as there is a
separate
chapter
(Chapter VI)
which deals
with specific
items falling
under the
heading
"Perquisites".
We are,
therefore, not
in favour of
any change in
this regard.
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this
connection, we
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Regulation No.
15(3)
2. Any other
person
appointed to
any grade
including
junior
management
grade shall be
on probation
for such
period as may
be decided by
the competent
authority.
Provided that
the competent
authority
may, in case
of any officer
reduce or
dispense with
the period of
probation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Article 14 of the
Constitution. The
Committee directed
that the clause
relating to reduction
in the probation
period in case of
specialist cadre
appointments,
appointments as in 
69
the field of
computers may be
provided for in the
regulation itself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
refer to
Regulation
14(1) of
Officer Service
Regulations in
terms of which
"All
appointments
in, and
promotions to
the officers
grades shall be
made by the
competent
authority in
accordance
with the policy
or guidelines,
if any. 
 
 
laid down in
this behalf by
the Board or
the Executive
Committee in
the light of the
State Bank’s
guidelines"
There is no
discriminatory
rule against
specialist 
cadre officers
as regards their
probation. We
are of the view
that the
provisio in
Rule 15 is
applicable to
all categories
of officers and
not to
specialist cadre
alone. As the
period of
probation is
determined by
the Board or
the Executive
Committee and
it being
uniform for a
particular
cadre, there is
no
discrimatory
aspect in the
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Regulation
No. 16(1) 
An officer
referred in
regulation 15
shall be
confirmed in
the service of
the Bank, if,
in the opinion
of the
competent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Committee
directed that the
word "Junior
Management Grade
may be" and
appearing in the
regulation should
be 
70
substituted
by the word
"Junior
Management
Grade shall
be"
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provision.
 
 
 
 
 
 
We are of the
view that
substitution of
the word "may
be" by the
words "shall
be" will have
the effect 
 
 
of making the
provision of
passing a test
in a language
other than in
his mother
tongue,
mandatory for
their
confirmation
for all directly
recruited
officers to
Junior
Management
Grade, We feel
that this is not
the intention
behind framing
the rule, Thus
we are not in
favor of
making the
amendment.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As the rule of
retirement is
common to all
banks, we
suggest that
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

authority, the
officer has
satisfactorily
completed the
training in
any
institution to
which the
officers may
have been
deputed for
training and
in service
training in
the Bank.
Provided that
an officer
directly
recruited to
the junior
management
grade may be
required also
to pass a test
in a language
other than his
mother
tongue.
4. Regulation
No. 19(1)
An officer
shall retire
from the
service of the
Bank on
attaining the
age of fifty-
eight years or
upon the
completion of
thirty years of
services,
whichever
occurs first. 
 
 
5. Regulation
No. 36
Leave upto a
period of
three months
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Committee
observed that there
was a need to retain
the clause
"attainment of the
age of 58 years"
instead of
"completion of 30
years service."
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Committee
observed that the 
71
issue of maternity
leave was yet to be
properly taken up by
most of the Bank.
The Committee
directed that the
regulations may be
re-drafted, keeping
in mind that the
female employees
would not be put to
any disadvantage
/harassment
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Committee
pointed out that the
words "shall lapse
on the death of the
officer or if he
ceases to be in the
service of the Bank"
and "shall be
matter may be
taken up with
IBA/GOI.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As the leave
rules are
uniform in the 
 
 
Banking
Industry, we
suggest that
the matter may
be taken with
IBA.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Regulation
is being
amended as
per guidelines
of GOI vide
their letter No.
4/6/1/97-IR
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

at a 
 
 
time may be
granted by
way of
maternity
leave
including in
respect of
post-natal
period or at
the time of
miscarriage
or abortion,
so, however,
that not more
than 12
months of
such leave
shall be
available
during the
entire period
of service of
the officer.
 
 
3. 6. Regulation
No. 38. 
4. All leave shall
lapse on the
death of the
officer or if he
ceases to be in
the service of
the Bank,
provided that
where an
officer dies
while in
service, there
shall be
payable to his
legal
representative
sums which
would have
been payable
to the officer
if he had
availed of the
privilege
leave, that he
eligible to be paid a
sum equivalent to
the emoluments of
any period of
privilege leave that
he has accumulated"
were inherently
contradictory in
nature.
 
 
 
 
 
dated
30.11.1998.
The work has
been taken up
in hand.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

had
accumulated
at the time of
his death.
 
72
VI
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
 
 
(I)
Industrial Development Bank of India General Regulations, 1964-Implementation of 105th Report of the Committee.
The Committee is not convinced with the argument put forth before it that the word ‘may’ under certain circumstances connotes ‘shall
and, therefore, it was appropriate to use the word ‘may’. In the opinion of the Committee, rules must be framed wherever they are
contemplated under an Act and there should be a least scope of discretion with the executive so far as the question of framing or not of
subordinate legislation was concerned. The Committee, during the course of the discussion with the Secretary, Legislative
Department, had mooted an idea that a legislation could contain separate rule making clauses one using the word ‘may’ and the other
using the word ‘shall’ but, the reaction of the Secretary, Legislative Department to this was not in the affirmative basically on the
ground such a segregation would be a very delecate and difficult job and use of the word "shall" that it would be very very risky and it
may create difficulties. The Committee does not find the explanation very convincing. It does not see any problem in clearly
specifying that such and such areas shall be regulated by rules and regulations. In such a case, there is hardly any justification for
using the word may. In case, however, there are certain areas where it is desired to give a discretion to the executive in the matter of
framing rules and regulations, the act may carry the word ‘may’. As regards the framing of rules under the IDBI Act, the Committee is
unhappy to find that subordinate legislation contemplated under the Act have not yet been framed particularly the staff Rules (Duties,
Conduct Salary and Allowance) as referred under section
73
37(2) of the Act. The explanation that the bank has not found the necessity for that is not acceptable to the Committee. In the opinion
of the Committee, any legislation of Government should be precise, in so far as the areas where subordinate legislation is required. In
case any subordinate legislation is contemplated in any provision of the Act, it should definitely be framed. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that Government should undertake a review in the matter in consultation with the Attorney General of the
country, and position may be reported to the Committee within a period of 3 months.
The Committee is not convinced with the view put forth by the Secretary, Banking Division that it did not matter much whether a
subordinate legislation was framed under Section 37(2)(i) or Section 26(1) of the Act. The Committee finds that the Ministry of
Finance have acted in a similar manner in the case of RBI Act and NABARD Act also. The Committee decides to take up this issue
separately.
 
 
(II)
 
 
Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial institutions Act, 1993-Implementation of 118th Report of the Committee.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

The Committee considered the subject matter at its meeting held on 1st March 2000. The Committee notes with satisfaction that its
recommendations vide paras 4.4(b) (d) and (g) had found favour with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee hopes that the
legislation incorporating the Committee’s suggestions shall be got passed through the Parliament by the Ministry of Finance during the
on-going Budget Session. As regards the Committee’s recommendation as contained in para 4.4(g), it notes with satisfaction the
comments of Ministry of Finance that the suggestion which requires amendment to the rules would be considered in the next state.
The Committee, in this context, recommends further that the new rules should also empower the Tribunal to notify the defaulters
names even on the website of DRT/BANK/FINANCE INSTITUTION.
74
The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the comments of the Ministry of Finance as also the recommendations of the
Working Group of the Reserve Bank of India with regard to paras 4.4(a), (e) and (f) of the 118th report of the Committee. On the
Committee’s recommendation para 4.4(a) for restructuring of Debt Recovery Tribunals and Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunals on the
lines of the Revenue Courts and Special Courts with codified rules, the Committee noted the observation of the Working Group of the
Reserve Bank of India in the matter viz. that no specific advantage could be foreseen by effecting such a change. The Committee
decides not to pursue this recommendation further. The Committee also agrees with the suggestion of the Working Group of the
Reserve Bank of India on its recommendation as contained in para 4.4(f) regarding authorization of the Tribunals under the Act/Rules
to order deposit of 50% of the certificate amount while setting aside an ex-party order. The Committee agrees that such issues should
be better left at the discretion of the Presiding Officer of the Debt Recovery Tribunal.
The Committee, thereafter, reviewed its recommendations as contained in para 4.4(e) regarding lowering of the fiscal limit from Rs.
10 lakhs to Rs. 2 lakhs for the purpose of bringing more cases within the cognizance of the Debt Recovery Tribunals. The Committee
notes that the Working Group of the Reserve Bank of India also supports the proposal for reduction in the fiscal limit from Rs. 10
lakhs to Rs. 2 lakhs but, prior to that, they want more DRTs so that DRTs are not overburdened with abnormally large number of cases.
The Committee feels that setting up of more DRTs is in fact the need of the hour and Government should take prompt steps in this
regard. The Committee accordingly reiterates its earlier recommendations for reduction in the fiscal limit from Rs. 10 lakhs to Rs. 2
lakhs so that more number of cases of recovery due to banks and the financial institutions are covered by the DRTs.
 
 
75
(III)
State Bank of India Officers’ Service Rules, 1975
The Committee had detailed discussion on the rules. Regarding provision of Rule 8 requiring an officer to officiate in a higher grade,
the State Bank of India gave a detailed reasoning for retaining the rule in its present form in view of the practical difficulties that
would come in the normal functioning of those branches where there were only two officers. The Committee was further informed that
officiating for a short period in a higher capacity would not involve any major decisions as also would not amount to promotion to
higher grade. The Committee agreed to their views and decided not to pursue the matter further but observed that the officers facing
major penalty/charges should not be allowed to officiate in a higher grade where alternative arrangement was available. Besides, in the
opinion of the Committee all efforts should be made to provide alternative arrangement at the earliest and an officer facing major
penalty/charges should not be allowed to officiate in the higher grade for a longer period. In relation to rule 15(3) regarding reduction
or dispensation of period of probation by the competent authority, the Committee was given to understand that the Executive
Committee of the Central Board of Bank, which was the highest policy making body in the bank, was the competent authority vested
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

with the powers under the rules. Therefore, there was no likelihood of misuse of powers. The Committee agreed to retain the rule in its
present form.
8. The Committee considered the subject matter at its meeting held on the 1st March 2000 and endorsed
the observations it had made in relation to rules 8 and 15(3) during the course of its deliberations with
the representatives of the Ministry of Finance as well as the SBI at Mumbai on the 16th February 2000.
The Committee hopes that Ministry of Finance shall take further necessary action in the matter
promptly. The Committee further hopes that the proposed amendment in rules 3(1)(u), 19(1), 38, 67 and
72 on the lines of the Committee’s suggestions shall be carried out expeditiously.
76
(IV)
State Bank of Mysore Officers’ Service Regulation, 1979
The committee during the course of the discussion at Mumbai did not agree with the replies of the State Bank of Mysore on definition
of the word ‘perquisite’, regulations 19 (1), and 38. The committee desired that these regulations should be amended as per the
suggestions of the Committee on the lines of similar regulations of the State Bank of India. The Committee, however reviewed its
earlier suggestions on regulations 3 (h), 15 (3), 16 (1) and 36 and noted the Comments of the Bank. As regards regulation 36 the
Committee felt that the Ministry of Finance/ Bank should find out the feasibility to rationalize the provisions relating to maternity
leave as per the provisions available in the Central Government Rules.
The Committee discussed the subject at its meeting held on March 1, 2000. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of
Finance/The State Bank of Mysore should take immediate steps to amend regulations 3 (definition of the word perquisites), 19 (1), 38
as desired by it.
---------
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________________________________
MINUTES
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

_________________________________________________________
80
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA
XXIV
Twenty Fourth Meeting
 
 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 1st March 2000 in Room No. 126 C (Chairman’s Room), Third Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Miss Saroj Khaparde –Chairperson
2. Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat
3. Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah
4. Prof. A. Lakshmisagar
5. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri R.B. Gupta, Under Secretary
2. The Committee considered the following Memoranda:-
(i) Memorandum No. 17/2000 regarding Recovery of Debtsdue to Banks and Financial Institution Act, 1993
and the rules made thereunder- Implementation of 118th Report of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation.
The Committee considered the above Memorandum and observed that the Ministry have accepted all the suggestions of the
Committee except those contained in paras 4.4(a), 4.4(e) and 4.4(f) of the Report. The Committee considered the Ministry’s comments
on the
81
recommendations contained in the said paragraphs. In relation to para 4.4(a), the Committee noted the observation of the Working
Group of RBI. As regards recommendation vide para 4.4(f), the Committee agreed with the opinion of the Working Group that matters
like deposit of a percentage of certificate amount while setting aside an ex-party order, should be better left at the discretion of the
Presiding Officer of the DRT. As regards the recommendation vide para 4.4(e), the Committee noted that the Working Group of the
RBI was also in support of the proposal for reduction in the fiscal limit from Rs. 10.00 lakhs to Rs. 2.00 lakhs but, prior to that, they
wanted more DRTs to be in position so that these are not burdened with abnormally large number of cases. The Committee endorsed
the opinion to have more DRTs in position and reiterated its earlier recommendation for reduction in the fiscal limit.
The Committee decided that the matter may be reported to the House.
(ii) Memorandum No. 18/2000 regarding Industrial Development Bank of India General Regulations, 1964-
Implementation of 105th Report of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

The Committee considered the subject matter and expressed its dissatisfaction over the plea put before it by the representatives of the
Ministry of Law as well as the Ministry of Finance. The Committee felt that there was no plausible reason for it to review its
recommendation as contained in its 102nd and 105th Report, namely, that the rule making provisions in an Act should carry the word
"shall" instead of "may" and that Government must frame subordinate legislation where it is contemplated under an Act. The
Committee desired that the Ministry of Law may obtain the opinion of the Attorney General of India also in the matter.
The Committee decided that the matter may be reported to the House.
 
 
82
i. Memorandum No. 19/2000 regarding State Bank of India Officers’ Service Rules.
The Committee considered the subject matter and noted the comments of the Ministry of Finance/SBI on its outstanding
recommendations relating to rules 8 and 15(3). The Committee also expressed hope that the Ministry of Finance would carry out the
amendments in rules 3(1)(u), 19(1), 38, 67 and 72 expeditiously on the lines suggested by the Committee.
The Committee decided that the matter may be reported to the House.
iv. Memorandum No. 20/2000 regarding State Bank of Mysore Officers’ Service Regulations, 1979.
The Committee considered the subject matter and expressly desired that the State Bank of Mysore should take immediate steps to
amend regulations 19(1) and 38 as per the discussions it had at Mumbai on February 16, 2000.
The Committee decided that the matter may be reported to the House.
3. The Committee also decided to meet again on Wednesday, March 8, 2000 for consideration and adoption of its draft 127th and 128th
Reports.
4. The committee adjourned at 3.50 P.M.
-----
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA
XXV
Twenty Fifth Meeting
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 8th March 2000 in Room No. 126 C ( Committee Chairman’s Room), Third Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Miss Saroj Khaparde –Chairperson
2. Shri Satyanarayana Dronamraju
3. Shri Radhakishan Malaviya
4. Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani
5. Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat
6. Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
7. Prof. A. Lakshmisagar
8. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra
9. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
SECRETARIAT
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

1. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
2. Shri R.B. Gupta, Under Secretary
3. Shri S.K. Tripathi, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered its 127th and 128th reports and after some discussions adopted the same with some modifications. The
Committee decided to present the same to the House on Tuesday, the 14th March, 2000 and authorised its Chairperson and in her
absence Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai and Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat for the same purpose.
3. The Committee adjourned at 3.45p.m.
------
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF