COSL 
  
 
 
                   PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
                                                   RAJYA SABHA 
 
     COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
                        HUNDRED AND NINETY FOURTH REPORT 
 
                                  (Presented on 26th August, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
                               The Haj Committee Rules, 2002. 
 
 
 
 
                                RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                              NEW DELHI 
 
                            August, 2011/ Bhadrapada, 1933  (Saka) 
194 


C O N T E N T S 
      
        PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION 
 OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
(ii) 
3. REPORT 
The Haj Committee Rules, 2002. 
 
 
4. S
UMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS   
 
5. MINUTES* 
 
 
6. ANNEXURE 
..... 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be enclosed later 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
 LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LE GISLATION, RA JYA 
SABHA 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   29 th  SEPTEMBER, 2010) 
 
 
 
1. Shri Kalraj Mishra   Chairman 
2. Shri Jesudasu Seelam     
3. Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
4. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
5. Shri P. Kannan 
6. Shrimati Maya Singh 
7. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
8. Shri Narendra Kashyap 
9. Shri Ali  Anwar Ansari 
10. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
11. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
12. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
13. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
14. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
15. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi    
 
    
 
S
ECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri N.K.Singh , Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
3.   Shri Sameer Suryapani, Deputy Director  
4. Shri  R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director  
5.   Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director  
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (i) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on i ts behalf, this One Hundred and 
Ninety Fourth Report of the Committee. 
 
 1.2     The Committee considered and adopted the R eport in its meeting held on the 24 
th  
August, 2011 
 
1.3 The matters examined by the Committee arose in the process of scrutiny of the 
The Haj Committee Rules, 2002 and issues relating t o it along with the comments 
received from the Government.  The observations and  recommendations of the 
Committee are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.  
 
.  
 
 
 
KALRAJ  MISHRA 
                                                                                                               Chairman 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
                                                                                                              Rajya Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI  
26 th  August, 2011  
 

  
Report on the Haj Committee Rules, 2002. 
 
 The Ministry of External Affairs framed the Haj Com mittee Rules, 2002 
(Annexure-I) in exercise of powers conferred by Section 44 of the Haj Committee Act, 
2002.  The Rules prescribe the manner of nomination  or election of the Members of the 
Committee; convening of meetings of the Committee; powers and duties of Chairperson; 
allowances and other terms and conditions of Chairp erson, Vice-chairpersons and 
Members; functions, powers and duties of the chief executive officer; provision for the 
custody of the Central Haj Fund; application of Cen tral Haj Fund; entering into contracts 
and incurring of expenditure by the Committee; prep aration, submission and approval of 
the budget of the Committee; maintenance of account s, auditing and publication; returns, 
statements and reports to be submitted by the Commi ttee; and, control of the Committee 
in respect of financial matters. 
 
2. The rules were examined by the Committee on Subo rdinate Legislation, Rajya 
Sabha and a questionnaire on the subject was forwar ded to the Ministry of External 
Affairs on the 24 
th  September, 2003.  The Ministry furnished their 
comments/clarifications on the 5 th  July, 2005. ( Annexure- II).  The points referred to the 
Ministry and their comments/ clarifications thereon  are reproduced in the subsequent 
paragraphs. 
 
3. Rule 7(2) authorizes the Chairperson to disallow  a proposal moved by any 
member, where the member or his partner or any othe r associate is directly or indirectly 
interested in the management or direction of any bu siness relating to the pilgrims traffic 
or in which any one of them is professionally inter ested on behalf of a person engaged in 
such business.  In this regard, the Committee sugge sted that there should be provisions in 
the rule rendering it obligatory on the part of the  members to disclose any interest in the 
management of any business relating to pilgrims tra ffic, etc.   The Ministry responded 
that it would be a good idea to ascertain such info rmation through individual declaration 
at the time of their selection/nomination to the Co mmittee and the possibility of dealing 
with it will be explored in consultation with the Legislative Department of the Ministry of 
Law & Justice. 

 
4. In Rule 7(3)(i), the Committee questioned the ju stification for directing the 
Chairperson to decide all points of order or proced ure “summarily” and asked the 
Ministry if there is any objection to delete the sa me.  The Ministry agreed to delete the 
words “summarily” from this rule and stated that ac tion to amend the rule would be 
taken. 
 
5. Rule 11(1) specifies that the Chairperson, Vice- Chairperson and Members of the 
Committee shall be entitled to traveling allowance and daily allowance for attending the 
meetings of the Committee and undertaking tours, at  the rates admissible to Group ‘A’ 
officers of the Government of India.  The Committee  pointed out that all Group ‘A’ 
officers are not entitled to the same rates of TA/D A and asked whether the Government 
have any objection in specifying the level of offic ers within Group ‘A’ in order to make 
the provision more specific.   The Ministry replied  that action would be taken to amend 
the rules.  
 
6. Rule 16(1) prescribes that the Chief Executive O fficer and other officers and 
employees of the Committee shall ordinarily be appo inted on temporary basis. The 
Committee pointed out that the word “ordinarily” in  this rule tends to make its provision 
vague and suggested that it should be deleted.  The  Ministry agreed to the suggestion.  
The Committee was further of the view that there sh ould be specific provisions in the 
rules relating to the appointment of the other offi cers and employees of the Committee as 
also the terms and conditions of their service.  Th e Ministry agreed to make amendments 
in the Rule accordingly.  The Ministry also agreed to add the words “deputation or” 
between the words “on” and “temporary”. 
 
7. Rule 16(4) authorizes the Committee to fix the p ay, allowances and other 
emoluments for the CEO and other employees with the  prior approval of the Central 
Government.  The Committee suggested that it would be more appropriate if the rules 
contain a schedule indicating the sanctioned posts for the Committee along with their 
scales of pay.  The Ministry agreed to the suggestion of the Committee and stated that the 

rules will be amended in consultation with the Legi slative Department of the Ministry of 
Law & Justice. 
 
8. Rule 16(6) prescribes that casual leave, ordinar ily not exceeding four days at a 
time or eight days in all during a year, may be gra nted by the Chairperson to the Chief 
Executive Officer, and by the Chief Executive Officer to the other officers and employees 
of the Haj Committee. The Committee questioned the justification for use of the word 
“ordinarily” and asked whether it means in extraord inary situations, an officer/employee 
can avail casual leave of more than 8 days. The Min istry agreed to delete the words 
“ordinarily” from the rule. 
9. Rule 20 prescribes the manner of nomination of m embers of the Haj Committee 
for a Union Territory.  Rule 20(3) provides for the appointment of a non-Muslim member 
by the concerned Government in case Muslim members are not available in any of the 
categories mentioned in Rule 20(2) (a) and (c).  Th e Committee enquired about the 
reasons for the non-applicability of the provision of Rule 20(3) in case of Rule 20(2)(b).   
The Ministry admitted that this was a typographical  error and that it should be made 
applicable to Rule 20(2)(b) also and stated that ne cessary amendment in the rule will be 
made. 
 
10. As per Rule 26(1)(a), a special meeting is to b e held within three months before 
the end of the financial year for the purpose of pr eparation of  budget, while as per Rule 
26(4), the estimate sanctioned by the Haj Committee  is to be submitted to the Central 
Government before the first day of September, each year.  The Committee asked whether 
these provisions were not contradictory to each oth er and sought clarification from the 
Ministry.  The Ministry admitted that this was a ty pographical error and assured that 
necessary amendments will be made in the rules. 
 
11. Rule 30 authorizes the Haj Committee to issue p ilgrim passes to the Haj pilgrims 
for their departure from India as bona fide  pilgrims to Saudi Arabia and to levy fees 
prescribed for issue of passport under the Passport s Act, 1967.  The Committee 
questioned the justification for levying fees for i ssue of pilgrimage passes equivalent to 

the fees prescribed for issue of passports and aske d whether the Government have any 
objection in issuing of such passes free of charge.   The Ministry replied that pilgrim 
passes, in fact, are travel documents like passport  booklets and considerable expenditure 
is incurred on printing of passes and argued that t he Haj Committee, being a self-funding 
organization, has to recover these charges from the pilgrims. 
 
12. The Committee, in its meeting held on the 19 
th  January, 2007, decided to examine 
further the functions of the Haj Committee in compa rison to the Committees under other 
Statutory Bodies like the National Human Rights Com mission (NHRC) and the terms 
governing the tenure of the Chief Executive officer and the  conditions of service of other 
employees of the Haj Committee particularly with re ference to their 
temporary/permanent status. Accordingly, a referenc e was sent to the Ministry seeking 
status in the matter on the 2 nd  March, 2007. The Ministry furnished their 
comments/clarifications in the matter on the 28 th  March, 2007 ( Annexure-III ).     
 
13.  The Ministry informed that the Haj Committee d ischarges the following main 
functions: 
 (i) Comprehensive Orientation/Training Programme f or pilgrims 
 (ii) Dissemination of information to the Haj pilgr ims 
(iii) Announcement of Haj program through leading newspap ers all over the 
country and inviting applications from the intending pilgrims 
(iv) Hiring accommodation for pilgrims with assistance o f Consulate General 
of India, Jeddah for Haj pilgrims in Makkah and Madinah 
(v) Preparation of pilgrims passes/passports of the int ending pilgrims after 
receipt of Haj Application Forms from the State Haj Committees 
(vi) Arrangements for purchase of foreign exchange for p ilgrims to meet 
expenses towards accommodation, compulsory dues and  day to day 
incidentals 
(vii) Finalization of embarkation points and flight sched ules in consultation 
with Ministry of Civil Aviation, Air India and Saudi Arabia Airlines. 
 

14. Subsequently, the Committee in its meeting on t he 28 th  November, 2007 decided 
to seek from the Ministry the status of implementat ion on its suggestions which have 
been accepted by the Ministry. Accordingly, a commu nication to that effect was sent to 
the Ministry on the 29 th  April, 2008 and the Ministry furnished their repli es on the 7 th  
November, 2008 ( Annexure-IV).  The Ministry, in their reply, stated that they hav e 
received inputs and suggestions on improving Haj Ma nagement from eminent persons, 
religious scholars, Members of Parliament.  Further the number of pilgrims going through 
the Haj Committee has expanded considerably which a lso necessitates considerable 
change in Haj management. The Ministry has, therefo re, set up a Committee to look into 
the matter and the recommendations of the Committee  on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya 
Sabha would also be incorporated while amending the  Haj Act.  Thereafter a major 
revamp of the rules would be required and the Minis try assured that the suggestions of 
the Committee would be incorporated in the rules also.   
 
15. The Committee was also informed that the quota for pilgrims proceeding for Haj 
through the Haj Committee of India is fixed by the Ministry of External Affairs in 
consultation with the Saudi Government.  This quota  is, in turn, allocated to the States in 
proportion to their Muslim population. As the numbe r of applications received by the 
State Haj Committees is much more as compared to the quota allotted to them, the system 
of computerized qurrah (draw of lots) is used for t hose states receiving excess 
applications. 
 
16. The Committee was  informed that there is a Cel l for the redressal of grievances 
in the Haj Committee of India.  Haj Pilgrims, who a re aggrieved by discharge of any of 
the duties performed by the Haj Committee, send representations for the redressal of their 
grievances.  All complaints are attended to by the Haj Committee of India and a suitable 
action is taken accordingly.  It is also a means to  look into shortcomings and make 
improvements to ensure satisfaction of pilgrims. 
  
17.  The Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of  External Affairs in the matter on 
the on the 10 
th  November, 2008.  During the meeting, the Committee  was informed that 
the Government proposed to bring about a new bill i n place of the existing Haj 

Committee Act, 2002, rather than bringing about sma ll amendments to the Act. A 
Committee had already been constituted to look into  the issue. The Ministry proposes to 
empower the Central Government to nominate persons from those states which have 
either not constituted their Haj Committees or wher e the State Committee has not 
nominated its representative.   This will address the existing situation where several states 
remain unrepresented in the Central Haj Committee. Also, the Ministry wanted to 
increase the number of nominated Muslim members from seven to ten.  The proposed bill 
will also cover the Private Tour Operators.  The Co mmittee, however, expressed its 
reservation about the existing practice of allocati ng sub-quota to the private tour 
operators out of the country’s quota.  The Committe e is of the view that the quota should 
only be utilized by the Central and State Haj Committees. 
 
18. There were still certain outstanding issues on which the Committee decided to 
seek clarifications from the Ministry.  Accordingly , questionnaire was sent to the 
Ministry on the 17 
th  November, 2008 and the Ministry furnished their re plies on the 12 th  
January, 2009. ( Annexure-V).  As regards the view of the Committee that the H aj 
Goodwill delegation is too large and leads to waste ful expenditure, the Ministry 
submitted that the approval for the Haj Goodwill De legations is accorded by the Hon’ble 
Prime Minister and its composition and size is deci ded in keeping in view the desire to 
have each region of the country and various sections of the society represented.  
 
19. The Ministry also stated that the complaints re ceived by the Haj Committee of 
India mainly pertain to deficiencies in accommodati on at Makkah/Madinah, delay in 
local transport, delay in flight schedules and cons equential non-availability of 
accommodation/food, etc.  These complaints are look ed into by the Haj Committee of 
India/ Consulate General of India and the Ministry of External Affairs takes necessary 
action towards systematic improvements.  About the lack of accommodation at places 
like Makkah, Arafat and Muzdalifah, the Ministry st ated that it was considering entering 
into longer term contract with the owners of suitab le accommodation.  Regarding air 
operations and subsidy, the Ministry stated that th e matter is handled by the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation. The amount of subsidy has increased  substantially over the years due to 
increase in number of pilgrims as well as increase in the cost of fuel and the air 

operations.  The Ministry of Civil Aviation stated that the rates charged by Air India for 
Haj operations are as per cost. 
 
20. In the matter of giving preference to senior ci tizens, the Ministry stated that the 
Haj Committee had introduced a scheme to give speci al consideration to the pilgrims 
above the age of 70 in Haj, 2007.  But the scheme w as discontinued as it was found to 
have been misused.  The main difficulty in this reg ard was in correctly identifying the 
senior citizens as people tended to produce bogus c ertificates of age to ensure seats for 
Haj.  
 
21.   The Ministry informed the Committee that some  states have not yet constituted 
State Haj Committees despite repeated requests. To avoid this anomaly, the Ministry 
stated that it proposed to make suitable amendment in the Act to appoint members from 
the concerned zones even it if contains States whic h have not constituted the State Haj 
Committees. 
 
22. The Ministry stated that the allocation of quot a for private tour operators (PTOs) 
is as per the bilateral Haj agreement signed every year between India and Saudi Arabia. 
The quota is provided to PTOs since in earlier times there as enough quota available to be 
provided to them and also because some pilgrims prefer to go for Haj through PTOs.  The 
proposed amendments in the Haj Committee Act will c over the supervision of PTOs and 
provide for their better regulation. 
 
23. On the Committee’s query regarding the discreti onary quota, the Ministry stated 
that out of the total quota allocated to the Haj Co mmittee of India, a quota of 6,000 seats 
is provided for allotment by the Central Government .  The Haj Committee Act, 2002 
does not provide for allotment of any quota and the  allotment of seats under the Central 
Government quota is made directly under the supervi sion of the External Affairs 
Minister/Minister of State for External Affairs.  T his quota is used for allotment of Haj 
seats based on the recommendations received from Me mbers of Parliament, Ministers, 
Chief Ministers and other dignitaries from Central Government and various State 

Governments and keeping in view the excess number o f applications received in various 
States. 
 
24. On the Committee’s query on whether rules perta ining to Haj Pilgrim Passes have 
been formulated, the Ministry replied that Rule 30 of the Haj Committee Rules, 2002 
covers the issue of pilgrim passes.   The Ministry further stated that the Saudi authorities 
have informed the Ministry that from Haj 2009 onwar ds all Indian pilgrims going for Haj 
would need to travel to Saudi Arabia on international passports which would be issued by 
the various passport offices in India.  As such the  provision under Section 9 and 35 of the 
Act would need to be suitably amended.  However, th e Committee notes that Rule 30 of 
the Haj Committee Rules, 2002 is mere reproduction of the provisions of Section 35(1) of 
the Act and does not prescribe anything substantial  regarding the pilgrim passes.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that such mere rep etitions should be avoided in 
future.   
 
25. Meanwhile, the Committee issued a press release  on the matter inviting the 
views/suggestions of the public on the Haj Committe e Rules, 2002.  The suggestions 
received from the public were examined and a questi onnaire based on these 
representations was sent to the Ministry on the 23 
rd  April, 2009. However, the Ministry 
failed to furnish their comments despite reminder d ated the 12 th  August, 2009 and D.O. 
letter dated the 25 th  September, 2009. Accordingly, the Committee heard the Secretary, 
Economic Relations, Ministry of External Affairs on  the 28 th  October, 2009.   On the 
delay in replying to the supplementary question for warded by the Secretariat, the 
Secretary informed the Committee that the suggestio ns given by the Committee were 
looked into and the views of the Haj Committee were  being sought.  The Haj Committee, 
in turn, had obtained the views of the State Haj Committees and therefore the delay.   
 
26. The Committee, during the meeting, pointed out that there is no provision for 
Goodwill Delegation in the parent Act and wanted to  know under what mandate this was 
being done. The Committee was informed that funds f or the Goodwill Delegation were 
met from the budget of the Ministry of External Aff airs and the Goodwill Delegation 
meets with the highest leadership of the Kingdom of  Saudi Arabia and the authorities 

concerned with Haj arrangements. The Committee expr essed serious concern over the 
fact that no criteria had been prescribed for the s election of delegates for the Goodwill 
Delegation. The Committee felt that selection of de legates for the Goodwill Delegation 
was being done arbitrarily by the Government.  The Committee also expressed concern 
about the increasing number of delegates and questi oned the need for sending such a 
large delegation. 
 
27. The Members of the Committee expressed their an guish that 
letters/recommendations of M.P.s for the Haj pilgri mage were not replied/responded to 
by the Ministry/Haj Committee.  The Committee was u nanimous in its opinion that 
replies should at least be sent to the Members on p riority, and if necessary, with detailed 
explanation of reasons for not honouring the recommendations. 
   
28. The Committee also sought to know about the rat ionale of allocating the quota to 
the Private Tour Operators (PTOs) from the quota al located to the country as per the 
bilateral agreement between India and Saudi Arabia.   If the quota given to PTOs is 
allocated to the Haj Committee, it will considerabl y ease the shortage currently faced by 
the Haj Committee. The Committee also noted that ma jority of the PTOs which were 
allocated the pilgrims quota were from one or two s pecific areas of the country.  The 
Committee felt that PTOs should not be restricted t o a particular area and should be 
equitably distributed as per the Muslim population.   The Committee also alternately 
proposed that the PTOs should not be engaged in the  Haj pilgrimage and only the Haj 
Committee of India should be engaged in this matter .  The Committee requested the 
Ministry to furnish the updated status in the matte r of bringing in a new legislation of the 
subject and also to furnish their replies to the questionnaire and representation of people’s 
representatives.  The Ministry assured that the views of the Committee shall be given due 
importance while examining the issue. 
 
29. The Ministry, thereafter, furnished their repli es to the questionnaire based on the 
representations received from the public on the 13 
th  November, 2009 ( Annexure-VI ).  
On the steps taken by the Government to remove the difficulties in respect of the Saudi 
authorities making it mandatory for pilgrims to tra vel on international passport from Haj-

2009, the Ministry stated that the matter was taken  up with the Saudi Government for 
exemption for at least a year but to no avail.  The  Ministry of External Affairs had issued 
specific directions to the Regional Passport Office s for early issuance of passports to the 
intending pilgrims of Haj 2009 and due to these eff orts, the Haj journey remains smooth 
to the extent possible. 
 
30. The Committee enquired about the steps taken by  the Government to ensure that 
Hajis are accommodated at places nearer to harem an d whether the Government 
considers making long term arrangement for accommod ation.  The Ministry stated that 
the placement of pilgrims nearer the harem is a cos tlier option.  However, it is the 
endeavour of the Government to extend the best faci lities including accommodation in 
the price bracket of the pilgrims.  The Government is considering long-term 
accommodation arrangements for Indian pilgrims subject to local laws and regulations. 
 
31. The Committee enquired about the provisions for  auditing the accounts of Central 
and State Haj Committes in the Act and whether ther e have been delays in auditing the 
accounts.   The Committee also enquired whether the  Government considers bringing in 
similar auditing norms as are meant for CPSUs.   Th e Ministry replied that  Section 34(1) 
and (2) of the Act contains provisions for auditing  the accounts of the Central and State 
Haj Committees.   The compilation of annual account s of Haj Committee is being done 
from govt. approved chartered accountants and there  were delays in the compilation of 
accounts by the chartered accountants. Audit is con ducted by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India in a similar way to CPSUs.   The Committee expressed its 
anguish that accounts of the Haj Committee have not  been audited for long time. There is 
specific provision 34(1) of the Haj Committee Act w hich says that the Committee shall 
maintain proper accounts and same shall be examined  and audited annually by such 
auditors as the Central Government may approve. Rul e 27(b) also mandates that these 
accounts shall be subjected to internal audit at le ast once in the financial year by the 
designated officers of the office of the Chief Controller of Accounts, Ministry of External 
Affairs, New Delhi. The accounts shall also be audi ted annually by the officials of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. The accou nts as certified by the auditor 
together with audit report have to be laid on the t able of each house of the Parliament.   

There is very elaborate arrangement for the financi al administration provided under the 
statute. The Committee is unhappy to note that such  important provisions relating to 
financial administration have been violated during the successive years and the Ministry 
failed to discharge its supervisory role. It seems that after the Act came into force the 
organization with Chief Executive Officer at the he lm of affairs did not comprehend the 
importance of statutory provisions relating to fina ncial administration. The Committee 
also feels that there should be a permanent Charter ed Accountant in the organization 
along with designated staff to handle the accounts for efficient financial administration.  
The Committee recommends that Ministry or Haj Commi ttee should appoint a 
Committee to have proper study by some professional  organization to find out the 
problem areas in the working of Haj Committee secre tariat and request them to suggest 
quality improvement and efficient working of organization. 
 
32. The Committee asked the Ministry about the feas ibility of confining the private 
tour operators only to conducting Umrah and the Haj  Committee regulating the entire 
quota during the Haj season.  The Ministry replied that the Ministry of External Affairs 
deals only with Haj matters and it is for the Gover nment to consider whether PTOs can 
be confined only to Umrah part while Haj Committee may deal with the Haj part.  The 
Ministry however argued that this would create a va cuum for those who want to perform 
Haj according to their specific requirement and com fort as the Haj Committee arranges 
for a fixed Haj programme.   Also such a step has i mplication on subsidy burden to the 
Government as well as set back to private enterprise. 
 
33. The Committee again had the oral evidence of th e Secretary (Economic 
Relations), the Haj Committee of India and the Secr etary, Ministry of Civil Aviation in 
the matter on the 14 
th  February, 2011 to have more clarity on a range of issues. During 
the meeting, the Committee was informed that numero us court cases challenging various 
aspects of the Government’s Haj Policy were filed i n 2010 and therefore, the outcome of 
these cases had to be awaited before proceeding wit h the Haj reforms.  Replying to the 
queries put forth by the Members, Secretary (ER) cl arified that as per OIC Resolution of 
1987, the broad norm followed by the Saudi Authorit ies is to allocate quota of 1000 
pilgrims for every million of Muslim population in a country. As to the State-wise 

distribution of pilgrim quota, the Haj Committee pilgrim quota was distributed among the 
States and Union Territories on the basis of Muslim  population in the 2001 census.  The 
Committee, however, felt that there were lots of di screpancies in the distribution of quota 
and that there was no transparency in the process. 
 
34. The Committee enquired about the criteria for s electing private tour operators as 
also the grounds on which they were blacklisted, cr iteria for allotting quota to the State 
Haj Committees, and, the time frame for notifying t he new rules on Haj.  The Committee 
was of the view that there is no system to check un registered private tour operators.  On 
the issue of PTOs, Secretary (ER) stated that till 2003, Government did not give any 
quota to PTOs. Quota to PTOs was given directly by the Saudi authorities. However, 
from 2003, as per directions of the Saudi authoriti es, registration of PTOs was started.  
Rules and regulations governing PTOs came into exis tence.  The PTOs were required to 
fulfill certain criteria such as enclosing certifie d copies of registration, proof of 
establishment, income-tax return, PAN, balance shee t of accounts of annual turnover of 
Rs.25 lakhs, the number of pilgrims sent during the  last three Haj seasons, etc. Regarding 
the blacklisting of PTOs, the Secretary (ER) informed that PTOs were blacklisted if there 
were complaints against them like furnishing of wro ng address, not having an annual 
turnover of Rs.25 lakhs, or, any other general comp laint against them.  Allocation of 
quota among the PTOs, Secretary (ER) informed, is based on the number of pilgrims they 
have carried over the last three years. The number of quota to be allotted to any PTO was 
fixed at 50 by the Saudi authorities and cannot be less than this.  New guidelines and 
policy for registration of PTOs for Haj-2011 were u nder consideration and would be 
notified through media and websites of the Ministry  and the Haj Committee.  The 
Committee is of the opinion that entire operations of PTOs should be brought within the 
ambit of Haj Committee.  There are complaints of al lotment of quota to PTOs, the 
Government should furnish a report on the issue. Th ere is also regional imbalance in the 
allotment of quota to PTOs, it has to be corrected urgently.  
 
35. The Committee was informed that the Haj Goodwil l Delegation is sent every year 
with the approval of the Hon’ble Prime Minister.  T he delegation meets high dignitaries 

of Saudi Arabia including the King, the Minister fo r Haj and the Governors of Makkah 
and Madina. The delegation also interacts wit the d elegation of other countries and also 
meets India pilgrims and oversees the Haj arrangeme nts. On the size and composition of 
the Haj Goodwill Delegation, he stated that this is  done keeping the desire to have each 
region of the country and various sections of the society represented in the delegation.  
 
36. The Committee was also informed that complaints  redressal mechanism is in 
place to address grievances and complaints received  from pilgrims in Haj Committee of 
India and CGI, Jeddah. The Ministry keeps a close e ye on the problem of the pilgrims 
and takes appropriate measures to redress them. The  Committee was also informed that 
reforms in Haj management is a constant process and  it is the endeavour of the 
Government to keep making improvements for the bene fit and welfare of the pilgrims. 
All efforts were being made to provide better facil ities for the Hajis after taking into 
account the feedbacks received in this regard. Furt her, a proposal for making the Haj 
management more efficient and transparent was also under consideration. 
 
37. The Committee expressed shock and concern over the high figure of around 300 
people dead during Haj last year and desired to kno w the reasons for the deaths.  The 
Committee felt that if better services in the form of better medical services and better 
habitation were provided, this would not have happened.  
  
38. The Committee suggested that MEA should conside r shifting the headquarters of 
the Haj Committee from Mumbai to Delhi. In the past , most of the Hajis made their trip 
by ship and Mumbai being the most important port of  India, it was made the capital of 
Haj Committee of India. However, at present, most o f the Hajis travelled by flight and 
there being a Haj terminal in Delhi, made Delhi a more favourable choice. On the issue of 
shifting the headquarters to Delhi, Secretary (ER) contended that this would require an 
amendment in the Act. The Committee opined that it had no objection to the Act being 
amended for the purpose.   
 

39. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation infor med the Committee that as a 
follow up to a decision of the Group of Ministers i n 2007, the Ministry went in for a 
competitive bidding process for inviting air operat ors.  Consequently, three airlines were 
selected for the year 2010-Saudi Arabian Airlines, NAS Air and Al Wafir.  The Ministry 
of Civil Aviation entered into MoU with these airli nes. As per the MoU, it was 
mandatory for the airlines to provide light refresh ment in case of flight delays from one 
to three hours, packed fresh meals on delays from t hree to six hours and hotel 
accommodation, transportation and meals on delays b eyond six hours. In case of 
violation of the conditions laid down in the MoU, t he flight operators would be liable for 
penalty.   
 
40. The Committee was of the opinion that governmen t should explore the option of 
going for reduced fares as provided by private operators instead of paying the full fares of 
Air India.  The Ministry clarified that previously only Air India was engaged in carrying 
the pilgrims and it was a monopoly by them.  But no w as a result of competitive bidding, 
the fare portion that has to be given by the Govern ment as subsidy has come down. On 
the Committee’s query on whether competitive biddin g processes were conducted for all 
the 21 points together or whether they were conduct ed separately, the Civil Aviation 
Secretary clarified that the bidding was conducted for all the 21 points together.  One the 
Committee’s query as to why Air India did not parti cipate in the bidding process, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation clarified tha t Air India did participate, but they 
could not compete on the fare prices which were off ered in a competitive mode. 
However, Air India was asked to look after the cont rol rooms at the 21 embarkation 
points.  
 
41. With regard to facilities being provided for di sabled and other kinds of 
passengers, Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation i nformed that the DGCA has framed 
detailed regulations on the facilities to be provid ed by operators to disabled passengers. 
In case of any violation, they are liable for penal ties.  Helpdesks had been set up for old 
persons and Air India personnel were helping the ol d and infirm passengers.  The 
Committee also directed the Ministry to consider ha ving a computerized database where 

one can register for Haj. This database should be p ublished on the website to make the 
process more transparent.  
 
 
42. On the issue of accommodation, the Committee wa s informed that every year 
advertisements were made for providing accommodatio n for pilgrims in Saudi Arabia.  
The State Haj Committee goes and checks the accommodations offered in response to the 
advertisements and ascertain whether they are satis factory and acceptable.  After that, a 
team from the Haj Committee of India along with the  Counsel Haj in Jeddah go and see 
the accommodations, take measurements and see wheth er the rentals are within the 
ceiling. After that, the Counsel Haj in Jeddah asks  for certification or papers from the 
local Government that the selected buildings have t he required certification and that they 
are fit for habitation.  One problem with regard to  habitation is that in the last two years 
or so a lot of buildings have been demolished by th e Government of Saudi Arabia for 
creating new infrastructures and new buildings. Ano ther constraint is that buildings close 
to the Holy Mosque are very expensive and therefore , the building inspection 
committees, are, sometimes, forced to take building s that are a little farther from  the 
Mosque. 
 
43. The Committee received several representations complaining about the quality of 
accommodation and stay arrangements at Makkah, Madi nah, Mina, Arafaat and 
Muzdalifah.
 The Haj Committee of India provides options to the pilgrims to apply for 
three categories, namely Green, White and Aziziya. Green category included buildings 
between 0-1200 meters from the outer periphery of H aram Sharif. White category 
included buildings between 1201-2000 meters from th e outer periphery of Haram Sharif. 
Aziziya is the farthest and attract minimum rent. T here are complaints that pilgrims who 
apply for green category, their status is changed at the last moment without assigning any 
reason. This has been causing great hardships to th e aged people who cannot walk so far. 
Moreover the pilgrims having already paid for green category not getting accommodation 
commensurate to what they have paid for. The Commit tee expects the Government to 
frame clear guidelines in this regard. The Committe e also recommends hiring the 
accommodation on the long term basis nearest to Har am Sharif. Government should also 

endeavour to provide accommodation to pilgrims abov e 60 in the green category and 
should see that all pilgrims above 65 must get acco mmodation in green category. The 
Committee also feels that there should be some perm anent staff of Haj Committee of 
India at the CGI, Jeddah and be responsible for ens uring neat, clean and hassle free 
accommodation. There have been complaints about lac k of bathroom and toilet facilities 
at the places of residences and also lifts not work ing in multistoried buildings causing 
great hardships to women and aged pilgrims. The Com mittee strongly recommends that 
proper habitability survey of such buildings should  be conducted by the consulate staff 
and Haj Committee before hiring such buildings and merely municipal certificates 
submitted by the building owners should not be relied upon. 
 
44. The Committee deliberated at length about the p owers conferred on Haj 
Committee of India by virtue of Haj Committee Act 2 002, Haj Committee Rules, 2002 
and Haj Committee Bye Laws 2005. The Committee has hardly got powers fit enough to 
discharge the duties of statutory organization. In most of the cases the Committee’s 
powers are subject to Central Government’s approval  and in all significant issues Central 
Government is final authority. The Chief Executive Officer is appointed by the Central 
Government and it also determines and controls the staff strength. If section 16(5) is to be 
read with rule 16, it gives impression that the org anization is created purely on temporary 
basis. The services of officers can be regularized only on the recommendations of Central 
Government. The Committee has got hardly any say on  staffing pattern of the 
organization. It is amazing that the organization w hich handles transaction of about 1400 
crores of rupees per annum and applications from ab out 3 lakhs pilgrims and has to 
coordinate with number of agencies handling about 2 4 embarkation points in the country 
is working with just about 81 officials in which 23  persons are in attendant grade. The 
organization doesn’t have permanent Accounts Office r either. There has not been any 
professional study of the organization as the work load increased significantly. In 1990, 
the Committee was handling quota of 24000 pilgrims and little above 24000 applications. 
Since then there has been significant increase of q uota including applications. The 
Committee recommends the Government to get the prof essional study done by some 
reputed organization and assess the workload and professionalism. The Committee is also 
of the view that middle level posts like Accounts o fficer and Administrative officers 

should be in the rank of at least Deputy Secretary to the Government of India so that 
organization gets efficient person handling financi al and personnel matters. The 
Government should endeavour to make the organizatio n more professional and efficient 
by creating a separate cadre for Haj Committee Secretariat and may also upgrade some of 
the posts urgently.  
 
45.  The Committee has gathered that the website of  the Haj Committee of India is not 
fully satisfactory. It needs to be developed furthe r. Its e-mail system particularly 
collapses frequently. Some of the information given  on the site is sometimes outdated. 
The site is not fully responsive, interactive and w ith online facility. The Committee 
therefore directs that the website of the Haj Committee should be developed properly.   
 
 
SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT ISSUES AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE  
 
Amendment of  Haj Committee Act and Rules 
 
46. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministr y of External Affairs is 
planning to bring out a new legislation on the Haj Committee.  But the Committee is 
constrained to note that the Ministry has taken a v ery long time in coming out with 
the new legislation. The Committee, therefore, reco mmends that this should be 
carried out expeditiously, without any delay.  The Committee also recommends that 
the Ministry should take steps to frame the rules s imultaneously so that there is no 
further delay.   While framing the rules, the Minis try should take note of the 
suggestions of the Committee which were agreed by t he Committee vide  their O.M. 
dated the 5 th  July, 2005 as follows: 
 
(i) The Committee had suggested that there should be pr ovisions in the 
rule 7(2) rendering it obligatory on the part of th e members to 
disclose any interest in the management of any busi ness relating to 
pilgrims traffic, etc.   The Ministry had responded  that it would be a 
good idea to ascertain such information through ind ividual 

declaration at the time of their selection/nominati on to the Committee 
and agreed to explore the possibility of dealing wi th it in consultation 
with the Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
 
(ii) The Ministry agreed to delete the words “summarily”  from Rule 7(3) 
which empowers the Chairperson to decide all points  of order or 
procedure by amending the rule. 
 
(iii) The Ministry agreed to amend Rule 11(1) by specifyi ng the level of 
officers within Group ‘A’ for the purpose of TA/DA in order to make 
the provision more specific.    
 
(iv) The Committee pointed out that the word “ordinarily ” in Rule 16(1) 
tends to make its provision vague and suggested tha t it should be 
deleted.  The Committee was of the view that there should be specific 
provisions in the rules relating to the appointment of the other officers 
and employees of the Committee and the terms and conditions of their 
service.  The Ministry agreed to make amendments in  the Rule 
accordingly.  The Ministry also agreed to add the w ords “deputation 
or” between the words “on” and “temporary”. 
 
(v) The Ministry accepted the Committee’s suggestion th at it would be 
more appropriate if Rule 16(4) contains a schedule indicating the 
sanctioned posts for the Committee along with their  scales of pay and 
agreed to amend the rule accordingly in consultatio n with the 
Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law & Justice. 
 
(vi) The Ministry agreed to delete the words “ordinarily ” from Rule 16(6) 
pertaining to granting of casual leave. 
 
(vii) The Ministry admitted to a typographical error in   Rule 20(3) and 
agreed to the Committee’s suggestion to amend the r ule so as to make 

it applicable to the category mentioned in Rule 20( 2)(b) also along 
with Rule 20(2)(a) and (c). 
 
(viii) The Committee pointed to the contradictory provisio ns in Rule 
26(1)(a) which provides for  a special meeting to b e held within three 
months before the end of the financial year for the  purpose of 
preparation of  budget and Rule 26(4) which provide s that the 
estimate sanctioned by the Haj Committee is to be s ubmitted to the 
Central Government before the first day of Septembe r, each year.  
The Ministry admitted to the typographical error an d assured 
necessary amendments in the rules. 
 
Goodwill delegation 
 
47. The Committee notes that there is no provision for Goodwill Delegation in 
the Haj Committee Act and  that no criteria is prescribed in the matter of sel ection 
of delegates.   The Committee expresses serious concern about the f act that selection 
of delegates is being done arbitrarily and as a mea ns of political appeasement. The 
Committee also questions the need for sending such a large delegation.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that either a prov ision should be made in the 
Act for Goodwill Delegation or the Ministry should come out with clear-cut 
rules/guidelines prescribing the criteria for selec tion of delegates.  The Committee 
also notes that the Comptroller and Auditor General  has made adverse comments 
regarding extravagant goodwill delegations.  The Co mmittee, accordingly, 
recommends that there should be a limit to the numb er of goodwill delegates so as 
not to incur unnecessary expenditure.  
 
Private Tour Operators 
 
48. The Ministry has conveyed that the quota allott ed to the Private Tour 
Operators 
 PTOs was part of the bilateral agreement between the Government of India and the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and not out of the allocati ons made to the Central Haj 
Committee. The Committee finds it ridiculous that s eats negotiated as part of 

bilateral agreement between the Government of India  and the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia should be given away to non-state actors whe n the Haj Committee itself is 
not able to fulfill the application for seats.  The Committee is of the view that 
considering the shortage faced by the Central Haj C ommittee, the entire country-
quota negotiated by the Government of India should go to the Haj Committee. The 
Committee is of the opinion that if the quota given  to PTOs is allocated to the Haj 
Committee, it will considerably ease the shortage c urrently faced by the Haj 
Committee. The Committee also notes that majority o f the PTOs which were 
allocated the pilgrims quota were from one or two specific areas of the country.   The 
Committee feels that PTOs should not be restricted to a particular area and should 
be equitably distributed as per the Muslim populati on.  The Committee also finds 
that the system of allotment of Haj seats to the PT Os is without proper norms and 
guidelines and it lacks transparency. Many cases we nt to Courts on this count only. 
The Government should furnish a report on the issue  of complaints of allotment of 
quota to PTOs. Also, new entrants are not encourage d and this seems to be the 
handiwork of strong lobby of existing PTOs. All the se need to be attended to 
promptly and rectified.  
 
Government Quota 
 
49. The Committee disputes the argument of the Mini stry that the government’s 
discretionary quota is utilized towards honouring t he recommendations of the 
MPs/MLAs. The Committee expresses its anguish over the fact that 
letters/recommendations of M.P.s for the Haj pilgri mage are not replied/responded 
to by the Ministry/Haj Committee.  The Committee is  unanimous in its opinion that 
replies should at least be sent to the Members on p riority, and if necessary, with 
detailed explanation of reasons for not honouring t he recommendations.   The 
Committee recommends that the process of allotment of the government’s 
discretionary quota should be made more transparent. 
 
 
Rules/Guidelines for issue of pilgrim passes 
 

50. The Committee is not satisfied with the Ministr y’s reply that Rule 30 of the 
Haj Committee Rules, 2002 covers the issue of pilgr im passes.  The Committee notes 
that Rule 30 of the Haj Committee Rules, 2002 is me re reproduction of the 
provisions of Section 35(1) of the Act and does not  prescribe anything substantial 
regarding the pilgrim passes.  The Committee, there fore, recommends that such 
mere repetitions of the provisions of the Act in th e Rules/Regulations should be 
avoided in future. The Committee, accordingly, reco mmends that suitable 
rules/guidelines should be framed on the issue of pilgrim passes.   
 
Senior Citizens 
 
51. The Ministry has indicated its agreement to giv e priority to such elderly 
applicants who have not ever performed Haj by assig ning some weightage in 
Qurrah to repeat applicants who are elderly citizen s over new applicants.   The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should come out with guidelines in this 
regard and start implementing it from the Haj 2011. 
 
Accommodation 
 
52. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministr y is considering long-term 
accommodation arrangements for Indian pilgrims subj ect to local laws and 
regulations.  The Committee expects the Government to frame clear guidelines in 
this regard. The Committee recommends hiring the ac commodation on the long 
term basis nearest to Haram Sharif.  Government sho uld endeavour to provide 
accommodation to pilgrims above 60 in the green cat egory and should see that all 
pilgrims above 65 must get accommodation in green c ategory. The Committee also 
feels that there should be some permanent staff of Haj Committee of India at the 
CGI, Jeddah and be responsible for ensuring neat, c lean and hassle free 
accommodation. The Committee strongly recommends th at proper habitability 
survey of bathroom and toilet facilities at the pla ces of residences and also proper 
functioning of lifts in multistoried buildings whic h cause hardships to women and 
the aged should be conducted by the consulate staff  and Haj Committee before 
hiring such buildings and merely municipal certific ates submitted by the building 

owners should not be relied upon.  The Committee ur ges the Ministry to speed up 
the process without any further delay in this regard. 
 
Complaint redressal 
 
53. The Committee urges the Ministry as well as the  Haj Committee to build a 
robust complaint redressal mechanism and see to it that complaints are redressed 
quickly and effectively.  The Ministry should take necessary steps and keep a close 
watch as to whether complaints are being dealt with  effectively by the Central and 
State Haj Committees.  
 
Accounting and auditing 
 
54. The Committee observes that there is very elabo rate arrangement for the 
financial administration provided under the statute . The Committee is unhappy to 
note that such important provisions relating to fin ancial administration have been 
violated during the successive years and the Minist ry failed to discharge its 
supervisory role. It seems that after the Act came into force the organization with 
Chief Executive Officer at the helm of affairs did not comprehend the importance of 
statutory provisions relating to financial administ ration. The Committee also feels 
that there should be a permanent Chartered Accounta nt in the organization along 
with designated staff to handle the accounts for ef ficient financial administration.  
The Committee recommends that Ministry or Haj Commi ttee should appoint a 
Committee to have proper study by some professional  organization to find out the 
problem areas in the working of Haj Committee Secre tariat and request them to 
suggest quality improvement and efficient working of organization. 
The Committee recommends that a suitable mechanism should be adopted so 
that delays in compilation of the accounts of the H aj Committee by the chartered 
accountants are avoided in future.  The Committee a lso notes that the Comptroller 
and Auditor General has recently made adverse comme nts upon the functioning 
and finances of the Haj Committee.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
sound financial practices and discipline should be followed by the Haj Committee so 
as to avoid the recurrence of such instances in future. 
 

State-wise distribution of Haj quota  
55. The Committee noted that the Haj Committee pilg rim quota was distributed 
among the States and Union Territories on the basis  of Muslim population in the 
2001 census.  The Committee, however, felt that the re were lots of discrepancies in 
the distribution of quota and that there was no tra nsparency in the process. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be more transparency in the 
allocation of quota to the states and steps should be taken to eliminate discrepancies 
in this regard. The Committee also recommends that the data on the allocation of 
Haj quota and the population of Muslims in each sta te should be uploaded on the 
website of the Ministry of External Affairs as well  as the Haj Committee of India as 
soon as they are allocation to ensure that there is  complete transparency in this 
regard. 
 
Facilities for Haj pilgrims 
 
56. The Committee expressed serious shock and conce rn over the high figure of 
around 300 people dead during Haj 2010 and wanted t he Government to make sure 
that no such instances are repeated in future.  The  Committee felt that better 
services in the form of better medical services and  better habitation should be 
provided to avoid the recurrence of such deaths in future.  
 
Shifting of Haj headquarters 
 
57. The Committee suggested that MEA should conside r shifting the 
headquarters of the Haj Committee from Mumbai to De lhi. The Committee noted 
that in the past, most of the Hajis made their trip  by ship and Mumbai being the 
most important port of India, it was made the capit al of Haj Committee of India. 
However, at present, most of the Hajis travelled by  flight and there being a Haj 
terminal in Delhi, made Delhi a more favourable cho ice. The Committee is of the 
opinion that Act should be suitably amended for the purpose.  
 
 
 

Computerized database for Haj registration  
58. The Committee directed the Ministry to consider  having a computerized 
database where one can register for Haj. This datab ase should be published on the 
website of the Ministry and/or the Haj Committee of  India to make the process 
more transparent. The Committee was also of the opi nion that preparations of Haj 
for a particular batch should start well in advance  at least two years back so that 
pilgrims get adequate time to do required preparations. 
 
 Creation of separate cadre for Haj Committee Secretariat 
 
59. The Committee recommends the Government to get professional study done 
by some reputed organization and assess the workloa d and professionalism in the 
Haj Committee. The Committee is of the view that mi ddle level posts like Accounts 
Officer and Administrative Officers should be in th e rank of at least Deputy 
Secretary to the Government of India so that the or ganization gets efficient person 
handling financial and personnel matters. The Gover nment should endeavour to 
make the organization more professional and efficie nt by creating a separate cadre 
for Haj Committee Secretariat and may also upgrade some of the posts urgently.  
 
Website of Haj Committee 
 
60. The Committee has gathered that the website of the Haj Committee of India 
is not fully satisfactory. It needs to be developed  further. Its e-mail system 
particularly collapses frequently. Some of the info rmation given on the site is 
sometimes outdated. The site is not fully responsiv e, interactive and with online 
facility. The Committee therefore directs that the website of the Haj Committee 
should be developed properly.   
 