 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-ROURTH REPORT 
 
(Presented on ________, 2008) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
________, 2008/_______,1929  (Saka) 
 

C O N T E N T S 
      
        PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
 
3. REPORT 
 
 
 I. The Determination of the Price of the Forfeited 
Property Rules, 2005. 
 
 
II. The Cement (Quality Control) Order, 2003. 
 
 
 
III. The Indian Council of World Affairs Rules, 
2006. 
 
 
IV. Communication received from Shri Dipankar 
Mukherjee, MP, Rajya Sabha regarding the 
industrial Emplo yment (Standing Orders) 
Central Rules, 1946. 
 
 
 
V The National Council for Teacher Education 
(Guidelines for regulation of tuition fees and 
other fees chargeable by unaided teacher 
education institutions Regulations, 2002. 
 
 
4. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
5. 
MINUTES* 
 
 
* To be enclosed later 
 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
 LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   4th  SEPTEMBER, 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla  Chairperson 
2. Prof. P. J. Kurien     
3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak    
4. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal    
5. Ms. Mabel Rebello  
6. Shri Vikram Verma     
7. Shri Surendra Lath*     
8. Shri Mahendra Mohan  
9. Shri Penumalli Madhu    
10. Shri N. Jothi,**     
11. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy  
12 Shri Ali Anwar 
13. Shri Harendra Singh Malik** *   
14. Shri R. Shunmugasundaram*   
15. Shri Abani Roy     
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Deepak Goyal, Director 
3. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
4. Smt. Subhashree Panigrahi  Deputy Director 
5. Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Assistant Director 
6. Shri  R.P. Shukla, Committee Officer 
 
.     
* Retired w.e.f. 02.04.2008 
* * Resigned   w.e.f. 27.3.2008 
*** Retired w.e.f. 09.04.2008 
  
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, do hereby present this Hundred and Seventy -Fourth Report of 
the Committee. 
 
1.2       The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting 
held on the _______________________________  
 
1.3 The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny 
of various Rules/Regulations and issues, relating to them along with the 
comments received from the Government.  Th e observations and 
recommendations of the Committee are contained in the succeeding 
paragraphs of the Report.  
 
 
 
DR. (SHRIMATI) NAJMA A. HEPTULLA                                                              
                                                                                                               Chairperson 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
                                                                                                              Rajya 
Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI 
___________, 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
      The Determination of the Price of the Forfeited Property Rules, 2005  
 
 The Determination of the Price of the Forfeited Property Rules, 
2005 framed under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 were 
examined and certain points, which needed further 
comments/clarifications, were put together in the form of a questionnaire. 
It was forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs for their 
comments/clarifications on July 10, 2006.  In reply, the Ministry of Home 
Affairs vide their communication dated October 16, 2006 informed as 
follows :- 
“….that the comments of Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
were examined and draft   comments were sent to the 
Ministry of Law for vetting.  The Ministry of Law has 
accepted the comments of Ministry of Home Affairs in Rule 
6.  The Comments in Rule 3, 5(1), 5(2), 7(1) and 7(2) have 
been reexamined and fresh comments of this Ministry are 
enclosed. 
 
On receipt of the Rajya Sabha acceptance on the 
proposed comments/amendments, the approval of Hon’ble 
Home Minister will be obtained for notifying the same.” 
 
2. The   points   referred to the Ministry and their comments thereon 
are reproduced below : 
 
1.     Point raised:  Rule 3 : Appointment of Authorised Officer  
“Where the person against whom an order of forfeiture has been 
made (hereinafter referred to as the person), is acquitted, the property 
shall  be returned to him or his legal nominee and if it is not possible for 
any reason to return the forfeited property, the State Government shall 

appoint an officer not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to that 
Government, to be known as Authorised Officer, to evaluate and fix the 
price of the forfeited property with a view to compensating the person in 
lieu of the forfeited property.” 
As per Rule 3, all what has been said about the Authorised Officer 
is that he must not be below the rank of Deputy Secretary of the 
Government. As the job of evaluation is technical, should the Authorised 
Officer not possess some technical qualification also? 
 
 
Ministry's reply: 
In order to have a more cogent procedure for the authorized officer 
to compute the value of forfeited property, it is proposed that Rule 3 
may be amended by inserting an explanation which will allow the 
Authorized Officer to utilize the service of consultant(s)/Valuer(s) to 
arrive at the value of forfeited property. 
 
2.    Point raised: Rule 5 : Consideration of the representation : 
          "(1) The Authorised Officer shall take into account, representation, 
if any, made by the person or his leg al nominee before the final 
determination of the price with respect to the forfeited property is made" 
 Whether the Ministry have any objection in specifying a time frame 
for disposal of representation, if any, given by the person or his legal 
nominee or f or that matter for completing the whole process of 
determining the price of the forfeited property under the rules? 
 
Ministry's reply 

 180 days from the first day of the next month of the receipt of the 
representation. 
 
3.    Point raised: Rule 5: Consideration of the representation: 
 
          "(2) The Authorised Officer shall thereafter fix the price of the 
forfeited property and intimate the same in writing to the person or his 
legal nominee". 
 Rule 5 mentions that the Authorised Officer shall intimate the person 
or his legal nominee as to the fixing of the price of the forfeited property. 
Rule 6 maintains that the State Government should issue an order to the 
effect that the property stands sold to the State Government at the price 
fixed under rule 5. 
        Whether the intimation to the person/legal nominee is accompanied 
by such an order, or such an arrangement is being viewed as an assurance 
to the concerned individual. 
Ministry's reply: 
 Within 60 days from the date the proces s of determining the price of 
forfeited property is completed. 
 The persons/legal nominee is informed about the price of the forfeited 
property as per Rule 5(2) of the said Act. Further reference by the State 
Government to the Central Government about the Head of Account etc. 
is an administrative function only.  The M/o Law and Justice have opined 
that this appears to be sustainable. 
 
4.    Point raised : Rule 7: Deposit of the amount by the Central 
Government: 
 

           " (1) The Central Government shall on receipt of the order under 
rule 6, deposit the price fixed for the forfeited property in such Treasury 
or under such Head of Account as may be specified therein under 
intimation to the person or his legal nominee." 
 As the matter being of utmost urgency  to the affected individual, 
whether the Ministry have any objection in specifying a time -frame 
within which the Central Government, after receipt of such an order as 
specified in rule 6, deposit the forfeited property in such Treasury under 
such Head of A ccount as specified in such an order under intimation to 
the person or his legal nominee.   
 
Ministry's reply: 
 Within 30 days from the date of order as specified in Rule 6. 
 
5.    Point raised: Rule 7: Deposit of the amount by the Central 
Government: 
 
           " (2) The amount of price along with interest there on, shall be paid 
to the person  
Or to his legal nominee."  
   
           Sub-rule (2) of Rule 7 mentioned about payment of the price of the 
forfeited property along with "interest thereon". Wheth er Ministry will 
specify at what rate interest will be paid to the claimant? 
 
 
 
Ministry's reply: 

 It is proposed that the interest may be paid at the prevailing interest 
rates on savings bank account of State Bank of India.  
 
The Committee considered the replies of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs on the points forwarded to them.  The Committee notes with 
satisfaction that the Ministry of Home Affairs have agreed to take action 
as follows in pursuance to its suggestions : 
(i) In Rule 3, to insert  an explanation allowing  the Authorized 
Officer to utilize the service of consultant(s)/Valuer(s) to 
arrive at the value of forfeited property.  In the existing rules, 
the Authorised Officer is required to do this job  without any  
assistance; and   
(ii) In Rule  7 (2), to  make provision for paying  the interest at 
the prevailing interest rates on savings bank account of State 
Bank of India on the price of the forfeited property to the 
claimant.  The existing provisions do no mention about  the 
rate of interest. 
 The Committee hopes that the Ministry would carry out the above 
amendments expeditiously under intimation to it. However, on other 
points, the Committee notes with satisfaction the reply given by  the 
Ministry of Home Affairs. 
      The Determination of the Price of the Forfeited Property Rules, 2005  
 
 The Determination of the Price of the Forfeited Property Rules, 
2005 framed under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 were 
examined and certain points, which needed further  
comments/clarifications, were put together in the form of a questionnaire. 
It was forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs for their 
comments/clarifications on July 10, 2006.  The Ministry of Home vide 

their O.M. No. 1-17014/52/2005-IS.VII dated October 16, 2008 stated that 
the points raised by this Secretariat were examined by that Ministry and 
draft comments  on the same were sent to the Ministry of Law  for vetting.  
The Ministry of Law has accepted the comments of Ministry of Home 
Affairs in Rule 6.  The Ministry of Home Affairs have re -examined  the 
Rule 3, 5(1), 5(2), 7(1) & 7(2) and  furnished their reply on these Rules.  
They had also asked for the acceptance of this Secretariat on the 
proposed comments/amendments and after obtaining the  approval of 
Hon’ble Home Minister for notifying  the same. 
The Committee, in its meeting held on 22 nd November, 2007,  
considered the replies of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the points 
forwarded to them and accepted the Ministry’s proposal for taking action 
with regard to the following points : 
(i) In Rule 3, by inserting  an explanation which will allow  the 
Authorized Officer to utilize the service of 
consultant(s)/Valuer(s) to arrive at the value of forfeited 
property; and  
(ii) In Rule  7 (2), by paying  the interest at the prevailing interest 
rates on savings bank account of State Bank of India on the 
price of the forfeited property to the claimant.   
 However, on other points, the Committee was satisfied with the replies 
given by  the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 The acceptance of the above proposal was communicated to the 
Ministry of Home Affairs vide this Secretariat O.M.  dated  the 20 th 
December, 2007. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Report Item 
On 
The Cement (Quality Control) Order, 2003 
 
 The Cement (Quality Control) Order, 2003 framed under the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 were examined and a 
questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of Commerce 
& Industry (Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion) for their 
comments / clarifications on the 15 th January, 2003.  The Ministry 
furnished their comments / clarifications on the 23rd March, 2004.  
 
2. The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on the 
17th March, 2005 and noted that while the Cement (Quality  Control) 
Order, 1995 was under the Essential Commodities Act, 1986, the said 
activity had been brought under the purview of the Indian Standards Act, 
1986 through the Cement (Quality Control) Order, 2003.  The Committee 
felt that there was a need for regu lating the activities relating to cement 
under both legislations and desired that views/ suggestions on the said 
Order may be called for from the concerned bodies/ organizations.  
However, no views/ suggestions came before the Committee.  
Accordingly, it w as decided to seek further clarifications, based on the 
Committee's observations on the points raised in the questionnaire from 
the Ministry.  A reference in this regard was sent to the Ministry of 
Commerce & Industry (Department of Industrial Policy & Pro motion) 
on the 17th April, 2006.  The Ministry furnished their views/ comments on 

the 18th October, 2006.  Following are the points raised by the Committee 
and the comments/clarifications furnished by the Ministry:  
 
(1) The Committee noted that as per Section 14 of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986, the Central Government has been empowered to 
notify any article or process of any scheduled industry, in order to make 
it conform to the Indian standard and direct the use of Standard Mark 
under a licenc e as compulsory on such article or process.  The Cement 
(Quality Control) Order, 2003 has been issued in exercise of these 
statutory provisions.  The Committee failed to understand the 
justification for picking up cement for compulsory use of Standard Mark 
after so many years of the legislation.  The Committee also wanted to be 
apprised about the manner of regulating the quality of cement prior to 
the enactment of the Cement (Quality Control) Order, 2003 and also the 
advantages that may accrue to the Govern ment in comparison to the 
earlier period.  
 
 The Ministry submitted the following clarification: 
 
 “The Cement (Quality Control) Order, 2003 has been brought into 
force to ensure the manufacture and supply of quality cement, adhering 
to Standard Mark, in t he country.  It has always been the endeavour of 
the Government of India to see that only Standard Mark quality cement 
is made available to the consumers.  Before the present Cement (Quality 
Control) Order was brought into force, the quality of cement was ensured 
under Cement (Quality Control) Order of 1995 issued under the 
provisions of Section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955.  However, 
after delicensing of the cement industry surplus capacity was created 
with the industry for supply of cement in the country.  It was, therefore, 

no longer felt necessary to keep the commodity of cement under the 
Essential Commodities Act.  Accordingly it was deleted from the purview 
of this Act.  However, to ensure quality of the cement, new Quality 
Control Order ha s been brought into operation under BIS Act.  Thus, 
Cement (Quality Control) Order has always been in existence to ensure 
its quality first by keeping the cement under the Cement (Quality 
Control) Order issued under the Essential Commodities Act and later by 
issuing the Quality Control Order under the BIS Act.  There was no 
period when the quality of cement was not sought to be ensured and hence 
there cannot be any comparison with the present regime and any regime 
in the past.  A brief comparison of the Cem ent (Quality Control) Order 
issued under the Essential Commodities Act and the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act is given in the Statement annexed which shows that except 
for some minor variations both the Quality Control Orders aimed at 
ensuring supply of quality  cement to the consumers.” 
 
(2) Clause 2 Definitions 
 
 (i) The term “Appropriate Authority” has been defined as 
follows:  
 (b) “Appropriate authority” means an officer not below the rank 
of an Under Secretary to the Government of India or an officer not below 
the rank of a General Manager, District Industries Centre of a State 
Government or as may be appointed by the Central Government or the 
State Government by a notification published in the Official Gazette to 
implement the provisions of this Order.” 
 
 The Committee felt that the minimum level of the officer in the 
Central Government as well as in the State Government for the purpose 

of implementation of provisions of this Order seemed to be somewhat not 
sufficiently senior keeping in view the discr etions, etc. bestowed, as well 
as the magnitude of the decisions required to be taken under the Order.  
The Committee, accordingly, sought to know as to whether the 
Government had any objection in amending the above provisions so as to 
authorize higher lev el officers say, a Deputy Secretary level officer for 
discharging these responsibilities. 
 
The Ministry was of the view that the appropriate authority under 
both the Quality Control Orders was the same and it was not felt 
necessary to change it as Officer in the rank of Under Secretary in the 
Government of India and General Manager, District Industries Centre 
in the State-both Class I Officers were considered responsibly competent 
enough to carry out the provisions of the Order. 
 
 (ii) The terms “Dealer” an d “Manufacturer” are 
defined as follows 
 
 (e) "dealer" in relation to cement, means a person who, or a firm 
or Hindu Undivided Family which, carries on directly or otherwise the 
business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing cement, whether in 
cash or for deferred payment or for commission, remuneration of other 
valuable consideration; 
 
(f) "manufacturer" in relation to cement, means a person who or a 
firm or Hindu Undivided Family  which, produces, makes or 
manufactures cement and includes a person who, or a firm or Hindu 
Undivided Family which, claims such cement to be produced, made or 

manufactured by any such person or firm or Hindu Undivided Family, 
as the case may be;” 
 
 The Co mmittee was of the view that there can be a dealer or a 
manufacturer who may not fall into these categories. A dealer or a 
manufacturer can be a corporate body.  The Committee therefore 
enquired about the justification for limiting the definition of ‘dealer’ and 
‘manufacturer’ to a firm or HUF? 
 
The Ministry clarified that the definitions of “dealer” and 
“manufacturer” were the same as in the earlier Quality Control Order 
and it was not felt necessary to revise these because they were elaborate 
enough to co ver any category of person/organization dealing with the 
cement. A corporate body was either a group of manufacturers or a 
group of dealers and thus covered under the present definitions. 
 
(3) (i) Clause 3 (1) Prohibition regarding manufacture, sale, distr ibution 
etc  
   
 Clause 3(1) lays down that 
  
  “No person shall himself or by any person on his behalf, 
manufacture or store for sale, sell or distribute cement which does not 
conform to the Specified Standard and which do not bear the Standard 
Mark: 
 
Provided further that the Central Government may, on an 
application made, permit any person to manufacture or store for sale, or 
sell or distribute cement without Standard Mark for a period of not 

exceeding one hundred and fifty days, if it is satisfied that the grant of 
regular Standard Mark is pending with the authorities under the Act.” 
 
Pointing out that the period of 150 days was on the higher side, the 
Committee enquired whether any monitoring mechanism was in place to 
check that the violations did not o verstep the period of 150 days.  The 
significance of 150 days up to which anybody could be allowed to 
manufacture, store, etc. cement without Standard Mark was also asked 
for.  Is there no fixed time period within which an application for regular 
Standard Mark should be disposed of.  The Committee felt that had a 
fixed time period for disposal of an application for regular Standard 
Mark had been prescribed, it would have been easier for the Central 
Government to dispose of requests under Clause 3 (1) and al so more 
efficiently. 
 
Justifying the period of 150 days, the Ministry gave the details 
about the procedure for processing of applications as follows: 
“The period of 150 days allowed for manufacturing cement without 
obtaining BIS licence or Standard Mark has been fixed keeping into the 
account the normal time which is utilized by the appropriate authorities 
for processing of applications for BIS Licence.  Earlier this period was 
120 days but practical experience showed that in some cases the 
processing of applications for BIS licence could go upto 150 days.  Hence 
the period was fixed accordingly.  As per the procedure, a manufacturer 
intending to start production of cement applies to BIS for a licence.  BIS 
carries out inspection at the site of the proposed cement plant to ensure 
that the applicant has the requisite infrastructure to install a plant and 
commence the production which shall ultimately conform to BIS norms.  
In the case of mini cement plants, this Department also gets another 

inspection done by National Council for Cement & Building Materials, 
an R & D unit under this Department.  Even after this inspection/these 
inspections, ad -hoc permission granted for manufacture of cement 
contains a clause for downgrading of cement by one step to ensure its 
quality, i.e. 53 grade cement is graded as 43 grade.  Moreover, the period 
of 150 days for processing the applications for BIS licence conveys the 
maximum limit for processing the applications which are, however, 
normally processed earlier than that.” 
 
The Committee wondered as to why a time -period could not be 
prescribed within which an application for regular Standard Mark 
should be disposed off, even if the overall time limit of 150 days was 
retained.  The Ministry repeated its earlier stand that the time period of 
150 days was given keeping in view the time required within which an 
application for regular standard should be disposed off.  BIS has norm of 
generally up to 120 days for grant of ISI license. 
 
 (ii) Clause 3 (2) 
 As per Clause 3 (2) 
 “The cement which do not conform to the Specified Standard shall 
be destroyed immediately within a month.” 
 The above provision evoked the following queries: 
 
 (a) What is the Authority that has been entrusted with the duty 
of ensuring    destruction of the  cement which does not 
conform with the specified    standards; 
 (b) Keeping in view the environmental aspects, what is the 
proce3dure for    destruction or disposal of such 

cement; whether Government have any    objection in 
covering these aspects in the Order; 
(c)  Who shall bear the cost of destruction of such cement and 
whether it  should not be specified in the Order; 
(d)  If such situation arises where cement is required to be 
destroyed, is there  any provision for imposition of penalty on 
the defaulter? 
 
The Ministry gave the following reply:  
 
“The appropriate authority defined above has to ensure the 
destruction of sub -standard cement immediately and the environment 
aspects are taken care of by it in the normal manner.  Cost of destruction 
of such cement is obviously borne by the manufacturer himself as there 
is no provision for carrying the sub -standard cement to Government 
laboratories for its destruction and it is destroyed at the site.  There is 
another penalty on the producer of such sub-standard cement.” 
 
The Committee was of the view that the procedure for destruction 
of cement may be prescribed in Clause 3 (2) itself.  The Ministry clarified 
that at present, the standard did not provide any procedure for 
destruction of sub -standard cement.  However, t he matter had been 
referred to the Technical Department of BIS for examination by a 
Technical Committee. 
 
(4) Clause 4: Obligation for certification 
 
 Clause 4 lays down that 
 

 “(1) the manufacturer of cement shall make an application to the 
Bureau for obtaining licence for use of the Standard Mark within forty 
five days of the issue of this Order, if not already obtained; and  
 
 (3) When any person by himself or through any person on his 
behalf proposes to manufacture cement, he shall make an application t o 
the Bureau before the commencement of production.” 
 
 Taking note of the fact that the order did not prescribe any format 
of application for obtaining licence for use of Standard Mark as well as 
for manufacture of cement, the Committee enquired from the 
Government whether there was any objection in prescribing such format 
in the order itself for convenience of the manufacturers.  Similarly, it was 
also asked whether Government had any objection in specifying a ti me 
frame for disposal of such applications. 
 
 The Ministry gave the following reply: 
 
“Application form for obtaining BIS licence for use of the Standard 
Mark is prescribed in BIS (Certification) Regulations, 1988.  It is readily 
available with all BIS offices as well as on BIS website. 
 
The permission to manufacture cement on ad-hoc basis is given for 
two months only, which is extendable upto 150 days.  Normally, by the 
time the period of first ad-hoc permission expires, the response of the BIS 
becomes ava ilable.  As such, no other time limit is required to be 
prescribed for processing these applications.” 
 

The Committee felt that the period for allowing the manufacturer 
to manufacture cement on ad-hoc basis, i.e. two months extendable upto 
a maximum period of 150 days needed to be prescribed in the Order itself. 
 
The Ministry explained that as per the existing practice, initial 
permission was being granted to large cement plants for a period of sixty 
days and for small scale/mini plants thirty days.  The Mi nistry however 
was in agreement with the Committee’s suggestion for initial permission 
for a period of 60 days, extendable up to a maximum period of 150 days 
could be given to cement plants, irrespective of their category, i.e. 
small/mini cement units or large units. 
 
(5) Clause 4 (4)-Obligation for certification  
 
 “Information relating to expiry or cancellation of any license or 
rejection of application for grant of licence by the Bureau for 
manufacture of one or more of the cement shall be sent to the 
Appropriate immediately by the Bureau.” 
  
 The Committee observed that the term 'immediately' appearing in 
the above provisions seemed to be vague. The Committee was of the view 
that there should be a time period within which information relating to 
expiry or cancellation of any licence or rejection of application for grant 
of licence was to be furnished to the Appropriate Authority.  The 
Committee wanted to know whether such information was also conveyed 
to the applicant, and, if so, in what manner.  The Com mittee also 
enquired about the existence of any provision for appeal against rejection 
of an application for grant of licence by the Bureau for manufacture of 
cement.  The Committee also noted that there were no provisions in the 

Order regarding allowing opportunity to be heard before passing order 
on his application for grant of licence or for making mandatory recording 
of reasons in writing while passing the rejection order on the application.  
The Committee’s query accordingly was as to whether these aspects were 
regulated in any manner, and if not done, should these not be provided 
in the extant order.  The Committee pointed out that in clause 4(4) a 
provision may be inserted in the Order allowing for opportunity to the 
applicant to be heard before the p assing of order on his application for 
grant of licence along with making mandatory for recording of reasons 
in writing while passing the rejection order on the application 
 
The Ministry clarified that in case BIS does not recommend 
granting of licence to an applicant it immediately sends information to 
this Department which is responsible for issuing ad-hoc permission.  Such 
rejections are conveyed by the BIS only after inspecting the site of the 
plant of the applicant and after giving him appropriate oppo rtunity to 
justify his application (two weeks time is given by BIS for explanation by 
the applicant). 
 
The Ministry informed that provision was given in the BIS 
(Certification) Regulations, 1988 at Clause 4(4). 
 
(6) Clause 5 Power to call for information etc. 
 
 Clause 5 lays down that 
“ The Appropriate Authority may, with a view to secure compliance with 
this Order:- (1) require any person engaged in the manufacture, storage 
for sale, sale or distribution of cement to give such information as it deems 
necessary in relation to the manufacture, storage for sale, sale or 

distribution of cement for the implementation of this order or require any 
such person to furnish to it samples of such cement.” 
 
 Noting that the Ministry had not prescribed any format for calling 
the information in relation to manufacture, storage etc. of cement, the 
Committee asked whether government had any objection in prescribing 
such format in the Order itself for convenience of the 
manufacturers/dealers.  The  Committee also enquired about the 
periodicity for calling such information and whether it would be 
mandatory for all manufacturers/dealers. 
The Ministry apprised that the power under this clause was to be 
read alongwith powers conferred upon the appropria te authority under 
Section 7 of the Control Order as it gave necessary powers to them to 
prescribe the manner in which the information is required from the 
manufacturer/dealer. 
 
(7) Clause 6   Testing of samples 
 
 Clause 6 provides that  
 “Samples of cement bearing the Standard Mark and drawn by the 
Appropriate Authority, for ascertaining whether they are of the Specified 
Standard, shall be tested in the laboratory approved by the Bureau and 
in the manner as may be determined by the Bureau.” 
 
 Pointing out that the words 'in the manner as may be determined' 
was inappropriate, the Committee enquired whether guidelines existed 
with regard to testing of samples and if so, the same may be specified in 
the clause itself.  
 

Response of the Ministry was that BIS ha d prescribed different 
Quality Standards for different varieties of cement which are to be tested 
differently.  This different treatment to be given to different varieties of 
cement itself determined the manner of testing of samples. 
 
 Not satisfied with t he Ministry’s reply, the Committee enquired 
about the reason for not prescribing the norms/guidelines with regard to 
the manner of testing of different samples of cement in the laboratory to 
be determined by the Bureau as provided for under clause 6. 
 
 The Ministry clarified that testing of cement samples was 
undertaken in accordance with the procedure specified in the relevant 
Indian Standards. Such samples were tested in BIS and the BIS 
recognized outside laboratories which were NABL approved. 
 
(8) The Committee desired to have an idea about any machinery the 
Central Government had for monitoring of proper compliance of the 
provisions of the Order, inspection of books and other documents, search, 
seizure of stock.  Also, in what manner, the Government coordinated with 
the State Governments, local authorities and local police in this regard. 
 
The Ministry apprised the Committee that “BIS had stated that 
they had set up an Enforcement Directorate which coordinates actions 
relating to search and seizure of goods when misuse of the BIS Standards 
Mark is reported.  The violators are prosecuted under Section 33 of BIS 
Act and the punishment for the violations may include imprisonment 
which may extend to one year or with fine which may extent to Rs. 
50,000/- or with both. 
 

The Central Govt. as explained above, has designated officers for 
monitoring the compliance of the provisions of the Control Order.  
However, the officers of the Govt. of India have so far not seized any Sub-
standard cement and have ordered its de struction.  Even if such an 
authority has not been exercised the officers of the State Govt., still the 
promulgation of such an order is necessary as it act as a deterrent to 
prevent production/import of sub-standard cement into the country.” 
  
(9) The Cement (Quality Control) Order, 1985 was framed under the 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955. The Committee noted that the activity 
has since been brought under the purview of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986. The Committee was of the view that th ere is need 
for regulating the activities relating to cement under both the legislations. 
 
 The Committee responded in the following manner: 
 
 “Consequent to the de -licensing of the cement industry, a large 
surplus capacity was created for adequate supply of cement in the 
country. As on date there is excess capacity in the cement industry. It was 
in 2002 while reviewing the list of items under Essential Commodities 
Act, it was felt that “Cement” as an item be taken out of its purview since 
it was freely and  abundantly available in the market. Therefore, 
“cement” as an item, was deleted from the Essential Commodities Act 
from 15.02.2002. 
 
 However, it was felt necessary that the quality of cement be ensured 
continuously and the best option was to bring a new quality control order 
under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 as it is the Bureau which 
generally sets norms in terms of quality and also monitors the same 

continuously. Thus, a new Cement (Quality Control) Order, 2003 was 
framed under the BIS Act. In fact, the Cement Quality Control Order 
under BIS Act is exhaustive and stringent in terms of maintaining quality 
and ensuring supply of quality cement to the consumer. In view of the 
above, the Committee’s suggestions for issuing Cement (Quality Control) 
Order, 2003 both under Essential Commodities Act and BIS Act has been 
considered and it is felt that this suggestion is not feasible.” 
 
3. The Committee considered the replies furnished by the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry (Department of Industrial P olicy and 
Promotion) as above and noted the position with satisfaction.  As regards 
the incorporation of the procedure for destruction of sub -standard 
cement in the regulations, the Committee notes that the matter has been 
referred to the Technical Departm ent of BIS for examination by a 
Technical Committee.  The Committee recommends that this may be 
examined urgently and the action taken in pursuance to the decision may 
be intimated to the Committee forthwith.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report Item 
on 
The Indian Council of World Affairs Rules, 2006 
 
 
 The Indian Council of World Affairs Rules, 2006 framed under the 
Indian Council of World Affairs Act, 2001 were examined and a                                                                                                                                                                                
questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of External 
Affairs on the 21 st December, 2006 for their comments/clarifications 
thereon.   
 
2. The Ministry of External Affairs have furnished their 
comments/clarifications on the points raised in the questionnaire vide 
their O.M. dated 12 th February, 2007.  The points raised by the 
Committee and the comments of the Ministry are reproduced below: 
 
 (1) The Committee  observed that although the Indian Council of 
World Affairs Act came into force in the year 2001, the Indian Council of 

World Affairs Rules could be framed in the year 2006.    The Ministry 
were accordingly asked about the existence of any  rules/regulations in 
force prior to the Rules of 2006 and if not, the manner in which the areas 
covered by these rules were being regulated in the absence thereof. 
 
Response of the Ministry was that rules under the ICWA Act 2001 
were not framed prior to 2 006. For some of the areas covered by the 
ICWA Rules 2006, (eg. Rule 3 of ICWA Rules, 2006), no situation had 
arisen before 2006 requiring the application of the rules. For certain 
other areas, for example, financial accounts, necessary instructions have 
been given to ICWA at the time of releasing funds to them. 
 
 
 
(2) Rule 3 Manner of filling vacancies among members 
 
   Section 7(2) refers to the composition of the Indian Council 
of World Affairs to be appointed by the Central Government 
within three months from the date of assent by the President of 
India of the Indian Council of World Affairs Act.  Specific queries 
regarding the date of the constitution of the ICWA, the reasons, if 
any, for the delay in the constitution of the ICWA, and the manner 
in which the objectives of the Act were being achieved/ regulated in 
the absence of the ICWA were raised by the Committee.  The 
Ministry was also asked to intimate whether four months time was 
sufficient for s election of the new Members and also the 
consequences in case the selection procedure over-stepped the term 
of the existing incumbent. 
 

Response of the Ministry to the aforesaid queries was that the 
provision of three months has been omitted in the ICWA (A mendment) 
Act, 2003 and it has been further specified that it shall be deemed always 
to have been omitted. The initial meeting of the Council of  ICWA was 
held on 24 th March, 2006. The reason for the delay was due to 
unavoidable circumstances.  The Committ ee was also given to 
understand that while framing the ICWA Rules, 2006, it was felt that four 
months would be sufficient time. So far no situation has arisen regarding 
the application of the rule. 
 
(3) Rule 3(3) Manner of filling vacancies among members 
 
'The nomination to fill the casual vacancy in the office of a member 
shall be made as soon as possible  after the date of occurrence of such 
vacancy'. 
 
The Committee felt that the words, 'as soon as possible' were vague 
and the time frame within which the v acancy had to be filled after the 
occurrence of such vacancy needed to be prescribed in the rule itself.  It 
was suggested that a period of four months could be prescribed for the 
purpose. 
 
 The Ministry clarified that it was not possible to specify a fixed 
time-frame for completing the procedure for filling up the vacancy, and 
the words  “as soon as possible” had been written to take care of situations 
where a vacancy arose due to unforeseen circumstances. 
 
(4) The Committee noted that as per Section 4(2) of the Act, the 
Head Office of the Council shall be in Delhi with other branches at other 

parts of India.  A query was raised as to whether branches of ICWA had 
been established in various parts of the country, and if so, how many 
branches had been established alongwith locations thereof. 
 
The Committee was informed that till date no branch of ICWA has 
been established outside Delhi. 
 
(5) Section 14 of the ICWA Act refers to the constitution of a 
Governing Body and other Committees by the Council, which shall 
exercise/ discharge their powers and functions as per prescribed rules/ 
regulations. The Ministry was specifically asked about the status of such 
rules/ regulations and whether all such rules/ regulations were in place? 
 
Ministry’s response was that ICWA Rules, 2006 had been made in 
exercise of the powers conferred by sub section (2) of section 25 of the 
ICWA Act, 2001 and notified on 21st February, 2006 and laid on the Table 
of both the Houses of Parliament. Regulations to be framed under Section 
26 of the ICWA Act, 2001 were under consideration. 
 
(6) Sections 25 and 26 of the Act refer to the power of the Central 
Government to make rules and the Council to make regulations, 
respectively.  The Committee enquired about the status with regard to 
the framing of all such rules/regulations.  Details of all the rules/ 
regulations, as contemplated under the ICWA Act, 2001 if framed and 
laid on the Table of both Houses of Parliament were asked for.  The 
Committee also desired to be apprised about the reasons for non-framing 
of required rules/regulations.  The Ministry was also asked to specify the 
time frame by when Government would frame subordinate legislation 
contemplated under such sub-clauses. 

 
Ministry’s only response was that any rules/regulations made 
under the Act in future shall also be laid before both Houses of the 
Parliament.  Regulations under Section 26 of the ICWA Act are 
contemplated and are at present under consideration of ICWA. 
 
3. The Committee is not satisfi ed with the explanation furnished 
by the Ministry of External Affairs with regard to the delay in the 
framing of Rules/Regulations under Sections 25 and 26 of the Indian 
Council of World Affairs Act, 2001.  The Committee would like to point 
out that the ICWA Rules, 2006 are not comprehensive rules covering all 
areas as envisaged under Section 25 (2) of the ICWA Act, 2001.  The 
Committee is not inclined to agree with the contention of the Ministry 
that prior to 2006, no situation had arisen which required application of 
such rules.  This according to the Committee is not a happy situation.  
The Committee would like to emphasize that the subordinate legislation 
contemplated under any Act of Parliament should be in place at the time 
of enforcement of the Act.  The Committee, however, observes that rules 
are yet to be framed in respect of two vital aspects concerning the officers 
and employees of the Council as indicated under Section 25 (2) (e) and (f) 
of the Act.  Similarly, the Council is still in the process of framing 
regulations contemplated under Section 26 of the Indian Council of 
World Affairs Act, 2001, even after so many years.  Response of the 
Ministry clearly indicates that these regulations are not likely to be 
framed in the near future.  Regulations are to be framed with respect to 
matters like conduct of meetings of the Council, powers and functions of 
the Governing Body, conditions of service of officers and employees, etc.  
The Committee strongly feels that such rules/regulations are required to 
be there for smooth and proper functioning of the Council.  The 

Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry of External 
Affairs should take immediate steps to ensure that the Regulations are 
put in place within a definite time frame, which may be intimated to it.  
 
 
 
 
  

Report Item 
on 
Communication received from Shri Dipankar Mukherjee, MP, Rajya 
Sabha regarding the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Central 
Rules, 1946 
 
 
Shri Dipankar Mukherjee, Hon’ble Member of Parliament, Rajya 
Sabha, on th e 1st January, 2004 had addressed a communication to the 
then Hon’ble Minister of Labour , Dr Sahib Singh Verma in connection 
with notification G.S.R.No. 936 (E) dated 10 th December, 2003, on the 
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Central Rules, 1946 framed 
under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946. In the 
communication, Shri Mukherjee objected to the introduction of a new 
classification of workmen, namely, 'Fixed Term Employment Workman', 
who would be engaged on ‘ contract of employment for a fixed period’ ; 
though such workman ‘shall be eligible for all statutory benefits available 
to a permanent workman’, his services can be terminated without any 
notice or pay in lieu therof as a result of non renewal of contract .  The 
Hon’ble Member had pointed out that the notification contains an 
amendment to the Schedule of the Industrial Employment (Standing 
Orders) Act, 1946 itself, which tantamounts to amendment of the Act 
passed by Parliament and the same cannot be substituted by an executive 
notification.  He, therefore, urged the Hon’ble Minister of Labour to 
rescind the said notification immediately and to come before the 
Parliament before taking any decision. A copy of this letter was endorsed 
to the Chairman, Committee on Subordina te Legislation, Rajya Sabha 
with a request to examine the issue.  
 
2. Accordingly, the Committee took up the matter and sought 
clarifications from the Ministry of Labour on the following points:  

 
(i) The background in which the Ministry of Labour have issued 
notification GSR No.936 (E) dated the 10 th December, 2003 
making amendments in the Industrial Employment 
(Standing Orders) Central Rules, 1946; 
(ii) The details of the circumstances as well as compulsions, if 
any, which necessitated the introduction of t he concept of 
fixed term employment of workman; 
(iii) The objective sought to be achieved by the notification; and 
(iv) The consequences of the amendment referred to in (i) above 
and whether the concept of fixed term employment can be 
legally brought into effect thro ugh an administrative action 
without corresponding amendment in the principal Act 
under which the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) 
Central Rules, 1946 have been framed or for that matter any 
other central Act regulating the employment of workman. 
 
3. The Ministry of Labour vide their O.M. dated 3 rd February, 2004 
have furnished their comments on the points/issues raised by the 
Ministry.  The comments/clarifications furnished by the Ministry are 
reproduced as follows: 
 
“Section 15 of the Industrial Em ployment (Standing Orders) Act, 
1946 has a provision for power to make rules by the appropriate 
Government.  This section empowers the appropriate Government to 
make rules and sub-section (1) read with clauses (a) & (b) of Sub-section 
(2) of the Section 15  of Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 
1946, the Central Government as appropriate Government is competent 
to issue a notification to insert additional matter in the schedule to the 
Act. 
 

Government have amended the Industrial Employment (Standin g 
Orders) Central Rules , 1946 to include “Fixed Term Employment 
Workman” in the Schedule of the Industrial Employment (Standing 
Orders) Act, 1946 and Model Standing Orders annexed to the Industrial 
Employment (Standing Orders) Central Rules, 1946. 
 
By thi s amendment, a fixed term employment workman will be 
engaged on the basis of contract of employment for a fixed period.  
However, his working hours, wages, allowances and other benefits will 
not be less than of a permanent workman.  He will also be eligible for all 
statutory benefits available to a permanent workman proportionately to 
the period of service rendered by him even though his period of 
employment does not extend to the qualifying period of employment. 
 
The objective is to facilitate the industri al establishment to resort 
to fixed term employment in many industrial establishments including 
CPSUs.  The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, in Section 2(oo) (bb) provides 
that in the event of termination of service of a workman as a result of non 
renewal of contract of employment, will not be treated as a retrenchment.  
But there was no such corresponding provision for fixed terms 
employment workman on contract in the existing provisions of Industrial 
Employment (Standing Orders) Central Rules, 1946 and Model Standing 
Orders.  The amendment would enable the legislative intention in the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1974 to be implemented in practice by its 
inclusion in the Model Standing Orders. 
 
At present we have following classification of workman in the 
Schedule annexed to the IE(SO) Act, 1946: 
 
Permanent, Temporary, Apprentices, Probationers, Badlis. 
 
In addition to above, Fixed Term Employment Workman as a new 
category has been added. 
 
The proposed amendments will give the required flexibility to the 
employers in appointing suitable persons in the industrial establishments.  
The period of contract would also be flexible depending upon the exact 
requirement of the employer.  It would improve suitably the work culture 
and productivity.  The employers will have access directly to the market 
from where they can recruit suitable trained persons on fixed term 
eliminating the middleman; social security will be given to the workmen 
which was not the case before.” 
  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
4. The Committee fe lt that the Ministry’s reply in the matter is not 
exhaustive as they have simply stated that by this amendment they have 
added another category of workman viz. a fixed term employment 
workman with the objective to facilitate the industrial establishments t o 
resort to fixed term employment.  Therefore, the Committee, on 19 th 
February, 2004, decided to hear the representatives of the Ministry of 
Labour in the matter. 
 
5. In the meantime, the matter was raised in Rajya Sabha by the 
Hon’ble MP, Shri Dipankar Mu kherjee through a question and the 
Minister of Labour and Employment, while replying to the same, 
informed Rajya Sabha that the matter has been reviewed and that it has 
been decided to rescind the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) 
Central (Amendment) Rules, 2003. 
 
6. The Ministry of Labour, on the 30 th September, 2004 notified the 
draft rules to amend the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) 
Central (Amendment) Rules, 2003 for information of all persons likely to 
be affected and called for objections/suggestions in the matter. 
 
7. Thereafter, the Committee pursued the matter with the Ministry at 
regular intervals.  However, the Ministry in their replies to the 
Committee maintained that the matter is under consideration of the 
government and a final decision yet to be taken.  Therefore, the 
Committee on 22nd February, 2007 decided that the representatives of the 
Ministry of Labour may be called before the Chairperson of the 
Committee for explaining the reasons for the delay in the matter. 
 

8. Finally, on the 30 th January, 2008 the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment informed the Committee that the notification GSR No.936 
(E) dated 10th December, 2003 through which the Industrial Employment 
(Standing Orders) Central Rules, 1946 was amended to include “fix ed 
term employment workman” in the schedule of the Industrial 
Employment (Standing Orders) Central Act, 1946 and Model Standing 
Orders annexed to the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) 
Central Act, 1946, has been rescinded.  They enclosed copies of th e 
Notification GSR No.655 (E) dated 10 th October, 2007 and corrigendum 
Notification GSR No. 708 (E) dated 13 th November, 2007 containing the 
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Central (Amendment) Rules, 
2007 which are placed as Annexure. 
 
9. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment vide notification G.S.R.655 (E), dated 10 th October, 2007 
(notifying the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Central 
(Amendment) Rules, 2007) rescinded the Industrial Employment 
(Standing Orders) Central (Amendment) Rules, 2003, amending the 
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Central Rules, 1946 whereby, 
a new classification of workman ‘fixed term employment workman’ was 
introduced.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Report Item on 
The National Council for Teacher Education (Guidelines for 
regulation of tuition fees and other fees chargeable by unaided 
teacher education institutions) Regulations, 2002 
 
 The National Council for Teacher Education (Guidelines for 
regulation of tuition fees and other fees chargeable by unaided teacher 
education institutions) Regulations, 2002 framed under the National 
Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993 were examined and a 
questionnaire on the subject was referred to the Ministry of Human 
Resource De velopment, Department of Elementary Education & 
Literacy on the 15th October, 2003. 
 
2. The Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of 
Elementary Education and Literacy vide their OM dated the 15 th June, 
2004 furnished their comments / clarifications which were considered by 
the Committee at its meeting held on the 6th July, 2005. The observations 
made by the Committee thereon were forwarded to the Ministry for their 
comments/ clarifications on the 2nd August 2005. The Ministry on the 21st 
November, 2005 furnished an interim reply informing that the matter 
was being examined in consultation with NCTE.  There was no 
communication from the Ministry thereafter, despite repeated reminders 
issued by the Secretariat at regular intervals during 2006.  
 
3. Accordingly, the representatives of the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development, Department of School Education and Literacy 
appeared before the Chairperson of the Committee on the 14 th March, 

2007. In the meeting the Ministry provided their clarifications. The points 
raised by the Committee, the Ministry's reply, the Committee's 
observations and the Ministry's clarifications are reproduced below: - 
  
1. Point raised 
 
 The NCTE Act was enacted in 1993 but the NCTE (Guidelines for 
regulation of tuition fees  and other fees chargeable by unaided teacher 
education institutions) Regulations could be framed in 2002. What are 
the reasons that the Ministry have taken such a long period in framing 
the regulations and in what manner these aspects were being regulated  
prior to framing of these regulations? 
 
 Ministry's reply (15/06/04) 
 
 (a) As per Section 32 (1) of the NCTE, the power to make regulations 
is vested in the Council itself and not in the Central Government / 
Ministry. 
 
 (b) Section 32 of the NCTE Act lays  down a total of 16 subjects on 
which the Council is expected to frame regulations. When we take into 
account the fact that on many subjects, more than one set of regulations 
may be needed so as to deal with different stages [e.g. Pre -Primary, 
Elementary, Secondary] and different modalities [e.g. face -to-face and 
distance modes], the size and complexity of the task become obvious. 
After enforcement of the NCTE Act, the Council gradually framed and 
notified regulations on various subjects. A list of Regulations notified by 
the Council during 1996 -2002 (prior to Tuition Fee Regulations) is 
enclosed (Annexure-A). The Regulations notified on norms and 

standards for various teacher education courses by the NCTE from time 
to time have provided for charging of tuition fees and other fees at the 
rates as prescribed by the concerned State Government / affiliating 
university. 
 
However, in the year 2000, some teacher education institutions of 
Andhra Pradesh filed a writ petition in the Andhra Pradesh High Court 
for directing Government of Andhra Pradesh and NCTE to formulate a 
scheme for charging tuition fee and development fee by the private 
colleges of education in Andhra Pradesh in accordance with  the 
guidelines formulated by the Supreme Court of India in Unnikrishnan's 
case. The Andhra Pradesh High Court in its judgement dated 3 rd 
October, 2001 directed NCTE to consider the representation made by the 
Association of Management of Private Colleges o f Education of Andhra 
Pradesh and take appropriate decision in the matter within six months. 
Consequently, NCTE constituted a Committee for the purpose and the 
Regulations in question were notified in June, 2002. 
 
2. Point raised 
 
 Regulation 2- Applicability 
 
 These regulations shall, for the time being, apply to institutions which 
offer courses or training in teacher education (other than those 
institutions offering a teacher education programme leading to a 
university degree) as defined in Section 2 (e) of the NCTE Act, 1993 and 
operating on 'no grant-in-aid' 'self-financing' basis. 
 

(i) What is the purpose behind making the above regulation 
applicable "for the time being"? 
 
(ii) What are the reasons for which institutions offering a 
teachers education programme leading to a university degree have been 
treated differently from institutions, which offer courses or training in 
teacher education. 
 
(iii) Are these regulations applicable only to recognised 
institutions; what is the position with regard to the unrecogniged 
institutions? 
 
Ministry's reply(15/06/04) 
  
(i) Since there was a case pending in the Supreme Court (TMA 
Pai Foundation Vs. State of Karnataka and others) on the subject, it was 
decided to make the applicability of the regulations "for the time being" 
because these regulations might undergo changes or modifications in the 
light of the judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court. 
 
(ii) In the field of teacher education, while the programmes 
leading to award of university degree fall under the purview of the UGC, 
other teach er training programmes leading to Diploma or Certificate 
(and not to a Degree) do not come under the purview of the UGC. It was, 
therefore, decided that the UGC Regulations on tuition fees of October 
1997 would be made applicable to Degree level teacher ed ucation 
programmes and separate regulations be framed by the NCTE for 
Diploma / Certificate level teacher education programmes. 

 
(iii) These regulations are applicable to the institutions 
recognised by the NCTE. The Council through public notice from time to 
time warns the prospective candidates not to take admission in the 
institutions not recognised by the NCTE. 
 
3. Point raised 
  
Regulation 3 (d) 
 
 “Competent Authority" means the University Grants Commission, 
the Central Government, a State Government or any other authority, as 
may be designated by the Council, to determine the fees or scales of fees 
payable by students and the allotment of students for admission to 
various teacher training institutions. The words “any other authority" 
appearing in the above su b-regulations seems to be vague; whether 
Government has any objection in describing or qualifying the other 
authority in the regulation itself in order to make the provisions specific? 
 
 Ministry's reply(15/06/04) 
 
 The words ' any other authority' in Clause 3 (d) have been used by 
NCTE to meet unforeseen circumstances in which authorities other than 
those specified in the clause, may have to be authorized to function as 
"Competent Authorities" under the regulations. 
 
 Committee's observation (6/7/2005) 
 

 The Committee did not agree with the reasoning furnished by the 
Ministry justifying the provisions of Regulation 3 (d) whereby "any other 
authority' can be designated by the Council to act as the competent 
authority.  The  Committee reiterated its viewpoint that the regulations 
must specify the conditions subject to which any person could be 
designated as the Competent Authority 
  
 Ministry's clarification (14/03/07) 
 NCTE will be asked to delete the phrase “….or any other authority 
as may be designated by the Council” from the Regulation. 
 
 
4. Point raised  
 
Regulation 4 (1) and 4 (2) - Admission 
 
4(1)- No student other than a student who fulfills the requirements 
of the NCTE Regulations laying down the norms and standards for 
various teachers education programmes shall be eligible for admission 
to a teacher education programme. 
 
4(2) -Eligibility of candidates and the procedure for admission will 
be regulated as per the policy of the State Government and in terms of 
NCTE Re gulations, laying down the norms and standards for various 
teacher education programmes, as amended from time to time. 
 
Regulation 4(1) refers to “student" and regulation 4(2) refers to 
"candidates". Does the term "candidates" in regulation 4(2) refer to a  
student only which has been formally defined in the regulations? 

 
  
Ministry's reply(15/06/04) 
 
 Yes, the term 'candidate' in regulation 4(2) refers to a student. 
 
 Committee's observation (6/7/2005) 
 
The Committee pointed out that the word "candidate" was more 
appropriate and accordingly, under Regulation 4(i), the word "student" 
should be replaced with the word "candidate". 
 
Ministry's clarification (14/03/07) 
The point has been noted. Clause 3 (m) in the Regulation defines 
the word "student". In the interest of consistency the word "candidate" 
in regulation 4 (2) will be replaced by the word "student". 
 
 
5. Point raised 
 
Regulation 4 (3) 
 
 Regulation 4 (3) contemplates division of seats into free and payment 
seats and the charging of higher fees in case of payment seats. Of late, this 
trend of division of seats into free and payment seats has been done away 
with, particularly, in the case of technical education by a number of states 
like Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, etc. Whether there is any rethinking in this 
direction in case of teacher education institutions also? 

 
Ministry's reply(15/06/04) 
 
 This aspect will be reviewed at the time of revision of the existing 
regulations, which is already under consideration in view of the 
guidelines la id down by the Supreme Court in two judgements 
(judgement dt. 31.10.2002 in writ petition no. 317 of 1993 titled TMA Pai 
Foundation and others vs. State of Karnataka and others and judgement 
dt 14.8.2003 in writ petition no. 350 of 1993 titled Islamic Acad emy of 
Education vs. State of Karnataka and others). In these two judgements, 
the Hon. Supreme Court has laid down guidelines about the admission 
procedure, division of quotas between the management and State 
Governments and fixing of tuition fees in respe ct of aided and unaided 
private professional educational institutions. 
 
 Committee's observation (6/7/2005) 
 
 It was pointed out that the two Supreme Court cases namely, TMA 
PAI Foundation Vs. State of Karnataka and the Islamic Academy of 
Education and another Vs. State of Karnataka had been decided as far 
back as in the year 2001 and 2002, respectively, but the Ministry were 
still considering the issue of division of seats into free and payment seats.  
The Committee felt that the Ministry were taking an unduly long time in 
deciding the matter.   
 
 
 Ministry's clarification (14/03/07) 
 In the PA Inamdar vs. State of Maharashtra matter the Supreme 
Court has substantially departed from the Islamic Academy of Education 

Judgment. The present position is that according to the Supreme Court 
there cannot be any free seats/ government quota of seats in unaided 
education institutions. Therefore the existing regulation 4(3)(i) being in 
conflict with the direction of the Supreme Court would be withdrawn. 
 
 In so far as differential fee for the students from weaker section 
admitted to unaided institutions is concerned, a Central Legislation in 
respect of Higher Education Institutions, including unaided deemed 
Universities, coming under the preview of Central Government is under 
consideration. Higher Education Institutions under the preview of State 
government can also be regulated for fee by respective State 
Governments in terms of Articles 15 (5) of the Constitution introduced 
recently through the Constitution 93rd Amendment Act, 2005. According 
to available information several states have enacted such laws.  
 
The NCTE Regulations would be appropriately amended as and 
when the proposed Central Legislation comes into force. 
 
6. Point raised   
 
Regulation 5 - Constitution of Committees for fixation of fees 
payable 
 
(i) Composition of the Committee does not include 
representatives from NCTE or representatives from the Teachers' bodies 
/ organizations or representatives of institutions or representatives from 
Teachers' Education Institutions. Whether Government have any 
objection in including these representatives in the State level Committee? 
 

(ii) It has been mentioned in the end in regulation 5 that the 
concerned Government may nominate any other official to serve on the 
Committee. This provision attempts to make the constitution of the 
Committee vague, as it does not specify even the capacity in which any 
one may be nominated or the objective for which Government may 
nominate an official on the Committee. 
 
(iii) The term of members and other ex-official members has been 
prescribed in sub -regulation (2) of regulation 6, which primarily deals 
with procedure to be adopted by the Committee. Would it not be 
appropriate if regulation 6 (2) forms part of regulation 5? 
 
Ministry's reply(15/06/04) 
 
The suggestions at (i), (ii) and (iii) will be considered at the time to 
revision of the existing regulations in the light or Supreme Court's 
judgements, mentioned above. 
   
7. Point raised  
 
Regulation 6(5) 
 
 The Committee may determine different rates o r scales of fees for 
different classes of institutions, if a classification is justified on intelligible 
and objective criteria. In particular, the Committee shall be free to fix 
different rates for institutions located in tribal areas rural areas and 
urban areas. 
 

 What are the various classes of institutions contemplated under the 
above provisions; if the Committee has been empowered to fix different 
rates of fees for institutions located in different areas, whether 
institutions in rural and tribal areas would be compensated in any way in 
case lower rates of fees are determined for them keeping in view the tribal 
/ rural population? 
 
 Ministry's reply(15/06/04) 
 
 Classification of institutions may be according to the stage of teacher 
education [e.g. Pre -Primary, Elementary, Secondary] category (e.g. 
general education, physical education), location (rural, urban, tribal) etc. 
Subject or Grants to Teacher Education institutions [compensatory or 
otherwise] falls within the purview of individual State Governments. 
 
8. Point raised  
 
Regulation 7 (vii) 
 
 The management of the institution may realize the actual cost of board 
and lodging from the students subject to the Committee being satisfied 
about the reasonableness of such costs. 
 
(a) Whether the Committee determi nes any uniform rate of 
charges as cost of board and lodging or the management of the 
institutions are free to charge any amount as cost of boarding and 
lodging? 
 

(b) Whether the cost of board and lodging being charged by 
the management of the institution is reviewed by the Committee at 
regular intervals, if so, the details in this regard? 
 
Ministry's reply(15/06/04) 
 
There is no specific provision in the regulation. Decision in this 
matter has been left to the State Level Committees and therefo re may 
vary from State to State. 
 
9. Point raised  
 
Regulation 7 (viii) & (ix) 
 
 7(viii)- The Committee shall at an interval of three years determine 
the development fee and different rates of development fee may be 
specified for students of Free Seats, Pa yment Seats and Foreign NRI 
Seats: 
 
7 (ix) - The development fee may be at flat rates. 
 
What is the meaning of the term "flat rates" in regulation 7 (ix); 
what is the justification for keeping regulation 7 (ix) in view of regulation 
7 (viii)? 
 
 Ministry's reply(15/06/04) 
 

 Regulation 7 (viii) provides for determination of development fee 
whereas regulation 7 (ix) makes a provision for the development fee to be 
at flat rates. 
 
'Flat rates' means a fixed amount per year for maintenance of 
quality and standard of the institution, without further sub-division into 
various items such as infrastructure, furniture, apparatus, library etc. 
 
10. Point raised  
 
Regulation 10 
 
 Regulation 7, which deals with criteria and procedure for determining 
fee, in its last Para, refers to a judgement of the Supreme Court. 
Normally, regulations being in the nature of a legislation are supposed to 
state the resultant position after keeping in view the judicial 
pronouncement, etc, and therefore, court cases etc. do not form a part of 
the text of any legislation / subordinate legislation; what are the 
comments of the Ministry in this behalf; whether these regulations have 
been vetted by the Ministry of Law? 
 
 Ministry's reply(15/06/04) 
 
 These regulations have been framed by the NCTE in exercise of 
powers vested in it under Section 12 (h) read with Section 32 (d) (v) of the 
NCTE Act, 1993. The Ministry of Law has not vetted these regulations, 
because they are not Regulations framed by the Government of India. 
 

Committee's observation (6/7/2005) 
 
The Committee was not convinced with the Ministry's logic that 
the Ministry of Law had not vetted the regulations, as they were not 
framed by the Government of India. The Committee held the view that 
any subordinate legislation under a statute, whether framed by the 
Central Government or by any subordinate authority should comply 
with the procedural requirements and, therefore, the regulations should 
have been vetted by the Ministry of Law.  The Committee desired the 
Ministry to furnish a clarification on this point.   
 
Ministry's clarification (14/03/07) 
Section 12 (h) of the NCTE reads as follows:”….. the Council may 
lay down guidelines regarding tuition fee and other fees chargeable by 
recognized institutions”.  
Section 32 (d) (v) further stipulates: “The Council may by 
notification in the Official Gazette make regulations not inconsistent 
with the provision of this Act… 
…such regulation may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely… 
 (v) the tuition fees and other fees chargeable by institution under 
clause (h) of section 12. 
  
 NCTE has been issuing the Regulations under the provisions 
provided in the NCTE Act. Hitherto these have not been vetted by the 
Ministry of Law, Government of India. When the Law Department was 
consulted in the matter it was stated that if such Regulations are 

forwarded to them through the Ministry/ Department concerned, the 
Law Ministry will vet the same. However, the Law Department did not 
spell out any procedural provisions in regard to vetting of such 
Regulations under the Government of India (Allocation of Business) 
Rules.  
 
11. Point raised  
 
Regulation 8 (4)- 
 
 The Accounts of the teacher education institutions shall be audited 
every year to ensure that t he financial management conforms to the 
broad framework of these regulations and the guidelines issued by the 
Council from time to time. 
 
 Who will audit the accounts of such institutions, whether the 
Committee has appointed any panel of auditors for this purpose, whether 
audit report is required to be submitted to the Committee? 
 
 Ministry's reply(15/06/04) 
 
(a) Although there is no specific body identified for auditing 
accounts in these Regulations as a matter of practice accounts of teacher 
training are audited by Chartered Accountants. 
 
(b)      No panel of auditors is being maintained by NCTE. 
 

(c) Teacher Education Institutions are not required to submit their 
audited statement of accounts to Committees. 
 
Committee's observation (6/7/2005) 
 
The Committee was not satisfied with the explanation furnished 
by the Ministry with regard to the audit requirements of the Teacher 
Education Institution as laid down under Regulation 8 (4).  The 
Committee also did not appreciate the position that the Teacher 
Education Institutions were not required to submit their audited 
statement of accounts to the Committee.  The Committee felt the need 
for the regulation of the accounts of such institutions.  
  
Ministry's clarification (14/03/07) 
 
The Government and the NCTE are of the view that the audit 
should be done by a competent Chartered Accountant. The audit report 
should be placed before the Management of the Teacher Education 
Institution concerned. There appears to be no need for the Audit Report 
to be submitted to the Regional Committee. If there is a specific 
complaint of misappropriation or defalcation of funds by the then 
NCTE or the Regional Committee would seek the audited statements. 
Accounts as part of the enquiry process. 
 
12. Point raised  
 
Regulation 9 (1) (i)- 

 
 Fees or the scales of fees once fixed under these Regulations shall be 
valid for a period of at least three years. 
 
 Should the words “three years” in the regulation not be “three 
academic years?  
 
 Ministry' reply(15/06/04) 
 
Yes, this will be taken care of in the revised regulations. 
 
13. Point raised   
 
Regulation 9 (I) (iii)- 
 
 Fees may be payable in advance for a semester. 
  
 Should the word "may" not be replaced by word "shall"? 
 
 Ministry's reply(15/06/04) 
 
 The word "may" in the regulations gives flexibility to the 
managements and is intended to avoid hardship to students who cannot 
pay fees in advance but can pay in installments. 
 
14. Point raised 
 
Regulation 9 (1) (iv)- 
 

 Each Committee shall notify in the month of December every year for 
general information, the total fee payable per semester for the next year, 
in three newspapers having circulation in the State concerned. Every 
year, the Committee shall fix the fees applicable for the third year. 
 
(a) What objective is sough t to be achieved by making the 
Committee fix the fee applicable for the third year, every year. 
 
(b) Whether Government have any objection in inserting the words 
"including at least one newspaper in regional language" wherever 
applicable? 
 
Ministry's reply(15/06/04) 
 
(a) Since in terms of Regulation 9 (1) the fees or the scales once fixed 
shall be valid for a period of 3 years the spirit behind fixing of fees every 
year by the Committee applicable for the third year was to inform the 
prospective students in advance the total fees payable by them in the next 
year. However, the suitability of this provision can be considered again 
at the time of review of existing regulations. 
 
(b) There is no objection to accept this suggestion. 
 
 
 
15. Point raised 
 
What is the mechanism in place under the Act or the Regulations 
under examination to ensure that the seats in the teacher education 

institutions are filled up in accordance with the regulations and the 
institutions do not unauthorizedly divert seats from o ne category to 
another for their personal gains or otherwise? 
 
 Ministry's reply (15/06/04) 
 
 There is provision for inspection of recognised institutions under 
Section 13 of NCTE Act to check and monitor the compliance of NCTE 
norms and standards includin g admission criteria. Further, where the 
Regional Committee is on its own motion or on any representation 
received from any person, satisfied that a recognized institution has 
contravened any of the provisions of the Act or the Rules. Regulations, 
orders m ade or issued thereunder, or any condition subject to which 
recognition under Sub-Section (3) of Section 14 or permission under Sub-
Section (3) of Section 15 was granted, it may withdraw recognition of such 
institution under Section 17 (1), after giving re asonable opportunity of 
making representation against the proposed order to the recognized 
institution. 
 
 Committee's observation (6/7/2005) 
 
The Committee desired to have an updated status note on the 
structure of the institution setup under the statue and manner and 
extent to which accountability has been ensured under the 
Act/Regulations.  
 
Ministry's clarification (14/03/07) 
A status note is attached at Annexure-B 

 
3. The Committee is unhappy to note that the NCTE failed to 
formulate the regulations in the matter of fees chargeable by the 
unaided teacher education institutions in the first instance in 
compliance with the provisions of the NCTE Act, 1993 and that an 
initiative was taken in the matter as late as in the year 2000 and that too 
in pursuance to the Court directions. 
 
4. While the Committee notes the explanation furnished by the 
Ministry on for the time being application of the regulations to 
institutions which offer courses or training in teacher education (other 
than those institutions offering a teacher education programme leading 
to a university degree), but the Committee feels that the Council should 
review the position now and regulation 2 should be modified suitably 
after taking into account the position obtaining as on date. 
 
5. The Committee notes  with satisfaction that the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development (Department of School Education and 
Literacy) have accepted most of its suggestions as under:- 
 
(i) In Regulation 3 (d) by agreeing to delete the phrase “…or any 
other authority as may be designated by the Council” so as 
to make the provision more specific. 
(ii) In Regulation  4 (2) by agreeing to replace the word 
“candidate” with the word “student” which has already been 
defined in Clause 3 (m) of the regulations in order to 
maintain consistency. 

(iii) In regulation 4 (3) by agreeing to amend the regulation so as 
to do away with the division of seats into free and payment 
seats as in the case of technical education by states  like 
Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, etc. 
(iv) In regulation 5 by agreeing to consider the suggestions of the 
Committee regarding the constitution of Committees for 
fixation of fees payable. 
(v) In regulation 9 (1) (i) by agreeing to replace the words “three 
years” with the words “three academic years” so as to make 
the provision more specific. 
(vi) In regulation 9 (1) (iv) by agreeing to insert the words 
“including at least one newspaper in regional language” so as 
to make aware a larger section of the people in the matter of 
fee payable. 
 
6.  The Committee hopes that the Ministry would carry out the 
above amendments expeditiously. 
 
7. The Committee takes note of the position regarding the vetting of 
regulations framed by the Council by the Ministry of Law.  It, however, 
feels that Government should take the framing of subordinate legislation 
very seriously and simply because the regulations have been framed by 
the Council, that should be no ground for not getting them vetted by the 
Ministry of Law, when the latter are prepared and ready to do it.  The 
Committee accordingly recommends that the Council should get all its 
regulations vetted by the Ministry of Law in order to eliminate 
discrepancies if any that have crept therein, maybe even inadvertently 
due to insufficient legal expertise.  The Committee is sure that the vetting 

by the Ministry of Law would have left the Council with much better 
quality regulations in a shorter time span.   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The Committee considered the replies of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs on the points forwarded to them.  The Committee notes with 
satisfaction that the Ministry of Home Affairs have agreed to take action 
as follows in pursuance to its suggestions : 
(i) In Rule 3, to insert  an explanation allowing  the Authorized 
Officer to utilize the service of consultant(s)/Valuer(s) to 
arrive at the value of forfeited property.  In the existing rules, 
the Authorised Officer is required to do this job  without any  
assistance; and   
(ii) In Rule  7 (2), to  make provision for paying  the interest at 
the prevailing interest rates on savings bank account of State 
Bank of India on the price of the forfeited property to the 
claimant.  The existing provisions do no mention about  the 
rate of interest. 

 The Committee hopes that the Ministry would carry out the above 
amendments expeditiously under intimation to it. However, on other 
points, the Committee notes with satisfaction the reply given by  the 
Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 
 
II 
 
 The Committee considered the replies furnished by the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry (Department of Industrial Policy and 
Promotion) as above and noted the position with satisfaction.  As regards 
the incorporation of the procedure for destruction of s ub-standard 
cement in the regulations, the Committee notes that the matter has been 
referred to the Technical Department of BIS for examination by a 
Technical Committee.  The Committee recommends that this may be 
examined urgently and the action taken in pursuance to the decision may 
be intimated to the Committee forthwith.  
 
 
 
III 
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the explanation furnished by the 
Ministry of External Affairs with regard to the delay in the framing of 
Rules/Regulations under Sections 25 and 26 of the Indian Council of 
World Affairs Act, 2001.  The Committee would like to point out that the 
ICWA Rules, 2006 are not comprehensive rules covering all areas as 
envisaged under Section 25 (2) of the ICWA Act, 2001.  The Committee 

is not inclined to agree with the contention of the Ministry that prior to 
2006, no situation had arisen which required application of such rules.  
This according to the Committee is not a happy situation.  The Committee 
would like to emphasize that the subordinate legislation contemplated 
under any Act of Parliament should be in place at the time of enforcement 
of the Act.  The Committee, however, observes that rules are yet to be 
framed in respect of two vital aspects concerning the o fficers and 
employees of the Council as indicated under Section 25 (2) (e) and (f) of 
the Act.  Similarly, the Council is still in the process of framing 
regulations contemplated under Section 26 of the Indian Council of 
World Affairs Act, 2001, even after  so many years.  Response of the 
Ministry clearly indicates that these regulations are not likely to be 
framed in the near future.  Regulations are to be framed with respect to 
matters like conduct of meetings of the Council, powers and functions of 
the Governing Body, conditions of service of officers and employees, etc.  
The Committee strongly feels that such rules/regulations are required to 
be there for smooth and proper functioning of the Council.  The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Minist ry of External 
Affairs should take immediate steps to ensure that the Regulations are 
put in place within a definite time frame, which may be intimated to it.  
 
IV 
 
 The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment vide notification G.S.R.655 (E), dated 10 th October, 2007 
(notifying the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Central 
(Amendment) Rules, 2007) rescinded the Industrial Employment 
(Standing Orders) Central (Amendment) Rules, 2003, amending the 

Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Central Rules, 1946 whereby, 
a new classification of workman ‘fixed term employment workman’ was 
introduced.  
 
 
V 
 The Committee is unhappy to note that the NCTE failed to 
formulate the regulations in the matter of fees chargeable by the 
unaided teacher education institutions in the first instance in 
compliance with the provisions of the NCTE Act, 1993 and that an 
initiative was taken in the matter as late as in the year 2000 and that too 
in pursuance to the Court directions. 
 
 While the Committee notes the explanation furnished by the 
Ministry on for the time being application of the regulations to 
institutions which offer courses or training in teacher education (other 
than those institutions offering a teacher education programme leading 
to a university degree), but the Committee feels that the Council should 
review the position now and regulation 2 should be modified suitably 
after taking into account the position obtaining as on date. 
 
 The Committee notes  with satisfaction that the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development (Department of School Education and 
Literacy) have accepted most of its suggestions as under:- 
 

(vii) In Regulation 3 (d) by agreeing to delete the phrase “…or any 
other authority as may be designated by the Council” so as 
to make the provision more specific. 
(viii) In Regulation  4 (2) by agreeing to replace the word 
“candidate” with the word “student” which has already been 
defined in Clause 3 (m) of the regulations in order to 
maintain consistency. 
(ix) In regulation 4 (3) by agreeing to amend the regulation so as 
to do away with the division of seats into free and payment 
seats as in the case of technical education by states like 
Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, etc. 
(x) In regulation 5 by agreeing to consider the suggestions of the 
Committee regarding  the constitution of Committees for 
fixation of fees payable. 
(xi) In regulation 9 (1) (i) by agreeing to replace the words “three 
years” with the words “three academic years” so as to make 
the provision more specific. 
(xii) In regulation 9 (1) (iv) by agreeing to insert the words 
“including at least one newspaper in regional language” so as 
to make aware a larger section of the people in the matter of 
fee payable. 
 
  The Committee hopes that the Ministry would carry out the 
above amendments expeditiously. 
 
 The Committee takes note of the position regarding the vetting of 
regulations framed by the Council by the Ministry of Law.  It, however, 
feels that Government should take the framing of subordinate 

legislation very seriously and simply because the regulations have been 
framed by the Council, that should be no ground for not getting them 
vetted by the Ministry of Law, when the latter are prepared and ready 
to do it.  The Committee accordingly recommends that the Council 
should get all its regulations vetted by the Ministry of Law in order to 
eliminate discrepancies if any that have crept therein, maybe even 
inadvertently due to insufficient legal expertise.  The Committee is sure 
that the vetting by the Ministry of Law would have left the Council with 
much better quality regulations in a shorter time span.   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 