.\ 
>$. 
"'· ·~ ~~~~~ 
PARJ;IAMEN!f O;F INDIA 
,RAJ~ A SA19ffA ,, ' .. . . llf!f~-~i' 
COMMITTEE ON~'SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION 
·PIFTY~FIRST B.BPORT 
(Presented on the :liSt February, 1983) 
RA)'YA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

CONTENTS 
l'ARA Nos.. PAGES 
I CouposmoN OF THE Co~TT£1!: (i) 
t REPORT 
I. Introduction 
II. The Central Industrial Security Force {Assistant 3-6 I-·4 
Direotor {AOOounts)] Reen:titm~t {Amwdment) 
R~;~tes, 1979 (G.S.R. 877 ef 1919). 
HI. ·Recruitment Rules for Group 'C' a!J4 'D' .Po.sts in 7·-·10 4-5 
the Border Roads Organisation;. 
IV. Rules, Regulations regarding fixation of limitation 11--14 5-6 
on ·borrowing by the Government of India as 
required under Article 292 of the Constituticn . 
. V, {i) The Indian Forest Service (Fixation of Cadre 15--·17 
Strength) Second Amendment Regulations, 
1980 {G.S.R.. 562 (E) of 198o). 
(ii) The Indian Forest Service (Fixation Of C-.dre 
Strength) Third· Amendment Regulations, 19fo 
(G,S.R 565 (E) of 1980). 
VI. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands Children Rules, 18-21 
1979· 
VII. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Children (Ma· 1!2,··24 
nagement, functions and responsibilities of Special 
Schools, Children's · Heme and Observation 
Homes) Rules, 1979. 
'J'UI. Tile Mini•try of H3me Affairs (Directorate of Coorc 25-·27 
dination Police Computers) Group A and B Posts 
Recruitment Rules, 1980 (G. S. R. II04 of 
1g8o). 
6- JI 
6- II 
19 
IX. Tile Export Inspection Agency (Recruitment) 28-29 19·20 
An1endment Rules, 1980 (G.S.R. 1080 of 1g8o). 
X. Delay in maliing Rules under the Central Acts : 
(i) Rules under the Kosangas Company (Acquisi· 31-34 20- 24. 
tion of Undertaking) Act, 1979 and the Pare! 
Investment and Trading Private Limited 
(Taking over of Managemenq Act, 1979. 
(li) Rules under the Border Security Force Act, 1968 35-·38 lil4-lil6 
153~ RS-1. 

PARA Nos. PAGEs 
3· ANNEXUR 
(i) Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic 
Affairs) 0. M. No. F. 4(5)-· W & M/70 dated 
the 5th June, 1970. 
(ii) Extracts regarding Andaman and Nieobar 
Islands Children Rules, 1979 from a note on 
the visit of the. Committee on Subordinate legis­
lation to Calcutta and the Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands from 16th tQ 24th September, 1982. 
(iii) Extracts regarding Andaman and Nicobar Is­
lands Children (Management, Functions and 
Responsibilities of Special Schools, Children's 
Home and. Observation . Homes) Rules, 1979 
from a note on the visit of the Committee 'on . 
Subordinate legislation to Calcutta and the 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands from 16th to 
24th September, 1982. 
4. MINUTES OP THE MEETINGS OF COMMITTEE. 
33-35 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(1982-83) 
CHAIRMAN 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri T. Basheer 
3. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
4. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
5. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
6. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
7. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
8. Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha 
9. Shri Sushi} Chand Mohunta 
10. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
11. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
12. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
13. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
14. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
15. Dr. Rafiq Zakiuia 
SECRE'l'ARIAT 
Shrtmati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary. 
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislativ·e Committee Officer. 
Shl'i B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
(i) 

• 
REPORT 
' I 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
having been authorised py the Committee to· present the Report on 
its behalf, present this Fifty-first Report. The Committee considered 
and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 17th November, 
1982. -· 
2. Observations of the Committee on matters arising out of the 
examination of various 'Orders', whieh in the opinion of the Com"' 
mittee should be brought to the notice oil the House, together with 
the recommendations of the 8ommitbee thereon a~e conta1.ned in the 
succee<;ling paragraphs. 
II 
THE CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURLTY FORCE [ASSISTANT 
DIRECTOR (ACCOUNTS)] RECRUI-TMENT (AMENDMENT) 
RULES, 1979 (G.S.R. 877 OF 1979) 
3. Pa1.'agraph 22 of the 41st Report of Committee reads as follows:-
"The schedule annexed to the Central Industrial Security Force 
[Assistant Director (Accounts)] Recruitment Rules, 1974 
was substituted by the amending Rules mentioned above. 
The entry under column 10 against the post of Assistant 
Director (Accounts) in the schedule titled 'Method of re· 
cruitment' reads as follows:-
"By promotion or by transfer on deputation". 
The provision in its present form ·affords an option to the 
appointing authority to fill the post either by promotion or 
by tr.ansfer on deputation. 'It wa~s felt that recruitment by 
deputation should be resorted to only after considerisg the 
¢l&im of employees eligible f<~r promotion. The expression 
1 

I 
2 
under the entry, therefore, needed modification to read as 
"by promotion failing which by transfer on deputation." 
The Ministry of Home Affairs were, therefore, asked to examine 
the suggestion. 
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Home Affairs have 
agreed to the suggestion for modifying the entry under 
column 1'\1 against the post of Assistant .Director (Accounts) 
in the schedu:~e to the said rules. to read as "by promotion 
failing which by transfer on deputation." 
4. The Committee's observations were forwarded to the Ministry 
of Home Affairs· for necessary action. 
Later on, the ~nistry of Home Affairs vide their O.M. dated the 
22nd December, 1981, informed the Committee that the U.P.S.C 
was not agreeable.to the proposed amendment and requested for 
, extension of time upto the 15th March, 19'82, for sending a final reply 
in the matter. At its meeting held on the 22nd January, 1982, the 
Committee acceded to the request. 
5. The Ministry vide their 0. M. dated the 16th March, 
stated as follows:-
" A reference was made to the UPSC whose concurrence was 
necessary to the proposed modification in the Recruitment 
Rules.· The Commission have advised that the correct 
method of recruitment to the post would be the composite 
method of recruitment viz. 'promotioh/transfer on depu­
tation' and not by 'Promotion or by transfer on deputation'. 
Under the ·composite method of reruitment, the depart­
mental Accounts Officer will be considered alongwith 
outsiders and in case he is s,~lected for appointment to the 
post, the same shall be deemed to have been filled by pro­
motion.· This position is already spclt out in Column 
11 of the Schedule to the Recruitment Rules. 
The matter has been re~examined in the light of the advice of 
the Union Public Service Commission. There will he only 
one post of Accounts Officer in the field of choice of Assis­
tant Director (Accounts). In case promotion is provided 
as the primary method of recruitment for the post of Assis­
tant Director (Accounts) there would hardly be any choice 
but to promote the eligible Accounts Officer subject, of 
course to fitness. This would negate the very idea of hold·· 
ing a selection. In these circumstanpes, it is not considered 
appropriate to provide promotion as the primary method. 

• a 
The main objection of the Committee. on Subordinate Legisla· 
tion to the existing provision in Column 10 of the Schedule 
is that this provision affords an option to the Appointing 
Authority to fill the post either by :promotion. or by 
transfer on deputation and thus leaves the method of re• 
cruitment uncertain .. Thi·s Ministry feels that the objection 
of the Committee would be adequat,ely met if the existing 
entry in Column 10 of the Schedule is reworded as 'by 
promotion/transfer on deputation' as envisaged by the 
UPSC for the composite· method of selection. · This would 
also obviate the difficulty in having the selection from the 
field comprising of only one officer. Considering the cir~ 
cumstances ·explained above, it is now propo8ed to amend 
Column 10 of the Schedule to the Recruitment Rules, in 
question as under:-"" '" 
"By promotionjtran~fer o:n deputation.". 
'The UPSC have also suggested that Column l1 of the Sched,ule 
should ,be reworded as fQllows:-
yPromotionjtransfer on deputation 
(i) Officers from any of the organised-Accounts Services 
holding posts in the Senior Scale (Rs. H00-1600) or with 
4 years service in posts in the Junior scale (Rs. 700-
1300); or 
(ii) AuditjAccounts Officer from any of the organised Ac':' 
counts Depart:rpents with 7 years service in the grade;· or 
(iii) Officers under the .Central Government holding analogous 
posts or posts of Accounts Officer or -equivalent in the 
·scale of Rs. 840-1200j~50-120Qf- with seve,n years and 
eight years service respectively in the grade; 
(iv) The departmental Accounts Officer with 7 years regutar 
service in the grade will also be considered and in case 
he is selected for appointment to the post, the same shall 
. be deemed to have been filled by promotion'. Period of 
deputati<?n shall not exceed· 3 y1ears. 
It is proposed to carry out this amendment also in the Recruit­
ment Rules. This amendment is intended to widen the field 
cif ehoii:!e so. as to include eligible officers of other Accounts; 
Audit Departments and also to prescribe the appropriate 
qualifying service for eligibility with reference to the 

4 
diiftenat prevdbt.g g:li'ades: itn various a€WulnltsfAudit 
<.Wpart:ment and Servica." 
6. The Com.milttee »etes. the iaf&l'D'Iiatien givew by the Ministry 
and dleeides Witt tG pusue the matt.e,r. 
Ill 
a.E.CRtJl'i'.J.'d,E;Mtt.• lltJ:LES FOR GROUP 'C' AND ''D~ POSTS 
1N 'l'lSE 1BORDER ROADS O:RGAN:tSATION 
7. The· Committee at its sitting h~ld on th~ 19th May, 1981, consi­
dered. ~ matter of non ... ma-kin.g, of reeru.itment rule$ in respect of 
Group 'C' and 'D' posts by' the Border Roadst OrgagisatiOft alld d,ecided 
to visit Srinagar, Leh and Jammu. The Committee acGordingly vis:ted 
these places in June-July; 1981 Mild swbsequently a :tllote on its findings 
was circulated to its Members. 
8. In October, 1981 the Committe;e· took up further consideration 
of the matter in the light of the evidence tendered before it at 
Srinagar and Leh. The Committee :Aetti that ~fl!)re it heal"€£' 1illre repre­
sentatives of the Ministries of Shipping and Transport and Defence, 
it s:t.l:oald vimt the· Net'th ... Eastenn Re:giolll> aJsot ittt o11dctt 1lo stw.dy the 
'\vovking eootditilon& of the· empJ·o-yees· Of tw &11der: ~ds Organisa­
ti-olli there. Be-fore the Cbmmit~ee could un~rtake the proposed 
visit, it was informally advised by the Ministry Ol_ft· ~~e to post­
pone its visit to that region in view of the situation prevailing there. 
The Committee considered this advice at its sitting held on the _2&th 
January, 1'98'2 and decided to postpone its visit. The Committee was 
f.l'l!formed' m the me:mttme- by t!he· 1\i:tint.stry of Dlrience (through a 
J~tter sent by 1lhe Mini:ss of Defence to HGn'Me Chailrman, Rajya 
sa.:~Jia") that tb.'e dbraft recrui:tmet:It rules :for Group •c• and 'D' posts 
in the Border· R'oa<ts. Oitgan~Mtioo: had:. b~en sent to, t.he Department 
o.£ Pw;sonnel ,and Adn:rlnii&trative Refocms. for scrutiny. After their 
approval ru:Jies will be laiG on t:ne Table of both Houses of 
Pa:rtiament. 
9. The Ministry of Snipping and Transport vide their O.M. dated 
the 30th June, 1982 further informed as follows:- )· 
", .. , .. the ciL"af.t N.oti.E.cation. of Recruitment and Promotion 
Rul-es for G~.rou.p 'C' and 'D' posts in the 'Border Roads 
Or:gahisation. of aloou.t 120 'categodes. (which., alter amalga­
~, ha~~Se now come down to 89. categories) have been 
got finalised from the Department of Personnel and Ad-

c 
.. 
5 
mini:sttative R~forms and Ministry of Law. The final draft 
Notification and Re.cmitment and Promotion Rules have 
been sent to Mfnistry . of Law Offi.(;!ial Languages (Legisla­
tive) Commission for Hindi vetsion. The Hindi version 
is almtlSt complete. As soon as we receive the Hindi ver­
sion, duly vetted from Ministry of Law Official Languages 
(Legislative) Commission, the material will be sent to 
Ggvernmt:mt Press for publication in Gazette of India." 
1{). At its_ meeting held on the 26th August, 1982 the Committee 
noted the position set out in the office memorandum. The Chairman 
informed ther Memb-ers that a copy' of . the Gazette 'notification con­
taining reeruit~nt rules in respect of Group 'C' and 'D' posts in 
1!h'e" Borde-r ~ads Organisation had since been received by the Sec­
retariat and would be examined in due course. In view of the changed 
circumstanqes, the Committee felt that it was no longer necessary to 
visit the Campbell Bay (Great Nicobar)· in this connection during 
the ensuing visit of the Committee to Calcutta and the Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands a decision regarding which had been taken by it 
earlier. 
IV 
RULES, REGULATIONS REGARDING FIXATION OF LIMITA­
TION ON BORROWING BY THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA AS 
REQUIRED UNDER ARTICLE 292 OF THE CONSTITUTION 
11. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya, M.P. had addressed a lett,er to the 
Chairman, Committee on Subordinate Legislation regarding rules, 
regutations on fixation of linHtation on borl'owing by the Govern­
m-ent of India as required under Article 292 of the Constitution. 
A copy of the letter from Shri Bhattacharya was forwarded to 
'fh:e Ministry of Finance requesting them to intimate the present 
:positil'>n .and Government's thinking in this regard. 
12. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) 
vide thei-r U.O. note dated the 14th July, 1982 informed as follows:-
" ...... The question whether it was neeessary to have a legis-
. lation under Article 292 of the Constitution fixing limits 
on the borrowing of Government was examined by · Gov­
ettnm:ent a number of times in the past,. pursuant to the 
r~'C'alt\lm:endations made bYt Public Aceounts. 'Committee on 

6 
the subject, and it was considered. that there was no need 
to limit the power of borrowing by legislation. In this 
connection a copy of this Ministry'~ letter No. F. 4 (5)­
W&M/70 dated 5-6-1970 addressed to the Chairman and 
Members of the Public Accounts Committee, which is self 
explanatory, is e:nclosed. (Annexure I). 
Parliament gets an opportunity to discuss the borrowing pro­
gramme of Government at the time of discussion on Plan 
and Annual Budget. 
In view of the above, Government are of the view that there 
is no need to limit the power of borrowing by legislation 
under Article 292. of the Constitution and that the earlier 
decision of the Government on the subject does not require 
any modification. 
This issues with the approval of Finance Minister." 
13. At its, meeting held on the 6th August, 1982, the Committee 
noted. the position set out. in the Ministry's communication. 
Pursuant to a reference m~de by Shri G. C. Bhattacharya, the 
Committee at its meeting held on the 25th August, 1982, decided 
to reconsider the matter at a subsequent meeting. 
14. Ac·cordingly, on. the 3rd September, 19'82, the Committee re­
consi!d:ered t~ maltter ahd decided to drop the same .. 
v 
(i) THE; INDIAN ·FOREST SE;RVICE .. (FIXATION OF CADRE 
STRENGTH) SECOND AMENDMENT REGULATIONS, 1980' 
[G.S.R. 562(E) ]OF 1980; AND 
(ii) THE INDIAN FOREST SE;RVICE (FIXATION OF CADRE 
STRENGTH) THIRD AMENDMENT REGULATIONS, 1980 
[G.S.R. 565i(E,)] OF 1980 
15. As a result of a scrutiny of the above regulations the follow­
ing points had arisen which were referred to the Mirtistry of Home 
Affairs (Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms) for 
their com~ents:-
(i) the criteria for determination· of the Central Government 
quota (in terms of percentage) in a· State cadre; 

7 
(ii) the basis for determination of percentage for deputation 
reserve,. leave reserve, junior posts and training reserve; 
. and 
(iii) whether the system of leave reserve and training reserve 
is extended to lower cadres such as Assistants; if so, the 
details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor? 
16. The Ministry of Home Affairs (Departm.ent of Personnel and 
Administrative Reforms) vide their O.M. dated the 29th December, 
1981 furnished their replies in respect of the above points which 
are reproduced below:-
"That the first . twq points relate to the Indian Forest Service, 
which is 'an All India Service. The rules and regulations 
relating to the conditions of· service of the members of 
the Indian Forest Service were framed on the pattern of 
the Indian Administrative Service, which was already in 
existence as an All India Service, with such modifications 
as were deemed necessary· in the case of· th.e Indian Forest 
Service. The Cadre Structure of the Indian Forest Service 
also follows broadly the cadre structure for lAS with pro­
vision for Central Deputation Reserve, State Deputation 
Reserve, Leave Reserve,· Training Reserve and Junior 
posts. 
2. Centml Deputation Reserve 
The need for providing a Central Deputation Reserve arises 
from the consideration that an All India Service is a ser­
vice common to the Centre and the States and there should 
be exchange of experience between the State Administra­
tion and tpe Central Administration. Th,e question of 
ma_king adequate arrangements for staffing of administra­
tive posts of and above the rank ·of Deputy Secretary in 
the Government of India in and outside the Central Secre­
tariat was examined by the Governm~nt of India in con­
sultation with Governments of part A States. With the 
approval of the Adminlstrative Organisation Committee 
of Cabinet, a scheme was prepared for the constitution of 
an Indian Civil Administpative (Central) cadre. However, 
when .the matter was further discussed in the Chief Sec­
retaries Conference .in 1954, it was decided to give up the 
idea of an Indian Civil· Administrative (Central) Cadre 
and the State. Governments; on their part, agreed to in­
crease their cadre strength in order to provide for Central 

8 
req,Niir~ments. ThuiS, prO'VJSlon was made· in each Cadre 
:ior a Central Deputation Re'Serve which re-presents the 
number of officers which each State would be a:ble to spare 
at any point of time for the requirements of the Central 
Government .. In the case of the l.A.S. thfs was fixed as 
40 per cent of the .senior posts under the State Govern~ 
. ments, keeping i~ vfew the requirements of the Central 
GovernmE;lnt for ma~ming posts of the, level of the Deputy 
Secretary and above. Simtlar exercise was undertaken in 
respect of the Indian Forest Serviee ancl. it was· fou11d that 
the number of posts under the Central Government which 
were required to be manned by the I.F .S. officers, re­
presented 3 per cent o>E the total number of the; senior 
duty posts under various State Governments. Thus the 
strength of the Central Deputation Reserve lor. each I.F .S. 
cadre was fi:x.ed at S per cent in this· Department's Noti­
fication No. 6/1/66'-.AIS(III) dated 31-10 .. 66. The position 
i:n respect of tlae I. F. S. was reviewed in 1976~77 in view 
of the increase in the requirement of manpower. The 
number of seniol' duty posts in all the State Cadres put 
together was 911 in 1976 and the number of p~:jsts required 
to be man~ed at the Centre by the I . F. S. officers was 
203. The percentage was 2·2.3. It was therefore decided 
that the strength of the Central Deputation Reserve should 
No. 16016/29/75-AIS(IV) dated 26,th February, 1977. 
be increased from 8 per ceB1l t& 20 ·~ eent and this· in~ 
crease was notified under this Department's Notification 
3. (a) Deputation Reserve 
The Deputation Reserve which is item 5 of the Cadre schedule 
represents the number of. posts reCJ,Uitted by the various 
State Cadres to meet their short-term need :for manning 
ex-cadre posts by I.F'.S. officers. The State Deputation 
Reserve was fixed when the Indian Fol'est Service was 
constituted in 1966 at 15 per eent of direct requirement 
pests on the analogy of a similar reserve kept for the I.A.S. 
In the l.A.S. Deputation Reserve. was subsequently en­
hanced to 2Ci per eent. In t.k?' I. F. S. also a review was 
made in 197;6-77, in the context oi additional requirements 
of the State Gove.rnments for LF. S. offi.~ers to man posts 
in the· State Forest, Co:rpora.tions, whi'ch had been set up 
in the vario$ . Sta•tes on the reco:rn;mendations of the 
National Commission on A-griculture. It was felt that 
the setting u,p of the Forest (!(!)vpora·tions was merely to 
·~. 

• 9 
convert the .~.cial werk e~ the forests departments 
into commercial .opera$ions. and as .saeh there was no need 
for an over-all additionality· of posts and that the require­
ments for manning senior posts in the Forest Corporations 
can, whefe necessary, be met by providing for adhoc in­
<;:rease i,n t;he Peputfl-tion. .R~serve. Thus t4e percentage of 
State Deputation Re.serve has bee.n ret~ined at 15 per cent 
of item 4 of the <;:.flcl.re s~hedule and q;daoc in~rease to the 
deputatioiJ. reserve is ~llowed ·in respect of individual 
cfl.dres, where specific requiremenU;; justified the sanction­
ing of the additio,nal posts in the I.F.S. Cadre. 
(b) Leave Reserve 
Leave Reserve was provided at the time of the constitution of 
the Cadres at 11 per cent of item 4 of the cadre schedule on 
the analogy of the leave reserve of 11 per cent in the lAS 
which was fixed on the recommendation of the Govern­
ment Aci'Uary. The question whether the percentage 
should be reviewed keeping in view the actual utilisation 
of the reserve in th~ recent years, is under consideration. 
(c) Training Reserve 
'!'raining Reserve represents the strength in a Cadre against 
which the pfficers on training are reckoned. After the 
initial training the direct recruits work in junior level post 
for a period of two to four years before they are promoted 
to the senior scale posts. In the Indian Civil Service the 
Training Reserv~ w~s 10.19 per cant and Inferior Posts 
26.9 per cent. In the I.A.S. it was felt. after ascertain­
ing the rate of wastage from the Government Actuary, 
thJ)t the percentage should be modified. It was decided 
that in the I.A.S. the Training Reserve should be 10.59 
p~r cent and Juni.or postg (known as inferior posts in the 
I. C. S.) should be 20.60 p~r <;?ent of item 4 of the cadre 
&Qh~dul~; W~n the L F. S. waa · com;tituted 1 a large num­
ber of posts were filled by ·initial recruitment from the 
State Forest Service and direct recruitment was not more 
than 15 per annum. It was therefore, felt that, to begin 
.. with, a Tral11i11g !W$erve of 5 pe;r Gent should be adequate. 
'fh~ pgm_tion was rev~wed in 197J6i-77 as the initial recruits 
w~r~ rlltidru~ in· l~rge number by then. apg it was decided 
. · tQ ~tep: up. direct recruitment tp provide for .an annual in­
tal>,e of over 9Q CiU').did3t~~- It w~:~s consequently decided 

10 
that the training reserve should be increased to Hl per cent 
to meet the actual requirements. 
(d) Junior Posts 
Although the training reserve was kept at 5 per cent when the 
Indian Forest Cadres were constituted, the strength of 
the junior posts was kept at 20 per cent of item 4 of the 
Cadre Schedule and not at twice the strength of the train­
ing reserve as in the lAS. This is for the reason that in 
the Indian Forest Service, unlike in the Indian Adm!nis­
trative Service, initial recruitment to the Cadres was made 
both against the senior sc>ale and against the junior scale 
of the service, thereby necessitating a higher proportion of 
posts to be kept in the junior scale to accommodate initial 
recruits. 
4. As regards information on point (iii), namely whether the 
system of leave reserve and training reserve . is extended 
to lower cadres such as Assistants, the position is as 
under:-
( a) Leave Reserve 
Leave Reserve is provided in the Central Secretariat Service/ 
Central Secretariat Stenographers Service/Central Sec­
retariat Clearical Service, at 10 per cent in each of the 
Services. The reason for prescribing the strength as 10 
· per cent is that the leave entitlement of a Government 
Servant was 1/llth of duty which has since been amend­
ed to 30 days a year. On this basis, the leave reserve 
is fixed as a round integer of 10 per cent. The reserve 
is provided in the lower or the lowest grade in each 
service, which is the direct entry point in the service . 
. If a vacancy occurs in the higher grades, officiating pro­
motion arrangements are made. Hence the leave reserve 
is calculated at 10 per cent on the total strength of all 
the grades in a service but provision is made in the 
lowest grade only. · 
(b) 'training Reserve 
Training Reserve is not provided in the Central Secretariat 
Service/Central Secretariat Stenographers Service; 
Central Secretariat Clerical Service' for the reason that 
the training courses for. the personnel belonging to these 
services are only short:..term courses, say for 4 to 8 weeks · 

• 
.. 
11 
duration. In such cases, the work can be managed with· 
out a substitute. In the case of Section Officers, how· 
e:ver who are recruited through the All India Competi­
tive Examinations conducted by the UPSC., training is 
provided to them before they are allotted to the various 
Ministries and requisite number of supernumerary posts 
are created to enable payment of salary to them." 
17. Ha.ving noted the position the Committee decides not to pur­
sue the matter further. 
VI 
THE ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS CHILDREN RULES, 
1979 
18. Some points which had arisen as a result of a scrutiny of 
the above Rules were referred to the Ministry of Social Welfare 
for comments. The Ministry in t·urn forwarded these points to the 
Andaman and· Nicobar Islands Administration for comments. The 
points and the Administrat.ion's reply thereto are reproduced 
below:-
Point (i) Rule 14 provides that if a child is to be sent back to his 
native place, his relative may be invited to come to the 
Observation Home to take charge of the child. ·In case 
the relative fails to come, the child shall be sent to his 
native p~ace in the company of an escort. It may happen 
that the relative refuses to take charge of the child or 
has died or changed his. place of residence. In such a 
situation, what course of action would be taken by the 
observation home authorities? 
Comments Necessary provision will be made in the releva~t rule to 
re-instate such children in home till such time the 
parents/relatives agree to accept the child or he/she 
becomes able to secure employment/earn his/her own 
livelihood . 
Poir~;t ·(U) 
. 
Rule 15(3) states that the appointment of a member of 
. the. Child Welfare Boar.d may be terminated by the 
Chief Commissioner at any time without assigning any 

12 
reason. The reason for making this provision may be 
explained. 
Comments This provision is made with a view to removing such 
members of the Child Welfare Board whose retention 
is considered to be against the interest of the Board for 
one reason or the other. 
Point (iii) Rule 26 relates to mode of dealin8 with children suffer­
ing from dangerous diseases or mental complaints. In 
sub-rule (3) of this rule, the. following words oceur, 
'Partner in marriage'. These words may be defined. 
Comments This provision has been kept, to be made applicable in 
case of married inmate, if any, admitted/residing in the 
home. 
Point (iv) The number and date of establishment of Observation 
Homes in the A&N Islands may be intimated and also 
whether the rules were framed before the establish­
ment of Observation Homes or afterwards. 
Gomments No Observation Home has been established so far. The 
building for an Observation Home is "llnder construc­
tion, under the Scheme 'Observation Home for delin­
quent children'. 
19. At its meeting held on the 11th June, 1982, the Committee 
considered the memorandum . and directed that the MinitStry of 
Social Welfare be as,ked to furnish the following information: 
(a} the progress made in the f.!:jtablishml!nt of an Observa .. 
tion Home in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands; and 
(b) whether any Child Welfare Board as envisaged in Section 
4 of the Children. Act, 1960 has been established for the 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands. 
20. In pursuance of its decision taken at its meetings held on 
the lst July and 6:th August, 1982 the Committee visited Calcutta 
and Andaman and Nicobar Islands from 16th to 24th September, 
1982. The Committee took the opport'Unity to discuss the Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands Children Rules, 1979, with the representatives of 
the MinJostry of E:ducation and Social Welfare· and the Andaman and 
· Nicobar Administration on the 18th September, 1982. An extractfrom 
the study note of the Committee is efl;closed: [Annexure-II.]. · 
' 
.--i; 

• 13 
21. The outcome of the discussions and 1 the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee thereon are set-forth below:-
(i) Ru!e 14-During the discussions, the Committee accepted 
the suggestion of the Administration that necessary pro"' 
vision wo•uld be made in the relevant rule to reinstate 
children whose relatives refuse to take their charge or had 
died or changed place of residencej in the After Care 
Homes till such time as the parents/relatives agreed to 
accept the child or he/she became able to secure employ~ 
ment/earn his/her own livelihood. 
The Committee recommends that action may be initiated early 
to amend the rule. 
(ii) f!,uLe u;; sub-ruie (3)-In regard to the prov1s10n con­
tained ih the sub-rule enabling the Chief Commissioner to 
terminate the appointment of a· member of the Child 
Welfare Board at any time without assigning any rea­
son, the officers of. the Administration were told by the 
Chairman that the Committee did not find their explana­
tion for retaining the provision, convincing. As a safe­
guard against misuse of the unfettered discretion which 
the sub-rule V'ests in the Chief Commissioner it was 
agreed to reword the rule so as to give the Chief Com­
missioner the power to terminate the tenure of appoint­
ment of a Member if the Member had been convicted of 
an offence involving moral turpitude or where termina­
tion of tenure was resorted to for any other reason, say 
for activities prej·udicial to the interest of the Board, the 
reason for such termination should be recorded in writing. 
The Committee also desired that a notice in all cases o1 
termi:nation of tenure should be given to the concerned 
member and he should also be given opportunity to be 
heard. 
The ·Committee r-ecommends that action may be initiated early 
to. sttit·ably amend 'the ·rule so as to provide for these matters. 
(iU) R.uloe 26-A point had been made in regard to the defini­
tion and necessity of the expression "partner in marriage" 
1531 RS-2. 
• 

14 
used in the sub-rule. The Administration's reply to this 
point was that this provision had been kept, to be made · 
applicable in case of married inmates, if any, admitted/ 
residing in the Home. 
The Committee notes the explanation given by the Adminis· 
!ration. 
(iv) During the discuooion of the Committee with the officers 
of the Administration, the officers were also requested to 
indicate the progress made in the establishment of an 
'Observation Home' for the Union Territory. 
The Committee notes the !'epl.y of thet Officers that the scheme 
for establishment of an Observation Home has been in­
cluded in the Sixth Five Year Plan (1980"85) of the 
Union Territory and an amount of Rs. 5.17 lakhs has ln~en 
provided therefor. The Committee hopes that as per the 
assurance given by the officers, the construction of the 
building would be taken up soon and as per their ex­
pectation, the Home would start functioning from 19&-1-85. 
(v) During the discu&sion, the officers were also requested to 
inform the Committee whether any Child Welfare Board, 
as envisaged in section 4 of the Children Act, 1960, had 
been set up and the Committee's attention was drawn to 
the Administration's notification No. 31/F'.No. 48-38/78-
MHF, dated the 2nd March, 1979. 
The Committee notes that a Child Welfare Board h~s already 
been set up for whole of the territory of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands vide the above cited notfiication. 
(vi) Form III-In regard to the legal validity of the bond to 
be executed on this form by a delinquent cbild as also of 
sub-rule (2) of rule 13 which provided for the execution 
of such a bond, the Committee expressed serious doubts 
and directed the Administration to have the legal validity 
of these provision'S examined. 
The Committee recommends that legal opinion in the matter 
may be obtained soon and amendment of the provisions, 
if any required to be made in the form and the concerned 
sub-rule, be made. 
(vii) Form IX-It was agreed during the discussion to delete 
the word 'Caste' from the column in this form in which 
• 

• 
. j 
.. / 
' 
15 
details regarding the name father's name etc. of the 
delinquent child are to be entered. 
The Committee expects that the Administration would carry 
out. this .amendment along with Qther amendments pro-
pOsed in the Rules. 
During the discussions, tha Committee. was informed that the 
delinquent children were, at present, detained in its sepa­
rate wing of the Cellular Jail and that there was no :mix­
up of these children with the other inmates of the jail. 
A suggestion was also made that in order to avoid un­
healthy psychological influence on the developing mind 
of a child, it would be a better arrangement and more 
conducive for his correction if he is not lodged in jail 
but in a separate building, if necessary, by taking one on 
hire, under the charge of a lady superintendent. 
The Committee supports the view and notes that the officers 
of the Adminis't'ration have agreed to consider the sug­
gestion with a view to implementing it. • • 
vn 
THE ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS, CHILDREN 
(MANAGEMENT, FUNCTIONS ANDr RESPONSIBILITIES, OF 
SPECIAL SCHOOLS CHILDREN'S HOME AND OBSERVATION 
HOMES) RULES, 1979 
22. Some points, which had arisen as a result of the scrutiny of 
the above-mentioned Rules, were referred to the Ministry of Social 
Welfare for comments. The Ministry in turn forwarded these points 
to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands Administration for their com­
ments. The points and the Administration's reply thereto are re­
produced below:-
St. Poirts Comments 
~--N_o·---------~----------------
(i) One ·of the d~Jties of Superintende-nt a5 specified This suggestion is agreed to. 
in Rule '7 is to keep a care-taker or watchmar 
on duty for 24 hours in the Institution. But 
·th,is provision~ will not apply in the case of an 
'Open In~titution' for boys . Since a watchman 
'is employed for security purposes and can be help-
ful in preventing tresp:min!f, robbery, etc .. , this 
provision should also be included in the duties 
of the Superintendent of an 'Open Institution.' 
---

16 
Sl. No. Points 
(ii)RI ' u e 3? giVes the composition of the Advisory 
Comn:uttee sub-rule (3) states that the Chief 
Com~sion<;r shall nominate the President of the 
Com.rru~tee. m tne a.'bsen.ce of tne 'Pte~~i.d.en.l, the 
Comu:u.ttee e.\eet a. C'n.au:ma.n.. 'l:b.e de-.ua.b\it 
of having a single designation may be eonsidereJ. 
(iii) Ac;cor~ing to rul~ 31 , the Chief Commissioner may 
tern:una.te the tenure of appointment of a non,.offi­
cia.l member without assinging any reason. The 
reasons for making, this provision may be 
e'X.p\ll.in.ed. 
Comments 
The suggestion to have a sin"'le 
designation is agreed to a~d 
necessary amendment is being 
made. 
The intention of keeping provi­
sion to terminate the tenure 
of appointment of non­
official member is to enable , 
the Chief Commissioner to 
Yemo~e a.n."V non.-offi.cl.~l 
~~:( \n. C"A ... ~~. ');\.('';.'! ?L-'t("'. 
~\~"""'-"""""'"~ '·"' ~"'""· 
"'~"'" mi)).'l "'' \.'-' ~ ... "·"~' <:>'\ U\<:i'l.t. <:J;)"\\.,'m.'l.'\.'Ci.'l."t\.~ ,,,, '1).<:)1:1.• 
ofuc\:.;.\ ro.e.ro.net. ~'-"'~ <:J;)"t\i\.· 
dered as against the interest 
of the Adviisory Committee •. 
(iv) Sub-rule 53 (4) spells out the duties and respon- Sub-rule 53 (4) is an error which 
sibilities of caretaker. But this sub-rule seems is now being corrected as 
to be incomplete. follows :-
. (v) Rule 57 states that the prior approval of the Chief 
Commissioner shall not be necessary in respect 
of-acceptance of any donation in kind. This pro­
vision may be abused by the staff. 
(vi) A:bout 115 duties of care-taker are listed in the 
rules. It does not. seem possible for an individual 
to discharge so many duties single-handedly. The 
number of care-takers employed in an institution 
andfor subordinates working under. them may 
therefore be intimated. 
If a care-taker is unable to 
come to his duty due 
illness or otherwise, he/she 
shall apply for grant of leave 
w~U in. advance for such 
absence, 
The following proviso m.ay be 
added to this rule, in order to 
avoid a possible abuse of the 
provisions of this rule by the 
members of staff : -
"Provided that a proper receipt 
duly signed by the Superin­
tendent is issued to the donor 
concerned and such donation 
is duly accounted for on the · 
books of the institution". 
Sufficient number of care-taker 
and other subordinate staff 
will be employed in an insti­
tution, in order to avoid a 
care-taker being over bur­
dened. 
23. In pursuance of its decision taken at its meeting held on the 
1st J•uly and 26th August, 19'82, the Committee visited Calcutta and 
the Andaman and Nicobar Islands from 16th to 24th September, 1982, 
the Committee took the opportunity to discuss the Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands Children (Management, functions and responsi­
bilities of Special Schools, Children's Home and Observation Homes} 
1----:.__ 
-~~==~-------------------------

• 
17 
Rules, J979 witn the representatives o£ the Ministry of Education 
and 'Social Welfare and the Andaman and Nicobar Administration 
on the 18'th September, 1982: An extract from the Study. Note of 
Committee is enclosed (Annexure--III). 
•. 24;. The points .arising out of the scrutiny of the Rules referred 
x on ·behalf of the. Committee to the Ministry. ~nd the reply of the 
·- _..., Andarp.an and. Nicobar Administration thereto were then examined 
·1<1 in detail. 'l'he outcome of the discussions .and the Committee's ob~ 
servation and recommendations in regard thereto are set forth 
below" 
(i) Rule 7-The Administration had already agreed to the 
suggestion for .inclusion among the duties of the Superin­
tendent of an 'Open Institution', provision for keeping a 
Caretaker or Watchman on duty ·for 24 hours. 
(ii) Rule 30, sub-rule (3)-The Administrat~on .had already 
agreed to the suggesti.l;m to have a ·single designation in 
place of . the words 'President' and 'Chairman' mentioned 
in the sub-rule. 
~y· (iii) Rule 31-The rule gave the Chief CommiSGioner, power 
to terminate the tenure of appointment of .a non-official 
member without assigning any reason. 
. ! 
~· 
Clarifying the intention of keeping this provision, the Officers 
of the Administration reiterated what . had been earlier 
stated in the Administrations' written comments furnish­
ed through the Ministry that it wa\3 to enable the Chief 
Commissioner to remove any non-official member in case 
he was elected/nominated to some other body or in the 
event of his continuing as a non-official member, being 
~ohsidered as against the interest of the Advisory Com­
mittee. The Committee did not agree with this view point 
88 it felt that if a non-official member ceased to represent 
the interest which he was to represent on appointment 
to. the Advisory .committee, his membership automatically 
stooQ. terminated and no enabling provision was required 
:fo~ the Chi~:f. Commissioner to remove him. The Com­
mittee :was also not in favour of giving blanket discre­
tionary power for removing non -official membel'>3 from 
the Advisory Committee whose continuance was consi­
dered as against the interest of the Advisory Committee. 

18 
It was agreed to amend the provision so as to give the 
Chief Commissioner the power to terminate the tenure 
of appointment of a non-official member if the member 
had been convicted of an offence involving moral turpi­
tude or where termination ()f tenure was resorted to 
for any other reason; say for activities prejudicial to the 
interest of the Advisory Committee, the reason for such 
termination should be recorded in writing. The Com­
mittee also desired that a notice in. all cases of termina­
tion of tenure should be given to the concerned member 
and he should also be given opportunity to be heard. 
(iv) Rule 53, sub-rule (4)-In regard to this sub-rule, in which 
duties and responsibilities of the Caretaker had been 
spelt out, the Administration had agreed to amend the 
provisien. According to the amendment proposed, in case 
a Caretaker was unable to attend to his duty due to illness 
or otherwis~, he should apply for grant of leave in ad­
vance. It appeared doubtful if this amended provision 
was enforceable as sending advance application would 
not always be possible in case of illness. It wa13 accord­
ingly agreed to delete the sub-rule. 
(v) Rule 57-In regard to the point made out in respect of 
rule 57, the Committee felt that the proviso which the 
Administration proposed to add to the rule provided 
enough safeguard against misuse of the rule and the rule 
after that addition would not require any further change. 
Rule 56-The Committee, however, felt that cla-use (i) of 
sub-rule (2) of this rule which provided for prior appro-. 
val of the Chief Commissioner for accepting certain 
donations or contributions should not be there as it would 
affect inflow of donations, It was agreed to delete the . 
clause. 
(vi) As regards the point concerning the duties of the Care­
taker; the Committee felt that the assurance given by the 
Adro.inistration that sufficient member of Caretakers and 
other subordinate staff will be employed in an institution 
in order to avoid a Caretaker being overburdened, 
acceptable. 
The Committee recommends that aetion to amend the Rules 
as already agreed to by the Andaman and Nicobar Ad· 

18 
It was agreed to amend the provision so as to give the 
Chief Commissioner the power to terminate the tenure 
of appointment of a non-offi.cial member if the member 
had been convicted of an offence involving moral turpi­
tude or where termination of tenure was resorted to 
for any other reason, say for activities prejudicial to the 
interest of the Advisory Committee, the reason for such 
termination should be recorded in writing. The Com­
mittee also desired that a notice in all cases of termina­
tion of tenure should be given to the concerned member 
and he should also be given opportunity to be heard. 
{iv) Rule 53., sub-rule (4)-In regard to this sub-rule, in which 
duties and responsibilities of the Caretaker had been 
spelt out, the Administration had agreed to amend the 
provisien. According to the amendment proposed, in case 
a Caretaker was unable to attend to his duty due to illness 
or otherwis~, he should apply for grant of leave in ad­
vance. It appeared doubtful if this amended provision 
was enforceable as sending advance application would 
not always be possible in case of illness. It wa>S accord­
ingly agreed to delete the sub-rule. 
(v) Rule 57-In regard to the point made out in respect of 
rule 57, the Committee felt that the proviso which the 
Administration proposed to add to the rule provided 
enough safeguard against misuse of the rule and the rule 
after that addition would not require any further change. 
Rule 56-The Committee, however, felt that cla·use {i) of 
sub-rule {2) of this rule which provided for prior appro­
val of the Chief Commissioner for accepting certain 
donations or contributions should not be there as it would 
affect inflow of donations, It was agreed to delete the 
clause. 
{vi) As regards the point concerning the duties of the Care­
taker, the Committee felt that the assurance given by the 
Administration that sufficient member of Caretakers and 
other subordinate staff will be employed in an institution 
in order to avoid a Caretaker being overburdened, 
acceptable. 
The Committee recommends that action to amend the Rules . · 
as already agreed to by the Andaman and Nicobar Ad· 

• 
.... 
19 
ministration and as further suggested by the Committee 
during its discussion with the Officers of the Administra· 
tion may be initiated soon. 
VIII 
THE MINISTRY OF HOME AJ?FAIRS (DIRECTORATE OF CO­
ORDINATION POLICE COMPUTERS) GROUP A AND B POSTS 
RECRUITMENT RULES, 1980 (GSR 1104 OF 1980) 
25. The method of recruitment ·for the post of Inspector Non­
Technical, as given i.n column 10 of the Schedule a}.l}.len.ded to the 
above-mentioned rule;;;, is as follows:-
"by transfer on deputation or transfer." 
26. Since the period of deputation had not be~n specified in the 
Schedul<:> the Ministry of Home Affairs (Directorate of Coordination 
Police Computers) were asked to intimate whether they had any 
objection to specifying it. The Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 
15•th March, 1982, stated as follows:-
"There is no objection to specifying deputation period for 
the po•,st of Inspector· (Non-Technical) in the Ministry of 
Home Affairs (Directorate of Coordination Police Compu­
ters) Group A and B posts Recruitment Rules, 1980. 
Necessary steps are being initiated to amend the said 
Recruitment Rules separately to give the effect that the 
period of deputation shall ordinarily not exceed three 
years." 
27. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Home Affairs have 
no objection in providing in the rules, the period of deput~ttion for 
the post of Inspector Non-Technical as ordinarily not exceeding 
three years. 
IX 
THE EXPORT INSPECTION AGENCY (RECRUITMENT) AMEND­
MEN'r RULES, 1980 (G.S.R. 1080 of 1980) 
28. The method of recruitment for t!Ie post of Additional Director 
Grade II, as given in column 8 of the Schedule appended to the 
above-mentioned rules, is as follows:-
"100 per cent by promotion failing which by transfer on 
deputation, failing both by direct recruitment." 
.. 

20 
As the period of deputation had not been specified in the sche­
dule, the Ministry of Commerce were .addressed in the matter. The 
Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 8th March, 1982, informed that 
they had no objection in prescribing the period of deputation as 3 
years for the post of Additional Director Grade II. 
29. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Commerce have 
agreed to amend the rules suitably so as to provide therein deputa­
tion period of 3 years for the post of Additional Director Grade II. . 
X 
DELAY IN MAKING RULES UNDER THE CENTRAL ACTS 
(i) Ru1es under the Kosangws Company (Acquisition of Un.dertCJ.k· 
ing) Act, 1979, and (ii) The Parel Investments and Trading• 
Priv'ate Limited ·(Taking Over of Management) .Act, 1979 
30. The Ministry of Petroleum, Chemicals and Fertilizers (De­
partment of Petroleum) were asked on the !Jth September, 1980 
to expedite making of rules and regulations required to be made 
under the above mentioned Acts of 1979. The Ministry, vide 
O.M. dated the 18th November, 1980, stated as follows:-
. " . . that no Rules are proposed to be framed under the 
two Acts in question. However, for the administrative 
convenience and for smooth running 'Of these companies, 
certain proposals for formulating I necessary schemes / 
etc. have been ~considered by this Department. The p()Si­
tion in this regard is indicated below:-
(i) The Kosangas Company (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 
1979 (No. 2:8 of 1979) 
Prop'Osals for framing rules under sub-section (2) of Sec­
tion 10 of this Act, regarding Kosangas Employee~' 
Gratuity Fund, were considered by this Department 
in consultation with the Law Ministry. Th.e Law 
Ministry were of the view that the power of the 
Central Government to make scheme is administrative 
in nature and hence it is non-statutory. Necessary 
gazette notification in this regard has accordingly been 
issued on 14th July, 1980. It would not appear neces­
sary to place a C'Opy of the same on the Table of the 
Sabha. 

20 
As the period of deputation had not been specified in the sche­
dule, the Ministry of Commerce were addressed in the matter. The 
Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 8th March, 1982, informed that 
they had no objection in prescribing the period of deputation as 3 
years for the post of Additional Director Grade II. 
29. The Committee not~s that the Ministry of Commerce have 
agreed to amend the rules suitably so as to provide therein deputa­
tion period of 3 years for the post of Additional Director Grade ll. . 
X 
DELAY IN MAKING RULES UNDER THE CENTRAL ACTS 
(i) Ru1es under the Kosangas Company (Acquisition of Undert'lk­
ing) Act, 1979, and (ii) The Parel Investments and Trading 
Private Limited (Taking Over of Management) .Act, 1979 
30. The Ministry of Petroleum, Chemicals and Fertilizers (De­
partment of Petroleum) were asked on the 9th September, 1980 
to expedite making of rules and regulations required to be made' 
under the above mentioned Acts of 1979. The Ministry, vide 
O.M. dated the 18th November, 1980, stated as follows:-
. " . . . that no Rules are proposed to be framed under the 
two Acts in question. However, for the administrative 
convenience and for smooth running of theS'e companies, 
certain proposals for formulating 2 necessary sch~m~s / 
etc. have been !Considered by this Department. The ppsi­
tion in this regard is indicated below:-
(i) The Kosangas Company (Acquisition of Undertak.ing) Act, 
1979 (No. 28 of 1979) 
Proposals for framing rules under sub-section (2) of Sec­
tion 10 of this Act, regarding Kosangas Employees' 
Gratuity Fund, were considered by this Department 
in consultation with the Law Ministry. The Law 
Ministry were of the view that the power of the 
Central Government to make scheme is administrative 
in nature and hence it is non-statutory. Necessary 
gazette notification in this regard has accordingly been 
issued on 14th July, 1980. It would not appear neces­
sary to place a copy of th~ same on the Table of the · 
Sabha. 

•, 
~·· 
21 
HPC have indicated that no other Rules are proposed to be 
framed under this Act. 
(ii) The Parel Investments and Trading Priv.ate Limited and Do­
mestk Gas Private Limited (Taking Over Of Management) Act, 
1979 (No. 29 of 1979) 
Proposals in consultation with the Ministry of Law, Justice 
and Company Affa:irs are under examination to issue 
under Section 6(2) read with Section i5 of this Act, 
seeking certain exceptions, restrictions and limitations 
in respect of some of the Sections of the Companies 
Act, 1956. These proposals have not yet been finalised. 
It is pr:esumed that in this case also, it would not be 
necessary to lay a copy of the ORDER when issued on 
the Table of the Sabha." 
31. The matter was again taken up with that Ministry on the 
lOth February, 1981. The operative part of the communication 
sent to the Ministry is reprodt1ced below:-
" . that under rule 204 of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of. Business in the Rajya Sabha, the Committee 
on Subordinate Legislation is required to scrutinize all 
the rules, regulations, bye-laws, scheme's or other sta­
tutory instruments conferred by the Constitution or 
detegated by Parliament. 
The Ministry of Petroleum, Chemicals and Fertilizers (De­
partment of Petroleum) had made a scheme under the 
provision of the Kosangas Company (Acquisition of 
Undertaking) Act, 1979 and notified in the Gazette of 
India. A copy of the scheme is required to be laid on the 
Table of both the Houses of Parliament. Similarly a 
copy of order proposed to be made under the Parel 
Investments and Trading Private Limited and Domestic 
Gas Private Limited (Taking Over of Management) Act, 
1979 is also to be laid on the Table of both the Houses of 
Parliament when finalised." 
32. When no comments were received from the Ministry, the 
following points were again referred to the Ministry on the 25th 
March, 1981:-
"(i) Whether all the Rules/Regulations/Schemes and Orders 
etc., required to be framed unde~ Section 20(1) of the 
Kosangas Company (Acquisition of Undertaking). Act, 

22 
1979 (No. 28 of 1979) and Section 16(1) of the Parel 
Investments and Trading Private Limited and Domestic 
Gas Private Limited (Taking over of Management) Act, 
1979 (No. 29 of 1979) have been framed and notified in 
the Gazette or not; 
(ii) Whether steps have been taken to lay the copies of such 
notifications on the Table of both the Houses of 
Parliament as required under Section 20 (2) and 16 (2) 
respectively of the Acts mentioned at (i) above. 
In this connection, attention of the Ministry of Petroleum, 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was also invited to the following obser­
vation made by the Co·mmittee on Subordinate Legislation in para 
48 of its 9th Report:-
"In order that such long and inordinat·e delays do not take 
place in future, the Committee recommend that rules 
and regulations requlred to be made under a statute 
should be made 'as soon as possible but in no case later 
than six months from the date on which the statute 
comes into force." 
33. 'The Ministry of Petroleum, Chemicals and Fertilizers vide 
their O.M. dated the lOth November, 1981 replied as follows:-
" .. that undermentioned two Notifications had been issued 
under (1) the Kosangas Company · (Acquisition of 
Undertaking) Act, 1979 (28 of 1979) and (2) the Parel 
Investments and Trading Private Limited and Domestic 
Gas Privat·e Limited (Taking over of Management) Act, 
1979 (29 of 1979). 
(1) Notification No. 8.0. 991 (E) dated the 30th December, 
1980, published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary 
dated 30th December, 1980, was issued under the Parel 
Investments and Trading Private Limited and Domestic 
Gas Private Limited (Taking over of Management) Act, 
1979 (29 of 1979). The Notification, in question was placed 
on the Table of the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha on the 23rd 
and 24th February, 1981, respectiv·ely. t:' 
(2) Notification No. R-11029/2/80. MC, dated 30th April, 1981, 
published in the Gazette of India, dated 23rd May, 1981, 
was issued under the Kosangas Company (Acquision of 
Undertaking) Act, 1979 (28' of 1979). The Notification, in 

• 
23 
question; was placed on the Tables of the Rajya Sabha/ 
Lok Sabha on the 24th August, 1981 and 1st September, 
1981, respectively, 
The delay in issuing the above Notifications under the two 
Central Acts is due to:-
(i) Submission of proposals for framing rulesjregulations 
by the Government Company concerned after the ex­
piry of 6 months in spite of repeated reminders to the 
Company. 
(ii) Consultation with Deptt. of Company Affairs and the 
Ministry of Law, Justice & C.A., which took a consi­
derable long time in taking a decision on procedural as 
well as legal aspects of these proposals." 
34. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Petroleum, ·Chemi­
cals and Fertilizers (Department of Pletroleum) has issued notifica­
tions und.er (i) the Kosangas Company (Acquisition of Undertaking) 
Act, 1979 (No. 2S of 1979) ·and (ii) the Parel Investments and Trading 
Private Limited and Domestic Gas Private Limited (Taking over 
of Management) Act, 1979 (No. 29 of 1979), and laid the same on 
the Table of both the Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee takes a serious view of the faet that a Government 
Company should! have taken unduly long time in the' matter ignoring 
its administrative Ministry's repeated reminders for the submission 
of the proposals within the time-limit laid down for the purpose. 
The Committee. expresses the hope that Government will see to it 
that in future, such situations do not arise and decisions are taken 
expeditiously. In this connection, the Committee reitrates its 
earlier recommendations on this subject as cont'ained in paragraph 
4S of its Ninth Report which reads as follows:-
"In order that such long and inordinate delays do not take 
place in future, the Committee :recommend that rules and 
regulations r•equired to be made under a statute should be 
made as soon as possible but in no case later than six 
months from the date on which the statute comes into 
force!' 
. As regards the delay involved in inter-Ministerial consultations, 
the Committee is of the view that Government should devise ways 
and means to ensure that the process of such consultations is comple-
• 

24 
ted expeditiouSly so as to ensure that the rules/regulations required 
to be· made under a statute is made ·not later than 6 ·months from the 
date on which the statute comes into force. 
(ii) Rules under the Border Security Force Act, 1968 
35. Paragraphs 15 and 16 of the 36th Report of the Committee 
.) 
read as follows:- ' JIL .. 
"15. The rules mentioned above were made in pursuance of 
the provisions of the Border Security Force Act, 1968 
which came into force on the 1st March, 1969. The ques­
tion regarding delay of about l{J years in framing the said 
rules was taken Aup with the Ministry of Home Affairs 
(Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms). 
The Directorate General, Border Security. Force explained 
the reasons in the following terms:-
"BSF was raised in December, 1965 under the executive 
powers of the Central Government. Initially it was 
decided by the Government to apply CRPF Rules to the 
members of BSF. In addition it was governed by other 
executhte orders issued by the Government from time to 
time. After the passing of B8F Act, 1968 which came 
into force w .e .f. 1st March, 69, BSF Rules 1969 were 
published. Rule 182 of the said Rules provides that any 
rule or order applicable to the F'orce on the date these 
rules come into force will, unless- repugnant to these 
rules, continue to apply. unless and until abrogated or 
modified by the Central Government or any other com~ 
petent authority. Thus as regards inter-se seniority and 
promotions, these were governed by · executive orders 
o:f the Government and Central Reserve Police Force 
Rules. Since the BSF Officer CadJ;'e consists of Officers 
drawn from various sources, like IPS, serving and retired 
Army Officers, released Army Officers, State Police 
Officers, direct entrants and local promote~s etc., it was 
a very difficult problem to determine their inter-se Slenio-
rity on permanent basis quickly. We had to obtain the 
views o:f IPS Cadre Officers and Army Officers etc. 
before we could finally decide on the issues. All this 
resulted in inordinate delay, in framing the BSF (Senio­
rity, Promotion and Superannuation of Officers) Rules, 
1978. We however, express .our regrets for the delay 
which may please be accepted and matter closed." 
• 

25 
In another communication the Ministry of Home Aftaim 
further elaborated the position as follows:-
"However, according to the information available so far as 
the Ministry of Home Affairs is concerned there is only 
one Central Act enacted in 1974 and before under which 
Rules and Regulations were required to be made and 
have not yet been made. Under Section 141 of the Border 
Security F'orce Act~ 1968, · 14 Rules were required to be 
framed. Out of· these, 13: Rules have since been framed 
and published in the Gazette. Only one Rule regarding 
ceremonials to be observed and· the marks of respect to 
be paid in the Force is pending finalisation. Action to 
·frame as early as possible the remaining one Rule h; in 
progress." 
16. The Committee considered the explanation of the Ministry 
of Home Affairs on the delay in making the Border 
Security F'orce (Seniority, Promotion and Superannuation 
of Officem) Rules, 1978. The Committee expresses its 
anguish at the Ministry's delay in making rules for a 
sensitive organisation like the Border Security Force." 
A copy of· the extract from the 36th Report was sent to the 
Mini•.stry of Home Affairs for their information and necessary action 
in the matter. 
36. The recommendation of the Committee on the aspect of delay 
in making of rules etc. as contained in paragraph 56 of its Tenth 
Report was again cirC'ulated to all Ministries/Departments of the 
Government of India vide their Secretariat O.M., dated the 22nd 
April, 1982, with the specific request to them to intimate this Secre­
tariat whether there were still any Central Acts. under which rules 
and regulations were required to be made but had not been made 
till then, and if so, what were the names of such Acts and the 
reasons for which rules and regulations had not yet been made. 
37. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their communications dated 
the 1st and 15th May, 1982, requested for grant of extension of time 
of six months and explained the position in following terms with 
regard to making the remaining one set of rules out of 14 rules to 
·~ · be made under the provisions of the Border Security Force Act, 
1968:-
" .... in so far as this Ministry is concerned, there is only one 
Act viz., BSF Act, 1968 under which rules have not been 
framed within a period of six months." 

26 
" .... in accordance with Section 141 of the BSF Act, 1968, the 
Central Government were empowered to make Rultl!i in 
respect of 14 items mentioned therein for carrying into 
effect the provisions of the Act. The Rules in respect of 
13 items mentioned therein have already been framed 
except those relating to ceremonials to be observed and 
marks of respect to be paid in the Force as mentioned at 
sub-section (1) of Section 141 of the above-mentioned 
Act. The Rules relating to ceremonials have to be :fina­
lised in consultation with the Ministry of Defence since 
observance of ceremonials and marks of respect to be paid 
in the Force are directly linked with the applicability of 
such marks of respect between the Army and the BSF 
who have to serve alongside each other at international 
borders. It has not been possible to frame the Rules 
because of. disagreement with the Ministry of Defence 
on certain points. The matter is being sorted out with 
the Ministry. It is requested that the time for framing 
the Rules relating to ceremonials in accordance with Sub· 
section (1) of Section 141 of the BSF Act may be extend­
ed for a period of six months. It is requested that the 
approval of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation to 
the extension of time for the framing of the Rules may be 
obtained and conveyed to this Ministry early. 
2. This issues with the approval of the Minister of State in 
the Ministry of Home Affairs." 
. 38. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Home Affairs had 
m*'de rules in respect of 13 items incl.uded in sub-section (1) of 
Section 141 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968.· The Committee 
accedes to the request of 'the Ministry and agrees to grant extension 
of time of six months i.e. upto the 15th November, 1982 for making 
rules relating to ceremonials in accordence with sub-section (1) of 
Sec'tion 141 of the Act. The Committee re!grets to note that .the ex· 
tension of time asked for by the Ministry for making the ·rules 
i.e. upto the 15th November, 1982 has already elapsed and still the 
rules have not been made by them. }t ~~ 
NEW DELHI; BHAI MAHAVIR, 
November 17, 1982 Chairman, 
Committee on ·Subordinate Legislation. 
f) 

~/-
1 
ANNEXUR:r 
.(Vide para 12. of the Report) 
No. F. 4(5)-W&M/70 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(Department of Economic Affairs) 
New Delhi, the 5th June, 1970 
MEMORANDUM 
SuBJECT: Sixty-Fourth Raport of the Public Accounts Committee 
(Fourth Lok Sabha)~Statutory Control over Govern­
ment's borrowing 
The Public Accounts Committee in para 1.11 of their Sixty­
Fourth Report have made the following recommendation:-
"The Committee have carefully 1considered the arguments put 
forward by Government for not accepting their repeated 
suggestion that a practical trial should be given to the 
healthy principle enunciated in Article 292 of the Cons­
titution for fixing a Limit by Parliament on Public 
borrowings. ·The country is now committed to planning 
on a five-years basis. This necessary presupposes a 
long-term assessment of resources needed for develop­
mental effort and the extent to whkh such resources 
should be raised through additional taxation 
borrowing and deficit financing. It should, there­
fore, be possible to vvork out with a reasonable degree of 
approximation a workable limit on borrowings for pur­
pose of incorporation in a statute as contemplated in 
Article 292 of the Constitution. The Committee would 
like Government to reconsider their position in the light 
of the foregoing considerations. 
2. The reasons for which the Government found it difficult tc. 
accept the earlier recommendations of the Public Accounts Commit­
tee had been explained in the Memorandum dated 29th January, 
27 

1967 submitted to the 
below:~ 
28 
Committee. These are briefly recounted 
"(i) The constitutional provision regarding Government's 
borrowings is permissive and not mandatory (Article 
292). 
(ii) Broad limits of the net borrowing proposed over a Plan 
periorl through domestic market loans from Reserve 
Bank, and through Budgetary receipts corresponding to 
external assistance . are generally indicated in the Plan 
documents. 
(iii) The borrowings proposed during the ensuing financial 
year by various categori>es are shown distinctly in the 
Budget presented to Parliament. 
The budget documents, of course, do not indicate the timing a;; 
well as the terms and conditions of the proposed borrow­
ings nor would it be possible to do so even if there is to 
be any statutory provision in regard to limits, etc. 
(iv) :Parliament has ample opportunity to discuss the pro­
posed borrowings by Government (a) over a plan period 
and (b) also during this ensuing financial year when it 
discusses the plan and the annual Budget. Moreover, in 
the ultimate analysis Government's borrowings from all 
sources are limited by the supply gr~nted by Parliament, 
the re~uirements for which cannot be raised through 
sources like Revenue etc. 
(v) Limits on borrowings from Reserve Bank present. special 
problem. These vary not only from year to year but even 
from time to time during· a year itself, 8Jccording to cir­
cumstances, needs and other considerations. It is only 
the net borrowing over a year which is of significance 
but any enactment in regard to limits would have to be 
with reference to the maximum amount of borrowing at 
any time and not the net over the year and this would be 
misleading. 
(vi) Limits on external borrowings would be even more 
difficult. The extent of such borrowings depends on the 
prevailing circumstances and involve p~tient negotiat:io~s. 
It would not be desirable or even practicable to put hm1tls 
on such borrowings halving regard to the factors which 
affect external assistance. 

, .. 
• 29 
(vii) If borrowirigs from. Reserve Bank and foreign loans are 
left out, any legislative approval for the residuary borrow~ 
ings will have little significance. 
(viii) If notwithstanding the foregoing consideration sta­
tutory limits. are though necessary, these would have to 
be sufficiently wide so that the need for frequent amend·· 
~·· ments to the statute does not arise. On the other hand, 
such wide limits:-which are by and large already set by 
the Plan documents and the annual Budgets-will serve 
no practical purpose. Statutory limits would, therefore, 
confer no advantage but on the other hand hamper the 
flexibility which is now available: 
3. In their latest recommendation contained in para 1.11 of the 
Sixty-Fourth Report (Fourth Lok Sabha), the Public Accounts 
Committee have suggested that a workable limit on borrowings can 
be incorporated in a st~atute in the light of the assessment of re­
sources made for the purpose of Five Year Plan. The assessment of 
resources made in the Five Year Plan is based on certain assump­
tions and is apt to be affected by development not foreseeable at the 
time of formulation of the Plan. For example, there ' were wide 
Yvariations between the scheme of financJng contemplated in the 
Third Plan and the actuals. The assumptions made in the Five 
Year Plans cannot, therefore, be taken as firm basis for fixing sta~ 
tutory limits on borrowings. The Five Year Plan is reviewed 
annually and the annual Plan and the annual Budget reflect the 
latest estimates for the year in regard to the debt to be incurred 
under various heads. But these too are subject to fluctuations. 
4. Parliament is Kept fully apprised of tihe borrowing of the 
Government. In fact, the Budget documents show not only the 
details of the borrowing programme for the Budget Year by cate­
gories, but also of the growth of Public Debt ever since 1950-51 vide 
Statement VI in Section II of Part II of tihe Explanatory Memo­
randum on the Budget. Moreover, in the ultimate analysis, Govern­
ment's borrowings are even now limited indirectly by the Parlia­
ment, year to year, by setting limits to the total expenditure to be 
incurred by the Government. 
/ 5. In view of the reasons stated above 9overnment even after 
~~reconsidering the matter .are of the view that no real advan.tage 
will ,be served by. prescribing statutory limits on Government 
borrowings, 
'' , ' Sdl-
B.MAITHREYAN 
Joint Stcretary to the Government of India. 

ANNEXURE D 
(Vide Para 20 ol the Report) 
(Extracts from the Study Note's of the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation on its visit to Andcman and Nicolxtr Islands) 
In pursuance of the decistcm. taken by the Committee on 
Subordinate I .. egislation at its meetings held on the 1st July and 6th 
August, 1982, the Committee undertook study visits to a number of 
places in Calcutta and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands from 16th 
to 24th September, 1982 and held discussions with concerned 
authorities there. 
2. A brief note/summary of the subjects studied/ dis•:!ussions 
held during the above mentioned visits ot the Com:rrti.t.tee is given 
in the succeeding paragraph&. 
• • • 
,The Andaman and Nicobar Islands Children Rules, 1979 
7.3 (i) The Chairman stated that in regrurd to the point made 
out by the Secretariat in respect of rule 14, the Committee agreed· 
with the suggestion of the Administration that necessary provision 
would be made in the relevant rule to reinstate children, whose 
relatives refused to take their charge ot had died or changed place 
of residence, in the 'After-care Home' till such time as the parents/ 
relatives agreed to accept the child or he/she became able to secure 
·employment/earn his/her own livelihood. 
(ii) In regard to the provision 1contained in sub-rule (3) of rule 
15 that enabled the Chief Commissioner to terminate the appoint­
ment of a member of the Child Welfare Board at any time without 
assigning any reason, the explanation given by the Administration 
was not very convincing. After some discussion, it was decided 
that the rule should be reworded on the same lines as had been 
agreed to in respect . of removal of a non-official member of the. 
Advisory Committee under rule 31 of the Andaman and Nicobal' 
Islands Children (Mana.gement, Functions and Responsibilities of 
****Relates to matter not included in this 'Report. 

• 31 
Special Schools, Children's Home anc,l Qbservatj_on H;qm~s) ~u),e~ 
19vt. 
(iii) As reg(\rds the point made out in respect of rule 2&, sub­
rule (~), tlae ~~plan~tio:n given by the Admini·st:tation was ao~epta-
~, ble to t.he CQI:n,mittee. 
-~ - 7.4 The Chairman then enquired about the progress made in the 
establishment of the Observation Home on delinquent children and 
also whether any Child Welfa:re Board, as envisaged in Section 4 of 
the Children Act had been established for t;he Islands, th~ officers of 
the Administration explained that the scheme for establishment of 
an Observation Home had been included in the Sixth Five Year 
Plan (:l980-85), and an amount of Rs. 5.170 lakhs has been provided 
therefor. ·The construction of the building would be taken up soon 
and it was expected that the Home would start functioning from 
1984-85. As regards the Child Welfare Board, one such Board had 
been established for the whole territory of the Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands by a notification issued on the 2nd March, 1979. 
7.5 Examining the forms appended to the Andaman and Nkobar 
y1slands Children's Rules, 1979, the Committee was very much in 
. doubt as to the legal validity of the bond. to be executed on Form 
III by a delinquent child as also the provision of sub rule (2) of 
rule 13 which provided for the execution of such a bond. The 
Committee, therefore, desired that the legal validity of these provi­
sions, including the Form be examined and amendments, as found 
necessary, may be made. 
7.6 It was also agreed to remove the word 'Caste' from the 
column in Form IX in which details regarding the name, father's 
name etc. of the delinquent child were to be entered. 
Asked by the Chairman whether there were any delinquent 
children under 0bservation and if so, where they had been lodged, 
the officers of the Administration sta;ted that there were six such 
children lodg.ed in 'a section of the Cellular Jail Asked further 
whether there wa·S any mix up of these children with the other 
inmates of the Jail, the officers of the Administration clarified that 
it wa:s not so as the children were housed in a separate wing of the 
jail and there was no access of other prisoners to that wing. 
7.7 Dt". Hira Singh, however, raised a point that in order to avoid 
unhealthy psyeh.ological influence on these and other delinquent 
children who are required to be detained in future, in his opinion 

32 
they should not be lodged in jail as the mere name 'jail' has an 
. unhealthy effect on the developing mind of a tchild which may not be 
very conducive for his correction. The Committee agreed with 
this view. The officers of the Administration agreed to consider the 
suggestion to arrange for their shifting to a hired building under the 
charge of a lady Superintendent till such time as a proper observa" 
tion Home was set up. 
7.8 Later on Members of the Committee visited the Cellular 
Jail and met the children detained there. 
* * * * 
------------- ----"-------~·--· -----·-****Relates to matter not included in this Report. 

• 
... 
' , 
• 
ANNEXURE III 
(Vide para 23 of the Report) 
Extracts from the Study Notes of the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation on its visit to Andaman 'and Nicobar Islands 
In pursuance of the d·ecision taken by the Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation at its meetings held on the 1st J'Uly and 
6th August, 1982, the Committee undertook study visits to a number 
of places in Calcutta and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands from 16th 
to 24th September, 1982 and held discussions with concerned authori-
. ties there. 
2. A brief note/summary of the subjects studied/disC'ussions held 
during the above mentioned visits of the Committee is given in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
"' "' 
Y The Andaman a11d Nicobar Islands Childre11 (Management, 
Functio11s and ResponsibiHties of Special Schools Children's Homes 
and Observation Homes) Rules, 1979 
7.2 (i) The Administration had already agreed to the suggestion 
for inclusion among the duties of the Superintendent of an 'Open 
Institution', provision for keeping a Caretaker or Watchman on duty 
for 24 hours. (Rule 7) 
(ii) The Administration had already agreed to the suggestion to 
have a single designation in place of the words 'President' and 
'Chairman' mentioned in sub-rule (3) of rule 30. 
(iii) Rule 31 gives the Chief Commissioner, power to terminate 
the tenure of appointment of a non-official member wjthout assign­
ing any reason. 
· Clarifying the intention of keeping this provision, the Adminis­
tration had stated that it was to enable the Chief Commissioner to 
remove any non-official member in case he was electedfnominated 
**"""Relates to matter not included in this Report. 
33 

34 
to Gome other body or in the event of his continuing as a non­
official member, being considered as against the interest of the .·· 
Advisory Committee. This approach, the Chairman stated, was· 
not a correct one. If a non-official member ceased to represent the 
interest which he was to represent on appointment to the Advisory 
Committee, his melt'hlb~ship ::!mtomaticaUy -stood termirrated and no 
enabling provision was required for the Chief Commissioner to ·re­
:tnovc him. Contibuing further, the Chairman stated that the Com­
mittee was not in favour of giving blanket discretionary power for. 
removing non-official members from the Advisory Committee whose 
continuance was considered as against th-e interest ·of the Advi~ 
Committee. Af.ter some discussion, it was agreed to amend the 
provision so as to g·ive the Chief Commissioner the power to te:rmi-. 
. nate the tenure of appointment of a non--official mem..Ji>e.r if the 
member had been Ctmvicted of an offence involving moral tlil:tpi~e 
or where termination of tenure was resorted to far any other 
~Y Eor '2iCtiv-ft'ies prejudli'ciail to ·tile inte!t'est :of t!t1e Advisory 
fhi ttee, the reaBen for "Stich tetTnJi!ttl'a'ti:on shouiJ.d be recorded in wrt'lf;­
ing. The Committee also desired that a notice in al1 cases of 
nation of tenure should be given to the eoncerned member and 
should also be given opportunity to b~ heard. 
· (tv) l'n 1:'egatd to sub-tule ('4) or r>Ile 53 in. which duties 
respon.sibiliti'es of t'h:e Caretaker h'ad been spelt ou:t, the aamiltllSlGI'a"'. 
tion had agreed to amerrd the provision. According to the .............. -
ment proposed, in case a Caretaker was unable to a•tte:H:til 
duty du~ to illness or ot~rwise, he should &pply for grant ·Of 
in advance. The Chairman tiloubted if this amended provisi'0n 
enforceable as sending advance application was n-&t possible ~:m 
of illness. After GOme discussion, it was agreed to delete the 
·rule. 
(v) In the reference made by the Co:rrtmittee Secretariat a 
had been made o'Ut in respect of rule 57. The Chairman felt 
t}l}e provi-so which the :Aaminis'tration proposed to ~cld to the 
prov4.ded ·enough sa:feguM."d aga4•n•.st misuse of the rnle ,and he 
therefore, not insist on the suggestion that the Secr.etariat baa 
·On the lOther hand, he !felt that •cl:au·ae '(i) ~of slil'b-rn~e (~ 10I 
56 1providin·g 1!ot prior <apprdval ·of the Chief ·Commissioner 
-accepting oe!'tain clona·t:i.ons or ·contrHttlt~ons should not be tbel'e 
it wo'Ltld .affect ·inflow of donations. After some discussion, it 
agreed to delete lthe c'l~trse. 

(0 
.. 
35 
(vi) As regards the point raised by the Committee Secretariat in 
regard to the duties of the Caretaker, he took the assurance given 
by the Administration that sufficient number of Caretakers and 
other subordinate staff would be employed in an institution in order 
to avoid a Caretaker being overburdened . 

-----~ --------------~--..--~···· 
·-------~ 
MINUTES 
·---··---~·· ---~-·--~-~---·- -----···---·~· 
··------ ---------

MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE, ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
(1982..83) 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met .oa:t iiOO ~..N. on Thursday, the lOth June, 
1982. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chail!'~ 
2. Shri T. Basheer 
3. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
4. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
5o. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
6. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
7. Shri Ra:m Niwas Mirdha 
8. Shri Sushi! Chand Moh·unta 
9. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
10. Shri Ghanshyambhai 0~ 
11. Shri Santosh Kumar Salwl 
12. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
13. Shri Shanti Tyagi. 
SE:cRETAJUAT 
'Slrti 'K .. Dajtai, Chief t.egi~lmw OO'mltlfttee Offteer. 
-2. Tine Ch&~raal'l w~ed .tbe Kemli>ers .at the Committee. He. 
then expbined the scope and functions of the Con::IDI.ittee .aDd. .scnwht 
cooperation of the Members in making the functioning of Committee 
a success . 
. a. ~he MembeN ~ecated ,the feeli~s -e~seti by the 
·C~.an anti! .sssurred -Gf their .C6fl)per.at4o.:a i:a the fanctioning of 
the Committee. 
4~ Xloe. Col.3:lm.i.tt-ee tAea .adjou.med .at -4,,5 .P.M. to. .m.eet . .m at 
U.OO ·A.M •. on Flriday, .the llth ,June, 1982. 
"3~ .. 

0 
11 
SECOND MEETING ..-.. 
> -A The Committee met at 1~.00 A.M. on Friday, the 11th June, 1982. · 
. MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri T. Basheer 
3. Shri Nand Kiehore Bhatt 
4. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
5. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
6. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
7. Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha 
3. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
9. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
10. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
11. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
12. Shri Shanti Tyagi. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committ~e Officer. 
2. The Committee considered and took decisions on the follow­
ing memoranda:-
(i) MEMORANDUM NO. 1 
The Ministry of Home Affairs (Direct01a.te of Coordination 
Police Computers) Group A and B Posts Recruitment 
Rules, 1980 (G.S.R. 1104· of 1980). 
The Committee noted that the Ministry of Home Affairs had no 
objection in providing, in the rules, the period of deputation ordi­
narily not exceeding three years. 
40 

\, 
/ 
41 
(ii) MEMORANDUM No: 2 
The Export Inspection Agency (Recruitment) Amendment 
Rules, 1980 (G.S.R. 1080 of 1980). 
The Committee noted that the Ministry of Commerce had no 
objection in providing, in the rules, the period of deputation ordi­
narily not exceeding three years. 
(iii) MEMORANDUM NO. 3 
D.elay in making rules under· the Border Security FOTce Act, 
1968. 
The Committee· noted that the Ministry of Home Affairs had 
made rules in respect of 13 items included in sub-section (1) of 
Section 141 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968. The Committee 
considered the request of the Ministry for grant of extension of 
tlme for six months for making rules relating to ceremonials in 
accordance. with sub-section (1) of Section 141 of the Act. 
The Committee granted extension of time upto the 15th Novem­
\ .;:; ber, 1982, for the purpose. 
J I 
(iv) MEMORANDUM NO. 4 
Delay in making Rules and Regulations under the Central 
Acts of 1979-The Kosangas Company (Acquisition ·of 
Undertakings) Act, 1979' and the Parel Investments and 
Trading Private Limited and Domestic Gas Private 
Limited · (Taking over of Management) Act, 1917!l. 
The Committee considered the memorandum and noted that the 
Ministry of Petroleum, Chemicals and Fertilis·ers (Department of 
Petroleum) had issued notifications under (i) the Kosangas Com­
pany (Acquisition of Undertakings) Act, 1979' (No. 28 of 1979) and 
(ii) the Parel Investments and Trading Private Limited and 
Domes,tic Gas Private Limited (Taking over of Management) Act, 
1979 (No. 29 of 1979), and laid the same tm the Table of both the 
Houses of Parliament. 
:-'t As to the reasons given by the Ministry for the delay in issuing 
the notifications, the Committee took a serious view of the fact that 
a Government Company should have taken unduly long time in the 
matter ignoring its administrative Ministry's repeated reminders 
for the submission of. the proposals .within the time limit laid down 

42 
for the purpose. The Committee ex}U'essed the hope that 00vern­
ment would see to it that in future, such situations did not arise 
and decisions were taken expeditiously. As regards the delay in­
volved in inter~Ministerial cc;msu~ations, the (;ommittee was of the 
view that Govtn·mnent sbo\lld devioae w•ya ~nd mQana t.o ~tl$\lre 
that the proees$ of sueb eolltiultat~ons ia coa;iplt~d within t~ ~ini· 
mum possible time. 
(v) MEMORANDUM NO. 5 
The A11ldamon. tmd Nicobcr Isla-nds Children. Rul,s, 1979. 
The Committee considered the memorandum and directed the 
Se<::retadat to a~e;rtain from the Ministry of Sooial Welfate:-
(a) the progreu made in the ~stablisbment of an Observation 
Home in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands; and 
(b) whether any Child Welfare Board as envisa,ged in Section 
4 of the Chfldren Act, 1000. has been established for the 
Andam.an and Ni<;.obar Ialande. 
(vi) * * .. • 
3. The Committee then considered its future programme of 
sittings and decided to bold its ne2Ct s~ries of meetings on the: 30th 
June and 1st July, 1982. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 P.M. 
****Relates to matter not incl·uded in this Report. 

• 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the lst July, 1982. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri T. Basheer 
· ' 3. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
5. Shri · B. D. Khobragade 
6. Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha 
7. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
8. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza · 
9. Shri Ng. ·Tompok Singh 
10. Shri Shanti Tyagi. 
SEcRETARIAT 
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer 
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Oftlcer . 
. 2. The Committee considered and took decisions on the follow­
ing memoranda:-
(i) * * * * 
(ii) MEMORANDUM NO. 9 
The Central Industrial Security Force-Assistant Director 
(Accounts}/Recruitment (Amendment) Rules, 1979· (G;S.R. 
877 of 1979). , 
The Committee considered the memorandum and reiterated its 
earlier recommendation contained in the 41st Report. The Com· 
mittee was also of the view that in the instant case there being only 
**"*Relates to matter not incl'Uded in this Report. 
43 

• 
.'f 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the lst July, 1982. 
MEMBERS P~'t 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri T. Basheer 
·a. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
1). Shri B. D. Khobragade 
6. Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha 
7. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
8. Shri Ghanshyambhai bza 
9. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
10. Shri Shanti Tyagi. 
SEcRETARIAT 
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer 
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
2. The Committee considered and took decisions on the follow­
ing memoranda:-
(i) * * * 
(ii) MEMORANDUM NO. 9 
The Central Industrial Security Force-Assistant Director 
(Accounts)/Recruitment (Amendment) Rules, 1979· (G;S.R. 
877 of 1979). , 
The Committee considered the memorandum and reiterated its 
earlier recommendation contained in the 41st Report. The Com­
mittee was also of the view that in the instant case there being only 
nuRelates to matter not included in this Report. 
43 

44 
one post of the Accounts Officer, the case of the eligible departmen­
tal candidate be considered on preferential basis. 
(iii} 
(iv} 
* * 
• 
(v) MEMORANDUM NO. 12 
* * 
• • 
The Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Children (Management, 
functions and responsibiliti.es of Special Schools, Children's 
Home and Observation Homes) Rules, 1979. 
The Committee considered the above two memoranda. After 
som< discussion, the Committee decided, subject to the permission 
of the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, to visit Andainan and Nicobar Islands 
with a view to studying some aspects, relating to the welfare of 
chilc.ren, women & girls in those Islands at first hand. 
Accordingly, the Committee deferred its decision on these two 
memoranda till after the visit to the Islands. 
(vi) MEMORANDUM NO. 13 
The Indian Forest Service (Fixation of Cadre Strength) Second 
Amendments Regulation~ 1980 [G.S.R. 562 (E) of 1980]; and 
The Indian FOrest Service (Fixation of Cadre Strength) Third 
Amendment Regulations, 1980 [G.S.R. 565 (E) of 1980] .. 
The Committee noted the position brought out in the memoran­
dum and decided not to pursue the matter further. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 P.M. 
****Relates to matter not included in thio.s Report. 

.. VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on ~iday, the 6th August, 1982, 
in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New 
Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhar Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
3. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty. 
4. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
5. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
6. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
7. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
8. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
9. Shri Shanti Tyagi. 
SE:CRETARIAT 
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer 
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior LBgislative Committee Officer. 
2. The Committee considered and took decisions on the folloWing 
memoranda:-
(i) * * * * 
(ii) Memorandum No. 14 in r~spect of Rules/Regulations regarding 
fixation of limitation on borrowing by the Government of India 
'as required under Article 2.92 of the Constituti:on. 
The Committee considered the memorandum. After a brief dis· 
cussion the Committee noted· the contents of the reply sent by the 
Ministry of Finance. 
3. The Chairman thereafter informed Members that among the 
complaints referred to him, there were some regarding (i) allotment 
\ 
~. ****Relates to matter not included in this Report. 
1531 RS--4. 
45 

• 
vm 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 26th August, 
1982, in Committee Room No. ta, First Floor, 'Parliament House, 
New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta-in the Chair 
2. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
3. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
4. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
5. Shri G. -Bwamy. Naik 
6. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
7. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
8. Shri N g. Tompok Singh. 
SEcRETARIAT 
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secr.etary 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
was voted to the Chair. 
3. Memorandum ·No. 17-Recruitment Rules for Group 'C' and (D' 
Posts in the Border Roads Organisation. 
The Committee noted the position set out in the memorandum. 
· The Chairman informed the Members that a copy of the Gazette noti­
fication containing recruitment rules in respect of Group 'C' and 'D' 
employees of the Border Roads Organisation had since been received 
by the Secretariat and would be examined in due course. The Com­
mittee, therefore, decided that it was no longer necessary to visit 
the Campbell Bay. (Great Nicobar) in this connection during the 
ensuing visit of the Committee to Calcutta and the Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands. 
4J 'and 5 . * * * * 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 11.50 A.M. to meet at 3.00 
P.M. on Friday, the 3rd September, 19·82. 
~~'***~elates to matter not included in this Report. 
47 

IX 
NINTH MEETING 
• 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 3rd Sept·ember, 
1982 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House An­
nexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhaf Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
3. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
5. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
6. Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha 
7. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
8. Shri G. Swamy N aik 
9. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
10. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
11. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
12. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
13. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria 
WITNESS 
Representati>Ves of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Food) 
Shri B. C. Gangopadhyay, Secretary 
Shri. H. D. Bansal, Joint Secretary. 
SEcRETARIA'r 
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary 
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
2. The Chairman made a reference to the passing away of Shri 
G. S. Pathak, former Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, and expressed 
profound grief and sorrow. He eulogi•sed the services of Shri Pathak 
to the nation. 'J:h~ Committee th!ereafter observed two minute·s 
48 

49 
· silence, all members standing, as a mark of respect to the memory 
of the de.ceased. 
3. Suppl,ement to Memorandum No. 14-Rules, Regulations reg·ard­
ing fixation of limitation on bor?·owing by the Government of India 
as required under article 292 of the Constitution. 
The Committee re-considered the point and decided to drop the 
matter. 
4. * * * * .. * * 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 P.M. to meet again at 
11.00 A.M. on Saturday, the 4th September, 1982 
• 
11 ***Relates to matter not included in this Report, 

XI 
ELEVENTH ME.ETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Saturday, the 3oth October, 
1982 in. Committee Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi, 
to meet the Chairman and Members of the Committee on Delegated "" 
Legislation, Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha-in the Chair 
2. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
3. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
4. Shri Sushi! Chand Mohunta 
5. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
6. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary. 
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer. 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha was 
voted to the Chair. 
3. The Chairman welcomed the Chairman and Members of the 
visiting Committee. 
• 
4. The members of the two Committees then exchanged notes and 
held discussions on points of common interest and some of the pro~ 1'-· 
cedural matters relating to the functioning of the two Committees. 
5. The Chairman of the visiting Committe$, inter alia sought 
clarifications on some aspects of the functioning of the two Com­
mittees on Subordinate Legislation of the two Houses of Parliament 
and enquired as to whether that resulted in duplication on any items 
of business undertaken by the two Committees. 
On a clarification being sought by one of the members of the 
visiting Committee, the Chairman explained the jurisdiction of the -fiii 
Committee on the question of examination of rules framed by 
autonomous bodies. 
The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 
50 

XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 3rd November, 
1982 in Committee Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairma.n 
2. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
3. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
4. Shri G. Swamy Naik . 
5. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
6. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
7. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary. 
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
!. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Fifty-first 
Report of the Committee. After some discussion the Committee 
decided to reconsider the draft Report at its next meeting. 
3. The Committee then considered its future programme of 
!ittings· and decided to hold its next sittings on the 17th and 18th 
November, 1982. ,., 
·... 4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.50 P.M. to meet at 3.00 
P.M. on Wednesday, the 17th November, 1982. 
51 

,.Xlll 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, tlie 17th 
November, 1982 in Committee Room No. 63:, Parliament House, New 
Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai' M'aha.vir-Chairman 
2. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
3. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
4. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
5. Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha· 
6. Shri Sushi! Chand Mohunta 
7. Shri G. Swa.my Naik 
8. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
9. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
10. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
SECRETARIAT 
Shn B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer 
2. The Chairman informed Members that the Committee had 
received a letter from the Standing Joint Committee on Regulations 
and other Statutory Instruments of the Canadian Parliament in 
which the representatives of the Committee had been invited to 
attend the Second Commonwealth Conference of Delegated Legisla~ 
tion to be held at Ottawa between the 11th and 15th April, 1983. The. 
Committee accepted the invitation. The Committee then decided to 
approach the Hon'ble Chairm-an, Rajya Sabha and authorised the 
Chairman to approach the Hon'ble Chairman for seeking his per­
mission for attending the Conference and also to decide the number 
of representatives who would be attending the conference. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, considered the draft Fifty-first 
Report. 
52 

,, ' 
\ 
· The "Coh:u:ni,.ttee decided to n1ake the following ·changes in the 
draft .:Repoit:~ 
"(i) Paragraph 6 of the Report to be substituted by the 
· following:-
"6. The. Committee notes the information given by the 
Ministry and decides not to pursue th~ matter.'~ · 
(ii) The last sentence of Paragratph 34, appearing at page 31 of 
the draft He port . may be substituted by the following:-
'"ln this connection, the Committee reiterates its earlier re· 
. commendations on this subject as contained in paragraph 
48 of its Ninth Report which reads as follows:. . . 
'In order that such long and inordinate delays do not take 
place in future, the Committee recommend that rules 
and regulations required to be made under a statute 
should be made as soon as possible but in no case later 
than six .months from the date on which the statute 
comes into force.' 
As regards the delay involved in inter-Ministerial consulta­
tions, the Committee is of the view that Government 
should devise ways and means to ensure that the pro­
cess of ~:uch consultations is completed expeditiously so 
as· to ensure· that the rulesjregulations required to be 
made ur der a stat'ijte is made not later than 16. months 
from the date on which the statute comes into force." 
(iii) Following sentence to be added after paragraph 38:-
"The Committee regrets to note that the exten!!ion of time 
asked for by the Ministry for making the rules i.e. upto 
15th November, 1982 has already elapsed and still the 
rules have not been made by them". 
(iv) Paragraphs 40 to 42 may be omitted. 
The Committee then adopted the Report with the above changes. 
4. The Committee decided to present the Report to the House on 
the second day of the Hundred and Twenty-fifth Session of the Rajya 
Sabha and authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri Sushil 
Chand Mohunta or Shri Shanti Tyagt to present the Report. to the 
)itouse. ' 
j· 
I 

5. The Committee ~onsidered the que~tion of ,giving ·utensf.On of 
time to the Ministries/Departments for making rules/regula.ti~Jltl ate~ . 
under various statutes, on their. requests from various Ministries. 
After some diccussion the Committee authorised the Chairman 
to consider such requests and give extension of the time for such 
period as he may consider necessary in each such case. 
* 
6. Th~ Committee thereafter considered its future programme of 
sittings and decided t!O hold its next series o~ meetings on the 2nd 
and 3rd December, 1002. 
7. 'rhe Committee then adjO'Urned at 4.35 :P.M. to meet again at 
11.00 A.M. on the 18th November, 1982 . 
....,.__..._,... -· _...__,.......,.;..............., ............. "'.-~--·-·- -~-~-'~-~..._~.o..-::;..e_--~:.c.'-- --"·~ 
***"'Relates to matter not included in this Report. · 