) 
COM•l ·68 
PARLIAI\'IENT 0}1"' INDIA 
RAJYA SABRA 
' , . 
~ 
"' COMMIT'l'EE 
ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
RAJ\.\ S.t\DH.J\. :,LCRET.t\RI.t\ '1' 
NEW DELHI 
January, 1985 Ma~;ha , 1906 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
1. Co)tPosrrro:;-! oF TilE CoYMITrEE (i) 
g REPORT 
1. Introduction 
' .. . 
'1: 
"\ 
II. Rules made un<ler Sl:etion 147 of the D~lhi Police Act, ,rg78 15 
III. 111c D .. lhi Dcwlopment Authority (Removal of Objecefonable 
Devc:lopmcnt)Rulcs, 1975 r6-t8 
TV. Thl" Defi nc" R<"•ca rch and Development ~ervice (Amendment) 
Rule•, 198.:2. 
S· Mr:nrrP OP MEETINGS ov THE C'oYMl'I'I'EE 

• 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
( 1984-85) 
CHATRMAN 
1. Shri M .M. Jacob 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri Lal K. Advuni '. • . "( 
3 . Shri Syed Rahmat A'l\ .. 
4. Shri Pawan Kumar Bans~} 
5 . Shri Madan Bhati~' ~, 
6. Shri Kamalendu Bhattacharjee 
7. Shri S. W. Dhabe 
8. Shri M. Kalyana sundaram 
9 . Shrimati Krishna Kaul 
1 0 . Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha 
II. *[Vacant] 
12. Shri Dhuleshwar Meena 
1.3 . Shri Rafique. Alam 
14 . Shri Syed Sibtey Razi 
15. Shri Deba Prasad Ray. 
SECRETARTA 'l 
Shrima~ K. K. Chopra, A dditionol Secretary 
Shri B. R. Goel, Chief Examitrer of Que.) /ions 
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committee Officer . 
---..---
*Dr. Mahabir Prasad resigned his seat in Rajya Sabha 
w.e.f. 19-1-1985. 
(i) 

REPORT 
I 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Olainnan of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, hav­
ing been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this Sixty-fifth Report. The Committee considered and 
adopted! the Report at its meeting held on the 22nd January , 1985 . 
1 . 1 . Observations of the Committeb , on matters arising o ut of the 
examination of various 'Orders', which.i,.n ·the opinion of the Committee 
should be brought to the notice of the Ho~e; together' with the recom­
mendations of the Committee thereon, are contained in the succeeding 
paragraphs. • ~~ 
II .f' 
RULES MADE UNDER SECTION 147 OF THE DELHI POLICE 
Acr, 1978. 
2. The following rules made under Section ·14 7 of the Delhi Police 
Act, 1978, were ~aminid:-
1. The Delhi Police Appointment and Recruitment Rules, 
1980. 
II. The Delhi Police (Promotion and Confirmation ) Rules, 
1980. 
ill. The Delhi Police (Miscellaneous Matters) Rule s, 1980 . 
IV. The Delhi Police (Punislunent and Appeal) Rules, 1980. 
2.1 The relevant provisions of the rules, the points referred and 
the comments of the Ministry of Home Affairs vide their 0. M. dated 
3 1-8-84 together with the Committee recommendations thereon are a.c; 
follows:-
(!) THE DELHI POLICE APPOINTMENT AND RECRUITMENT 
RULES, 1980 
2.2 Rule .5 Recruitment:-
( a) Save in the case of Ministerial Cadre, Women Police and 
other specialised appointments, as hereinafter provided in 
these rules, direct recruitment to subordinate ranks 
(executives of Delhi Police shall be made only at two 
lcve1s, viz, Sub-Inspectors and constables. 
1 

2 
(b) Other things being equal, in the recruitment of const­
ables, preference shall be given to the children of Police 
Officers/Officers of subordinate rank serving or those 
who die in office. Special consideration shaLl also be given 
to the attainments of candidates in sports. athletics and 
N.C.C. The appointments in this category ~hall not 
exceed 5 per cent of the total number of vacancies in a 
year. 
(c) Appointments to the f<1W~ shall be subject to the orders, 
issued by the GoveqtmtYnt of India from time to time 
regarding sp~cial reprtseomtion in the service for Sche­
duled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Ex-servicemen. depart-
mental candidates, etc. ., 
(d) Notwithstanding the above rules. the Commissioner of 
Police shall be competent to make .appointment of sons 
and daughters of Police Officers and men, who die in 
service without subjecting them to competitive test as a 
special case upto 5 per cent of the vacancies occurring 
in a calendar year in the rank of constable in which dirct 
recruitment has been prescribed, subject to their possess­
ing minimum technical educational quatifications. age 
and phvsical standards for the said post. as prescribed in 
these Rules. 
(e) All direct appointments of subordinate ranks shall be 
made initially on purely temporary basis. All such ap­
pointees shall be on probation for a period of 2 years. 
During this period their wurk ali'd conduct shall be closely 
watched and if found unlikely to become efficient police 
employees, they shall be discharged after g1vmg one 
month's notice or one month's pay in 1ieu thereof, with­
out assigning any reason. On satisfactory completion 
of prescribed probation, they shall be treated as tem­
porary police employees and shall have no claims for 
substantive appointment. They shall continue to be 
governed by the terms and conditions of service of a 
temporaty police employee, till they are confirmed in 
their appointments on availability of permanent post. Tf 
the requisite No. of posts do not become available. they 
may be considered for grant of quasi-permanent status. 
• 

3 
on satisfactory completion of three years service as tem­
porary police employees. 
(f) All direct appointees (Non-gazetted Officers) in Delhi 
Police shall, before appointment, be required to execute 
a bond for the refund of capitation charges for training 
imparted to them in full in lump-<>um if they leave service 
without completing 5 years service from the date of 
appointment. The decision of the Commissioner of 
Police in this behalf shall be final. Standing jnstructions 
ior working out such chqrges for various courses shall 
be determined by the Commissioner of Police. 
" (g) All enrolled police officers ~"an have to take an oath of 
allegiance to the Union of Tndia and the Constitution . 
Point referred:--
. , 
As laid down in' rule 5, in the recruitment of constables, preference 
will be given to the children of Police Officers/Officers of subordinate 
rank serving or those who me in office. Is there a fixed quota for 
such recruitment or is there any fixed weightage to be given in favour 
of such candidates? What is the rationale for overlooking merit and 
competence especially in the case of children of serving personnel? 
MinislrJ·'s comments:-
The~e is no reservations or fixed quota fot' recruitment for the 
children of Police officers of subordinate ranks serving or those who 
<lie in office Tt \"Ia" been a standard practice since long to give pre­
ference to the children of policemen at the time of recruitment. The 
present structure of police in Delhi is based upon Punjab Police ac­
cording lo which sons (~r near relatives of police personnel were to be 
given prcfl!rcnce over other candidates for police employment.Such 
preference does not mean that t11~ merit is overlooked and is con­
fined only to ensure that the morals of the force is kept up by giving 
them a feeling that their children get preference. However, only those 
who are competent are taken in Police Department. The Rule does 
not advocate over looking of merit of competence as such and it is 
not only in Delhi Police but in all police forces that some preference 
ic; given to the children of the members of the force. 
Ob1·e.rvations Recommendations of the Committee: 
l'he Committee notes the explanation given by the Minish·v that 
the rull! docs 11ot allow oYcrlooking of merit and competence in t he 

I 
• 
4 
case of children of serving person.nel or those who die in office; and 
only when other things are equal, some preference is given to the 
children of members of the force under R. S(b); and that if is onl~ 
for the sonsJdaughters of Police officers and men who die in senice 
that the Commissioner of Police is competent to make appointment 
without subjecting them to competitive test under R. 5(d). The 
Committee also notes that the Rule is in consonance with the Rules 
in vogue in respect of other police forces. 
2.3 Rule 12: Appointment,of E.D.P, programme Assistant/ 
Console operator {Inspector):- · .. 
" E.D.P. Programme Ass1stantjConsole Operator.t is a tech-
nical selection post and shall be filled firstly by promo­
tion, failing which by 'direct recruitment and lastly by 
transfer/deputation. The promotion shall be made on 
the recoinmendations of a Departmental Promotion 
Committee, consisting pf Additional Commissioner of 
Police, Deputy Commissioner of PoliceJCommunication 
and Transport and one more member to be nominated 
by the Commissioner ,of Police. 
Point refe"ed:-
Rule 12(1), relates to appointment of E.D.P. Programme Assis­
tantJConsole Operator. These posts shall be filled firstly by promo­
tion failing which by direct recruitment and lastly bv transferldepu­
tation. But no period of deputation has been specified. This may 
be specified, as not to· exceed the total period of deputation of 4 years. 
as usual. ' _ I! 
Ministry's comments:-
There is no objection to the proposed change. 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee: 
The Committ~ notes that the Ministry have agreed with the 
Committees that the period of deputation should be specified in the 
'rule itself if the posts of E.D.P. pro,.amme assistant!console operator 
(Inspector) are filled by deputation and have a2reed to amend 
the said Rule. The Commitiee recommends that the role should be 
suitably amended at the earliest. · 

8 
2. 7 Point referred: 
Whether standing orders laying down details of the evaluation 
system for holding various departmental tests and the procedure to 
be followed by D.P.Cs for interviews etc. have been issued by the 
Commissioner of Police. 
Ministry's comments:. 
Standing Orders laying down details of evaluation system for 
hblding various departmental tests and 'Procedure to be followed by 
D.P .Cs have been issued by the Commissioner of Police from time 
to time. However, after the rece'lt amendment in the Delhi Police 
(Promotion and Confirmation) ~ules ... 1980, the test system has been 
abolished and Delhi Police have reverted to the earlier system of 
Promotion on the basis of seniority-.cum-fitness. Therefore, these 
standing orders are being revi~ accordingly. 
Observations!Recommendations of the Committee: 
The Committee is satisfied to note that the test system has been 
abolishe4 for the purposes of promotion and that the earlier system 
of pro.trWion in the basis of seniority-cum-fitness bas been revertetl 
to and recommends that the provisions of the Standing Order be re­
vised acc«*dingly and the Committee be infomtcd about the same. 
2.15 The Committee notes with satisfaction that Government have 
accepted most of the recommendations of the Committee and under­
taken ~ amend the various Rules framed under Delhi Police Act. 
1973, accordingly. The Committee directc; that the impugned Rules 
be accordingly amended forthwith by way of issue of necessary 
Gazette Notifications, under intimation to the Committee. 
(III) THE DELHI POLICE (MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS ) 
RULES, 1980 
2.8 Rule 4: Dcterminanon of Cost of Additional Police: The 
cost of Additional police to be employed unaer Section 38 of the 
Delhi Police Act shall be worked out as under:-
( a) Total o( emoluments, including average pay, Dearness 
Allowance, Washing Allo \lance, Metropolitan Allow­
ance, City Compensatory Allowance, House Rent Allow­
ance plus expenditure on clothing, equipment , convey­
ance, leave contributit 1n, pension and contingencies, 
shall be worked out on monthly basis and divided by 30' 
to calculate daily per capita charges. 

9 
(b) The daily charges shall mean charges for 5 hours duty 
during day or 4 hours duty during night. 
(c) The charges shall be doubled where the duty lasts for 
more than the above prescribed hours. 
(d) The entire cost shall be deposited by the person making 
the request in ~dvance. 
(e) When the person on whose application additional police 
force has been deployed, makes a written request that 
the police force so deployed htay be removed, such re­
quest may be accepted by ~e L>eputy Commissioner of 
Police concerned subject to tM cotrdition that the advance 
payment made by the person shall not be refunded. 
Point referred: ~ 
Rule 4 relates to determination of cost of Additional Police. The . 
entire cost has to be deposited in advance by the person making the 
request. According to sub-clause (e) on a written request by the 
person, the Police force so deployed may be removed subject to the 
condition that the advance payment made by tl).e person shall not be 
refunded. Fairness demands that the advance pavment after deduc­
ting the expenditure incurred so far should be refunded. 
Ministry's comments: 
In case the application for additional force is for a specific num­
ber of days, arrangements are made by withdrawing men from other 
duties for so many days, and making them available to the applicant. 
lf the suggc~tion is accepted, the applicant will start telling the police 
authorities on the preceding day that police were not required from 
next day onwards and it may not be possible to usc those policemen 
for other duties because by the time such requests for cancellation 
:u·e received. the other duties are already detailed for the next day. 
Therefore. then' has to be a margin of 24 hours for which the 
apnlicant mml pay. Und{'r the circumstances. the following may be 
added in the prest;nt sub-rule (e):-
"for the next 24 hours from the date of such request". 
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee: 
The Committee notes that the Ministry have agreed with the 
committee that it would not be fair to forefiet the entire payment and 
have agreed to amend Rule 4(e) in order to provide for a margin of 
24 hours for which the person (on \\hose apnlication additional police 
force is deployed) must pav the.cost of additional police force. The 
Committee recommends thnt the rule should be accordingly amended a t 
the earliest . ' 

.. 
10 
2.9 Rule 5: 
Taking Measurement and Photographs etc. of persons against 
whom action under sectio11s 46, 47 & 48 of Delhi Police 
Act, 1978 is taken: 
( 1) Whenever an order is passed against a person ( s) in Delhi 
under Section 46, 47 or 48 of the Delhi Police Act 
such person(s) shall be liable to be photographed, mea­
sured and to give his"fi~ger prints, etc. to the police at a 
time and place to ~ determined by the Station House 
Officer concerned irv th; •following manner:-
( a) Photographed from whichever angle and in whatever 
costume it is considerM necessary; provided that in 
the case of female externees due regard to modesty 
shall be kept. 
(b) height and chest shall be measured and identification 
marks noted down (chest measurements in case of 
female~ shaH not be taken); 
, (c) finger prints and thumb impression shall be taken; and 
(d) complete descriptive roll shall be prepared for police 
record. 
(2) Whenever any person(s) to be photographed!measured . 
etc. as laid down in sub-rule (I) above is a woman, such 
measurements'photographs, etc., . shall invariably be 
taken in the presence of a member of women police and 
two respectable ladies. 
Point referred:-
Rule 5 relates to taking measurement and photographs etc. 
of persons against whom action under sections 46, 47 & 
48 of the Delhi Police Act, 1978 is taken. According 
to sub-rule (2) measurements! photographs of a woman 
shall invariably be taken in the presence of a member of 
women police and two respectable ladies. Is this pro­
vision being strictly adhered to? 
Ministry's comments:-
There have not been many cases in which action was taken 
under sections 46 47 & 48 of Delhi Police Act against 
women. Howeve;, it is not always possible to get two 

• 
1 I 
respectable ladies in addition .to the women police offi­
cers for taking mea<>urementsjphotographs of a woman. 
It is suggested that instead of words 'a member of the 
women police and two respectable ladie!)' it may be sub­
stituted by 'a member of the women police or a respec­
table lady from the locality'. However even now mea­
surements/photograph of a woman are always taken in 
the presence of women police, when respectable ladic-.. 
are not readily available to come forward. 
' .. Observations/Recommendations ~ tli'[> Committee: 
The Committee feels that the lprt'J;isions of Rule 5 are not being 
adhered to in the matter of taking photpgraph of woman externec and 
directs that the Ministry should ensurb that the rule ill strictly ad­
hered · to. The Committee also recommends that provision shoul<.l 
be made in the rule for sending notices to responsible women well in 
advance requesting them to be present on the day when the photo­
graph of a woman externee is to be taken. 
2.10 Rule 9: 
Manner of submitting claims:-
(i) The person claiming compensation shall apply to the 
Deputy Commissioner of Police, Old Police Lines in the 
prescribed fonn. The Deputy Commissioner of Police 
(Lines) shaH forward the applicatiOn to the Deputy 
Commissioner of Police in whose jurisdiction the property 
was found, intimating the expenditure incurred by the 
State on the transportation, storage and auction of the 
property for which compensation is claimed; date of its 
auction and the amount credited to Government's ac­
count as a result thereof. The Deputy Commissioner 
of Police of the Disirict!Urut c'oncerncd sh;~ll verify the 
claim with reference to his own record for final assess­
ment and issue payment of compensation orders. 
(ii) While assessing the claim, the Deputy Commissioner of 
Police of the District'Unit concerned shall keep the fol­
lowing facts in view:-
(a) .Cost incurred by the Police department on transporta­
tion, storage and auction is recovered from the clai­
mant. 

12 
(b) Where the claim is preferred by a Government 
Department except a State Government, Defence, 
P&T and Railway, the charges incurred by the Police 
department on storage, transportation, organising 
auction may not be recovered. 
(c) The cost of transport, storage and auction shall be 
calculated in accordance with the instructions to be 
issued by the Commissioner of Police from time to 
time. ' "' . (d) The total am~nt of the accepted claim shall not ex- . 
ceed the amount 
11 
realised by way of ·auction of the 
property for which. compensation is claimed. 
(e) The orders regarding net payment to be made to the 
claimant shall be issued by the Deputy Commissioner ' 
o~ Police concerned. The amount will be drawn 
under head, "Reward to Public" through a contingent 
bill and sent to the Deputy Commissioner of Police 
lines for disbursement to the claimant under proper 
receipt. 
Point r~ferred:-
Ruic 9 elaborates the manner of submitting claims for un­
claimed property. As laid down in the rule. the Dy. 
Commissioner of Police. while assessing the claim. 
iihall ensure that the cost incurred by the police 
department on transportation, storage and auction is 
recovered from the claimant. It is felt that the 
amount accruing from the auction should be deducted 
while charging for transportation, storage and auction. 
Ministry's comments: 
There is·no objection to agree to the suggestion. 
0 bSf1Tations1Recommendations of the Committee: 
The Committee notes that the Ministry have agreed \\ith 
the Committee that the Deputy Commi~ioner of Police should ensure 
that cQSt incurred by police department in respect of unclaimed pro­
perty is deducted from the amount accruin~ from the auction of the 
l',u.claimed property and ha\·e agreed to amend rule . The Com-
mittee recommends that the rule 4;hou1d he suitah1\' amended at ' the 
earliest. 
.. 

' 
13 
lV. THE DELHI POLICE (PUNISHMENT AND APPEAL 
RULES, 1980 
2. I 1 Rule ( 6) ~ ( 1 ) Classification of punishments and authorities 
competent to award them:-Pun.ishments mentioned at Sl. No. (i) to 
(vii) above shall be deemed "major punishment" and may be awarded 
by an officer of the rank of the appointing authority or above after . a regular departmental enquiry:-
(ii) Punishment mentioned at SI. ?i_o. (viii) shall be called 
"Minor punishment" and may be' $warded by the authori­
ties specified in sub-section i) ~ Section 21 of the 
Delhi Police Act, 1978 after servii'!g a show cause notice 
giving reasonable time to : the def'\ulter and considering 
his written reply as well as oral deposition, if any, for 
which opportunity shall be afforded on request. 
~Ui h 'lrity to aWa rl ---------C mp e t 
-~-------
{i) D p 1 v C >mm ss on r <.f P lic.­
a nd above 
( i) A~s·s a,t C >mmiss,onr r of Polic.-
- - -----
Ra k to wh">m it can 
be nwardcd 
I I'Spc-cror a d b elow. 
Cor srab lc to Sub­
Iuspf'ctor . 
---
(iii) The punishment mentioned at Sl. No. (ix) above may 
be called "Orderly room punishment" and shall be awar­
ded after the defaulter has been matched and heard in 
Orderly Room by the Officers of and above the rank of 
Inspector as laid down in section 21(3) (c) of the Delhi 
Police Act, 1978. 
Point referred: 
Rule 6 relates to classification of punishment and aathorities 
competent to award them. The words 'and may be 
awarded by an officer of the rank of appointil}g authority 
or above' occurring iv the rule are not precise enough. 
They may be substituteo, if no objection, with the words 
"and may be awarded by an officer not below the rank 
of the appointing authority". 
Ministry's comments:-
'I'h.te is no objection to the proposed change. 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee: 
The Committee note6 that the ~finistry have agreea to sul>­
titute the words 'and. may be awardect by an officer of the rank of 
• 

! 
\ 
I 
appointing authority or above' by the words 'and may be awarded b) 
~ officer not below the rank of the appointing authority', as suggested 
by the Committee. The Committee recommends that the rule be 
amended accordingly at the earliest. 
2. 12 Rule 8: Principles for inflicting penalties-
( a) DismissahRemoval:- The punishment of dismissal or re­
moval from service shall be awarded for the act of gnlve 
misconduct rendering him unfit for police service. 
Point referred: ', •, 
Rule 8(a) spells out th\ Ppiftciples for in!licting penalties. The 
term 'act of grave misconduct rendering him Wlfit for 
police Services' occurlj1g in the rule should be precrisely 
defined by .describing the act or the nature of the act or 
misconduct which may render a person unfit for police 
senrice. This may possibly be done adding a schedule to 
the rules giving the acts or the nature of the acts which 
render one unfitfor Police Service. 
Ministry's Comments: 
It is not possible to visualise all types of grave misconduct 
which police officer may be guilty of rendering him unfit 
for police services. Each case which the police officer 
handles is different from the other. Adding a schedule 
would mean that only those acts mentioned in the sche­
dule would be covered and others will not be. Under the 
ckcumstances it may not be alvisable to describe the acts 
and nature of acts of misconduct in the form of a sche­
dule. 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee: 
The Committee agrees with the explanation given by the 
Ministry with regard to the poillt raised in respect of the said role and 
accepted the view IOf the Ministry that it is not advisable to describe the 
acis and nature of acts Of misconduct in the fonn or a schedule as it 
would mean limiting 'the scope of the Rules to certain specified act~ 
only'. , ,, •• 
2 .13. lr.ule 11: Punishment on judicial conviction: 
V. hen a report is received from an official source. e.g. a court 
or the prosecution agency, that a subordinate rank has 
been convicted in a criminal court pf an offence, involving 
moral turpitude or on charge of disorderly conduct in a 

, 
' 
(2) 
15 
state of durkemess or in any criminal case, the disciplinary 
authority shall consider the nature and gravity of the 
offence and if in its opinion that the offence is such as 
would render further retention of the convicted police 
officer in service, prima facie undesirable, it may forth­
with make an order dismissing or removing him from 
service without calling upon him to show cause against 
the proposed action provided that no such order sha~ be 
passed till such time the result of tbe first appeal that 
may have been filed by such'f>9lice officer is known. 
. ..: 
If such police officer is acqu~d on second appeal or revi-
sion, he shaH be reinstated in'scrv1ce from the dlate of the 
disn1issal or removal an~, may be, proceeded against de­
partmentally. · ~ · 
. (3) In cases where the dismissal or removal from service of the 
convicted police officer is not considered necessary, the 
disciplinary autliority may ex~ine the judgement and 
take such departmental action as it may deem proper. 
( 4) When a oolicc officer is convicted judicially and consequen- ' 
tly dismissed or removed from service and it is desired to 
ensure that the officer dismissed or removed shall not be 
re-employed cl<;cwhere, a full descriptive roll with parti· 
culars of punishments shall be sent for publication in the 
Delhi Police Gazette. i 
Point referred: 
According to rule 11 ( 4). when ·it is desired to CIL<;urc that the \ 
officer convicted judicially and consequently cismissed or 
removed from service shall not be re-employed elsewhere, ' 
a full descriptive ron shall be sent for publication in the 
Deihl Police Gazette. The cases in which the disciplinary 
authority has to invoke this rule mav be preci<;ely laid 
down, for example, those involving moral turpitude. 
Ministry'.~ comments: 
No chan.!!e in the present sub-rule ( 4) of Rule 1 l appenrs desi­
rable because the Rule is self-explanatm1·· 
Obsen.:ationsiR;ecommendations of the Committees: 
The Committee accepts the explanation given by the Ministry with 
regard to the point raised in respect of the rule. \ 

16 
m 
THE DELID DEVELOPMENT AUTIIORITY (REMOVAL OF 
OBJECTIONA~LE DEVELOPMENTS) RULES, 1975 
3. The Delhi Development Authority (Removal of Objectionable 
Developmen,ts) Rules, 1975, made under Section 56. read with Section 
30, of the Delhi Development Aci, 1957, were examined and the 
following points were referred to the Ministry of Works and Housing 
on the lOth March, 1983 fO'l'. their comments:.--.; 
' ' (i) As laid down ~ rul~ 3, the minimUJil period of notice of 
seven days as con\'pared to the maximum period of thirty 
days appears to be rather insufficient. What is the crite­
rion behind this pro\ision? 
(ii) It is felt that notwithstanding any general provisions in this 
regard, the Rule should specifically mention tha~ the period 
of notice shall commence from the date on which the 
notice is served to the person concerned . 
. 
3.1 Tire Ministry vide their 0. M. dated April, 1983, replied as 
follows:-
(i) " .... Rule 3 of the above noted Rules provides issue of 
show cause notice of a peciod of not less than 7 days and 
not more than 30 days before the Administrator of the 
Union Territory of Delhi can issue a direction for removal 
of unauthorised constructions or otherwise. This provi­
sion has been made with a view to expedite the proceedings 
for demolition. As per experience, where the interval 
between the date of initi&lting the proceedings for removal 
and its finalisation is long, it is invariably used either to 
secure intervention of law courts or to confront the autho­
rities wth fait accompli which complicates the matters. It 
was to safegufl!rd against such eventualities that it was 
decided to empower the Administrator to determine $S to 
how much time between 7 days to 30 day., should be allow­
ed to the unauthorised builders keeping in view the cir­
cumstances and e~gencie<; of each cac;e. 
(ii) The suggestion that, notwithstandin\! ~ny general provision 
in this regard, Rule 3 of the above noted Rules should 
svecifically mention that the period of notice !'i all com­
mence on the date on which the notice is served on the 
persons is under examination in consultation with the 

I 
i 
17 
Delhi AdministrationJDDA. Funher communication will 
be sent to the Rajylf Sabha Secretariat in the matter sub­
sequently." 
3. 2 On the 21st May, 1983, the Ministry were asked to expedite 
their reply in respect of item (ii) above. In response, the Ministry vide 
theic O.M. d~: ed the 18th July, 1983, stated as follows:-
" .... in aL'CC'rdance with Section 56 of the Delhi Development 
Act, 1957, it is necessary to consult the OOA before carry­
ing out any amendment in the Delhi Development Autho 
ri•y (Removal of Objection~lp Developments) Rules, 
1975. Accordingly, the ~ws' of the DDA have been 
called for in regard to the &Qggestion made in item No. 
(i'i) of the Rajya Sabha Secretariat O.M. No. RS.5 (10) 
82-Com. I dated the lO.th Marc~. 1983. The case is 
being pursued with the DDA and Delhi Administration 
vigorously and further action in the matter will be taken 
as soon as their report is received. " 
3. 3 On being reminded, the Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 
28th March, 1984, further stated as follows:-
" .... Ministry of Law has already been consulted in the 
matter. The views of the Delhi Administra•ion and that 
of the Delhi Development~uthority at official level have 
also been received. However, it is obligatory to consult 
the Delhi Development Authority as constituted under 
the Delhi Development Act. 1957 in terms of Section 
56(1) of that Act before making any amendment to the 
rules framed under the Act. Accordingly, formal recom­
mendations of the Authority had been called for before 
finalising the Government's comments on the suggestions 
for amendment of the Delhi Development Authority (Re­
moval of Obiectionable Developmentc:;) Rules. 1975 made 
in item (iii) of the Rajya Sabha Secn't~ria• 0 M. No. RS. S 
(10)!82-Com.I dated the lOth March, 1983. The matter 
has already been placed before the Authority which is 
likelv to meet on 2 4.1984 Necessarv comments will 
be furnished to the Rajva Sabha Secretariat. as soon as 
the Authority's recommendations are received. 
It is ther~f0re. reouec;ted that some more time of sav 3 weeks, 
may be a1lowed to the Ministrv to ob'ain the recommenda­
tion of the Authority and furnish the Government com­
ments in the matter." 

J • 
.. 
18 
3 • 4 After several reminders, the Ministry of Works and Housing 
vide their O.M. dated the lOth August, 1984. informed as follows:-
.... the suggestion made in item No. (iii) of the Rajya Sabba 
Secretariat O.M. No. RS. 5(1 0)82-Com . I dated the 1Oth 
March, 1983 regarding amendment of Rule 3 of the Delhi 
Development Authority (Removal of Objectionable De­
velopments) Rules. 1975 has been considered and to 
convey no objection to carrying out the proposed amend­
ment, if the Committee on Subordinate Legislation so 
recommends. , 
i 3.5 The Committee not wit'll~ satisfaction that tlte Ministry of 
Wora and Housing have a~ tQ.amend rule 3 1of. the Delhi De"fe­
topment Authority (Removal of Objectionable Developments) Rules. 
1915. ~ 
3.6 The Committee accordinJ;!l.y recommends that Rules 3 be so 
ameaded as to specifically mention in the rule itself that the period 
of notice shall commence from the date on which notice is sen'ed to the 
person eo~ The Committee is not happy to observe that the 
Ministry bave taken more than a year in agreeing to Sts suggMion. 
IV 
THE DEFENCE RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT SERVICE 
(AMENDMENT) RULES, 1982 (SRO 196, dated 14-8-82). 
4. Clause (a) of sub-rule (2} of Rule 8 of the Defence Research & 
Dovelopment Service Rules, 1979 reads as follows:-
.. AsSessment Boaros shall be convened at least once a year or 
I 
I 
I • 
r at slJch intervals as m~ be prescribed by the Director 
General. These Boards may meet as a whole or in parts 
in one or more establishments as may be decided by the 
Director General for the purpose af assessing merit of 
persons serving in different establishments or Lateortories 
or }Jeadquarters for promotion to the highei' grade." 
4. t The above rule was amended through Defence Research and 
Development Service (Amendment) Rules, 19R2 CSRO 196 dated 
14-8-82) which reads as follows:-
1 • Assessment Boards shall he convened at least once a year or 
I , at such intervals as :may be prescribed by the Director 
General. 'These Boards may meet as a whole or in parts 
in one or more establishments or at the office of the Com· 
mission (UPSC) a; may be decided by the Director Gene­
ral for the purpose of assessing merit of persons serving in 
different Establishments or Laboratories or Headqul.'\rters 
for promotion to the higher grade.'' 

, 
• 
19 
4. 2 In the amended rule the words 'or at the office of the Commis­
~ion' were added after the words 'one or more establishments' in order 
to include office of the UPSC as one of the meeting plc£es for convening 
the meetings of assessment boards for assessing the merit of persons 
serving in that organisation for the purpose of promotion to higher 
grade. 
4. 3 The above rule was eXamined and the following point was 
referred to the Ministry of Defence on 29-6-83 for comments:-
" .... tbat cl<Juse (a) of sub-rule (2) lof Rule 8 of the above said 
rules, provide that the B~ds may meet in whole or in 
parts. In the later case ~er~ may be a single member to 
constitute a meeting of tli~ ~rds 'in parts' and the very 
purpose for which the Boards arc constituted will be 
defeated, if the recommendati~1 of an individual member 
is to be taken as recommendation of the Board. The 
Ministry of Defence may intimate to this Secretariat whe­
ther in view of the position ex'plaincd they h<.!ve any ob­
jection for deleting the words. 'in parts' from the clause 
(a) Of -sub-rule (2) of Rule 8 of the -aforesaid Rule5.'' 
4.4 In reply, the Ministry of Defence vidt• their O.M. dated the 
16th September, 1983 informed as under:-
" .... and to say that this Ministry have no objection for delet­
ing the words 'in parts' frOm the clause (C:.!) of sub-rule (2) 
of the DRDS Service (Amendment) Rules, 1 ~82. How­
ever, the concurrence of the Department of Personnel and 
UPSC woUld also be required to affect the amendment to 
the recruitment rules. The matter is, therefore, being 
taken up with the DP & AR/UPSC for their concurrence 
and amendment to the Rules will be issued immediately 
thereafter." 
' 4. 5 The Ministry, were reminded on. 16th December, 1983 to inti­
mate· as to whether the required amendment hac; since hcen issued and 
i( not by when it was likely to be issued. 
4.6 In reply, th" Ministry vide their 0. !\1. dated the 22th Decem­
ber, 1983 informed as follows:-
" .... the proposed amendment to DRDS (Amendment) Rules, 
1982, as suggested by Rah a Sabha Secretariat. has been 
referred to Departtnent of Pcrc;onnel and ~ for their 
approval. Thereafter, thi ... will be got approved by UPSC 

, 
20 
and Ministry of Law & Justice Leg-1 before publication in 
the Gazette of India. A copy of the Notification will be 
forwarded to Rajya Sabha Secretariat after it is published 
in the official Gazette." 
4 . 7 As no communication was received from the Ministry, a remin­
der in which the attention of the Ministry was invited to para 116 of 
the 57th Report of the Committee was issued to the Ministry on the 
17th January, 1984 as under:-" .... and to request the Ministry of Defence, (Deptt. of 
Defence, Research and Developmen ) kindly to expedite 
the fi.nalisation ~ the matter in this regard. 
' In thi~ connection, ttenjion of the Ministry is invited to the 
cecommendation <'1: the Committee on Subordinate Legis­
lation of Ra}ya Sabha contained in para 116 of its Fifty­
seventh Report whith is reproduced below:-
"116. The Committee observes from their study of the 
variom factors contributing to delay in making rules 
and regulations under the various Acts of Parliament. 
the one main 'factor for the dcloy has been the involve­
ment of various Ministries , Bodies Departments for con­
sultation in framing, vetting and finalisation of the rules 
etc. It has been brought to the notice of •he Committee 
by the concerned Minisfries that correspondence bet­
ween different departments consumes lot of time. In 
this context the Committee recommends that in such 
cases where multiple agencies are involved in the mat+e" 
of fiinalisation of rules the nr~ct;c,. <:~n,Jlrl be to call 
the reprec,entatives of all th'\t concerne;l Ministries. De­
partments etc. simul•aneouslv. round the table, for di~­
cuc;<;ion in<:tf'"d of writin(T to 0ne aut1-.oritv or the 
other. Such a meetino mw h"' rf"n"'"t"'rl if necess!irv 
for speedy de-ci<:ions and expeditions finalisation of the 
roles and regulations." 
"The Ministry of DP.frnce m"'ntt of n~>tenr<> -p ... c;earch and 
Development) are, therefo,-e. rPnne<:tl"~ ldnd1v to take 
nece~sav action in terms of the Committe"''" recommenda­
tions quoted above and to send their reply in the matter 
without further del1ly." 
4.8. !J1 reolv the Ministry vide ther 0. M. dated the 1st February 
1984 jnformed as under:­" .... that apnrovat of the Deptt. of personnel & A.lt. to 
proposed amendment has since been o'1t'l;nea. The 

J 
21 
amendment is now being referred to UPSC and Ministry 
of Law for vetting before publication in the Gazette of 
India. In accordance with the recommendation of the 
Comntittee on Subordinate Legislation contained in para­
graph 116 of its Fifty-Seventh Report need for urgent dis­
posal is being emphasised to UPSC and Ministry of Law." 
4. 9 The Ministry were reminded on the 7th March, 1984, the 3rd 
April, 1984 and finally on the 18th May, 1984, with the request to 
expedite action in the matter. 
4.10 In the reminder dated May, -!_8. 1984 the Ministries' attention 
was also invited to the following reco~endations of the Committee 
con tai,ned in para 48 of its Eighth epo .. rt:-
-"'The Committee therefore after considering the problem of 
chronic delays Of the Minis\fies recommended that im­
mediatelY on receipt of a reference on Subordinate Legis­
lation, if a final reply is not possible within a month or so, 
Ministries must send a preliminarv or interim reply to the 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat. The Ministries should finalise 
their replies on all cases referred to them within three 
months from the date of receipt of the first communication . 
If a final reply is not received within the aforesaid period 
then in such a case the Secretary of the Ministry in which 
the delay has taken place should be called to appear before 
the Comntittee to explain the delay. If a Ministry persists 
in the delay, the matter should be brought to the special 
attention of the House. The Committee trust that the 
Ministries would deal with the cases of Subordin ate Legis­
lation prompt!¥ and expeditiouslv and the Committee 
would not be required to resort to the coun;e mentioned 
above.• ~ 
4.11. In reply, the Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 23rd May, 
1984, informed as under:-
41 • •• tl'lat the amendment!' suggested by the Committee have al­
read y been accepted by the Ministry as also bv the Deptt. 
of Personnel & A.R. The draft amendments to Rul es have 
been forwarded to the UPSC and their concurren ce is 
awaited . The Commission is beinsz constantly reminded to 
expedite their al)lYoval and the fact that the proposed 
amendments have been SUJ!1!ec;ted by the Committee also 
been broutzht to their notice. The url!enev of earlv al'Pf()val 
of the Commission to the proposed amendments has also 

22 
been brought to the notice of higher authority in the Com­
mission. It is hoped that the Comm.i!lsion's approval will be 
conveyed very shortly whereafter necessary SRO to effect 
the amendment to the DRDS Rules will be issued ." 
4.12. The proposed amendment to the Rules was later notified in 
the Gazette of India vide S.'R.O. No. 176 dated the 7th September , 
1984. 
4 . 13 The Committee at it" meeting 11eld on the 29th November , 
1984. considered the matter in the matter in the light of the comments 
jnformation furnished by the Ministry. 
' 4.14. The Committee notes that Ute Ministry of Defence have since 
amended the impugned Rules by're Q.efence Research and Develo~ 
JOenJt Service (Amendment) Rules. 1984 which were notified in 
SRO 176 on 1-9-1984. 
4.15. The Committee how~ver eXJpr~es its di~atisfaction over the 
i nordinate delay on the part of the Ministry in the instant ca..e. 
4.16. The Committee hopes that the Minis'try of Defence would ex· 
J">Odite such matters. 
NEW DELID ; 
January 22, 1985. 
M . M. JACOB , 
Chairman , 
Committee on Subordiuate Legislation . 

' . ,. 
~·I I N U T E S 
==============~==~============~-~-----

MINUTEs OF THE MEETING OF TilE COMMITTEE ON SUB­
ORDINATE LEGISLATION 
XII 
1WELFTII- MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on ,Thursday, the 20th Septem­
ber, 1984, in Committee Room 'A', <Jround Floor , Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. ' .. ,. 
" MBMBE.R.S PJtliSENT 
1. Shri M. M. Jarob-Chairman., t 
2. Sh,ti Lal K. Advani 
3 Shri Syed Rahmat Ali 
4. Shri Pawan Kumar Ramal 
5. Shri S. W. Dhabe 
6. Shri M. Kalyanasundaram 
7. Shrimati Krishna Kaul 
8. Sh.ri Ram Naresh Kushawaha 
9. Shri Dhuleshwar Meena 
10 . Shri Rafique Alam 
11. Shri Syed Sibtey Razi 
12. Shti Deba Prasad Ray 
SECRETARIAT 
Sb!ri B. R. Gool, Chief Examiner of Question s. 
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
2. MEMORANDUM NO. 20!84 
Rules and Regulations Framed by D.D.A. for Demolition of Structures 
The Committee considered the ab<)Ve memorandum in the light of 
the comments of the Ministry and noted that the Ministry of Works and 
HO'USing had accepted the Committee's suggestion Of} the amendment of 
rule 3 of the Delhi Development Authority (Removal of Objeotionable 
Development) Rule_,, 197~. ' 
• • • It 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 P.M. 
t Dr,Mahobu Prasada resrg~d his lr-at in R a)ra Sabh n w,,.,r, 13· 1· 13fl5, 
25 
I 

26 
XIV 
FOUM'EENTH MEETING 
Th: Committee met at 3. 00 P.M. on Monday, the 22nd October, 
1984, m Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor Parliament House 
Anncxe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESEN f 
1 . Shri M. M. Jacob--Chairman 
2. Shri Lal K. Advani "\ 
3. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal 
4. Shrimati Krishna Kaul 
5. Shrimati Krishna Kaul 
6. Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha 
7. Dr. Mahabir Prasad 
8 . Shr Dhuleshwar Meena 
9 . Shri Rafi.que Alam 
10. ShTi Syed Sibtey Razi 
SECJtETAlUAT 
Slrri B. R. Goel, Chief Exammer of Questions 
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior ,Legislative Committee Officer. 
3. MEMORANDUM NO. 25!84. 
Rules made under Section 147 of the Delhi Police Act, 1978. 
The Committee considered the above Memorandum and noted that 
the Ministry have agreed to make necessary amendments to rule 11 
of the Delhi Police (Promotion and Confirmation) Rules, 1980 to lay 
down the minimum qualifications fo'r each of ~ categories mentioned 
therein. As regards rule 12, the Chairman observed that the Depart­
melnt proposed to revise the Standing Order in view of tbe suggestion5 
made by the Committee and desired that the revised Standing Order 
may be called for from the Ministry, for scrutiny. 
The Committee further noted th'at the Ministry of Home Affairs 
have agreed with the points raised by the Committee in respect of 
Rules, 4, 8 and 9 of the Delhi Police (Miscellaneous matters) Ru1e6, 
1980. As regards ru1e 5, regaroing the photograph of women, the Com­
mittee noted that the ru1e is not being adl1ercd to in this regard and 
directed that the 'Ministry be asked to ensure that the rule is srictly ad-
hered to. 
\ 

} 
\ 
27 
The Committee further noted that the Ministry of Home Affairs 
have by and large agreed with the recommendations made by the Com­
mittee and directed that the Ministry be asked to carry out the same 
by amending the rules accordingly . 
• " * 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 3. 55 p.m. to meet again at 
11.30 A.M. on the 3rd November, 1984. 
' 
XV 
FIFTEENTH ~lmTING 
The Committee met at 11 . 00 A.~ 09 Monday, the 5th November, 
ber, 1984, in Committee Room 'A', Ground Flour, Parliament House Annex:e, New Delhi. ., ,, 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri M. M. Jacob-Chairman 
2. Shri Lal K. Advani 
3 . Shri Syoo Rahmat Ali 
4. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal 
5 . Shri Kam.alendu Bhattacharjee 
6 . Sh'ri S. W. Dhabe 
7. Shri M. Kalyanasundaram 
8. Shrimati Krishna Kaul 
9. Shn Ram Naresh Kushawaha 
10. Shri Rafique AJam 
11 . Shri Deba. Prasad Ray 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary 
Shri B. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions 
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committee Offkc\r. 
2. The Chairman m_ade an obituary reference to the sad and sudden 
demise of the Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi. The Commit­
tee placed on record their profound sorrow and grief on her death. The 
Members of the Committee observed two minutes' silence, all Members 
standing, as a mark 'of re5pect of the memory of the great leader. The 
Committee directed that its condolences may be conveyed to the mem­
bers of the late Prime Minister's family. 
:n-xx Relat=s to matter not included ir lhi§ Report. 

28 
3. The Chairman then informed the Committee that the meeting 
scheduled for the 3rd November, 1984 was not held as the office was 
dosed ~ that day on account of the sad demise of Prime Minister, 
Shrimati Indira Gandhi . · 
• • * 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 11.15. A.M. to meet again at 
3P.M. on the 16th November. 1984. 
- ' -, . 
X~ ,. 
~ .... 
NIN1EENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00'A.M. on Thursday, the 29th November, 
1984, in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House An­
nexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBE1lS PRESENT 
1 . Shri M. Kalyanasundaram-in the Chair 
2 . Shri Lal K. Advani 
3 . Shri Syed Rahi:nat Ali 
4. Shri Dhuleshwar Meena 
5 . Shri aafique Alam 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additio~ Secretary 
Shri B. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions 
2. In the absence of the Chairman Shri M. Kalyanasundaram. was 
voted to the Chair. 
* * * • 
4. MEMORANDUM No. 33!84 
Defence Research and Development Service (Amendment) Rules, 1982 
The Committee considered the above memorandum and noted 
that on a suggestion earlier made by it the Minic;try of Defence had 
agreed to omit the words "in parts" from clause (a) d sub-rule (2) 
of rule 8 (a) of the above Rule$ and have since amended the clause 
vide S.R.O. No. 176 dated 7th August, 1984. 
4. The Comn1~ ttn then adic.•trned at ll.A5 A.M . to meet again a· 
3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 3rd January, 1985-
= Rclall"S to matter not mcludcd in thi s R eport . 

29 
XXII 
TWEN1 Y-SECOND MEE'llNG 
The Comnuttee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 22nd January, 
1985, in Room ~o. 67, Fir.st floor, Parhame.nt House, New Dolhi. 
MEMB!.RS PRLSENT 
Shri M. M. Jacob--Cizai(man 
2 . Shri .Lal K. Advani ' ' 
1. Shri Pawan Kumar Bans~ 
41 
.. 
4. Shri Kamalendu Bhatta,charjc.: 
.. , 5. Shri S. W. Dhabe ' 
6. Shri Deba Prasad ~ay. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri B. R. Goel, Chief Examine~ of Questions 
Shri R.N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committee Officor. 
2. The Committee comidered its draft 65th and 6otl~ Reports and 
after c;ome discussiOn adopt~J the '>an~e. with some ~harges. 
3. The Committee decided to present the 65th and 6(Jth ~ports 
to the House on the 24th Ja mary. 1985 and .tuthorised the Chairman 
and in his absence Shri S W. Dhabc or Shri Karhalendu Hhattachl'tr­
jee, to present the Report' fr> the House . 
• • * • 
5. The Committee then adiomncd at 3. 20 p.1n . 
• 
••••R•· r u. t n lt ncluded 'n th1s R<'port. 
GMGJPMR'ID-RS f-387 RS--2-7-1985. 