 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
LEGISLATION COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE
 
HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH  REPORT ON DETERMINATION OF RATE OF INTEREST
PAYABLE TO SUBSCRIBERS  OF EMPLOYEES PROVIDENT FUND
 
(Presented on 1st December, 2000)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
(November, 2000 /Agrahayana 1922 )
C O N T E N T S
                               
1.     COMPOSITION  OF  THE  COMMITTEE                                                                                                        
 
2.     I NTRODUCTION                                                                                    
 
3.        REPORT
       
        I      Determination of rate of interest payable to subscribers of Employees Provident Fund.
 
        II     Minutes of the Meetings of the Committee
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on the 16th May 2000)
RAJYA SABHA
1.        Shri Dipankar Mukherjee – Chairman
        2.     Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt
        3.     Shri Kapil Sibal
        4.     Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
        5.     Dr. A. R. Kidwai
        6.     Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
        7.     Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
        8.     Shri  Lajpat Rai
        9.     Shri  Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
     10.     Shri  S. Sivasubramanian
     11.     Shri  Dara Singh Chauhan     
     12.     Shri  H. K. Javare Gowda 
     13.     Shri  Drupad Borgohain
     14.     Shri  R. Margabandu
15.         Shri Suresh A. Keswani
S ECRETARIAT
 
1.    Shri S. Vijay Kumar, Joint Secretary,Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary,
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

3.    Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary,
4.    Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
 
 
 INTRODUCTION
 
 
        I,      the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been authorized by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Hundred and Thirtieth Report of the Committee
.
1.2   The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on November 13, 2000.
 
1.3     The Committee received a representation from the Secretary, CITU pointing out the anomalies in the determination of
rate of interest payable to the subscribers of Employees Provident Fund.  The Committee examined the subject matter in the light
of provisions of Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 as well as the Scheme framed thereunder.  The
Committee in the process of examination heard the views of the representatives of various Central Trade Unions.  The Committee
also obtained the written comments on the subject matter from the Ministries of Labour and Finance and it also heard the oral
evidence of the Secretary Ministry of Labour.  The observations and recommendations of the Committee on the subject matter are
contained in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
 
  
N EW  D ELHI                                                   DIPANKAR   MUKHERJEE
November 13, 2000                                                                    Chairman
Committee on Subordinate Legislation,
 Rajya Sabha
REPORT
 
The Committee received a representation dated July 5, 2000 from the Secretary, Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU)
bringing to its notice a “serious violation by the Government of India of para 60 of the EPF Scheme, 1952 in the matter of
their unilateral decision to reduce the rate of interest payable to subscribers of the  (Employees Provident) fund for the year
2000-01.”  The CBT in its meeting held on April 25, 2000 unanimously   decided to recommend interest @ 12% to be credited to
EPF members for the financial year 2000-01, but the Government “did not consult the Central Board on their proposal not to
accept the recommendation of the Board” which as per their view was a violation.  A copy of the representation is enclosed
(Annexure-I).
2.       A copy of the representation was forwarded to the Ministries of Labour and Finance for their comments on July 12, 2000,
comments on which were received from both the Ministries. 
        2.1   The Ministry of Labour in their comments dated July 18, 2000 stated that under para 60 of the Scheme, the rate of
interest to be credited to the accounts of EPF subscribers is required to be determined by the Central Government in consultation
with the CBT.  As per normal   practice   the   interest   rate   should   have   been  declared  by 
March, 2000, but, in the present case, the CBT  “took time” and recommended 12% rate of interest on April 25, 2000.  The Central
Government “considered the recommendation of the Board in the light of average income of the fund from April, 2000
onwards” which according to them had “drastically fallen down and is less then 11%” and it accordingly, determined 11%
interest for EPF subscribers.   However, in doing so, “Central Government was guided by the provision of para 60 (4) of the
scheme” whereunder it has to “satisfy itself that there is no over-drawal on  the interest suspense account as  a result of
giving  interest to EPF in subscribers”.   The Ministry of Labour further added that  “in order to avoid difficulties to person
that retired during April- June, 2000 over payment in such case, on account of 12% interest has been condoned /written
off.” 
        2.2   The Committee also received   comments from the Ministry of Finance dated the July 25, 2000 wherein it has been stated
that the Ministry of Labour “had recommended to the Ministry of Finance that interest rate be fixed at 12% for the year
2000-01”, but the Ministry of Finance requested the Ministry of Labour to review their recommendation on grounds, viz.  (i)
Average income of EPF “ as   intimated by the Ministry   of Labour in March, 2000 was only 11.27%.”;   (ii)  difficulty being faced
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

by smaller  exempted  establishments to pay interest @12% “ as intimated by the Ministry of Labour.”;   and  (iii)  the  falling 
interest  rate  regime  in  the  economy
Whereby “interest rates on other Provident Funds, significantly   the PPF and the GPF, had been reduced from 12% to 11%.”
Based upon the assessment of the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Labour “reviewed the matter” and “recommended
an interest rate of 11% from 1.7.2000”.  The Ministry of Finance “endorsed” the proposal of the Ministry of Labour.  Replies
received from the Ministries of Labour and Finance are placed at Annexures II and III.
         2.3   In the meantime, a supplementary representation dated 8th August, 2000 was received from CITU wherein the
Committee was informed that a special meeting of the Central Board of Trustees was held on July 25, 2000 and in that
meeting, the Chairman of the Board had “agreed to take up the issue of rate of interest for the year 2000-01 with the
Ministry of Finance.”  The Committee’s attention was also drawn towards “violation and contravention   of some provisions of
EPF and MP Act, 1952 in some paragraphs of the EPF Scheme”.  A reference was made to the provision of sections 5(1) and 5(1A)
of the Act and para 52 of the Scheme, and it was pointed out that the powers vested in the CBT by the Act cannot be taken away by
the scheme framed by Government.  The Committee was further informed   that   Government   had   not   constituted the
Board  of Trustees in the States, as contemplated under Section 5 B of the Act.   The EPF Scheme, 1952 does not have any
provision to govern the constitution of the State Board, but on the other hand, it only provides for setting up of   “a  Regional 
Committee  for  the  State until
such time a State Board is constituted”  The Committee was requested to initiate appropriate action in the matter.    The
supplementary representation (Annexure-IV) was also referred to the Ministry of Labour for comments.
        2.4   In reply dated August 31, 2000 the Ministry of Labour while referring to the provisions of section 5 (1B), items 6 and 8
of Schedule II of the Act, and paras 52 and 60 of the Scheme maintained that “paras 52 and 60 of the EPF scheme do not violate
the provisions of section 5 (1A)  of the Act as alleged by  CITU”.   As regards the meeting of CBT dated the 25th July, 2000, the
Ministry of Labour stated that the CBT in the said meeting had recommended that  “the Ministry of Finance may be prevailed
upon to approve atleast credit of interest @  12% on EPF till June, 2000.”  and, accordingly,  “ the matter was being
pursued with the Ministry of Finance.”  As regards the setting up of State Boards, the Ministry of Labour informed that the
Regional Committees in the States/Union Territories were working  “generally satisfactorily and rendering the requisite
results.” and, therefore, it was “not considered desirable” to set up   State level Boards.  A copy of the reply received from the
Ministry of Labour is enclosed (Annexure-V).
        3.     The Committee considered the subject matter on September 12, 2000 and decided to hear the representatives of Ministry
of Labour as well as the various Central Trade Unions on the subject, separately.
3.1    Accordingly, the Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Labour, in the meeting held on October 11, 2000.  During
the course of the oral evidence, the Committee raised the question of compliance of “consultation process” as envisaged under
the Scheme.  In response, the Secretary, Ministry of Labour clarified as follows:-
“The normal interpretation of the Allocation of Business Rules    would be that it is the administrative Ministry,
which is, here, the Ministry of Labour.  But, because this is a matter that involves certain financial matters, we
would be required to consult the Ministry of Finance.  The Central Government’s decision in this case would only
be complete if the Ministry of Labour in consultation with the Finance Ministry takes it.  It is the Central
Government that has to take the decision in consultation with the CBT and here the Ministry of Labour being the
nodal Ministry has to take a lead and establish this mechanism of consultation and in that process while taking the
final decision, the Ministry of Labour would be required to consult the Ministry of Finance.”
                                “I am not such an expert on this matter, Sir, This is one of the issues where there is difference.  I
think, consultation means recommendation from the Board of Trustees”
“The existing consultation procedure is a past practice.  If there is any suggestion or any improvement, we would
be quite prepared to consider that”.
“This is construed as consultation.  Now that this issue is thrown to us whether it is adequate in terms of letter and
spirit, in terms of the legal provision, we will give you the views that we have on this matter”.
                                3.2           On being asked whether the meeting of CBT in which the Ministry of Labour and
Finance are represented can  be construed as consultation process.   The Secretary, Ministry of Labour responded as
follows:-
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

“I don’t think that would be correct to say.  CBT is an autonomous organization that has been set up as a legal
body.  It takes a decision and having taken that decision, it has to approach the Central Government under the
Act.  So, although it is true that the Central Government’s representatives are on the CBT, it does not necessarily
mean that the Central Government has been consulted”.
 “The representation of the Ministry of Labour on the Board of Trustees is a step to involve the Ministry of Finance
in the decision-making process.  But, as I mentioned earlier, this does not take away the need for the Central
Government to apply its mind independently on the recommendation of this autonomous body, and discharge its
duty which have been given under this Act and Schedule.  As I mentioned, the Ministry of Labour is the nodal
Ministry.  The Labour Ministry would be required to consult the Ministry of Finance”.
                                                3.3           Explaining further the process being followed in recommending 12% rate of interest, it was
submitted before the Committee as follows:
 “the actual procedure is this.  Finance and Investment Committee meets a day or some days before the meeting of Central
Board of Trustees is to be held.  It is a sub-committee of the Central Board of Trustees.  It deals particularly with the
matters relating to accounts or declaration of rates of interest.  All facts regarding financial position are put before the
meeting.  In the meeting, Fund managers make their presentation as to what is being earned by funds, what the fund can
afford to pay, etc.  then minutes of the meeting are prepared.  These minutes of the meeting are also put before the meeting
of the Central Board of Trustees.  Even this time this procedure was followed and full facts as to what is the financial
position,  what are the earnings of Fund,  how much the Fund can afford to pay, etc.  were placed before the Board.  Some
members did express their view that we should explore all the possibilities to keep it at 12%.  But it was held that was not
possible.  At last, it was decided that the fund could afford to pay 11.5% and not 12%. 
However, the Central Board of Trustees, which consists of 43 members, in its wisdom decided to recommend 12%”.
                “No, the Finance and Executive Committee did not recommend 11.5%; they only said that they could afford to
pay 11.5%.  This being a sensitive matter and the actual decision was to be taken by the Board, they never gave their firm
recommendation.  They gave only the factual position”.
                Thereafter the Committee inquired about the non constitution of the State Level Boards under section 5B of the EPF
and MP Act, 1952 to which the Secretary, Ministry of Labour gave the following reply:-
“I have heard very carefully the observations on section 5(B) of the Act.  I will have to really look into the papers
what exactly is the thinking of the Ministry, who has decided why the State Boards have not been constituted”.
“Unless we consult the Ministry of Law on this point, what is the legal connotation, what should constitute legal
sense, we cannot give a reply.  I would request the Committee to give us at least 15 days time to consult the
Ministry of Law and then give a reply”.
 
        3.5   The Committee incidentally also sought clarifications about contradictions in the replies of the Ministries of Labour  and
Finance like, (i)  variation   in the rate of earnings from the funds as informed by the two Ministries; (ii)  the Ministry of Labour
mentioning to the Ministry of Finance but not to the Committee about the problems of exempted establishments being one of the
considerations for lowering the rate of interest; and (iii) the Ministry of Finance stating that they had endorsed the Labour
Ministry’s proposal  to credit interest at the rate of 12 per cent on EPF  till June, 2000 whereas Ministry of Labour stating that they
were still pursing the mater with the Ministry of  Finance.  Responding to the Committees’ queries, the Secretary, Ministry of
Labour stated that he had received the reply of Ministry of Finance “ just now” and that the Ministry of Finance might have made
their own calculations and they might have come to the figure of 11.27%.   On being specifically asked that the figure of 11.27% as
quoted by the Ministry of Finance, is based upon intimation from the Ministry of Labour, the Secretary initially maintained that in
the papers they  had  sent  to  the  Ministry  of Finance, they had stated the average
income from the fund to be just about 11% and the Ministry of Finance might have made their own calculations and come to the
figure of 11.27% but when insisted for  a specific reply stated that they may “have to ask the Ministry of Finance”.  He further
added that he “may not be able to answer the question just now” because this letter had come to his notice “just now”. On the
contradiction as at (iii) above the Secretary, Ministry of Labour responded that they would have to confirm from the Ministry of
Finance. The Committee, thereafter heard the representatives of  (i) Bhartiya Mazdoor Sangh; (ii) Hind Mazdoor angh; (iii) All
India Trade Union Congress;  (iv) Indian National Trade Union Congress; and (v) Centre of Trade Unions on the subject.
        4.1   Discussion with the Unions representatives Centered around points, like,  (i) the provisions of the scheme are violative of
the provisions of the EPF Act, 1952 and whatever powers are given to the CBT under the Act are diluted under the scheme; (ii) it
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

was the unanimous decision of the CBT to allow interest at the rate of 12 per cent, and in that meeting, senior Officers from the
Ministies of Labour and Finance were present; (iii) the order to allow 12 per cent rate of interest to those employees who are
retired during the period from April  to  June,  2000  is  discriminatory  viz-a-viz, crores of employees
who continue to remain in the job and who would get interest only at 11 per cent; (iv) the Government of India should look into the
matter again and the rate of interest as determined by the Government, should have prospective effect only; (v) the EPF
Organization collects money from the defaulter employees at the rate of 12 per cent per annum and when it come to the employees,
it pays only 11 per cent interest which is not the objective of the Provident Fund Organization or the Central  Board.  (vi) that the
Central Government has taken into account other factors in deciding to reduce the rate of interest payable to the subscribers which
are not the guiding factors as per the law.
3.       Following the oral evidence before the Committee by the Secretary, Ministry of Labour on October 11, 2000, a
communication dated the October 18, 2000 was sent, requesting the Ministry of Labour to furnish the following information as
promised during the course of oral evidence:-
        (i)            Note indicating the process gone through in arriving at the decision to allow interest  @ 11% after the
recommendation of the Central Board of Trustees to allow @ 12%.
        (ii)   The date on which Government finally notified the rate of interest of 11%, the date and manner in which Central Board
                of Trustees was formally informed of the decision of Government;
        (iii)  Note on the compliance of consultation process by the Ministry of Labour alongwith the opinion of Ministry of Law; and
(iv)   Note on the legal frame work on the non constitution of the State Level Boards as envisaged under the Act alongwith the
opinion of the Ministry of Law.
 5.1    A reply dated the 25th October 2000 was received from the Ministry of Labour wherein the position was clarified on the
various points as enumerated in the succeeding paragraph.
5.2    On the question of the process gone through in arriving at the decision to allow interest @ 11%, after the recommendation
of the CBT. the Ministry of Labour has explained that the recommendation of the Board was communicated to the Central
Government on April 26, 2000.  The Ministry of Labour, although being aware that the average income from the fund is just
around 11%, recommended interest @ 12%, keeping in view the sentiments of CBT, The Finance Ministry, as the average income
from EPF was only 11.27%, returned the proposal to the Ministry of Labour for review.  After review, the Ministry of Labour, 
recommended  12%  rate   of  interest for the period upto June,
2000 and 11% for the period from July 1, 2000 to March 31, 2001.  The Ministry of Finance, however, vide their communication
dated June 28, 2000, reduced the rate of interest from 12% to 11%  w.e.f. April 1, 2000 subject, however, to condonation of
overpayment to employees retiring during April-June, 2000 on account of 12 per cent interest rates.  On receipt of the said letter
dated June, 28, 2000 from the Ministry of Finance, a letter was issued to the Central Provident Fund Commissioner on the same
day, directing them to act as per the decision of the Finance Ministry.  “The CBT was apprised of the decision of the Government
in the meeting held on July 25, 2000”.  On the question of compliance of the consultation process, the Ministry of Labour stated
the actual practice being followed in this regard is that Central Government first formally obtain recommendations of the CBT
about the rate of interest and the same is examined, keeping in view the earnings of the fund and thereafter the matter is submitted
to the Ministry of Finance for their final advice/approval and after the approval of the Ministry of Finance, the rate of interest on
EPF is formally declared by the Ministry of Labour.  This practice of the Ministry of  Labour “ has by and large  worked
satisfactorily and it is seemingly in accordance with the process of consultation as prescribed in para 16 of the scheme”.  On the
question of non-constitution of State Level Boards, the Ministry of Labour  mentioned that there had been a Review  Committee 
headed  by  the former President of INTUC which
had recommended that there was no need to set up State Level Boards and that the practice of having Regional Committees may
continue by making necessary amendment in the Act and scheme.  According to them, the Regional EPF Committees, that have
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

been set up in all States, were working “generally satisfactorily” and the Ministry proposes to delete Section 5B when the Act is
next amended.
5.3    The Ministry of Labour later on also furnished the opinion of Ministry of Law on the completion of “ consultation
process” as envisaged under the Act/Schemes vide O.M. dated 6.11.2000 (Annexure VI).
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
        6.     The Committee considered the subject matter at its meeting held on the 30th October, 2000 in the light of the information
received.   The Committee has gone through the provisions of the Employee Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provision Act,
1952 as well as the scheme framed thereunder.  The Committee feels that a combined reading of the provisions of the Act and the
scheme does give an impression that the power to administer the fund which has been vested in the Central Board under Section 5
has to some extent been watered down by the provisions of the scheme, particularly, the provisions of para 60 which vests the
power to determine the rate of interest with the Central Government.    A  perusal of the provisions of Section 5(1A) of
the Act gives an impression that the Central Board has full powers to administer fund.  There is no proviso to this provision in the
Act and in that situation, vesting of powers to determine the rate of interest with the Central Government does not seem to be in
consonance with the above provisions of the Act. The Committee would like the Ministry of Labour to undertake a review of the
relevant provisions of the Act/Scheme so as to ensure that  the  Central Board of Trustees which has been set up under the Act, is
conferred with powers, as contemplated under the Act.  In that process the Board could be made more  accountable  and Central
Government could  issue certain guidelines within which the  Board must  function. 
6.1    The Committee next considered the compliance of the consultation process as contemplated under the Act and the
Scheme by the Ministry of Labour.  The Committee does not subscribe to the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Labour that
“consultation means recommendations from the Board of Trustees”.  In Committee’s view consultation is not a one way traffic; it is
a process which facilitates dialogue between two parties. The dialogue is essential.  In this case the Ministry of Labour , after
consultation with the Ministry of Finance over the question of rate of interest , did not go back  to the CBT finally for
“consultation”.  The consultation was between the two departments of Government of India and the Ministry of Labour had only 
intimated  the  decision  of Ministry  of Finance  to the CBT. In Committee’s view
the consultation process has not been carried out as envisaged  under the scheme.   The procedure of obtaining the recommendation
of the CBT and  thereafter  taking a final decision on the question of rate of interest in consultation with the Ministry of Finance,
had been working without any problem in the past years  because there was no difference of opinion on the rate of interest between
the CBT  and the  Central Government.    In what way such a consultation should take place has not been established so far because
the necessity for the same did not arise.  Now that such a situation has come, and in order to avoid complication/confusion in
future, it would be desirable if the Ministry of Labour reviews the matter and decides as to what mechanism need be followed
between the CBT and the Central Government to comply with the requirements of consultation.   The Committee for this purpose
recommends  that,  first,  the Ministry of Labour should act as the nodal
agency for the Central Government and secondly,  the consultation process is undergone during the meeting of the CBT itself 
where the Central Government is represented both  by the Ministries of Labour and Finance.  The Government’s views on the rate
of interest should be placed unambiguously in the meeting of CBT and this process should be treated as consultation process before
the Central Government takes a final view in the matter. In Committee’s opinion, this procedure would ensure compliance of the
provision of the Act/Scheme.
        6.2   The Committee at this juncture would also like to give its observations on the manner in which the whole question of
finalizing the rate of interest payable on EPF has been handled. As per the Ministry of Labour, income from the fund was less than
11% .  This figure however varies from the figure given by the Ministry of Finance which is 11.27%.  During the course of the
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

meeting of the CBT which was held on April 25, 2000, the Finance and Investment Committee of the CBT was of the view that the
Fund could afford an interest rate of 11.5%. However the CBT having representation of both the Ministries of Labour and Finance
recommended interest rate of 12%.    In Committee’s view, when there was so much variation in the figures pertaining to earning
from the fund it was all the more necessary for the Central Government to have gone back to CBT before finally declaring the rate
of interest of 11%.  Keeping this position in view the Committee   recommends  that  the  Ministry  of  Labour should call for
another meeting of CBT where all the parties should be apprised of the exact  position  of the fund and the existing decision of 11%
interest for
the year 2000-2001 is reviewed so that the consultation process is carried out.
        6.3   As regards the legal advice of the   Ministry of Law on the subject, the Committee is constrained to note that the
reference made by the Ministry of Labour to the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs was not specific to the
requirements of the Committee.  It was never  the  opinion  of  the Committee that consultation meant “seeking
approval” and therefore the reference to that extent did not reflect the correct position. Under the circumstances, the Committee has
no comment to offer on the opinion of the Ministry of Law.
6.4    The Committee also considered the question of non-constitution of State Level Boards by the Ministry of Labour.  The
Committee is extremely unhappy with the way this issue has been handled by the Ministry of Labour. The Ministry of Labour have
not amended the Act although a Committee which had been set up by them had recommended deletion of Section 5B as far back as
in the year 1983.  Even now the note furnished by the Ministry of Labour, say that they would move for deletion of Section 5B of
the Act only when the EPF Act is next amended. If there is no need of the State Level Boards, and the Regional Committees were
serving the purpose well, they could have   gone   for  the  amendment  of  the  Act  so  that  the  records  are
straight.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Labour should take prompt action in this matter.
 
        Annexure-I
 
REPRESENTATIVE RECEIVED FROM CENTRAL OF INDIAN TRADE UNIONS ON JULY 5, 2000
 
        I wish to bring to your kind notice a serious viciation by the Government of India, of the Para 60 of the Employees Provident
Fund Scheme, 1952, in the matter of their unitateral decision to reduce the rate of interest payable to the subscribers of the Fund for
the year 2000-01.
        Para 60 of the EPF Scheme reads as under 60 interest – (i) The Commissioner shall credit to the account of each member
interest at such rate as may be determined by the Central Government in consultation with the Central Board.
        The Central Board of Trustees, EPF in the meeting held on 25th April, 2000 unanimously decided to recommend that the
interest @ 12% p.a. on the monthly running balances be credited to EPF members account for the financial year 2000-2001.
        If the Govt. (or more precisely the Finance Ministry) was in disagreement with the decision of the CBT, they ought to have
come back to the CBT for consideration.
        Inasmuch as the Government did not consult the Central Board on their proposal not to accept the recommendation of the
Board it is a violation of the above rule.  Which is part of the Scheme under the EPF Misc. Provident Act, 1952.
 
        I, therefore, request you to take cognizance of this violation and take appropriate action.
Annexure-II
 
O.M. Received from Ministry of Labour Dated 18th July, 2000
 
Subject:- Reduction in the rate of interest payable to EPF subscribers – representation regarding
 
 
        The undersigned is directed to refer to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat O.M. No.RS.13(6)/2000-Com.I dated 12th July, 2000 on
the subject mentioned above and to say that under paragraph 60 of the EPF Scheme.  1952, rate of interest to be credited in
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

accounts of the EPF subscribers is required to be determined by the Central Government in consultation with the Central Board of
Trustees, Employees Provident Fund.  As interest is required to be credited on monthly-running-balance basis, normal practice has
been to declare rate of interest well before commencement of new financial year.  Accordingly, for the year 2000-01, the interest
rate was to be determined and declared in March 2000, made recommendation to the Central Government for crediting interest in
accounts of the EPF subscribers at the rate of 12% for the year 2000-01.  The Government considered the recommendation of the
Board in the light of the average income of the Fund has drastically fallen down and is less than 11%.  In view of this position, it
has not been found feasible to give 12% interest to the EPF subscribers.  Accordingly, the Central Government determined 11%
interest for the EPF subscribers for the year 2000-01.  In doing so, the Central Government has also been guided by provisions of
paragraph 60(4) of the EPF Scheme which provide that Central Government has to satisfy itself that there is no over-drawal on the
interest suspense account as a result giving interest to the EPF subscribers.  However, in order to avoid difficulties to the persons
retired during April and June 2000, over-payment in such cases on account of 12% interest has been condoned/written off.
         2.     In view of the position explained in the preceding paragraph, it would be observed that the procedure prescribed under
the EPF Scheme 1952 has been duly followed while determining the rate of interest on the Employees Provident Fund.
     Annexure-III
O.M. RECEIVED FROM MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) DATED JULY 25,
2000
 
Subject:- Reduction in the rate of interst payable to     subscribers of EPF Representation regarding.
 
        Rajya Sabha Secretariat may kindly refer to its O.M. no. RS13(6)/2000-Com.I dated 12th July 2000 on the above mentioned
subject.  I am directed to convey the following facts in this matter.
 
2.        The interest under the EPF Scheme is determined by the Central Government in consultation with the Central Board of
Trustees under papa 60 of the EPF Scheme.  Accordingly, the Ministry of Labour had recommended to this Ministry that the
interest rate be fixed at 12% for the year 2000-01.  This Ministry requested the Ministry of Labour to review their
recommendations on the following grounds:-
 
        (a)    The average income of the EPF from all investments (as intimated by Ministry of Labour) in March 2000 was only
11.27%.
 
(b)     As informed by Ministry of Labour, presently there are about 3000 exempted establishments, which are required to
follow the rate of interest declared under the EPF Scheme.  As some of the exempted funds are smaller, they may not be
in a position to give 12% return on deposits.  Had an interest rate of 12% been accepted it would have meant that these
smaller funds would also have to compulsorily pay out 12% interest on exempted EPF would have been anachronistic.
 
(c)     Interest rate on other provident funds, significantly the PPF and GPF had been reduced from 12% to 11% in view of the
falling interest rate regime in the economy.  Retaining 12% interest on exempted EPF would have been anachronistic.
 
 
        Based on our assessment of the situation the Ministry of Labour reviewed the matter.  That Ministry recommended an interest
rate of 11% from 1st July 2000.  Ministry of Finance endorsed this proposal.
 
Annexure-IV
 
O.M Received From Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) Dated July 25, 2000
 
                  Subject:  Reduction  in  the  rate  of  interest  payable to    
                                  subscribers of EPF Representation regarding.
 
        I am making this representation further to my letter dated the 5th July, 2000 wherein I had requested you to take cognizance of
the violation by the Government of India the provisions of Para 60 of the Employees Provident Fund Scheme, 1952.
 
        I may inform you that subsequent to my letter of 5th July, 2000, a Special Meeting of the Central Board of Trustees of the
Employees Provident Fund was held on the 25th July, 2000.  As decided thereat, the Chairman of the Board has agreed to take up
the issue of rate of interest for the year 2000-01 with the Ministry of Finance.  The outcome of that exercise is awaited.
 
        Here, I wish to bring to your notice that framing of some paragraphs in the EPF Scheme, 1952 is itself a violation and in
contravention of the EPF (MP) Act, 1952.  I enumerate them hereunder.
 
        Section 5(1) and sub-section (1A) of the Act provide as under:
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
“5(1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame a scheme to be called the Employees” Provident
Fund Scheme for the establishment of Provident funds under tha Act for the employees or for any class of employees and specify
the establishments or class of establishments to which the said Scheme shall apply and there shall be established, as soon as may be
after the framing of the Scheme, a Fund in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Scheme”.
  
“5(1A)  The Fund shall vest in and be administered by the Central Board constituted under section 5A”.
 
        Para 52 of the EPF Scheme, 1952 (which deals with the investment of monies belonging to the Employees Provident Fund,
vesting the Central Government with the power to give directions from time to time) and Para 60 (which, vests the power to
determine the rate of interest to be credited to each member in the Central Government) seriously violate the provisions of Section
5(1A) of the EPF (MP) Act, 1952.
 
        The power vested in the Central Board of Trustees by the Act cannot be taken away by the Scheme framed by the Government
which cannot but only be in accordance with the provisions of the Act as laid down in Section 5(1) of the Act itself.
 
        Again, Section 5B of the EPF (MP) Act, 1952 provides as under
 
“5B.  State Board – (1)  The Central Government may after consultation with the Government of any State, by notification in
the Official Gazette, constitute for that State a Board of Trustees (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the State Board) in such
manner as may be provided in the Scheme”.
 
        But the EPF Scheme, 1952, has not made any provision for the constitution of such State Board as envisaged in the Act .  On
the other hand Para 4 of the Scheme provides for setting up of only “a Regional Committee for the State” with a proviso “until
such time as a State Board is constituted for a State”  This makes it abundantly clear that the setting up of Regional Committee in
the place of State Board was at best an interim arrangement.  But continuing with the Regional Committee arrangement for several
decades without even making a provision for constituting State Board as liad down in the Act, is a serious violation of the
EPF(MP) Act, 1952.
 
        I shall be much obliged if you will please look into these violations of the Act and initiate appropriate action in this regard.
 
Annexure-V
 
O.M. Received From Ministry of Labour Dated 31st August, 2000
 
 
        Subject:-       Reduction in the rate of interest payable to subscribers of EPF Representation regarding.
 
 
        The undersigned is directed to refer to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat O.M. No.R.S.13(6)/2000-Com I dated August 17, 2000 on
the subject mentioned above and to say that the CITU has questioned validity of Paragraph 52 & paragraph 60 of the EPF Scheme
1952.  The legal position in this regard is as under:-
 
(1)     Paragraph 52 of the EPF Scheme:-  Section 5(1B) of the EPF & MP Act stipulates that the EPF Scheme may provide for
all or any of the matters.  Specified Schedule II item 6 of schedult Ii of the Act provides inter-alia investment of EPF
money in accordance with the directions issued by the Central Government.  Accordingly para 52 of the EPF Scheme
makes provision for investment of EPF money as per the pattern approved by the Central Government.
 
(2)     Paragraph 60 of the EPF Scheme:- Item 8 of Schedule II of the EPF & MP Act, 1952 provides as under:
 
‘The fixation by the Central Government in consultation with the board of trustees concerned of the rate of interest
payable to members”.
 
Accordingly Paragraph 60(1) of the EPF Scheme 1952 provides as under:
 
 ‘The Commissioner shall credit to the account of each member interest at such rate as may be determined by the Central
Government in consultation with the Central Board’.
 
        In determining the rate of interest on EPF the Central Government is also guided by provisions of Paragraph 60(4) of the EPF
Scheme, which is as under:
         In determining the rate of interest, the Central Government shall satisfy that there is no overdrawal on the Interest Suspense
Account as a result of the debit thereto of the interest credited to the account of members.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

         In view of the position explained in the preceding paragraphs the provision of para 52 & 60of the EPF Scheme do not violate
the provisions of section 5 (1A) of the EPF & MP Act as alleged by the CITU.
         As regards the rate of interest for 2000-01 the CBT in its meeting held on 25.7.2000 has recommended that the Ministry of
Finance may be prevailed upon to approve at least credit of interest @ 12% on EPF till June 2000.  Accordingly the matter is being
pursued with the Ministry of Finance.
         As regards setting up of State Boards, it is clarified that the system of Regional Committees in States/Union Territories has
been working generally satisfactorily and rendering the requisite results.  Therefore, it has not been considered desirable to set up
State level Boards.
 
    Annexure-VI
 
O.M. Received From Ministry of Labour Dated November 6, 2000
 
 
Subject :     Declaration of rate of interest on EPF under Paragraph 60(1) of the EPF Scheme, 1952.
 
         In continuation of this Ministry’s O.M. of even number dated 25th October 2000 on the subject mentioned above, the
undersigned is directed to say that the matter was referred to the Ministry of Law for their advice on the following points:-
(1)     Whether “consultation” as referred to in  Item 8 of Schedule II of the EPF & MP Act, 1952 and paragraph 60(1) of the
EPF Scheme 1952 means seeking approval of the Central Board of Trustees or ascertaining the views of the Board; and
(2)     In the event of there being a disagreement between the Central Government and the Central Board of Trustees, whether it
is necessary for the Government to consult the Board again.
         The view taken is that ‘consultation’ under paragraph 60(1) of the EPF Scheme does not mean seeking approval.  It only
means ascertaining the views of the Board.    This is because if consultation had meant seeking approval, use of the word
‘Central Government’ both  in  the  Act  as  also  in  the  EPF  Scheme  would  have   become
 superfluous.  Since final decision, about the rate of interest on EPF is to be taken by the Central Government, ascertaining of
views/opinion/recommendation of the CBT only helps the Central Government in taking a final decision after taking into account
other relevant factors.  Such views/recommendations cannot be binding on the Government.  Accordingly, it is also not necessary
for the Central Government to consult the Board again in the event of there being any difference of opinion between the Central
Government and the Board. 
                 
 MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF COMMITTEE ONSUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA
 
VII
 
Seventh   Meeting
 
        The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on  Tuesday the 12th September, 2000 in Room No. 126-C  (Committee Chairman’s Room),
Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
                MEMBERS PRESENT
1.    Shri Dipankar Mukherjee─Chairman
2.     Shri Bramakumar Bhatt
3. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
4. Dr. A. R. Kidwai
5. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
6.        Shri  Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
7. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
8. Shri  H.K. Javare Gowda
9. Shri R. Margabandu
     10.      Shri Suresh A. Keswani
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

                SECRETARIAT
      
1.      Shri Deepak Goyal,  Deputy Secretary
2.      Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary
3.  Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
       
               3.     Memorandum Number 44/2000  regarding reduction in the rate of interest payable to subscribers of EPF
representation received from CITU.
         The Committee decided to hear the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Labour and Central Trade
Unions, separately  on the subject on 11th October, 2000. 
         4.     The Committe then adjourned at 12.15 P . M .
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA
 
 
VIII
 
Eighth Meeting
 
       The Committee met at 11.30 a.m. on Wednesday,  the  11th October, 2000 in Committee Room ‘B’,  Ground   Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
        1.     Shri Dipankar Mukherjee─Chairman
2.        Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt
3.        Shri Kapil Sibal
4.        Dr. A. R. Kidwai
5. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
6. Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
7. Shri  Lajpat Rai
8. Shri Suresh A. Keswani
                SECRETARIAT
 
        1.     Shri Deepak Goyal,  Deputy Secretary
        2.     Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary
        3.     Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
 
       A.    REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR
 
1.        Shri Vinod Vaish, Secretary
2.        Shri Ajay Singh, Central P.F. Commissioner
3.        Shri S.K. Ray, FA & CAO
4.        Shri J.P. Shukla, Deputy Secretary
 
B.   REPRESENTATIVES OF  THE CENTRAL TRADE  UNIONS
 
        1.     Bhartiya Mazdoor Sangh
 
        1.     Shri A. Venkatram, Member, National Executive,
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

        2.     Shri K. Lakshma Reddy, Secretary,
 
2.       Hind Mazdoor Sangh
 
                Shri A.D. Nagpal, Secretary
 
3.       C.I.T.U
                Shri W.R. Varada Rajan, Secretary
 
        4.    All India Trade Union Congress
                Shri K.L. Mahendra, General Secretary
 
        5.    Indian  National Trade Union Congress
Shri Chandi Das Sinha, Secretary,
 
        2.     The Committee heard the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Labour on the  subject  of reduction in
the rate of interest payable to the subscribers of Employees Provident Fund.   The   Committee desired the representatives to
furnish factual information on certain points to enable  it to consider the matter further.  A verbatim record  of  the evidence   was 
kept.
         3.     The Committee adjourned for lunch at 12.30 P.M. and met again at 2.30 P.M. and heard the views of the representatives
of the Central Trade Unions on the same subject matter.  A verbatim record of the evidence was kept.
         4.     The Committee adjourned at 4.30 P . M
 
 
                                                                               
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA
 
IX
 
Ninth  Meeting
 
        The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday the 30thOctober 2000 in Room No. 126-C (Committee Chairman’s Room)
Third   Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
        1.     Shri Dipankar Mukherjee─Chairman
        2.     Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
        3.     Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
4.        Shri  Lajpat Rai
5.        Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
6.        Shri H.K. Javare Gowda
7.        Shri Drupad Borgohain
8.        Shri R. Margabandu
9.        Shri Suresh A. Keswani
                SECRETARIAT
 
1.      Shri Deepak Goyal,  Deputy Secretary
2.      Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary
3.         Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
 
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

             3.     Memorandum No. 48/2000  regarding   reduction  in the rate   of interest payable to the
subscribers of EPF
 
 
        The Committee  considered  Memorandum No. 48/2000 in the light of  information  received from the Ministry of Labour.  
The Committee took objection to the fact that  the Ministry of Labour in their reply on the issue  pertaining to ‘consultation
process’  have mentioned that they were taking the opinion of the Ministry of Law  in the matter  as per the directions of the
Committee.  The Committee observed that it had never directed the Ministry of Labour to  have  the opinion of  the Ministry of
Law and that it was the Ministry of Labour only that desired to seek the opinion of the Ministry of Law.  The Committee desired
that the Ministry of Labour may be asked to put the records straight  on this point.    The Committee discussed the subject and
decided that a draft report may be prepared for its consideration. 
        5.     The Committee then  adjourned at 4.15 P.M.
 
                                                                                                                                                                     
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA
 
X
 
Tenth  Meeting
 
        The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on  Monday  the  13th  November, 2000 in Room  No. 126-C (Committee Chairman’s Room)
Third   Floor,  Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
        1.     Shri Dipankar Mukherjee─Chairman
2.        Shri  Brahmakumar Bhatt
3.        Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
4.        Dr. A.R. Kidwai
5.        Shri  Lajpat Rai
6.        Shri  Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
7.        Shri  S. Sivasubramanian
8.        Shri H.K. Javare Gowda
9.        Shri R. Margabandu
                 SECRETARIAT
 
        1.     Shri Deepak Goyal,  Deputy Secretary
2.        Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary
3.        Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
 
   
        I      Draft report on  Determination of Rate of Interest Payable to Subscribers of Employees Provident Fund.
 
       The Committee considered the draft report on the above mentioned subject.  In the meantime, the Ministry of Labour had also
furnished  the opinion of the Ministry of Law on the question of compliance of  the consultation procedure .  The Committee was
apprised  of the same.  The Committee examined the advice of the Ministry of Law but noted that the reference sent by the
Ministry of Labour to the Ministry of Law for the purpose of seeking advise did not  correctly reflect the Committee’s view that
has emerged during the course of the oral evidence and , therefore, in its opinion, the view  of the Ministry of Law was not very
specific.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

         The Committee desired that the  aspect of Law Ministry’s advice may be added in the report along with the Committee’s view
thereon.  The recommendations contained in the draft report  were examined by the Committee and accepted .  The Committee
authorized the Chairman to carry out necessary corrections in the report  on its behalf in the light of the discussions.  The
Committee authorized the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence Dr. A.R.Kidwai and Shri R.Margabandhu, Members to
present the report to the House during the ensuing Session of the Rajya Sabha.
          The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P . M
 
_________________________________________________________    * Relates to other subjects                  
 
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF