COSL 
  
 
 
                        PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
                COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
TWO HUNDREDTH REPORT 
 
                                              (Presented on 03.09. 2012) 
 
 
 
 
                                
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2012/ Bhadrapada  1934  (Saka) 
200 


C O N T E N T S 
      
        PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION 
 OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
(ii) 
3. REPORT 
I. Tuticorin Port Trust Employees 
(Recruitment, Seniority and Promotion) 
Regulations, 2008. 
 
II. Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Regulation of 
use in Motor Vehicles) Order, 2001.  
 
 
1-67 
 
 
68-134 
 
4. MINUTES 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RA JYA SABHA 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   29 th  SEPTEMBER, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
1. Smt. Maya Singh   Chairperson 
2. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
3. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
4. Shri P. Kannan 
5. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
6. Shri Narendra Kashyap 
7. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
8. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
9. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
10. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi  
11. Shri Shantaram Naik 
12. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
13. *Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
14. *Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
15. *Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra 
 
   
 
S
ECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri N.K.Singh , Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
3.   Shri R.S. Rawat, Deputy Director  
4. Shri  R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director  
5.   Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director  
 
* Nominated  w.e.f.  9 th  May, 2012  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (i) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordina te Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on i ts behalf, this Two Hundredth   
Report of the Committee. 
 
 1.2     The Committee considered and adopted the R eport in its meeting held on the 30 
th  
August 2012 
 
1.3 The matters  examined  by the Committee  arose in  the process  of  scrutiny of   
(i) The Tuticorin Port Trust Employees (Recruitment , Seniority and Promotion and (ii) 
The Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Regulation of use in M otor Vehicles Order, 2001  and 
issues relating to them along with the comments rec eived from the concerned 
Governments.  The observations and recommendations of the Committee are contained in 
the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.  
 
.  
 
 
MAYA SINGH 
                                                                                                               Chairperson 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
                                                                                                              Rajya Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI  
3rd  September, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

I 
Report on the Tuticorin Port Trust Employees (Recruitment, Seniority and 
Promotion) Regulations, 2008  
 
The Tuticorin Port Trust Employees (Recruitment, Se niority and Promotion) 
Regulations, 2008 (Annexure-I)  were framed in exercise of powers conferred by Sec tion 
28 of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963. The Regulati ons superseded the Tuticorin Port 
Trust Employees (Recruitment, Seniority and Promoti on) Regulations, 1979 and 
prescribe the manner of appointment/recruitment, fi xation of seniority and promotion of 
employees of Tuticorin Port.  
 
2. The Regulations were taken up for examination by  the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation, Rajya Sabha and a questionnaire on the  subject was forwarded to the 
Ministry of Shipping for their comments/clarificati ons on the 9 
th  March, 2010. The 
Ministry furnished their comments/clarifications on  the 7 th  June, 2010 (Annexure-II) . 
The important points/issues raised by the Committee  and the comments/clarifications 
furnished by the Ministry are elaborated in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
3.  The Committee observed that the Tuticorin Port Trust Employees (Recruitment, 
Seniority and Promotion) Regulations, 2008 have bee n framed in supersession of the 
Tuticorin Port Trust Employees (Recruitment, Senior ity and Promotion) Regulations, 
1979.  On the reasons that necessitated the framing  of new/revised Tuticorin Port Trust 
Employees (Recruitment, Seniority and Promotion) Re gulations, 2008, the Ministry in 
their written reply submitted that the Ministry of Shipping on the 16 
th  October, 1996 had 
appointed a Pay Revision Committee under the Chairm anship of Shri S.P. Bagla, former 
Secretary to the Government of India to recommend o n pay and allowances of Class I 
and II officers of the major ports and Dock Labour Boards.  The Committee submitted its 
report on the 1 st  February, 1999 in two volumes. Government orders o n Volume-I of the 
report regarding revision of pay and allowances of Class I & II officers in the Major Port 
Trusts and Dock Labour Boards were issued on the 10 th  January, 2000. The 
recommendations made by the Committee in Volume II of their report on Cadre 

Restructuring had been considered by the Government  and the Government had decided 
to implement the Cadre Restructuring in respect of Class I and Class II of the Major Port 
Trusts and Dock Labour Boards. On 6 th  February, 2004, the Ministry of Shipping 
directed that all Major Port Trusts should, in cons ultation with the Indian Ports 
Association, revise their Recruitment, Seniority an d Promotion Regulations by 
incorporating the changes envisaged under Cadre Res tructuring. This directive 
necessitated the framing of revised Tuticorin Port Trust Employees (Recruitment, 
Seniority and Promotion) Regulations, 2008 in order  to ensure proper career 
opportunities to its officers.  
 
4. On the salient features of the new regulations a nd the main points of difference 
between the 1979 Regulations and the new Regulation s of 2008, the Ministry in their 
written reply stated:- 
 
(i) The new Regulations of 2008 are framed based on the  model common 
Recruitment, Seniority & Promotion Regulations (RSP ) prescribed for all the 
Port Trusts by the Indian Ports Association at the instance of the Ministry in 
connection with implementation of the Cadre Restruc turing of Officers of 
Major Trusts and Dock Labour Boards; 
(ii) As the new Regulations of 2008 are based on the com mon RSP Regulations, 
the Port is able to follow the procedure for recrui tment, seniority and 
promotion being followed by all the Major Port Trusts; 
(iii) Hitherto, the vacancies in the posts treated as Hea ds of Department are filled 
in by composite method, whereas the vacancies in th e posts which are one 
level below the Heads of Department are also to be filled in by composite 
method as per the new Regulations of 2008 (Regulations 4); 
(iv) Hitherto, the vacancies to be filled in by direct r ecruitment or promotion 
should be filled in by the particular method only w ith reference to the register 
of vacancies, whereas according to the new Regulati ons of 2008, if a vacancy 
which is reserved for direct recruitment cannot be filled in by direct 
recruitment, it may be filled by promotion and the next vacancy shall be filled 

by direct recruitment and similar practice can be f ollowed in the case of a 
vacancy reserved for promotion but cannot be filled  by promotion method 
(Regulation 6); 
(v) Hitherto, the existing employees are eligible for d irect recruitment only up to 
a particular age, whereas according to the new Regu lations of 2008, when the 
posts required to be filled by direct recruitment a re advertised, employees 
already in service may also apply, provided they po ssess the prescribed 
qualifications and experience and age limit in such  cases will not apply 
(Regulation 9); 
(vi) Hitherto, in accordance with regulation 31 of Tutic orin Port Trust Employees 
(Recruitment, Seniority & Promotion) Regulations, 1979, when a post is filled 
by promotion, the Departmental Promotion Committee may, subject to the 
approval of the Chairman, relax the academic qualif ications, if the candidate 
to be promoted is otherwise suitable and qualified by reason of adequate 
experience. However, the new Regulations of 2008, h as no such regulation to 
relax the academic qualifications; 
(vii) Hitherto, period of probation is prescribed as two years for all the posts. 
According to the new Regulations of 2008, the perio d of probation is two 
years for all Class I and Class II posts, one year for direct recruits to Class III 
and Class IV posts and no probation for promotees t o Class III and Class IV 
posts.  
 
The Committee noted that Regulation 31 of the Tutic orin Port Trust 
Employees (Recruitment, Seniority & Promotion) Regu lations, 1979 provides that 
when a post is filled by promotion, the Departmenta l Promotion Committee may, 
subject to the approval of the Chairman, relax the academic qualifications, if the 
candidate to be promoted is otherwise suitable and qualified by reason of adequate 
experience. However, the new Regulations of 2008 ha ve no such provision to relax 
the academic qualifications. The Committee felt tha t the provisions of the 1979 
Regulations seem to be more desirable in this regar d as it will go a long way in 
motivating the employees to perform to their fulles t potential. Denying them the 

opportunity for promotion, when they are otherwise suitable, on the grounds of 
academic qualification, is not desirable. The Commi ttee, therefore, recommends 
that the provision of 1979 providing that when a po st is filled by promotion, the 
Departmental Promotion Committee may, subject to th e approval of the Chairman, 
relax the academic qualifications if the candidate to be promoted is otherwise 
suitable and qualified by reason of adequate experience, may be retained .  
 
5. Upon being enquired about the frequency of const itution of the Pay Revision 
Committee in major ports, the Ministry replied that  there is no specific duration for the 
constitution of the Pay Revision Committee. As and when revision of pay and allowances 
with reference to the existing Pay Revision Orders issued by the Ministry in respect of 
the Class I and Class II officers of the Major Port  Trusts, is due, a Pay Revision 
Committee is required to be constituted by the Mini stry to decide the pay and allowances 
to be paid to the Class I and Class II officers dur ing the next particular period, which is 
fixed by the Ministry. 
 
6. The foot note to the Regulations states, “The existing Recruitment Rules in 
respect of Class II, III and IV employees will be i n force for recruitment till the cadre 
restructuring of the above is completed and publish ed in the Gazette of India.” The 
Committee, accordingly, enquired whether the cadre restructuring in respect of Class II, 
III and IV had since been completed and what was th e status in that regard. The Ministry 
replied that consequent to the notification of the Tuticorin Port Trust Employees 
(Recruitment, Seniority & Promotion) Regulations, 2 008 and the Recruitment Rules for 
Class I Posts, in the Gazette of India vide  GSR No. 603(E), on the 21 
st  August, 2008, 
Cadre Restructuring in respect of Class I posts was  completed in the Port by making 
promotions/re-designations under Cadre Restructurin g. The Ministry had prescribed 
Recruitment Rules for Class I posts vide  the said Gazette Notification and the Port was 
taking action to prescribe the Recruitment Rules for Class II, Class III and Class IV posts. 
Approval of the Tuticorin Port Trust Board was soug ht on the 29 th March, 2010, for the 
Recruitment Rules for Class II, Class III and Class  IV posts, so as to enable the Port to 
send the same to the Ministry for notification in t he Gazette of India as Schedule-II to the 

Tuticorin Port Trust Employees (Recruitment, Seniority & Promotion) Regulations, 2008. 
The Committee recommends that cadre restructuring i n respect of Class II, Class 
III and Class IV posts be completed expeditiously a nd the recruitment rules for 
Class II, Class III and Class IV posts should be in cluded in Schedule-II of the 
Tuticorin Port Trust Employees (Recruitment, Seniority & Promotion) Regulations, 
2008 at the earliest . 
 
7. The Committee noted that Regulation 4 prescribes  that the normal period of 
deputation is three years, extendable to four years  which in exceptional circumstances 
can be extended to five years. Upon being enquired about the exceptional circumstances 
under which the period of deputation can be extende d to five years and the competent 
authority to decide so, the Ministry replied that t he exceptional circumstances under 
which the period of deputation can be extended to five years, are 
(i) In the case of an officer, who has school/college g oing children, the 
deputation may be continued till the completion of the academic year; 
(ii) The deputation may be continued on public interest 
  The Ministry further clarified that the Competent  Authority is Chairman, 
Tuticorin Port Trust for all posts, except Heads of Departments.  
 
8. The Committee noted that Regulation 7 provides t hat orders issued by the Central 
Government from time to time for the reservation of  posts, whether to be filled by direct 
recruitment or promotion, in favour of SCs/STs and OBCs shall apply mutatis-mutandis 
to all appointments covered by these Regulations. U pon being asked whether reservation 
was being maintained as per the Central Government directions and whether all backlog 
vacancies had been filled in the Port, the Ministry  replied that reservation is being 
maintained as per the directions of the Central Gov ernment and that action to fill up the 
backlog vacancies is taken by the Port as per the i nstructions of the Central Government. 
The Committee is happy to note that the Central Gov ernment directions on 
reservation of posts for SCs/STs and OBCs are being  followed by the Port and 

directs the Ministry of Shipping to ensure that the se are followed in letter and spirit 
by the Port management.  
 
9. Upon being enquired about the frequency of revis ion of the Schedule indicating 
the permanent and temporary strength of various gra des and whether the Schedule 
annexed to the regulations reflected the true pictu re/present strength of employees, the 
Ministry informed that the Schedule indicating the permanent and temporary strength of 
various grades would be revised as and when the str ength in a particular grade is 
increased due to sanction of additional posts or de creased due to abolition of posts and 
that the Schedule annexed to the Regulations reflec ts the true picture/present strength of 
employees. The Committee noted the reply furnished by the Mini stry and 
recommends that the Schedule indicating the permane nt and temporary strength of 
various grades be revised and updated immediately a s soon as the strength in a 
particular grade is increased due to sanction of ad ditional posts or decreased due to 
abolition of post .  
 
10. The Committee noted that Regulation 12 stipulat es that a representative of SC/ST 
and OBCs nominated by the Ministry of Shipping shal l be a member of the Services 
Selection Committee to conduct interviews for vario us posts in the Port. The Committee, 
accordingly, enquired about the criteria for nomina ting the representative of SC/ST and 
OBCs, whether the nominated Member was a serving or  retired employee of the Central 
Government and whether it was not desirable to pres cribe some minimum qualifications, 
experience and/or rank of such a Member. The Minist ry replied that a representative of 
SC/ST and OBCs is to be nominated as a Member by th e Ministry of Shipping in respect 
of the Services Selection Committee for the posts o f Head of Department (HOD) only. 
The representative of SC/ST and OBCs should be of a n appropriate status compatible 
with other Members. Normally, only the serving offi cers are to be nominated and an 
officer working in a lower rank will not be nominat ed on a Services Selection Committee 
for making selection to higher posts. In-as-much as  the instructions of the Central 
Government issued from time to time are to be followed by the Port, the Ministry felt that 

there is no need to prescribe minimum qualification s, experience, etc, in respect of the 
nominees to the Services Selection Committee. The Committee noted that the 
instructions of the Central Government issued from time to time are being followed 
by the Port and directs the Ministry of Shipping to  ensure due compliance of such 
instructions by the Port Management.    The Committee, however, feels that in 
regard to nomination for representative of SC/ST & OBCs, minimum level/ rank of 
the officer nominated as representative should be m entioned as has been done for 
other Members of the Service Selection Committees for different levels of posts. 
 
11. The Committee observed that Regulation 14 provi des that all appointments by 
direct recruitment shall be made by the appointing authority on the recommendations of 
the concerned Services Selection Committee. However , the appointing authority has 
power not to accept the recommendations of the Serv ices Selection Committee for 
reasons to be recorded in writing. The Committee, a ccordingly, enquired the 
circumstances under which the appointing authority may not accept the recommendations 
of the Services Selection Committee. The Ministry r eplied that the appointing authority 
may not accept the recommendations of the Services Selection Committee if it feels that 
the Committee has not followed the instructions/rul es regarding the selection procedure. 
The Committee noted the reply furnished by the Mini stry but would like to stress 
that the instructions/rules regarding the selection  procedure should be strictly 
followed by the Services Selection Committee.  The Committee, accordingly, directs 
the Ministry and the Port Trust that they should en sure that instructions/rules 
regarding the selection procedure should be strictl y followed by the Services 
Selection Committee so that undue controversies do not arise. 
 
12.   The Committee observed that while Regulation 26 provides for the composition 
of Departmental Promotion Committee (DPC) but it di d not specify the frequency of the 
meetings of the DPC. Upon being asked about the fre quency of such meetings and  
mentioning it in the Regulations itself, the Minist ry replied that according to the 
instructions of the Central Government, Departmental Promotion Committee should meet 

at regular annual intervals to draw panels to be ut ilized for promotions over a year. In-as-
much as the instructions of the Central Government issued from time to time are to be 
followed by the Port, the Ministry felt that there is no need to indicate the same in the 
Regulations itself.  
 
13. Regulation 27 (2) (a) states that the DPC shall  determine the merit of those being 
assessed for promotion with reference to the prescribed benchmark and accordingly grade 
them as “fit” or “unfit”. The Committee, accordingl y, enquired about the criteria for 
grading officers as “fit” or “unfit” for promotion and whether these should not be 
included in the regulations itself. The Ministry re plied that the DPC has to grade the 
officers as 'fit' or 'unfit' only with reference to the bench -mark in the Annual Confidential 
Reports (ACRs). Only those, who are graded as 'fit'  shall be included in the select panel 
prepared by the Departmental Promotion Committee. A s such, the reasons that will make 
an officer 'unfit' are the entries in the ACRs. In- as-much as the instructions of the Central 
Government issued from time to time are to be followed by the Port, the Ministry felt that 
there was no need to indicate the same in the Regul ations itself. The Committee noted 
that the instructions issued by the Central Governm ent with regard to DPCs are 
being followed by the Port. However, taking note of  the significant role being played 
by DPCs in the career of the employees and the need  for DPCs to meet at stipulated 
intervals, the Committee would like to bring to the  notice of  the Ministry and 
Tuticorin Port Trust its recommendation as containe d in its 38 
th  Report regarding 
the functioning of DPCs which is reproduced as follows: 
 
"The Committee finds that the Departmental Promotio n Committees play significant 
role in the career of the service personnel. The Co mmittee is astonished to learn that 
the Departmental Promotion Committees which are gen erally required to meet every 
year do not meet for years as a result of which ser vice personnel suffer as these cases 
are not regularized. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take 
such steps as it may deem proper to ensure that all  the Ministries and Departments of 
the Government of India including the Union Territo ry Administrations adhere to the 

guidelines issued by them in regard to the meetings  of Departmental Promotion 
Committees and in case of failure, strong 'action s hould be taken against the erring 
Department/Ministry' or the Union Territory Adminis tration. Strict compliance of the 
guidelines and instructions issued by the Departmen t of Personnel and Administrative 
Reforms should not be left to the concerned Ministries/Departments.  A constant vigil 
is needed in this regard. At the same time the Comm ittee would like to stress that the 
role of the Departmental Promotion Committees in va rious Ministries/Departments 
should be periodically reviewed to ensure that they  do not go into tasks not assigned to 
them or assume powers that might come in the way of  the smooth discharge of duties 
by service personnel. The burden on the Government,  particularly the Department of 
Personnel is thus heavy to ensure that the service personnel work in an atmosphere 
free from fear and favour.” 
(Para 17 of 38th Report) 
(Presented on 28.3.1980) 
 
14. Taking note of Regulation 30 which states, “Where a doubt arises as to the 
interpretation of any part of the Regulations, the matter shall be  referred to the 
Chairman for a decision.”  the Committee enquired whether the decision of the  Chairman 
in this regard was final.  The Committee also enqui red about any mechanism for appeal 
against the decision of the Chairman and the number  of cases which had so far been 
referred to the Chairman for a decision. The Minist ry clarified that the decision of the 
Chairman is final and that there is no mechanism fo r appeal against the decision of the 
Chairman. The Ministry further submitted that no ca se had so far been referred to the 
Chairman. While the Committee accepts the position that the d ecision of the 
Chairman is final with regard to the interpretation  of the Regulations, the 
Committee recommends that this should specifically be mentioned in the 
Regulations itself by adding the words, “whose decision thereon shall be final and 
binding” after the words  “…,the matter shall be referred to the Chairman fo r a 
decision. ” 
 

15. The Committee noted that the Act, Regulations a nd other subordinate legislation 
concerned with the Tuticorin Port Trust have not be en uploaded on the website of both 
the Ministry of Shipping and the Tuticorin Port Tru st. The Committee, therefore, 
directs that the Act, Regulations and other subordi nate legislation concerned with 
the Tuticorin Port Trust should be uploaded immedia tely on the websites of both 
the Ministry of Shipping and Tuticorin Port Trust. In this regard, the Committee 
would like to reiterate its recommendation as conta ined in its 135 th  Report 
presented to the House on 27 th  July, 2001 that the Ministries, as part of their e -
governance initiative, put all subordinate legislat ion on their websites, preferably 
bilingually .    
 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE  
 
Relaxation of educational qualifications for promotion 
 
16.  The Committee noted that Regulation 31 of the Tutic orin Port Trust 
Employees (Recruitment, Seniority & Promotion) Regu lations, 1979 provides that 
when a post is filled by promotion, the Departmenta l Promotion Committee may, 
subject to the approval of the Chairman, relax the academic qualifications, if the 
candidate to be promoted is otherwise suitable and qualified by reason of adequate 
experience. However, the new Regulations of 2008 ha ve no such provision to relax 
the academic qualifications. The Committee felt tha t the provisions of the 1979 
Regulations seem to be more desirable in this regar d as it will go a long way in 
motivating the employees to perform to their fulles t potential. Denying them the 
opportunity for promotion, when they are otherwise suitable, on the grounds of 
academic qualification, is not a desirable thing. T he Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the provision of 1979 providing tha t when a post is filled by 
promotion, the Departmental Promotion Committee may, subject to the approval of 
the Chairman, relax the academic qualifications if the candidate to be promoted is 
otherwise suitable and qualified by reason of adequate experience, may be retained .  
 

Cadre Restructuring in respect of Class II, Class I II and Class IV employees and 
updating in the Schedule  
 
17.  The Committee recommends that cadre restructuring i n respect of Class II, 
Class III and Class IV posts be completed immediately and the recruitment rules for 
Class II, Class III and Class IV posts should be in cluded in Schedule-II of the 
Tuticorin Port Trust Employees (Recruitment, Seniority & Promotion) Regulations, 
2008 at the earliest . 
 
Reservation of posts for SCs/STs and OBCs 
 
18.  The Committee is happy to note that the Central Gov ernment directions on 
reservation of posts for SCs/STs and OBCs are being  followed by the Port and 
directs the Ministry of Shipping to ensure that the se are followed in letter and spirit 
by the Port management. 
 
Updation of sanctioned strength in Schedule to the Regulations 
 
19.  The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry and r ecommends that the 
Schedule indicating the permanent and temporary str ength of various grades be 
revised and updated immediately as soon as the stre ngth in a particular grade is 
increased due to sanction of additional posts or decreased due to abolition of post . 
 
Nomination of Members of Services Selection Committee 
 
20.  The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry that instructions of the 
Central Government issued from time to time are fol lowed by the Port and directs 
the Ministry to ensure due compliance of such instructions by the Port management.  
The Committee, however, feels that in regard to nom ination for representative of 
SC/ST & OBCs, minimum level/ rank of the officer no minated as representative 
should be mentioned as has been done for other Memb ers of the Service Selection 
Committees for different levels of posts. 

 
 
Selection Procedure 
 
21.  The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry but w ould like to stress that 
the instructions/rules regarding the selection proc edure should be strictly followed 
by the Services Selection Committee.  The Committee, accordingly, directs the 
Ministry and the Port Trust that they should ensure  that instructions/rules 
regarding the selection procedure should be strictl y followed by the Services 
Selection Committee so that undue controversies do not arise.  
 
 
 
Departmental Promotion Committee (DPC) 
 
 
 
22. The Committee noted that the instructions issue d by the Central 
Government with regard to DPCs are followed by the Port. Noting the significant 
role being played by DPCs in the career of the empl oyees and the need for DPCs to 
meet at stipulated intervals, the Committee would l ike to bring to the notice of  the 
Ministry and Tuticorin Port Trust its recommendatio n as contained in its 38 
th  
Report regarding the functioning of DPCs which is reproduced as follows: 
 
"The Committee finds that the Departmental Promotio n Committees play significant 
role in the career of the service personnel. The Co mmittee is astonished to learn that 
the Departmental Promotion Committees which are gen erally required to meet every 
year do not meet for years as a result of which ser vice personnel suffer as these cases 
are not regularized. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take 
such steps as it may deem proper to ensure that all  the Ministries and Departments of 
the Government of India including the Union Territo ry Administrations adhere to the 
guidelines issued by them in regard to the meetings  of Departmental Promotion 
Committees and in case of failure, strong 'action s hould be taken against the erring 
Department/Ministry' or the Union Territory Adminis tration. Strict compliance of the 

guidelines and instructions issued by the Departmen t of Personnel and Administrative 
Reforms should not be left to the concerned Ministries/Departments. A constant vigil 
is needed in this regard. At the same time the Comm ittee would like to stress that the 
role of the Departmental Promotion Committees in va rious Ministries/Departments 
should be periodically reviewed to ensure that they  do not go into tasks not assigned to 
them or assume powers that might come in the way of  the smooth discharge of duties 
by service personnel. The burden on the Government,  particularly the Department of 
Personnel is thus heavy to ensure that the service personnel work in an atmosphere 
free from fear and favour.” 
(Para 17 of 38th Report) 
(Presented on 28.3.1980) 
 
Regulation 30-Interpretation 
 
23. While the Committee accepts the position that t he decision of the Chairman 
is final with regard to the interpretation of the R egulations, the Committee 
recommends that this should specifically be mention ed in the Regulations itself by 
adding the words, “whose decision thereon shall be final and binding”  after the 
words  “…,the matter shall be referred to the Chairman for a decision. ” 
 
Updating/Uploading of subordinate legislation on the website 
 
24. The Committee directs that the Act, Regulations  and other subordinate 
legislation concerned with the Tuticorin Port Trust should be uploaded immediately 
on the websites of both the Ministry of Shipping an d Tuticorin Port Trust. In this 
regard, the Committee would like to reiterate its recommendation as contained in its 
135 th  Report that the Ministries, as part of their e-gov ernance initiative, put all 
subordinate legislation on their websites, preferably bilingually . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

II 
 
The Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Regulation of Use in Motor Vehicles) Order, 2001  
 
 
The Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Regulation of Use in M otor Vehicles) Order, 2001 
(Annexure I ) has been framed under the power conferred by Sect ion 3 of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 ( Annexure II). This Order allows Government Oil Companies 
and Rated Parallel Marketeers to import (including Auto LPG import substitution), 
storage, distribution and selling AutoLPG for Autom otive purpose through Auto LPG 
Dispensing Stations to registered vehicles fitted w ith permanently fitted Auto LPG tanks 
and approved LPG conversion kits as notified by the  Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways.  
 
2. The Committee took up the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Regulation of Use in Motor 
Vehicles) Order, 2001 for detailed examination and a questionnaire on the subject matter 
was forwarded to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natu ral Gas for their 
comments/clarifications on the 10 
th  January, 2002. The Ministry furnished their 
comments on 1 st  April, 2002 ( Annexure III) . The points raised by the Committee and the 
comments/ clarifications received from the Ministry are reproduced below: 
 
(I) Para 2(b) gives the definition of consumer as f ollows: 
“Consumer” means a registered owner of a motor vehicle or a person having in his 
possession a motor vehicle or vehicle fitted with a n auto LPG tank, and a 
conversion kit as notified by the Government of Ind ia in the Ministry of Surface 
Transport, and runs such motor vehicle or vehicle b y using auto LPG as 
automotive fuel alone or with some other petroleum fuel” 
 
The Committee felt that the words “some other petro leum fuel” used in the Order 
had not been defined/ explained and sought to know whether there was any objection in 
defining or explaining the term in the Order itself.  
 
The Ministry clarified that the words “some other p etroleum fuel’ has already 
been covered by the Ministry of Surface Transport &  Highways in the Central Motor 

Vehicles (3 rd  Amendment) Rules, 2001 as notified on 24.04.2001  (Annexure IV).   As 
per para 2(d) of the said notification, “Vehicle sh all be capable of bi-fuel operation such 
as LPG and Petrol”. Thus, other petroleum fuel is p etrol (Motor spirit) and Auto LPG 
stand permitted for gasoline vehicles capable of bi -fuel operation.  The Ministry was of 
the view that if considered necessary, the words ‘a s notified by Ministry of Surface 
Transport & Highways may be added after the words ‘ with some other petroleum fuel’ in 
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Regulation of Use in Motor Vehicles) Order, 2001.  
 
The Committee noted the facts as enumerated by the Ministry and 
recommends that the words ‘as notified by Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways’ be added after the words ‘with some other  petroleum fuel’ in Liquefied 
Petroleum Gas (Regulation of Use in Motor Vehicles) Order, 2001. 
 
(II) Para 2: definitions 
The Committee observed that in every statute the de finitions are always placed 
alphabetically but in the said Order the definition s had not been put in alphabetical order.  
The Committee, accordingly, wanted to know the reas ons for deviating from the 
established practice. 
 
The Ministry agreed that the definitions in the Ord er had not been put in 
alphabetical order, and explained that they were so  placed in order to maintain a link 
among various terms defined in the order.  
 
(III)  Para 5(4) 
 Procurement, storage and sale of auto LPG by the au to LPG 
dispensing station dealer states that 
 
“No auto LPG dispensing station dealer shall keep t he auto LPG dispensing 
station premises including the storage point closed  during working hours on any 
day without the prior written permission of the Gov ernment Oil Company or a 
parallel marketeer” 
 

The Committee enquired as to whether the Ministry h ad any objection to 
prescribing that the permission so obtained may be displayed in order to avoid hardship 
to the consumers likely to arise due to unauthorized closure of dispensing station. 
 
The Ministry submitted that there was no objection to prescribe that the 
permissions obtained by Auto LPG Dispensing Station s (ALDS) for keeping the 
premises, including the storage points, closed duri ng working hours to be displayed to 
avoid hardship to the consumers likely to arise due  to closure of dispensing stations as 
suggested by the Committee and that the said instru ctions may be issued by the Ministry 
of Road Transport & Highways by an Administrative O rder to the Government Oil 
Marketing Companies/ Parallel Marketeers, who in tu rn would instruct their ALDS, or 
the Order may be amended. 
 
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Liq uefied Petroleum Gas 
(Regulation of Use in Motor Vehicles) Order, 2001 b e amended to incorporate that 
the permissions obtained by Auto LPG Dispensing Sta tions (ALDS) for keeping the 
premises, including the storage points, closed duri ng working hours to be displayed 
well in advance to avoid hardship to the consumers likely to arise due to closure of 
dispensing stations. 
 
(IV)  Para 6(1)(a):Assessment and certification rating of parallel Marketeers:- 
“No parallel marketer shall commence any activity, such as, import (including 
Auto LPG Import Substitution), transport, marketing , distribution, sale or any 
activity incidental thereto, relating to the busine ss of auto LPG to be used as 
automotive fuel without obtaining a minimum of low risk rating certificate, on the 
basis of evaluation and rating for his capability, infrastructure network and 
readiness to carry out professed business and deliv ery of good and services 
promised by him by an agency specified in Schedule-I. 
 
Provided that a parallel marketer carrying on the b usiness of transportation, 
marketing, distribution or selling of auto LPG for automotive fuel, as an agent of 
another parallel marketer, who has obtained a minim um of low risk rating 
certificate, shall not be required to obtain a rating certificate.”  
 

The Committee sought to know the objectives sought to be achieved by proviso 
and explanation to para 6(1)(a) of the Order. 
 
The Committee was informed that the objective for p roviding explanation to Para 
6(1)(a) of the Order was to clarify that the dealer s/agents appointed by the Parallel 
Marketeers for undertaking activities under Paralle l Marketing System (PMS) shall not 
be required to obtain the 'rating certificate' prov ided their principal 'Parallel Marketeer' 
had obtained the minimum of low risk rating certifi cate and had appointed dealers/agents 
through a legal instrument. 
 
(V)  Para 6(1)(b) -- Issue of rating certificate:-
 
 
"The rating certificate shall be issued in the form at as specified in Schedule -II 
and as per the forwarding letter given in Schedule- IV". 
 
It was enquired whether the procedure for obtaining  the rating certificate and a 
time frame in that behalf had been prescribed anywh ere, may be in the principal 
legislation, and if not, whether Government had any  objection in prescribing the same in 
the Order itself. 
 
The Ministry replied that as defined in Para 6(1)(a ) that since no parallel 
marketeer shall commence any activities relating to  the business of Auto LPG to be used 
as automotive fuel without obtaining a minimum of 'low risk' rating certificate, there is no 
need to define the time frame for obtaining the rat ing certificate as the Parallel 
Marketeers cannot commence any activity without obt aining a minimum low risk rating 
certificate. The para is based on similar para as i s applicable for issue of rating certificate 
in LPG (Regulation of Supply & Distribution) Order,  2000.  Further, the Ministry 
informed that no representation had so far been rec eived regarding any objection of 
undue delay for obtaining rating certificate. 
 
(VI) Para 6(4) (i):  Assessment and certification r ating of parallel Marketeers :
 
 
" There shall be paid in respect of every application to a rating agency- 
 

(i)  for the rating certificate awarded to the para llel marketeer, a fee at the rate of 
0.05% of the project cost, subject to a minimum of rupees fifty thousand  and 
maximum of rupees ten lakhs” 
 
The Committee felt that there was no mention in the  para about the mode or 
payment of fee and wanted to know whether the same could be provided in the Order 
itself.  Also, the fee appears to be on higher side  and whether there was any scope of 
reducing it. 
 
The Ministry replied that no need was felt to defin e the mode of payment under 
para 6(4)(i) as the same was governed by norms laid  down by Reserve Bank of India/ 
Ministry of Finance, and mutual agreement with the parties. Further, the fees as defined 
in the above para was retained at the same level as  was applicable for obtaining rating 
certificate by the parallel marketeers for marketin g of LPG as per Liquefied Petroleum 
Gas (Regulation of Supply & Distribution) Order, 19 93 and subsequent Liquefied 
Petroleum Gas (Regulation of Supply & Distribution)  Order, 2000.  The Ministry further 
submitted that since they had not received any repr esentation objecting to the said level 
of fees for obtaining rating certificate, no need was felt to review the same. 
 
The Committee feels that just because no representa tion on the fees has been 
received, it does not mean that efforts should not be made to bring the fees in 
consonance with the Market forces. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should review and, accordingly, revise the  fee periodically after making an 
assessment of the market conditions and the need to  protect the interest of the 
consumers. 
 
(VII)  Para 8(3) Maintenance of records and furnishing of information by parallel 
marketeers  - 
 
 
"Every parallel marketer shall furnish to the Minis try of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas, or to such authority as may be specified by th e Central Government, such 
information as may be required" 
 

The Committee felt that the words "to such authorit y as may be specified by the 
Central Government" were vague and wanted to know w hether the Ministry had any 
objection in qualifying the authorities contemplate d in the said para.  Also, the 
Committee felt that the provision appears to be gen eral giving wide discretion to the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas or any authorit y which may lead to undue 
harassment and sought to know whether it was possib le to anticipate the information 
required and prescribe the same in the Order itself. 
 
The Ministry replied that the petroleum industry wa s passing through a transition 
period of dismantling of APM and that an Authority may be notified in the near future.  
Regarding Committee’s apprehension on discretionary  powers and undue harassment by 
the Ministry or the authority, the Ministry submitt ed that Paras 8(1) and 8(2) prescribe 
the information required from parallel marketeers 
The Committee considered the comments of the Minist ry and was of the opinion 
that the Ministry’s reply that paras 8(1) and 8(2) prescribe the information required from 
the parallel marketeers was not convincing because if this was the only information 
required from the parallel marketeers, there should  have been no necessity of prescribing 
in para 8(3) calling for “such information as may be required” from parallel marketeers. 
 
The Ministry clarified that apart from the informat ion to be provided by the 
parallel marketeers as per para 8(1) & (2), it may be required in future to call for the 
information from them such as investment details, s pecification of the product being 
imported/marketed by them, details of their marketi ng network etc. Therefore, provision 
to call for such other information has been include d in the Control Order in para 8(3). 
Such a provision exists in LPG (Regulation of Supply and Distribution) Order, 2000 also. 
 
(VIII)  Para 11  - Power to exempt  
 
"The Central Government may, if it considers necess ary, for avoiding any 
hardship or in consideration of public interest by notification in the Official 
Gazette, exempt any person or class of persons from  all or any of the provisions 
of this Order, either generally or for any specific  purpose, subject to such 
conditions as may be specified in the notification." 

 
The Committee was of the opinion that the provision  gave the Central 
Government power to exempt any person or class of p ersons from all or any of the 
provisions of this Order. The Committee, accordingl y, sought to know the justification 
for providing such exemption, the circumstances con templated to be in public interest, 
and, whether it was possible to enumerate them in the Order itself so as to be indicative. 
 
 
The Ministry clarified that Para 11 had been added in the order to take care of any 
exigencies/extra ordinary situation to avoid hardship or in consideration of public interest 
which may arise during the course of marketing Auto  LPG and which was not possible to 
anticipate/enumerate in the order. However, such ex emptions were to be notified in the 
official Gazette as per the provision of the Order. 
 
The Committee considered the comments of the Minist ry.  It was of the view that 
notification in the Official Gazette does not seem to be a sufficient safeguard or a 
justification for provisions of para 11 which autho rizes the Central Government to 
exempt any person from all or any of the provisions  of the Order either generally or for 
any specific purpose and sought to know whether it was possible to prescribe some 
guidelines for invoking provisions of para 11. 
 
The Ministry informed the Committee that the Centra l Government would 
examine critically before exempting any person from  all or any of the provisions of the 
Control Order. Such exemption may be required to be  given depending upon the 
circumstances prevailing at any point of time. Ther efore, specific guidelines for invoking 
the provisions of para 11 cannot be visualized in advance. Such a provision exists in LPG 
(Regulation of Supply and Distribution) Order, 2000 also. 
 
The Committee while accepting the views of the Mini stry was of the opinion 
that  since the Ministry already had the experience  of the implementation of the 
LPG (Regulation of Supply and Distribution) Order, 2000, hence, some basic 

guidelines for invoking para 11 should be framed by  them. This would help check 
arbitrariness and help in deciding cases in which exemptions could be granted .  
 
(IX)  The Committee raised a query that although penalti es of the nature of fine, etc. 
might be provided under the Essential Commodities A ct for violation of any provisions 
of the Order but, the penalties of other nature lik e cancellation of dealership, etc, or other 
deterrent actions for the purpose of ensuring stric t compliance of the provisions of the 
Order could be provided in the Order itself.  The C ommittee sought to know the views of 
the Ministry in this regard. 
 
The Ministry informed the Committee that penalties like cancellation of 
dealership etc. are covered separately in the 'Deal ership Agreement' which the 
Government oil companies/parallel Marketeers were e ntering into with their 
Dealers/Agents. The penalties for violation of any provisions of the Order are as laid 
down in the Essential Commodities Act itself. In fa ct, in appropriate cases there is 
provision for imprisonment also under Essential Com modities Act, which is harsher than 
cancellation of dealership. 
 
The Committee noted the Ministry’s reply and sought  clarification as to whether 
control over the dealers/agents would not be more e ffective if the penalties, which 
presently find place in the dealership agreement, a re incorporated in the Order itself.  
Also, would it not be obligatory on the part of the authorities to take action in that case.  
 
The Ministry explained that in the decontrolled reg ime, it would not be 
appropriate for the Government to notify penalties.  In order to protect their market share 
and survive in the competitive environment, oil com panies are expected to exercise 
control over their dealers as per the dealership ag reements concluded between them/any 
other guidelines such as Marketing Discipline Guide lines (MDG). Presently, oil 
companies take action against erring dealers as per  the MDG/dealership agreements. 
Further, enforcement agencies take action under the  provisions of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955.  
 

The Committee accepted the comments of the Ministry  but were of the 
opinion that the principles on the basis of which t he Marketing Discipline 
Guidelines are framed and the standard clauses incl uded in the dealership 
agreements should be incorporated in the Rules itse lf to bring transparency which 
would also provide Statutory backing to them. The C ommittee, therefore, 
recommends that the Rules may, accordingly, be amended to incorporate the same.  
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, discussed the said Or der with the State Government of 
West Bengal, Indian Oil Corporation, Indo-Burma Petroleum Company Ltd. and Ministry 
of Petroleum & Natural Gas at Kolkatta on 27 
th  October, 2004. A study note (Annexure 
V) on the said visit was forwarded to the Ministry o f Petroleum & Natural Gas for their 
comments/clarifications.  The comments/ clarifications received from the Ministry on the 
issues raised are placed at Annexure VI. On perusal of the comments furnished by the 
Ministry, the Committee recommends that  regarding para 6(1)(b) a time limit for 
issue of rating certificate be incorporated in the Order.  Also, the Committee feels 
that the status of the application should be put up  on the website of the Ministry so 
as to ensure transparency.   
 
4. The Committee also had discussion on the said Or der with the State Government 
of Maharashtra along with Indian Oil Corporation, H industan Petroleum Corporation 
Limited, Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited and M inistry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas at Mumbai on 1 
st  August, 2008. The Committee was informed that in o rder to stop 
the diversion of LPG cylinders, the Government had enacted “Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
(Regulation of Supply and Distribution) Order, 2000 ” and formulated “Marketing 
Discipline Guidelines, 2001” which provides for pen al action against LPG distributors 
indulging in diversion of LPG. It was also informed  that State Governments were also 
empowered to take action against diversion of domes tic LPG. Similarly, the Weights and 
Measures Departments of the States/UTs initiate leg al action against those LPG 
distributors found diverting LPG cylinders.A brief Note on the issues raised by the 
Committee along with the comments of the Ministry o f Petroleum & Natural Gas is 
enclosed ( Annexure VII).  

5. The Order was also taken up for discussion with the State Government of Tamil 
Nadu, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural and the Oil M arketing Companies at Chennai on 
17 th  September, 2008.  The Committee was apprised that Section 7 of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 provides for prosecution and imposition of fine and that most of 
the cases of violation in Tamil Nadu is of Black Ma rketing. The Committee was further 
apprised that detection of adulteration was done by marker system and transportation was 
tracked through the GPS-tracking system installed i n oil tankers. It was also informed 
that 100 percent GPS based tracking system was to b e achieved in HPCL by 2010. The 
Committee was of the opinion that detention period of six months in Black Marketing 
Act should be increased to one year to make it stringent enough to act as a deterrent.  The 
Committee further insisted that Oil companies shoul d not depend on the State 
Government and make sure that the pilferage is not taking place. A study note of the said 
discussion is enclosed ( Annexure VIII). 
 
6.    The Committee is hopeful that the Ministry would ca rry out the 
recommendations  of the Committee expeditiously und er intimation to it. The 
Committee is also of the opinion that proper monito ring and inspections are 
essential for the proper implementation of the Orde r and stresses upon the Ministry 
to strengthen its enforcement mechanism to ensure t hat the objectives of the Order 
are achieved.  
 
 
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
7. Definition of consumer  
The Committee noted the facts as enumerated by the Ministry and 
recommends that the words ‘as notified by Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways’ be added after the words ‘with some other  petroleum fuel’ in Liquefied 
Petroleum Gas (Regulation of Use in Motor Vehicles) Order, 2001. 
 

8. Procurement, storage and sale of auto LPG by the  auto LPG dispensing 
station dealer states that  
 
The Committee recommends that the Liquefied Petrole um Gas (Regulation 
of Use in Motor Vehicles) Order, 2001 be amended to  incorporate that the 
permissions obtained by Auto LPG Dispensing Station s (ALDS) for keeping the 
premises, including the storage points, closed duri ng working hours to be displayed 
well in advance to avoid hardship to the consumers likely to arise due to closure of 
dispensing stations. 
 
9. Assessment and certification rating of parallel marketeers : 
 
The Committee feels that just because no representa tion on the fees has been 
received, it does not mean that efforts should not be made to bring the fees in 
consonance with the Market forces. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should review and, accordingly, revise the  fee periodically after making an 
assessment of the market conditions and the need to  protect the interest of the 
consumers. 
 
10. Power to exempt  
 
The Committee while accepting the views of the Mini stry was of the opinion 
that  since the Ministry already had the experience  of the implementation of the 
LPG (Regulation of Supply and Distribution) Order, 2000, hence, some basic 
guidelines for invoking para 11 should be framed by  them. This would help check 
arbitrariness and help in deciding cases in which exemptions could be granted .  
 
11. The Committee accepted the comments of the Mini stry but were of the 
opinion that the principles on the basis of which t he Marketing Discipline 
Guidelines are framed and the standard clauses incl uded in the dealership 
agreements should be incorporated in the Rules itse lf to bring transparency which 
would also provide Statutory backing to them. The C ommittee, therefore, 
recommends that the Rules may, accordingly, be amended to incorporate the same.  
 

12. The Committee recommends that  regarding para 6(1)(b) a time limit for 
issue of rating certificate be incorporated in the Order.  Also, the Committee feels 
that the status of the application should be put up  on the website of the Ministry so 
as to ensure transparency.   
 
13. The Committee is hopeful that the Ministry woul d carry out the 
recommendations  of the Committee expeditiously und er intimation to it. The 
Committee is also of the opinion that proper monito ring and inspections are 
essential for the proper implementation of the Orde r and stresses upon the Ministry 
to strengthen its enforcement mechanism to ensure t hat the objectives of the Order 
are achieved.  
 
 
 
 
 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
 
XXI 
Twenty First Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on the 30 th  August, 2012 in Room No. 126-C 
(Chairperson’s Room), Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
    
Present 
 
1. Smt. Maya Singh    - Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
2. Shri P. Kannan 
3. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
4.   Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
5 Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
6. Shri Shantaram Naik 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
3. Shri R. S. Rawat, Deputy Director 
4. Shri R.P.Shukla, Assistant Director 
5. Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director 
 
2.  The following items were taken up for considera tion by the Committee: 
●    The Draft 198 
th  Report on Statutory Orders Laid on the Table of th e Rajya  
Sabha during its 224 th  Session 
 
●      The Draft 199 
th  Report on Statutory Orders Laid on the Table of th e Rajya  
Sabha during its 225 th  Session  
 
●     The Draft 200 
th Report on the Tuticorin Port Trust Employees (Recru itment, 
Seniority and Promotion) Regulations, 2008 and the Liquefied Petroleum 
Gas (Regulation of Use in Motor Vehicles) Order, 2001 
 
3. The Committee considered the draft 198 
th  and 199 th  Reports  on Statutory 
Orders Laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha during the  224 th  and 225 th  Sessions, 

respectively, and took note of the delay in the fra ming and also in laying of rules/ 
regulations under the different Acts by the various  Ministries/ Departments.  The 
Committee decided to continue to call the major def aulting Ministries/ Departments to 
explain the delay as well as not appending delay st atements in most of the cases. The 
Committee adopted both the 198 th  and 199 th  Reports. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft 200 
th  Report  on the Tuticorin 
Port Trust Employees (Recruitment, Seniority and Pr omotion) Regulations, 2008 and the 
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Regulation of Use in Motor Vehicles) Order, 2001. After some 
discussion the Committee adopted the 200 th  Report unanimously.  The Committee 
decided to present the reports to the House on the 3 rd  September, 2012.  Accordingly, the 
Committee authorized its Chairperson and in her abs ence Dr. Janardhan Wagmare and 
Dr. K.P. Ramalingam to present the reports to the House.  
 
5. ***                                            * **                                    *** 
 
6. ***                                           ** *                                      ***. 
 
7. The meeting adjourned at 3.45 p.m. 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
***  Matter not related to the subject 
 