COM-I
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
 
HUNDRED AND TWENTY NINTH REPORT
 
(Presented on July 26,  2000)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
( July  2000/Saravana 1922 )
C O N  T  E  N  T  S
                       
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                      
2.         REPORT
           
I Introduction
 
II General Insurance (Rationalisation  of
Pay Scale and Other Conditions of
Service of Development Staff)
Scheme, 1976.
 
III Tuticorin  Port Employees’  
(Classification, Control and Appeal)
Regulations, 1979.
 
IV Industrial Development Bank  Of India
(Employees’ Provident Fund)
Regulations, 1981-Implementation of
123rd Report of the Committee on
Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha.
 
V Securities  and Exchange Board of
India   (Debenture  Trustees) Rules,
1983
VI Handlooms (Reservation of Articles
for Production) Rules, 1986.
 
VII Courier Imports and Exports
(Clearance) Regulations, 1998.
 
VIII           Summary of Recommendations
IX Minutes 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

(Constituted on the 16th May, 2000)
 
1.   Shri Dipankar Mukherjee¾ Chairman
Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt
Shri Kapil Sibal
Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
Dr. A. R. Kidwai
Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
Shri  Lajpat Rai
Shri  Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
     10.     Shri  S. Sivasubramanian
     11.     Shri  Dara Singh Chauhan         
     12.  Shri  H. K. Javare Gowda 
     13.     Shri  Drupad Borgohain
     14.    Shri  R. Margabandu
     15.    Shri Suresh A. Keswani
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            1.         Shri Deepak Goyal,  Deputy Secretary
            2.         Shri R.B. Gupta,     Under Secretary
        3.Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
REPORT
I
INTRODUCTION
 
            I,          the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been authorized by the
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Hundred and Twenty  Ninth  Report of
the Committee.
.
The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on  11.7.2000.
 
1.3       The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various Rules/Regulations and
the issues, related therewith, alongwith the Government’s comments received thereon.  The observations and
recommendations which, in the opinion of the Committee, should be brought to the notice of the House, are
contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.
 
NEW DELHI
July 11, 2000
 
 
DIPANKAR   MUKHERJEE
Chairman
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation,
 Rajya Sabha
II
 
GENERAL INSURANCE (RATIONALISATION OF PAY SCALES AND OTHER CONDITIONS OF
SERVICE OF DEVELOPMENT STAFF) SCHEME, 1976.
 
 
            The General Insurance (Rationalisation of Pay Scales and other Conditions of Service of
Development Staff) Scheme, 1976 were examined and some points were referred to the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) on the 15th October, 1990 for their comments.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

The Committee had discussion on the subject with the representatives of the Ministry of Finance and General
Insurance Corporation of India at Bombay on the 27th October, 1990.  The relevant extracts  from the study
note (Annexure-I) on the discussion were forwarded to the Ministry of Finance on the 14th February, 1992
for their further comments on the points raised during the discussion. The points raised during discussion and
the comments furnished by the Ministry vide their Office Memoranda dated the 23rd October, 1990, 15th
April, 1991 and 24th March, 1992 are as under:-
 
Point referred
 
Whether all the rules/regulations/schemes to be framed under the General Insurance Business
(Nationalisation) Act, 1972 have been framed?  If not, what are the matters in respect of which
rules/regulations/schemes are yet to be framed and how the matters are being dealt with in the absence of the
rules?
           
Comments
 
Yes. All Rules, Regulations and Schemes have been framed.
 
II         Point referred
 
Whether the General Insurance (Rationalisation of Pay Scales and Other Conditions of Service of
Development Staff) Schemes, 1976 has been laid  on the Table of the Rajya Sabha, if so, when and if not,
what are the reasons therefor?
           
Comments
 
All Schemes are to be laid in the Table of both Houses and these Schemes must also have been so laid. 
However, in the absence of records which are not readily  traceable (that being of the year 1976), it is not
possible to indicate the exact date.
 
III        Point raised
 
The Chairman of the Committee wanted to know whether all the Rules, Regulations and Schemes framed
under the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 had been placed before the Rajya Sabha. 
As the requisite information was not readily available, the same was assured to be supplied to the Committee
in due course. The Chairman of the Committee wanted that at least in future record should be maintained
properly so that there was no problem in furnishing the information relating thereto.
 
Further Comments
 
The General Insurance (Rationalisation of Pay Scales and Other Conditions of service of Development
Staff)Scheme, 1976 was laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on 3rd November, 1976.
 
IV        Point referred
 
According to proviso contained in paragraph 4 of the Scheme, the Chairman is empowered to appoint a
Committee for categorisation of Development staff.  Whether the Ministry have any objection if the power to
appoint such Committee is vested in the Board of Directors?  The latest composition of the Committee may
also please be furnished.
 
            Whether there are any criteria other than initial cost ratio factor taken into consideration for the
purpose of categorisation of the personnel of Development Staff as Development Superintendent, Inspectors
Grade-I, Inspectors-Grade-II and Field Workers?  The Ministry may please explain the position.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

Comments
 
The categorisation of employees was a one time exercise and the categorisation Committees are not required
now as the Committees have completed their function of categorisation by 1978 as prescribed in the Scheme
and, therefore, no longer operational. Besides the initial cost ratio the scheme provides for the scheduled
premium income for the year 1974 as another criterion for categorisation.  For Inspector Grade -I the
scheduled premium income requirement was Rs. 1 lakh and for Grade-II Rs. 60,000/-.  For Development
Superintendent the scheduled premium income requirement was as follows:
 
having 3 or more persons in the organisation of Development Staff (other than himself) the Premium was not
less than ten lakhs of rupees; or
 
having 4 or more persons in the organisation of Development Staff (other than himself) the premium was not
less than eight lakhs and fifty thousand rupees; or having 5 or more persons in the organisation of
Development staff (other than himself) the premium was not less than seven lakhs and fifty thousand
rupees.Those members of development Staff who were not categorised as Development Superintendent or
Inspector Grade I or Grade II were designated as Field Worker.  The Field Workers  so designated were
thereafter categorised as Inspector Grade I or grade II on satisfying requirements of the cost ratio and
scheduled premium income on the basis of their performance during the years 1975, 1976 and 1977.
 
V         Point raised
 
The Committee pointed out that in the categorisation norms for Development Superintendent, the premium
incomes requirement came down  in inverse proportion to the number of persons supervised by the
Development Superintendent.  It appeared to the Committee thatwith alarge number of subordinates premium
requirement should have correspondingly been raised.
 
It was explained to the Committee that the criteria for categorisation was not only volume of business but
also the span of control and cost ratio.  A large volume of business could be generated in cities with smaller
staff, whereas more staff would be required to develop the same volume in semi-urban areas.  Accordingly,
the cost ratio for cities was tighter as compared to that in other area.  Hence in categorisation the overall
criteria had to be examined   and not more volume of business.  The Committee desired that in view of the
complexities linking the various criteria, an explanatory note be sent.
 
Comments 
 
Information is placed at Annexure-II.
 
VI        Point referred
 
Under the proviso contained in paragraph 6, the Chairman shall decide in case an appeal is made by any
person aggrieved by the decision of the Committee.  Whether the Ministry have any objection if the
aggrieved person is given right to go to the Board of Directors for redressal  of his grievances?
 
Comments
 
The process of categorisation and appeal by the aggrieved persons is now over. No appeal is pending at
present.
 
VII      Point referred
 
Paragraph 21 (1) of the Scheme reads as under:
 
“A Development Officer who has attained the age of 55 years and has completed at least 25 years of service
may at the request be considered for the appointment to the post of Assistant, by the chairman of the
Corporation, subject to availability of vacancy and of his being found suitable for the post.”
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
The term “his being found suitable for the post” is not clear. What are the factors determining suitability for
the post of Assistant?  The Ministry  may please elucidate it.
 
Comments
 
This provision has been introduced by recent amendment dated 13th June, 1990.  The guidelines/factors for
determining suitability are being framed.
 
VIII Point raised
 
The Committee wanted to know the rules framed for conversion of Development Staff to administration after
attaining the age of 55 years subject to minimum 25 years of service.  The Committee also wanted to know
the purpose of the Scheme and whether it applied to physically handicapped employees also.
 
It was stated that rules for such conversion had not yet been framed as the provision came into force only
recently.  The provision was not meant for handicapped employees as there was a separate scheme for them. 
The provision was introduced for Development Staff who due to age or other reasons felt state or stagnated
and despite the loss of functional incentives wanted to be placed in the administration.
 
Comments
 
Rules for conversion have since been framed and instructions issued to Companies.  The guidelines on the
basis of which Chairman, General Insurance Corporation of India may consider individual request for
absorption/conversion are as per note attached. (Annexure-III)
 
IX        Point referred
 
Paragraph VII of the Schedule C reads, inter-alia, as under:-
 
“A confirmed Development Officer who qualifies or has qualified in an examination  shall be paid with effect
from the date of publication of the results of the examination, or Ist day of January, 1988, whichever is later,
the allowance of Technical Qualification.
 
*                        *                                  *
 
            *                        *                                  *
 
What is the rational for selecting the Ist day of January, 1988, when the Scheme came into effect on
1.4.1989?  Whether the scheme for qualifying in various examinations as enumerated in the paragraph VII
was introduced before 1.1.1988, if so from which date and as to why the benefit of allowance could not be
given from the date of its introduction?
 
Comments
 
In the Scheme published on 13.6.1990 the effective date for incentives such as growth incentives and profit
incentives was kept at 1.4.1989 to be co-terminus with the commencement of the performance year, i.e.
Financial Year 1989-90.
 
However, since their pay and allowances were due for revision for quite some time, it was decided to fix
1.1.1988 as the date for revision in salary and allowances including allowance for technical qualification.
 
X         Point raised
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

The  Committee wanted to know whether there was any representatives of the Unions on the Board.  The
Committee was informed that as there was no recognised union, the question of representation of the unions
on the Board did not arise.  The Committee desired to know as to why the process of recognition of unions
had not been completed.
 
Comments
 
            The General Insurance Corporation informed that, in principle, they had no objection to the step but
would readily follow any procedure suggested by the Government in this regard for according recognition to
the unions. The proposal for recognition of associations is under consideration.  The matter is pending on the
side of associations asthe requisite information called for by the Ministry of Labour has not been furnished
by them.
 
XI        Point raised
 
The Committee asked about the composition of General Insurance Corporation Board and wasinformed that
the Board had 15 members, but at that point of time apart from the Chairman, the two MDs and 4 ex-officio
directors, nobody was appointed to the Board.  The Committee enquired the reasons for not filling up the
posts of non-official members of the Board.  The General Insurance Corporation informed that the proposal
in this regard was forwarded to the Ministry.  In response to the Committee’s query on the action taken by the
Ministry, the Director (Insurance), mentioned that the proposal was processed and forwarded to the
appropriate authorities for approval.
 
Comments
 
The appointments  of non-official Directors on the Board of General Insurance Corporation are yet to be
made.
 
XII      Point raised
 
With regard to the position regarding the quorum at the Board  meeting of the General Insurance
Corporation  the Committee   was  informed  that  the quorum was three.  The Committee was of the view
that this number should be raised and also sought the reasons for fixing the quorum at three only. 
 
Comments
 
            Life Insurance Corporation of India is a statutory body and is not comparable to General Insurance
Corporation of India which is a Company under the Companies Act, 1956. In view of the above, provisions
with regard to Board Meetings, Resolution, etc., are specified under the Indian Companies Act as far as
General Insurance Corporation of India is concerned.  In the case of Life Insurance Corporation of India the
same are governed by Life Insurance Corporation Regulations, 1959.
 
Board
 
            Directors of General Insurance Corporation of India are appointed by the Government.  The
minimum and maximum number are fixed by Article 17 of General Insurance Corporation of India which
says that the number of Directors should not be less than 3 and not more than 15.
 
            Similarly quorum for Meetings also are to be governed by the Articles  of Association of the
Company or if there be no specific provision in the Articles of Association, the provisions of Table ‘A’ will
apply.
 
            While the quorum for the General Meetings is fixed at 2 as per Article 13 (2) of the Articles of
Association, quorum for the Board in the absence on specific provision in the Articles of Association is as per
Table ‘A’ which is 1/3 of the total strength of the Board of Directors or 2 Directors, whichever is higher.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

            As far as Life Insurance Corporation of India is concerned 5 Members present in person will be the
quorum for the corporations Meeting as per regulation 7 (I) of the Life Insurance Corporation Regulations,
1959.The Ministry of Finance was again asked to furnish  the latest  position with regard to appointment of
non-official Directors on the Board of General Insurance Corporation and after a couple of reminders the
Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 4th March, 1993 informed as under:-
“that the proposal for filling up the vacancies of non-official Directors on the Board of General Insurance
Corporation is pending with the  Appointment Committee of the Cabinet.”
Thereafter the matter was discussed by the Committee at Bombay on 25th May, 1993 with the representatives
of Ministry of Finance and General Insurance Corporation of India.  The relevant extracts from the study
note (Annexure-IV) were forwarded to the Ministry  of Finance on the 9th March, 1994 for  their comments
on the points raised during the discussions.  The Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 22nd April,1994
furnished the following information:-
“that the case of recognisition of Unions/Associations is pending because the Unions/Associations are not
furnishing the relevant information required by the Labour Commissioner (C).  Inspite of several  reminders
to the General Secretaries of Unions/Associations, the information in the prescribed proforma giving
verification of membership is not coming up.  As regards the appointment of non-official Directors of Board
the case is awaiting approval of the ACC”.
Meanwhile, the Committee discussed the subject matter with the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Insurance Division) and General Insurance Corporation of India on the 25th July, 1995 at Calcutta. But it
was decided to adjourn the discussion due to non-presence of the representatives of all the four subsidiaries
of General Insurance Corporation of India in during the discussion.
6.         The Committee during its visit to Mumbai again discussed the subject matter with the representatives
of General Insurance Corporation on September 20, 1995.  During the course of the discussion the
Committee was not happy with the reply given by General Insurance Corporation that unrecognised Trade
Unions/Associations were invited regularly for discussion and correspondence was exchanged on service
matter, and if new group were recognised, that would only increase the problem of multiplicity of unions.
After sending many reminders, Ministry of Finance, (Insurance Division) have furnished a note and list
(Annexure V) of Trade union which are generally being interacted by General Insurance Corporation for
consulting various issues.
8.         The Committee considered the subject matter at its meeting held on June 20, 2000.   It notes with
satisfaction  the  position on all the points that were under correspondence with the Ministry of Finance. The
Committee  also notes the comments furnished by Ministry of Finance on the subject of representation of the
Unions/Associations in the GIC in decision making on service matter, etc.
 
ANNEXURE-I
[Vide-Para- 2 Page-2]
 
EXTRACTS FROM THE STUDY  NOTE ON THE VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA, TO MANGALORE, GOA AND BOMBAY FORM
23 TO 28 OCTOBER, 1990.
                                               
SUNDAY, THE 27TH OCTOBER, 1990
 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. in the Board Room of the General Insurance Corporation of India,
Bombay and held discussions with the officers of the Corporation with regard to the General Insurance
(Rationalisation of  Pay Scales and Other Conditions of Service of Development Staff) Scheme, 1976.
 
The following were present:
           
Shri Sukomal Sen ¾ Chairman
 
MEMBERS
1.  Shri M. Palaniyandi
                        2.  Shrimati Pratibha Singh
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

            3.  Shri Ashok Nath Verma
            4.  Shri Kapil Verma
 
SECRETARIAT
 
1.  Shri R.P. Mahajan, Deputy Secretary
2.  Shri S.K. Ganguli, Committee Officer
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (INSURANCE DIVISION)
 
1.   Dr. P.V. Thomas, Director
2.   Shri T.C. Nanda, Under Secretary
 
GENERAL INSURANCE CORPORATION OF INDIA
 
1.   Shri Ashok Goenka, Chairman
       2.   Shri B.D. Shah, Managing Director
3.   Shri A.S. Mitra, Managing Director
       4.   Shri V. Jambunathan, G.M. & C.V.O.
       5.   Shri A.N. Poddar, A.G.M.
       6.   Shri A. Ramachandran, A.G.M. 
 
The Chairman, GIC, Shri Goenka, welcomed the Chairman and Members of the Committee and also
introduced his team of officers who were present.
 
The Chairman of the Committee wanted to know whether all the Rules, Regulations and Schemes framed
under the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 had been placed before the Rajya Sahba. 
As the requisite information was not readily available, the same was assured to be supplied to the Committee
in the course.  The Chairman of the Committee wanted that at least in future record should be maintained
properly so that there was no problem in furnishing the information relating thereto.
 
The Committee wanted to know as to why the Development Staff Scheme was framed in 1976 when the
General Insurance Business (Nationlisation) Act, 1972 had come into force in 1973.  The Committee also
enquired about the position of Development Staff in the intervening period.The Chairman, GIC, stated that
after nationalization considerable work had to be completed in reorganising and restructuring the set up and
the manpower of the various companies  both Indian and foreign.  After consolidating the operations, the
rationalization of wage structure was taken in hand.  In the intervening period, the erstwhile service terms
applied to the employees of the merging companies.
 
The Committee pointed out that in the categorization norms for Development Superintendents, the premium
requirement came down in inverse proportion to the number of persons supervised by the Development
Superintendent.  It appeared to the Committee that with a large number of subordinates premium requirement
should have correspondingly been raised.
 
It was explained to the Committee that the criteria for categorization was not only volume of business but
also the span of control and cost ratio.  A large volume of business could be generated in cities with smaller
staff, whereas more staff would be required to develop the same volume in semi-urban areas.  Accordingly,
the cost ratio for cities was tighter as compared to that in other areas.  Hence in categorization the overall
criteria had to be examined and not more volume of business.  The Committee desired that in view of the
complexities linking the various criteria, an explanatory note be sent.  The GIC noted this requirement.
 
The Committee wanted to know the rules framed for conversion of Development staff to administration after
attaining the age of 55 subject to minimum 25 years of service.  The Committee also wanted to know the
purpose of the scheme and whether it applied to physically handicapped employees also.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

It was stated that rules for such conversion had not yet been framed as the provision came into force only
recently.  The provision was not meant for handicapped employees as there was a separate scheme for them. 
The provision was introduced for Development staff who due to age or other reasons felt stale or stagnated
and despite the loss of functional incentives wanted to be placed in the administration.To a query as to
whether any Development Officer had been kept under suspension for a long period pending completion of
enquiry, the GIC informed that guidelines had been issued to reduce delays in the completion of inquires etc.
in such cases but delays did occur an individual cases due to various reasons such as procedural delaying
tactics adopted by the employees, problems faced by the Enquiring Officer/Disciplinary Authority etc.  The
GIC had also finalized a proposal for the appointment of full time Enquiry Officer to reduce delays in
completing vigilance cases.
 
The Committee inquired about the general industrial relations in the Industry.  The Committee was informed
that the industrial relations were quite good and the situation was well under control.  The main problem
appeared to be the multiplicity of unions as there was no recognized union.  The GIC was, therefore, calling
all the registered unions for discussions.
 
The Committee wanted to know whether there was any representative of the Unions on the Board.  The
Committee was informed that as there was no recognized union, the question of representation of the unions
on the Board did not arise.  The Committee desired to know as to why the process of recognition of unions
had not been completed.  The GIC informed that, in principle, they had no objection to the step but would
readily follow any procedure suggested by the Government in this regard for according recognition to the
unions.
 
The Committee asked about the composition of GIC Board and was informed that the Board had 15
members, but at that point of time apart from the Chairman, the two MDs and one ex-office director nobody
was appointed to the Board.  The Committee enquired the reasons for not filling up the posts of non-official
members of the Board.  The GIC informed that the proposal in this regard was forwarded to the Ministry.  In
response to the Committee’s query on the action taken by the Ministry, the Director (Insurance), mentioned
that the proposal was processed and forwarded to the appropriate authorities for approval.With regard to the
position regarding the quorum at the Board meeting of the GIC, the Committee was informed that the
quorum was three.  The Committee was of the view that this number should be raised and also sought the
reasons for fixing the quorum at three only.  The GIC noted the suggestion and promised to send a note on
this subject in due course.
 
The Chairman of the Committee then thanked the Chairman and officers of the GIC for giving clarifications
on various points raised in the meeting.
 
The Committee, thereafter, heard the representatives of the various Associations/Unions viz.  New India
Development Officers Association, Mumbai, All India Federation of General Insurance Company etc.,
regarding their grievances and asked them to submit written memoranda to the Committee within a fortnight
to enable the Committee to examine the issues raised therein.
 
12.1  The meeting, thereafter, concluded at 11.10 A.M
 
ANNEXURE-II
[Vide Para –2 Page -5 ]
 
            A query was raised by the Parliamentary Committee on 28.10.90 as to why the premium income
requirement is inversely proportional to the number of Inspectors in the categorization norms of
Development Superintendents which are as under:-
 
“Development Superintendent- A person of the Development Staff working in the  supervisory capacity and
whose initial cost ratio for the year 1974 would have been within stipulated limits shall be eligible to be
considered for categorization as Development Superintendent”.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

Provided that the scheduled  premium income procured for the year 1974 from his organization –having 3 or
more persons in the Development Staff (Other than himself) was not less than ten lakhs of rupees; or having
4 or more persons in the Development Staff (other than himself) was not less than eight lakhs and fifty
thousand rupees; or having 5 or more persons in the Development Staff (other than  himself) was not less
than seven lakhs and fifty thousand rupees.”
 
            The following explanatory note is given in this regard:-
 
Over 4000 employees of the erstwhile insurance companies working in the field were to be categorized in
different cadres/scales of Development Staff.  These scales were :-
 
Development Superintendents
Inspector Grade I
Inspector Grade II
 
For categorization as Inspector Grade I and Inspector Grade II, the employees who were procuring business
in their individual capacity were considered.  Categorisation was done on the basis of minimum stipulated
premiums and the initial cost ratio to be within the stipulated limits.  Premium requirement was Rs.1 Lakh
for Grade I and Rs. 60,000/- for Grade II.  Initial cost ratio limit was fixed of 9.5% for ‘A’ class cities 10.5%
for ‘B’ class cities and 12.5% for other centers.
 
There were only a few employees in the erstwhile companies working in supervisory capacity in
development side.  The primary functions of these employees were to induct Inspectors, train and guide
them.  Until such time that these Inspectors could perform on their own independently, they were attached to
the organization of the Development Superintendent.
 
In order to consider categorisation as Development Superintendent, it was necessary to apply a basic test viz.,
Whether the concerned person was working in supervisory  capacity.  In cities and urban areas due to high
business potential a net work of smaller number of Inspectors could generate large volume of premium,
whereas in Rural and Semi-urban areas the premium potential being much lower, a larger number of low
premium procuring Inspectors are required to produce even lesser volume of business.  Taking these factors
into account the norms for categorisation as Development Superintendent were prescribed as under:-
 
Organisation of 3 or more Inspectors with a premium of Rs. 10  lakhs, or
 
Organisation of 4 more Inspectors with a premium of Rs. 8    lakhs, or
 
Organisation of 5 or more Inspectors with a premium of Rs. 7.5 lakhs.
 
However, the study of actual cases of supervisory personnel on development side revealed that some of the
supervisory employees did not have the organization of minumum 5 Inspectors as some of the Inspectors
after initial training in the organization and gaining confidence were detached from the organization and
started functioning independently thereby bringing the number of Inspectors in the organization below 5.  In
these cases, it was not possible to immediately induct new Inspectors.  No doubt, even with a smaller number
of Inspectors in the organization, the premium procurement was higher than Rs. 7.5 lakhs  expected of the
organization of 5 Inspectors.
 
5.         In Rural and Semi-urban areas the premium potential was much lower compared to cities.  However,
a larger number of lower premium procuring Inspectors could be available in these areas.  It was, therefore,
considered necessary to prescribe lower premium target for categorisation as Development Superintendent to
take care of such Rural and semi-urban areas provided a supervisory Development Staff had a reasonably 
wider organization of a larger number of Inspectors.  Hence the premium norm of 7.5 lakhs with the
organization of 5 or more Inspectors was prescribed considering the need of these areas.
 
In the context of  the above facts  it was felt reasonable that because of the exit of fully trained  Inspector
from the organization, the concerned supervisory Development Superintendent who has taken pains to induct
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

and train Inspector should not be deprived of on opportunity of being considered for categorisation as
Development Superintendent at best we might prescribe higher premium target for their organization.  It was
therefore, decided that a person of development staff should satisfy one of the three norms prescribed in the
Scheme which (i) would prove their functioning in the supervisory capacity and (ii) have reasonable
premium income.  Hence, the minimum number of Inspectors to constitute an organization was fixed at 3. 
Accordingly, the three norms were:-
 
Person satisfying a norm of larger organization of 5 or more were considered with lower premium target of
Rs. 7.5 lakhs because of all new recruits, or With a smaller organization of 4 Inspectors with relatively higher
premium procurement of  Rs.8.5 lakhs premium, or
 
Smallest organization of 3 Inspectors with Rs.10 lakhs premium
 
7.         In this connection, it may be stated that only one employee in the entire Industry satisfied the
categorization norms as above and was categorized  as Development Superintendent. In view of this position,
the cadre of Development Superintendent has since been treated as closed cadre.  The employee who was
categorized as Development Superintendent was also upgraded to the lowest scale of Class I.
ANNEXURE-III
[Vide Para 2 –Page- 7]
 
GUIDELINES FOR CONSIDERING INDIVIDUAL REQUESTS OF DEVELOPMENT OFFICERS
FOR ABSORPTION/CONVERSION TO ADMINISTRATIVE SIDE UNDER PARAGRAPH 21 OF
GENERAL INSURANCE (RATIONALIZATION OF PAY SCALE AND OTHER CONDITIONS OF
SERVICE OF DEVELOPMENT STAFF) SCHEME, 1976.
______________________________________________________
 
Development Officer(a) should have passed SSC Examination with at least 45% marks; or (b) should have
passed HSC or higher Examination.  If candidate has completed Associateship in Insurance, the requirement
as to minimum marks in SSC may be waived.
 
His cost during each of the immediate three performance years should have been with the stipulated limits.
 
There should be no enquiry under CDA Rules pending or contemplated against him.
 
Besides, he should not have been subjected to any major penalty under CDA rules earlier. Also no enquiry
should be pending against him involving major penalty proceeding.
 
 3(a).  Before conversion, his portfolio should be audited by Internal Audit and queries, if any, relating to his
portfolio should be satisfactorily resolved.
 
The candidate satisfying above norms shall be interviewed by the Committee to be specifically appointed by
Chairman, General Insurance Corporation comprising Officers not below the rank of Deputy Manager.
 
Candidate successful at the interview shall have to undergo medical test and should be found fit for carrying
out clerical functions.
 
Each such request of employee be first scrutinized by H.O. of Company and then forwarded to General
Insurance Corporation with views and remarks of C.M.D.
ANNEXURE-IV
[Vide Para-4 Page- 11]
 
EXTRACTS FROM THE STUDY NOTE OF  THE DISCUSSION ON THE GENERAL INSURANCE
(RATIONALISATION OF PAY SCALES AND OTHER CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF DEVELOPMENT
STAFF) SCHEME,1976. HELD AT MUMBAI ON THE 25TH MAY 1993
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
The Committee assembled at 12.05 P.M. on the 25th May, 1993, in the Banquet Chancery III of Hotel
President, Bombay and held discussion with the representatives of the General Insurance corporation of
India, Bombay and the Ministry of  Finance (Insurance Division).
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Bhubaneswar   Kalita  ¾ Chairman
2.         Shri   Sangh Priya Gautam
3.         Shri  Md. Salim
4.         Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
5.         Dr. Yellamanchili Sivaji
6.         Shri Gopalsingh G. Solanki
7.         Shri P. Upendra
8.         Shri Tindivanam G. Venkatraman
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            1.         Shri  Om Parkash,  Under Secretary
            2.         Shri A.K. Singh,     Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF GENERAL INSURANCE CORPORATION OF INDIA
 
            1.         Mr. S.V. Mony, Chairman, GIC
            2.         Mr. A.S. Mitra ,   MD, GIC
            3.         Mr. U. Mahesh Rao,  MD, GIC
            4.         Mr. P.R. Haredia , GM, GIC
            5.         Mr. R.M. Solanki , Manager, GIC,
            6.         Mr. Niranjan Pant, FA
            7.         Mr. S.G. Kaimal , AM , GIC
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE
 
                        Shri G.C. Basumatari,   Deputy Secretary
 
Shri S.V. Mony,  Chairman, General Insurance Corporation of India, welcomed the Committee and
introduced his team of Officers.  Thereafter, the Chairman also introduced the Members and Officers of the
Committee.
 
At the outset, Shri Mony gave brief account of the working of the General Insurance Corporation of India.
 
The Committee was informed that action has been taken by the Ministry of Finance regarding subject-wise
indexing of all rules, regulations, schemes etc. framed under the Nationalization Act, 1972.
 
The Committee was also informed that there were no Development Superintendents in the General Insurance
Corporation now.
 
In regard to framing of rules for conversion of Development Officers in the Administrative side, who attain
the age of 55 years and who have put in minimum of 25 years of service as Development Officers, the
Committee was informed that these rules are now meant for same cases where a Development Officer finds,
field work a problem due to advanced age but is fit to take up administrative job and the number of cases
where such proviso was invoked was very limited.
 
In regard to the quorum for General Insurance Corporation Board, it was intimated that quorum proviso will
apply as per companies Act, 1956.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
8.7       The Committee was informed that all the rules/regulations/schemes             under the General
Insurance Business (Nationalization) Act, 1972 and the General Insurance (Rationalization of Pay Scales and
Other Conditions of Service of Development Staff) Scheme, 1976 have been laid on the table of the Rajya
Sabha.
 
The Committee was satisfied with the reply that the Categorization of employees’ was a one time exercise
and the Categorization Committee were not required now as the Committee  has completed its function of
categorization by 1978 as prescribed in the Scheme, and therefore, no longer operational.
 
The Committee was happy to note that the process of categorization and appeal by the aggrieved persons is
now over and no appeal was pending at present.
 
 The Committee noted that the guidelines and factors for determining stability have been framed and issued.
 
 The Committee stressed the need for recognition of trade unions/associations and recommends that
immediate steps should be taken to identify and grant recognition to trade unions/ associations of different
organizations.
 
 The Committee was constrained to note that the appointment of non-Official Directors on the Board of
General Insurance Corporation was pending since long and recommended that this matter be expedited at the
earliest.In regard to appointment of Directors of General Insurance Corporation of India, who are appointed
by the Government, it was informed that the appointment of Board of Directors is pending with the
Appointments committee of the Cabinet.  The Committee directed the representative of the Ministry to
expedite the matter.
 
 The discussion concluded at 1.15 P.M. with a vote of  thanks to the Chair.
ANNEXURE-V
[Vide para- 7  page - 12]
 
VIDE MINISTRY OF FINANCE O.M. No. 4(5)/Ins.III/95
DATED OCTOBER 13, 1999.
 
Subject:           Recognition of Unions/associations in GIC
 
As of now, though there are no Recognised Unions, the Industry is dealing with the representative Unions on
historical basis.  The management has been dealing with a set of Unions (as per list attached) and calling
them for structured meetings.
(Appendix A)
 
It would be necessary to review the criterion for inviting Associations/Unions for negotiations.  It has  been
our experience that in the absence of an established mechanism or criterion to determine the representative
strength, it becomes very difficult to deal with splinter groups and new formations, each of which claim to
have sizeable representative strength whereas factually the position may be quite different.
 
The right to collective bargaining flows from the factum  of recognition of Unions.  There is no statute
applicable to Central Government Undertakings, providing for recognition of Unions.  Keeping in view that
the powers to regulate pay scales and other terms and conditions of service of employees are vested in
Central Government, under the General Insurance (Business) Nationalisation Act, 1972 (GIBNA), the
situation of reaching bipartite settlements with the Unions has not arisen as far as General Insurance Industry
is concerned.
 
Matters concerning Industrial relations do come within the purview of the Industrial Disputes Act.  However,
we have taken   the   position   that   it   does   not apply to our Industry.  In respect   of   matters   on   which 
Central Government have framed specific Schemes in terms of Section 17A of GIBNA, 1972, (Annexure-II)
the relevant extracts of which supporting the above position are reproduced hereunder:
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
“The provisions of this section and of any scheme framed under it shall have effect notwithstanding anything
to the contrary contained in any other law or any agreement, award or other instrument for the time being in
force”.
 
4.         Against this background, none of the Unions in the Industry is recognised.  Consequently, there are no
bipartite  settlements on service conditions as far as General Insurance Industry is concerned.  To that extent
the right of collective bargaining culminating in signed agreements with the Unions is not formalised. 
However, structured meetings are held with representative Unions (details as per Annexure-I) on all issues
concerning service conditions, including revision in pay scales and other matters of employee benefit.  Based
on the discussions with the Unions, our approach is finalised keeping in view the position in comparable
financial institutions, including LIC and where applicable Banks.  As far as wage revision and core benefit
items are concerned, our recommendations are formulated keeping in view the  Government guidelines on
cost parameters and other relevant factors and submitted to the Government and Implementation is through
Notification of the amendment to Rationalisation Schemes on the part of the Government.  For other benefit
items, not covered under the Government notified Rationalisation Schemes, Board’s approval is taken.
 
The position obtained in our Industry is in sharp contrast to the position in the Banking Industry where
negotiations are carried out as between the employees unions and IBA as Management designated collective
negotiating agency, and bipartite settlements under Section 2(p) and Section 18(1) of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 read with Rule 58 of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Act, 1957 are reached.In the context of
Industrial relations, the management would be on a stronger footing where it has powers vested with it to
regulate the terms and conditions of service of employees, including  wage revision.  Under such a situation,
the management has the necessary flexibility to negotiate and arrive at settlements through bipartite written
agreements as between the management and the Unions.  This inherent right provides for a stronger leverage
to management and the vis-à-vis Unions and the employees.  If the industry is vested with the powers to
decide on pay scales and service conditions of its employees, it would indeed go a long way in strengthening
the Industry.  It would also then be  possible for the Industry to start thinking  in terms of recognition of
Unions and to recognise the rights of the Unions for collective bargaining under the Industrial Disputes Act. 
Once the right to determine the pay scales and service conditions is vested with the management, a suitable
mechanism would have to be evolved on recognition to representative Unions.
 
As an alternative the quantum of recognition was examined in the light of the provisions of the Code of
Discipline formulated by the 16th Indian Labour Conference, 1958.  The Code of Discipline provides for
recognition by an Industry on purely voluntary basis as between the Unions and the Management and also
prescribes a Code of Discipline within which the two parties have to operate.  A copy of the code of
discipline formulated by the Indian Labour Conference is enclosed for information (Annexure III).  It is seen
that the Code imposes various rights and obligations on the Unions and the Management. In particular, the
Code envisages that no unilateral decision can be taken in connection with any industrial matter and disputes
should be settled at appropriate level.  This per-supposes that there would be a continuous dialogue as
between the management and Unions on all issues concerning employees and that any changes can be made
only through such consultations having first taken place.  It further provides  for  the  grievance  settlement 
machinery.  There are other issues which will have to be tackled, if we were to consider recognition of
Unions under the Code of Discipline of ILC.
 
6.1       It is felt that at the present moment, it would be difficult to settle all these issues,  Further, any move
to recognise any Union, under the Code of Discipline, may be construed as recognition for collective
bargaining rights as well, where recognition is in terms of a set of “rights and obligations”. This issue could
be gone into only when powers are delegated to GIC to frame pay scales and other terms and conditions of
service when we could have bilateral agreements with the “recognised” Unions which situation does not exist
as of now and is only a part of contemplated scenario for future.
 
Keeping the above position in view, move on recognition may be restricted to the limited purpose of
determining the representative strength of Unions for being called for structured meetings and discussions
with the management, so as to obviate splinter groups coming up and demanding to be called for structured
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

meetings.  In the process, it could be that some of the existing Unions may lose their established status but
that is inevitable and we would have to be ready to face any reaction from such quarters consistent with fair
and reasonable standards for determining numerical strength.
 
Once the policy decision on the mechanism for ascertaining the representative strength, we may write to the
Unions on the mechanism for determining their representative strength based on benchmark adopted, making
it clear that the process is meant to determine the representative character of the Unions for the limited
purpose of calling them for structured meetings and discussions on matter relating to employees of the
Industry.  This line of action would not conflict with the stand taken in the pending case before the Supreme
Court. It   would
also obviate Union invoking application of Industrial Disputes Act.  The process is meant to be an Internal
mechanism to deal
with the issue of multiplicity of Unions and splinter groups clamoring for right to be called for structured
meetings mainly on the ground that they are a registered trade Union.
 
Within this frame work and with a view to settle the issue, it is proposed to have a mechanism in place with
the following objective:
 
To determine the representative strength of various groups representing employees.
 
This would cover existing Unions/Associations as well as new groups/formations.
 
The representative strength could be determined through check-off facility.
 
Employees Unions/Associations which are found to have minimum prescribed representative strength, as
ascertained through check-off facility would be accorded the status of representative bodies to be called for
structured meetings and discussions on wage revision and other employee related matters.
 
We have held discussions with all the existing Unions and also with some of the new formations.  The
managements of the four subsidiaries have also been consulted on the check-off system and they have
endorsed the idea.  This seems to be the way out but it is likely that some of the existing Unions may lose
their existing status once the check-off system is introduced and would, for that reason, oppose the system. 
On the other hand, this system would provide for a fair and equitable opportunity to all existing as well as
new formations to be called for structured meetings based on their numerical strength and therefore the idea
is appealing.  We would have to contend with such opposition as may come up as we go along.
 
32
In the past, we had referred the matter of proceeding with the issue of recognition of Unions to the Ministry
and we were advised that we could take our own view in consultation with the Labour Ministry.  The matter
has been discussed with Labour Ministry officials who have opined that we could evolve an appropriate
mechanism as may be found suitable in our situation.  As of now, there is no central legislation under which
we could settle the issue and hence, we would have to evolve our own mechanism.
APPENDIX-A
[VIDE PARA -1 PAGE-28]
 
LIST OF EMPLOYEES/OFFICERS’ UNIONS/ASSOCIATIONs HISTORICALLY CALLED FOR
DISCUSSIONS/nEGOTIATIONS ON SERVICE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYEES.
 
Sl. No Class I Officers
1. National Confederation of General Insurance Officers’ Associations (NCGIOA)
 
2. General Insurance Officers’ All India Association (GIOAIA)
  
Class II (Development Officers)
3. All India Federation of General Insurance Development Officers’ Association 
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

4. All India General Insurance Field Workers’ Association (AIGIEWA)
       
5. General Insurance Development Officers’ Federation (GIDOF)
 
 Class III/IV Employees
6. General Insurance Employees’ All India Association (GIEAIA) 
 
7. All India Insurance Employees’ Association (AIIEA)
 
8. National Federation of General Insurance Employees’ Federation (NFGIE)
 
9. Indian National General Insurance Employees’ Federation (INGIEF) 
 
10. All India confederation of General Insurance Employees’ Federation (AICGIEF)
 
11. All India General Insurance employees’ Congress (AIGIEC)
 
III
 
Tuticorin Port Employees’ (Classification,
Control and Appeal) Regulations, 1979.
 
            The Committee  examined the Tuticorin Port Employees’ (Classification Control and Appeal)
Regulations, 1979 framed under the  Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 and certain points were referred to the
Ministry of Surface Transport on June 6, 1995 for their comments/clarifications.  The Committee discussed
these points in the light of the comments furnished by the Ministry with the representatives of the Tuticorin
Port Trust and the Ministry of Surface Transport at Tuticorin on June 15, 1995.
 
The points referred to the Ministry, their comments thereon and the observations of the Committee are as
under:-
 
I           Point referred
Regulation 7 (3) (a)
 
An employee shall be deemed to have been placed under suspension by an order of appointing authority-
 
With effect from the date of his detention, if he is detained in custody, whether on a criminal charge or
otherwise, for a period exceeding forty eight hours;
 
The term ‘otherwise’ appearing in the regulation is vague.  Whether the Ministry have any objection in
specifying the said term in the regulation itself?
 
Ministry’s reply
 
            Regulation 7 (3) (a) of the Tuticorin Port Employees (Classification, Control and Appeal)
Regulations, 1979, are based on Rule 10 (2) (a) of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and
Appeal) Rules, 1965 which are the mother rules to  all classification, Control and Appeal Rules/Regulations. 
As  observed  by
 
35
 
the  Committee, the  term ‘otherwise’ appearing in the  Regulation   is vague.  It is suggested that the words
‘whether on a criminal charge or otherwise’ appearing in the said Regulation may be deleted.
 
            Committee’s Observation/Suggestion
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
            After some discussion the suggestion of the Committee  was  agreed.  It was further agreed by the
Chairman, Tuticorin Port Trust to incorporate a provision regarding reinstatement of an employee as soon as
he was acquitted.
 
II          Point referred
                   Regulation 8
 
Penalties- The following penalties may, for good and sufficient reasons and as hereinafter provided, be
imposed on an employee, namely:-
 
Minor penalties:
         
                        *                      *                      *
 
Major penalties:
 
*                      *                      *
            The term ‘for good and sufficient reasons’ appearing in the regulation is vague which may be misused
against an employee.  Whether the Ministry would like to elaborate as to what the term ‘for  good and
sufficient reasons’ constitutes?
 
            Ministry’s Comments
 
            Regulation 8 of the Tuticorin Port Employees (Classification, Control and Appeal) Regulations, 1979,
is based on Rule 11 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965.
 
            No  penalty can be imposed on an employee unless the charge is found proved.  The words ‘for good
and sufficient reasons’ may be deleted and the words ‘if the charge (s) is/are found proved and keeping in
view the gravity of the  charge (s) so proved’ may be substituted.  This would make the intention behind the
Regulation clear.
 
            Committee’s Observation/Suggestion
 
            The Committee observed that the word ‘found’ in the proposed substitution was redundant which the
Chairman Tuticorin  Port Trust agreed to delete.
 
III        Point referred
                   Regulation 10 (2)
 
Whenever the disciplinary authority is of the opinion that there are grounds for inquiring into the truth of any
imputation of misconduct or misbehaviour against an employee, it may itself inquire into, or appoint an
authority to inquire into, the truth thereof. 
 
Whether the Ministry would like to explain what acts of an employee constitute the imputation of
misconduct or misbehaviour?
 
            Ministry’s Reply
 
            The Tuticorin Port Employees (Classification, Control and Appeal) Regulations, 1979, deal with only
the procedure to be followed in taking disciplinary action against employees for misconduct or
misbehaviour.    The Tuticorin Port Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 1979, deal with various kinds of
misconduct which an employee may commit and for which  department  proceedings may be launched
against him.  But, in the very nature of things, these Regulations cannot be exhaustive of every conceivable
kind of misconduct or misbehaviour that may be committed by an employee.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

            Committee’s Observation/suggestion
 
            The Committee pointed out to the Chairman, Tuticorin Port Trust that the Regulation, as at present
worded was not clear.  It was therefore suggested to them that the words ‘as contemplated in the conduct 
Regulations’ may be added after words ‘misconduct or misbehaviour’ with a view to make the Regulation
precise.
 
            The Chairman, Tuticorin Port Trust  agreed to the suggestion.
 
IV        Point referred
       Regulation 10 (4)
 
(4)        The disciplinary authority shall deliver or cause to be delivered to the employee a copy of the articles
or charge, the statement of the imputations of misconduct, or misbehaviour and a list of  documents and
witnesses by which each article of charge is proposed to be sustained and shall require the employee to
submit, within such time as may be specified a written statement of his defence and to state whether he
desires to be heard in person.
 
            The  term ‘within such time as may be specified’ delegates unguided and unspecified discretionary
power to  the disciplinary authority and is liable to be used with  discrimination.
 
Whether there is any objection in prescribing a  definite time limit in this regard so that the power may not be
misused?
 
            Ministry’s reply
 
Presently, in the Central Government a time limit of 10 days has been prescribed through executive
instructions.  Tuticorin Port Trust also allows 10 days to its employees to submit written statement of
defence.  In Regulation 10 (4), the  words ‘within such time as may be specified’ may be substituted by the
words ‘within10 days’, so as to make it specific.
 
Committee’s Observation/suggestion
 
Members felt that the period of 10 days was inadequate.  They felt that a period of 30 days may be allowed to
an employee to file his written statement.  The chairman, Tuticorin Port Trust agreed to substitute the words
‘within such time as may be specified’ by the words ‘within 30 days’ in  the aforesaid Regulation.
 
V         Point referred
       Regulation 10 (15) (a)
 
If it appears necessary before the  close of the case on the side of the disciplinary authority, the inquiring
authority may, in its discretion, allow the presenting officer to produce evidence not included in the list given
to the employee or may itself call for new evidence or recall and re-examine any  witness and in such case
the employee shall be entitled to have, if he demands it, a copy of the list of further evidence proposed to be
produced and an adjournment of the inquiry for three clear days before  the production of such new evidence,
exclusive of the day of adjournment and the day to which the inquiry is adjourned.
 
What criteria are kept in mind by the inquiring authority to exercise its discretion in allowing the Presenting
Officer to produce evidence not included in the list given to the employee or may itself call for new evidence
or recall and re-examine any witness?
 
Ministry’s reply
 
            The note below Regulation 10(15) (c) reads as follows:-
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

“New evidence shall not be permitted or called for and no witness shall be recalled  to   fill up any gap in the
evidence.  Such evidence may be called for only when there is an inherent lacuna or defect in the evidence
which has been produced originally.”
 
            Identical provision is also available under Rule 14(15) of the Central Civil Services (Classification,
Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965.  Since the disciplinary Authority has to follow the above provisions is
exercising its discretion to allow the Presenting Officer to produce new evidence, or recall, or re-examine any
witness, it is felt that no injustice would be caused to any employee.
 
Committee’s Observation
 
            THE COMMITTEE AGREED THAT NO MODIFICATION WAS NEEDED IN
REGULATION 10(15)(A).
 
VI        Point referred
                   Regulation 13
 
Communication of orders:-  Orders made by the disciplinary authority shall be communicated to the
employee who shall also be supplied with a copy of the report of the inquiry, if any, held by the disciplinary
authority and a copy of its findings on each article of charge or where the disciplinary authority is not the
inquiry authority, a copy of the report of the inquiring authority and a statement of the findings of the
disciplinary authority together with brief reasons for its disagreement, if any, with the findings of the
inquiring authority (unless they have already been supplied to him).
 
            Whether there is any objection to provide time limit for communication of orders of the disciplinary
authority to the employee?
 
            Ministry’s reply
 
            There is no objection to provide time limit for communication of orders of the Disciplinary Authority
to the employee.  Taking into account the nature and quantum of work involved, it would be reasonable to
prescribed a time limit of 45 days for the communication of orders of the Disciplinary Authority to the
employee.
 
            Committee’s Observation
 
THE COMMITTEE AGREED TO THE PROPOSAL.
 
VII       Point referred
                    Regulation 18
 
Orders made by Central Government not appealable :-  Notwithstanding anything contained in this part,
no appeal shall lie against (i) any order made with the approval of the Central Government; (ii) any order
passed by an inquiring authority in the course of an inquiry under regulation 10.
 
            What is the justification for retaining this ouster Clause which makes the Central Government final
adjudicating authority and debars courts from entertaining appeals?
 
            Ministry’s reply
 
            Regulation 18 of the Tuticorin Port Employees (Classification, Control and Appeal)  Regulations,
1979, is based on Rule 22 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965,
which inter alia provides that no appeal shall lie against any order made by the President.  In the case of Port
Regulations, the ultimate administrative authority for entertaining appeals is the Central Government.  This
provision does not debar the courts from entertaining    writ   petitions    against     the  orders   of   the   
ultimate administrative appellate authority, namely, Central Government.  In this connection, it may be
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

mentioned that under the Central Government also, even though no appeal can be made against any order
made by the President, the Central Government employees are free to seek justice by approaching the central
Administrative Tribunal, etc.
 
            Committee’s Observation/suggestion
 
            The Committee felt that the provision appeared ultra vires in as much as this interfered with the
principle of natural justice.  Accordingly, it was suggested that the provision should be made clear by
deleting the word ‘no’ appearing in the Regulation and add the words ‘notwithstanding any thing contained
in this part, appeal shall lie before competent, court of law.”
 
            The Chairman Tuticorin Port Trust, agreed to the suggestion.
 
VIII Point referred
                     Regulation 29
 
Review-(1)       Notwithstanding anything contained in these regulations – (i)  Central Government; or (ii) the
Board; or (iii) the Chairman; or (iv) the appellate authority within six months of the date of the orders
proposed to be reviewed, or (v) any other authority, specified in this behalf by the Board by a general or
special order, and within such time as may be prescribed in such general or special order, may at any time
either on his or its own motion or otherwise call for the records of any inquiry and review any order made
under these regulations from which no appeal is allowed, but no appeal has been preferred or from which no
appeal is allowed after consultation with the Central Government where such consultation is necessary and x
x x
 
            What criteria are kept in mind in taking suo moto action for calling the records of any inquiry and
reviewing any final orders?
            Ministry’s reply
 
            Regulation 29 of the Tuticorin Port Employees (Classification, Control and Appeal) Regulations,
1979, is based on Rule 29 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965,
which,  inter-alia, provides for review.  The provisions in Port Regulations as well as in the Central Civil
Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965, are based on the Government of India instructions
issued vide Ministry of Home Affairs O.M. No. 43/109/64-AVD, dated 18.11.1964.
 
            Ordinarily, the power of review is exercised by the prescribed authorities if some new fact or material
having the nature of changing the entire complexion of the case comes to the notice of the Reviewing
Authority.
 
            Committee’s Observation
 
            The Committee agreed that no modification was required in the Regulation.
 
Relevant extracts from the study note on the visit of the Committee referred to above were forwarded to the
Ministry of Surface Transport on November 6, 1995 for necessary action/compliance.
 
After a couple of reminders and interim replies, the Tuticorin Port Trust vide their  letter dated 27.2.97
furnished a copy of the notification notifying the amendments to the Tuticorin Port Employees
(Classification, Control and Appeal)  Regulations, 1979, as recommended by the Committee except the
Regulation 13 (Annexure-I)
 
On July 31, 1997 the Ministry of Surface Transport were, requested to furnish the latest position with regard
to the amendments to be carried out in regulation 13 providing for a time limit  of   45 days for
communication of orders of the disciplinary authority to the employee.  The Ministry after a couple of
reminders furnished a copy of the Notification implementing the recommendation of the Committee on
Regulation 13 (Annexure-II)
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
6.         The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on July 19, 2000.  It notes with satisfaction
that the Ministry have since notified the amendments in regulations 7(3)(a), 8, 10(2), 13 and 18 of the
Tuticorin Port Employees’ (Classification, Control and Appeal) Regulations, 1979 as suggested by it.
 
ANNEXURE- I
[Vide Para -4 Page- 43]
 
MINISTRY OF SURFACE TRANSPORT
(DEPARTMENT OF PORTS )
 
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 10th October, 1996
 
            G.S.R. 466(E) In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 124, read with sub-
section (1) of Section 132 of the Major Ports Act, 1963 (38 of 1963), the Central Government hereby
approves the Tuticorin Port Employees’ (Classification, Control and Appeal) Second Amendment
Regulations, 1996 made by the Board of trustees for the Port of Tuticorin and set out in the Schedule
annexed to this notification.
 
            2.         The said regulations shall come into force on the date of publication of this notification in the
Official Gazette.
 
SCHEDULE
 
TUTICORIN PORT EMPLOYEES (CLASSIFICATION, CONTROL AND APPEAL) SECOND
AMENDMENT REGULATIONS, 1996.
 
            In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 28 of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963)  the
Board of Trustees for the Port of Tuticorin hereby makes the following Regulations further to amend the
Tuticorin Port Employees (Classification, Control and Appeal)  Regulations, 1979 (published at G.S.R. 
101(E) in the Gazette of India Extraordinary dated the 1st March, 1979), subject to approval of the Central
Government under Section 124 ibid.
Short title and commencement:
 
(i)         These Regulations may be called the Tuticorin Port Employees   (Classification, Control and Appeal)
Second Amendment Regulations, 1996.
 
They shall come into force on the date on which the Central Government’s notification approving these
Regulations is published in the Official Gazette.
 
2.     (i)             The existing provisions of sub-regulation (3) of Regulation 7 shall be substituted by the
following, namely-
 
“(3)      An employee shall be deemed to have been placed under suspension by an      order of appointing
authority-
 
with effect from the date of his detention, if he is detained in custody for a period exceeding forth-eight
hours;
 
with effect from the date of his conviction, if in the event of a conviction for an offence, he is sentenced to a
term of imprisonment exceeding forty-eight hours and is not forthwith dismissed or removed or compulsorily
retired consequent to such conviction.
 
Provided that if the employee is acquitted or granted bail, he/she shall be reinstated in service forthwith.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
Explanation:  The period of forty-eight hours referred to in clause (b) of this sub-regulation shall be
computed from the commencement of the imprisonment after the conviction and for this purpose,
intermittent periods of imprisonment, if any, shall be taken into account”.
 
 (ii)  In regulation 8 for the words “for good and sufficient reasons” the words ”if the charge (s) is/are proved
and keeping in view of the gravity of the charge(s) so proved” shall be substituted.
 
(iii)       In sub-regulation (2) of Regulation 10 the words” as   contemplated in the Tuticorin Port Employees
(Conduct) Regulations, 1979” shall be inserted between the words “misbehavior” and “against”.
 
(iv) In sub-regulation (4) of Regulation 10, for the words “within such time as may be specified” the words
and  figures “within 30 days” shall be substituted.
 
Regulation 18 the existing provisions shall be substituted by the following, namely-
 
“18.      Appeals against orders of the Central Government—
 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this part, appeal shall lie before the competent Court of Law against
any order made with the approval of the Central Government.
 
Note: Any order passed by an inquiring authority in the course of an inquiry under Regulation 10 is not
appealable”.
 
(F.No.II-11011/7/95-PE-I)
K.V. RAO, Jt. Secy.
 
            Foot Note:
Principal Regulations were published in the Gazette of India videG.S.R. No. 101(E) dated the 1st March,
1979 and subsequently amended vide G.S.R. No. 90(E), dated the 21st January, 1990.
 
ANNEXURE-II
[Vide Para-5 page -44]
 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY
 
MINISTRY OF SURFACE TRANSPORT
(Ports Wing)
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 29th June, 1998
 
G.S.R. 366 (E)-In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 124, read with Sub-section
(1) of Section 132 of the Major Ports Act, 1963 (38 of 1963), the Central Government hereby approves the
Tuticorin  Port Employees (Classification, Control and Appeal), Third Amendment Regulations, 1998 made
by the Board of Trustees for the  Port of Tuticorin and set out in the Schedule annexed to this notification.
 
2.         The said regulations shall come into force on the date of publication of this notification in the
Official Gazette.
 
SCHEDULE
 
TUTICORIN PORT EMPLOYEES  (CLASSIFICATION, CONTROL AND APPEAL) THIRD
AMENDMENT REGULATIONS, 1998.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

In exercise of the power conferred by section 28 of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963), the Board
of Trustees for the Port of Tuticorin hereby makes the following Regulations further to amend the Tuticorin
Port Employees (Classification, Control and Appeal) Regulations, 1979 (Published at G.S.R. 101 (E) in the
Gazette of India Extraordinary, dated the 1st March, 1979), subject to approval of the Central Government
under Section 124 ibid.
 
1.         Short title and Commencement:
 
These Regulations may be called the Tuticorin Port Employees (Classification, Control and Appeal) Third 
Amendment Regulations, 1998.
 
They shall come into force on the date on which the Central Government’s notification approving these
Regulations is published in the Official Gazette.
 
In Regulation 13, the words, “within  45 days of the order” may be inserted between the words
“Communicated” and “to the employee”.
 
 
[ F.No. H-11011/7/95-PE-1]
K.V. RAO, Jt. Secy.
 
Foot Notes:-  Principal Regulations were published in the Gazette of India vide GSR 101 (E) dated the 1st
March, 1979, and subsequently amended vide GSR 90 (E) dated the 21st January, 1990 and GSR 466 (E),
dated the 10th October, 1996.
IV
 
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INDIA (EMPLOYEE’S PROVIDENT FUND)
REGULATIONS, 1981 IMPLEMENTATION OF 123RD REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA.
 
            The Committee examined the Industrial Development Bank of India (Employees’ Provident Fund) 
Regulations, 1981 framed under the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964 and the matter was
reported vide its 123rd Report which was presented to the House on the 21st December 1998.  The
Committee was satisfied with the Ministry’s comments on most of the points arising out of the examination
of the Industrial Development Bank of India (Employee’s  Provident  Fund) Regulations, 1981.  The
Committee noted with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance had accepted its views on Regulations 20 (iii)
and 22 (i).  The Committee further expressed hope the Government would carry our necessary amendments
in the Regulations.
 
2.         The Ministry of Finance has since implemented the Committee’s suggestion in  relation to Regulation
22(i) and a notification dated the 4th January 1997 had already been laid on the Table of the House on the
14th May  1997.
 
Relevant extracts from the Report in relation to Regulation 20 (iii) are reproduced below:-
 
I           Regulation 20 (iii)
 
            A subscriber who has been permitted to withdraw money from the Fund under sub-regulation (ii) of
Regulation 19 shall satisfy the Development Bank within a reasonable period as may be specified by the
Development Bank that the money has been utilized for the purpose for  which   it was   withdrawn and  if 
he   fails  to   do so,     the whole of the sum so withdrawn, or so much thereof as has not been applied for the
purpose which it was withdrawn, shall be forthwith repaid in one lump sum together with interest thereon at
the rate determined under Regulation 13, by the subscriber to the Fund, and in default of such payment, it
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

shall be ordered by the  Development Bank to be recovered from his emoluments either in a lump sum or in
such number of monthly installments as may be determined by the Development Bank.
 
II         Point referred
 
The  period for satisfying the Development Bank  regarding the utilization of the Money needs to be
specified in the Regulation itself instead of leaving to the judgement of the Bank.
 
            Reply of IDBI (January 1992)
 
Under Regulation 20 (iii), the subscriber is required to satisfy IDBI regarding utilization of the money for the
purpose for which it was withdrawn under Regulation 19 (ii), within a reasonable period as may be specified
by IDBI.
 
            The Committee’s observations/recommendations with regard to regulation 20 (iii) were as under:-
 
            Withdrawal of money under Regulation 19 (ii), is for different purpose mentioned therein e.g. higher
educations, celebration of marriage, treatment for illness, etc.  The period of utilization varies from case to
case depending on the purpose for which the amount is withdrawn.  Therefore, the period for satisfying IDBI
regarding utilization of the monthly also differs from case to case.  Hence, it is not desirable to specify the
period for the purpose.
 
            This  Regulation is based on Rule 16 (2) of GPF Rules.
 
Committee’s Observations (June 1995)
 
            The Committee felt that six months’ time should be prescribed in the Regulation itself for satisfying
the Bank, regarding the utilization of the withdrawals from P.F.   The Chairman & Managing Director, IDBI,
agreed to amend the Regulation, accordingly.
 
            Action taken (29.4.97)
 
            This has been considered by the Committee of Administrators of IDBI Employee’s Provident Fund on
21.1.97 and by the Board of Directors of IDBI on 25.2.97. IDBI has requested  for Government’s approval
vide its letter dated March 21, 1997.
 
4.         Relevant extracts from the 123rd Report were forwarded to the Ministry of Finance on the 1st January
1999 for implementation.
 
            5.         The Ministry of Finance vide their O.M. dated 5th April, 2000 had forwarded a copy of the
notification dated 17th August 1999 carrying out necessary amendments in Regulation 20 (iii).
 
            6.         The Committee considered the subject matter further in its meetings held on June 20, 2000.  It
notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance have carried out the necessary  amendment in regulation
20 (iii) as per recommendation providing therein a definite time period of 6 months for satisfying the Bank
regarding  utilization of the money for the purpose it was withdrawn.
V
 
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA (DEBENTURE TRUSTEES) RULES, 1993.
 
TheCommittee examined the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Debenture Trustees) Rules, 1993.  A
questionnaire was forwarded to Ministry of Finance (Capital Market Division) on October 9, 1995 for
furnishing their comments thereon. In the meantime, the Committee, discussed the subject matter with the
representatives of the Securities and Exchange Board of India and the Ministry of Finance at Bombay on
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

January 16, 1996.  The Committee was not agreeable  with the reply of the Ministry with regard to sub-rule
(1) of Rule 3.   The Committee was of the view that a suitable time frame must be incorporated in the rule
itself for the speedy disposal of work.  The Committee also directed the Ministry of Finance to come out with
a modified format of the application form for obtaining the certificates by making it more exhaustive for
eliminating any delay.  A study note (Annexure-I)  on the said discussions containing the points referred to
the Ministry, their reply thereon and the Committee’s observation on each point  was forwarded to the
Ministry on the 12th June, 1996 for compliance of Committee’s recommendations and suggestions.
 
The Ministry of Finance vide their O.M. dated September 22, 1997 forwarded a copy of the Notification
GSR 541(E) dated the 16th September, 1997 effecting Committee’s suggestion with regard to Rule 3(1)
(Annexure-II). Regarding modification in the format of application form for obtaining certificates the
Ministry, after a period of three years, have now accepted the Committee’s suggestion and furnished to this
Secretariat on 4.4.2000 a copy of the notification S.O. 135(E) dated 17.2.2000 incorporating the desired
changes in the format of the application form (Annexure-III).
 
3.         THE COMMITTEE CONSIDERED THE SUBJECT MATTER AT ITS MEETING HELD ON JUNE
20, 2000.  THE COMMITTEE NOTES WITH SATISFACTION THAT THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) HAD ALREADY IMPLEMENTED THE COMMITTEE’S
SUGGESTIONS WITH REGARD TO SUB RULE (1) OF RULE 3 BY INCORPORATING SUITABLE
TIME FRAME FOR SPEEDY DISPOSAL OFAN APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION AS
DEBENTURE TRUSTEE AND HAS NOW ALSO MODIFIED THE FORMAT OF APPLICATION FOR
OBTAINING THE CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION AS DEBENTURE TRUSTEE.  THE
COMMITTEE, HOWEVER, EXPRESSES ITS UNHAPPINESS THAT THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE
HAD TAKEN MORE THAN THREE AND HALF YEARS FOR IMPLEMENTING THE COMMITTEE’S
SUGGESTION WITH REGARD TO MODIFICATION OF THE FORMAT OF APPLICATION.  THE
COMMITTEE HOPES THAT THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE WOULD IN FUTURE TAKE PROMPT
ACTION ON THE COMMITTEE’S  RECOMMENDATION.
ANNEXURE-I
[Vide Para- I-Page-53]
 
STUDY NOTE ON THE DISCUSSION ON THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF
INDIA (DEBENTURE TRUSTEES) RULES, 1993 HELD AT MUMBAI ON 16TH JANUARY,  1996
 
 
            The Committee assembled at 11.00 A.M. on the 16th January, 1996 in the Board Room of the
Securities and Exchange Board of India at Mumbai and held discussions with the representatives of the
Securities and Exchange Board of India and the Ministry of Finance.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Som Pal ¾           Convenor
Shri Misa R. Ganesan
Shri Tara Charan Majumdar
Shri Chimanbhai Mehta
Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao
Shri Shiv Charan Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri S. S. Rana, Under Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Committee Officer
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

1.         Shri D. R. Mehta,  Chairman,
2.         Shri C. B. Bhave, Senior Executive Director
Shri L.K. Singhvi, Senior Executive Director
Shri Pratap Kar, Executive Director
 
Shri K. Sivaraman, Executive Director
Shri D.N. Raval, Executive Director
Ms. D.N. Raval, Executive Director
Shri Vijay Ranjan, Executive Director
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE
 
Shri Shashank Saxena, Deputy Director (C.M.)
 
At the outset some Members raised certain queries regarding the functioning of SEBI which were replied to
by the Chairman of SEBI.  Thereafter the Committee took up the Agenda.
 
The Committee was broadly satisfied with the comments furnished by the management of SEBI and Ministry
of Finance.
 
Rule-3(1)
 
Existing provision not to act as debenture trustee without obtaining certificate no person shall  act as
debenture trustee unless he holds a certificate granted by the Board under the Regulations: Provided that such
person who was engaged as debenture trustee prior to the coming into force of the Act, may continue to act
as debenture trustee if he has made an application for such registration under the proviso to sub-section (1) of
section 12 of the Act till the disposal of such application.
 
(i)         Whether, in terms of the above rule or otherwise, a person who was not engaged as debenture trustee
prior to coming into force of the Act can register himself to act as debenture trustee?
 
Ministry’s reply
 
Yes
(ii)        Whether the Ministry have any objection in prescribing a time frame for the disposal of application
for obtaining a certificate under Rule 3(1)?
 
            Ministry’s reply
 
            SEBI in principle can have no objection in prescribing the time period within which an application
for obtaining a certificate as a debenture trustee under rule 3(1) has to be disposed of.  The procedure for
consideration of the application for the grant of a certificate, procedure for seeking further information from
the applicants, procedure for grant of a certificate are specified in the SEBI (Debenture Trustee) Regulations. 
As soon as SEBI receives an application from the applicant, the Board has to consider the application and
come to a conclusion as to whether the applicant can be granted a certificate of registration.  In case it is
considered necessary, the Board can ask for further information and clarifications from the applicant.  In case
the applicant takes time in furnishing information or clarification to SEBI, then specifying the time period
within which SEBI should decide on the grant of a certificate may be detrimental to the interest of the
applicant.  In any event, it would be more appropriate to amend the SEBI (Debenture Trustee) Regulations
and not the Rules, as the regulations provide for the consideration of the application.
 
(iii)  What would be the fate of an intermediary who has not made an application for registration as debenture
trustee to the Board  within the stipulated period of 3 months as mentioned in the proviso of sub-section (1)
of section 12 of the Act ?
 
Ministry’s reply
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
Proviso to regulation 3 is a transitional provision so that the persons who were acting as debenture trustee
prior to the coming into force  of  the  Act  would  be   permitted  to  continue   to  carry  on  the activities till
their application for certificate was disposed of.  This provision was for the benefit of those persons who
were acting as a debenture trustee prior to the notification of the SEBI Act.  A period of 3 months was given
to the existing debenture trustees to make an application to SEBI.  Such a person who has made an
application to the Board could act as a debenture trustee, till the disposal of the application.  The debenture
trustee who has not made an application under  the  proviso to Rule (3) can make on application under
section 12 of the SEBI Act and the SEBI (Debenture Trustee) Regulations, for obtaining a certificate as a
debenture trustee.  Rule 3 does not prohibit a person who has not made an application under the proviso, to
make a application later on if he so desires.
 
Committee’s observation
 
The Committee noted the comments furnished by the management of SEBI but was of the view that some
time frame should be prescribed for the Board to dispose off the application for obtaining a certificate under
Rule 3(1).  The Committee further directed that the application form for obtaining the certificates may be
made more exhaustive so as to obviate any delay at a later stage.  The SEBI accepted the recommendation of
the Committee and agreed to do the needful.
 
Rule 4(a)
 
Existing Provision conditions for grant or renewal of certificate the Board may grant or renew a certificate to
a debenture trustee subject to the following conditions namely (a) in case of any change in the status and
constitution, the debenture trustee shall obtain prior permission of the Board to continue to act as debenture
trustee.
 
            There is no time-limit to obtain prior permission of the Board by a debenture trustee to continue to act
as such in case of any change in the status and constitution.  Whether the Ministry have any reservation in
prescribing a definite time-limit in the rules itself?
 
Ministry’s reply
 
Prescribing time limit within which an application has to be  made to SEBI for seeking prior approval of
SEBI would act as  a restriction on the applicant.  As per the existing provision approval of SEBI has to be
obtained prior to the changes in status and constitution.  Unless SEBI give such an approval no change in
status or constitution can take place.  In case the debenture trustee does not make an application for the
approval of SEBI within the time stipulated by amending the rules as proposed then the debenture trustee
would be deemed to have violated the provisions of the SEBI (Debenture Trustee) Rules.  This would give
rise to procedural technical defaults.
 
(ii)  Whether any format/guidelines have been prescribed by the Ministry for granting permission to the
debenture trustee for renewal of certificate ?
 
Ministry’s reply
 
The provisions of regulation 9 of the SEBI (Debenture Trustee) Regulations, 1993 specify that any
application for the renewal of the certificate would be dealt with by the Board in the same manner as if it
were an application for grant of a fresh certificate.  In view of the provisions of regulation 9(1), the
conditions under which SEBI has to consider an application for renewal has been already provided for in the
regulations.
 
(iii)  If due to certain reasons, a debenture trustee fails to obtain the prior permission of the board then what is
the procedure to be followed or formalities to be completed for allowing a debenture trustee to continue in
his position.  Whether the Ministry propose to provide for such contingencies?
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

Ministry’s reply
 
In case the debenture trustee does not obtain or fails to obtain the prior permission of the Board, then as per
the provisions of the SEBI Act, SEBI  (Debenture Trustee)  Rules  and  SEBI  (Debenture Trustee)
 
59
Regulations, the debenture trustee would be liable to have his certificate suspended or cancelled.  However,
while imposing an order of suspension or cancellation the Board is entitled to take into consideration as to
whether the debenture trustee should be permitted to continue as a debenture trustee for those debenture
issues to which the investors have already subscribed.  In this case, SEBI may  consider in appropriate cases,
passing an order whereby the order of suspension or cancellation comes into effect at a predetermined future
date, and the debenture trustee can continue to act as such for existing issues.
 
Committee’s observation
 
            The Committee noted the reply furnished by SEBI.
 
Rules 4(d)
 
Existing provision conditions for grant or renewal of certificate- The Board may grant or renew a certificate
to a debenture trustee subject to the following conditions namely (d) he shall take adequate steps for
redressal  of grievances of  the investors within one month of the date of the receipt of the complaints and he
shall keep the Board informed about the number nature and other particulars of the complaints received and
the manner in which the complaints have been redressed.
 
What are the further venues available to an investor for redressal of his grievances if the redressal  under the
above rule is inadequate or non-existent.  Whether any appellate remedies are proposed to be spelt out in the
above rule?
 
            Besides, it has been observed that the allotment letters issued by companies for debentures,
particularly non-convertible debentures remain unexchanged with debenture certificates even when the
maturity period is drawing to a close.  Whether SEBI has provided for such cases making it obligatory for the
companies to issue debenture certificates within a framework of time?.
 
Ministry’s reply
 
The investor can approach SEBI and SEBI can issue necessary instructions to the debenture trustee to resolve
the complaints of investors and to carry out such acts as are necessary for the protection of debenture holders.
 
The provisions of section 20 of the SEBI Act provide that if an intermediary is aggrieved by an order of
SEBI then the debenture trustee can prefer an appeal before the Central Government.  The Central
Government has already notified the Appellate Rules in this regard.
 
The companies are required to issue debenture certificates within the time stipulated in section 113 of the
Companies Act, 1956.  Regulation 15(1) (g) (ii) of the SEBI (Debenture Trustee) Regulations, 1993 casts a
responsibility on the debenture trustee to ensure that the debenture certificates have been dispatched to the
debenture holders in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act.
 
Committee’s observation
 
The Committee noted the reply furnished by SEBI.
ANNEXURE-II
[Vide para-2-Page-53]
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
 
NOTIFICATION
 
New Delhi, 16th September, 1997
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Debenture Trustees) Amendment Rules, 1997
 
            GSR 541(E)- In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 29 of the Securities and Exchange Board
of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) the Central Government hereby makes the following rules further to amend
the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Debenture Trustees)  Rules, 1993.
1.         (1)  These rules may be called the Securities and  Exchange    Board of India (Debenture Trustees) 
Amendment Rules, 1997.
(2)        These shall come into force on the date of their      publication in the Official gazette.
 
In rule 3 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Debenture Trustees) Rules, 1993, after sub-rule(1),
sub-rule (2) shall be added as follows, namely:-
 
“(2) The Board shall, within three months of receipt of all the information for considering the application
under sub-rule (1), take a decision thereon and send an intimation to the applicant.”
                                                     [F. No.20 (3)SE/93]
U.SARAT CHANDRAN, Jt. Secy.
 
Foot Note:-The principal Notification on SEBI (Debenture Trustees) Rules, 1993 was issued under GSR
788(E) dated December 29, 1993 published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary Part II, Section 3, sub-
section (i) dated December 29, 1993.
 
ANNEXURE-III
[Vide Para 3-Page-53]
 
 
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA
 
NOTIFICATION
 
Mumbai, the 17th February, 2000
 
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGFE BOARD  OF INDIA (DEBENTURE TRUSTEES) (AMENDMENT)
REGULATIONS, 2000
 
            S.O. 135 (E)- In exercise of the powers   conferred by sub-section (1) of section 30 of the Securities
and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) the Board hereby makes the following regulations to
further amend the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Debenture Trustees) Regulations, 1943, namely:
 
1  (1) These Regulations may be called the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Debenture Trustees)
(Amendment) Regulations, 2000.
 
            (2) They shall come into force on the  day of their publication in the Official Gazette.
 
II          (1)       In Schedule 1, for Form A, the following new Form A shall be substituted, namely:-
 
“SCHEDULE 1
 
FORM A
 
Securities and exchange board of India (Debenture Trustees) Regulations, 1993
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

(regulation 3)
 
APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION AS DEBENTURE TRUSTEE
 
 
            NAME OF APPLICANT  AND ITS STATUS
            (For status see regulation 7)
 
            NAME AND DESIGNATION OF PRINCIPAL OFFICER
            DESIGNATION:
            TELEPHONE NO.
            EMAIL:
 
            INSTRUCTION:-
 
       1.    Applicants must submit a                         
completed application form together  with
supporting documents to the Securities and
Exchange Board of  India.
 
  3.  Information which needs                    to    be
supplied in more details may be written on separate
sheets which should be attached to the application
form.
2. All columns of the application should be filled
in.  In case a column is not relevant then ‘not
applicable’ should be specified.
4.    Original copy of form duly signed should be
submitted for registration.
 
 
PART-1
GENERAL INFORMATION
 
APPLICANT’S DETAILS
 
Name of the  applicant:
 
Address of applicant:
 
Pin Code:                     Telephone No:
Telex No:                     Fax No:
 Email:
 
Address of the applicant for correspondence:
 
Pin code:                      Telephone No:
Telex No:                     Fax No:
Email:
 
Name of the Compliance officer:
 
Designation                   Telephone
 
Address of branch offices (in India) of the applicant, if any:
Whether any other application under Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 has been made  for
grant of certificate, if so, details thereof:
 
1.5 (a) Whether the applicant or its Director/s or partner/s is a partner of proprietor or promoter/s or director/s
in any of its associated/group company/concern or any company/concern which is also registered with SEBI
under any of its Regulations, and if so, details thereof:
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

                       
1 2 3
Name of  Company/concern
 
 
 Category registered Any warning                    given/penal action
taken/investigation/enquiry
initiated/pending  
 SEBI Regn. No.  
 
In case the applicant is a Bank or an NBFC, any, warning/action taken by RBI.
2.         ORGANISATION STRUCTURE:
 
2.1       Object of the organisation of the applicant.
 (Attach extracts from relevant documents like,          Charter/Memorandum of Association/Articles of
Association etc.) in support of objects of the organisation.
 
2.2       Date and Place of incorporation/Establishment of the organisation of the applicant.
 
Day                  Month              Year                 Place
 
Organisation chart stating the functional responsibilities at various levels.
Particulars of all directors.
[Name, qualification, experience, date of appointment, other directorship (Name & date appointment),
previous positions held]
 
Number  of employees (mention separately the employees in the debenture trusteeship activity)
 
Name and activities of associate companies/concerns.
 
Name/Address/Phone Nos/Type of activity/Ownership details/Nature and Quantum of financial trading.
 
List of major share holders (holding 5% or more voting rights) and percentage of their shareholdings.
 
3.         DETAILS OF INFRASTRUCTURAL FACILITIES
 
Office Space (mention the extent of area and ownership details available).
 
Office Equipment (mention the details of electronic office equipment, typewriters, telecommunication
equipment, furniture & fixtures, other communication facilities etc.)
 
(For point no. 3.1 and 3.2, please mention the infrastructure for debenture trustee activity separately)
 
BUSINESS PLAN (FOR THREE YEARS)
 
History, Major achievements and present activity
 
FINANCIAL INFORMATION
 
5.1 Capital        Structure                   (Rs. In lakhs)
 Year prior to the preceding
year of current year
Preceeding year Current year
 
Paid-up capital
 
Free reserves (excluding revaluation reserves)
 
Total (a)+ (b)
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
Loans (Details)
 
Net profit
General
Specific
 
5.2       Deployment of Resources
Fixed Assets
Plant & Machinery and office equipment 
Investments (Details should be given separately)
Others
 
6.  Other Information
 
Name and address of the principal bankers.
 
 Name and Address of the auditors (internal, external and tax auditor, if any, as applicable)
 
Indicate involvement in any offence relating to economic offences (including those concerned with the
securities market) in the last three years, if any.
 
Any significant awards or recognition, collective grievances against the services rendered by the applicant.
 
Any other information considered relevant to the nature of services rendered by the applicant
 
PART-II
 
7.         Business Information
 
Describe proposed activity
 
Details of Key Legal Personnel:
 
a . Name of the Person    b  Responsibility   c   Experience
 
Existing/proposed facilities for redressal of investor grievances. (Furnish number and type of complaints
received, follow-up with the Companies, average time taken in resolving the complaints and over all system
of handling complaints).
 
Details of any personnel experienced in the activity of debenture trusteeship.
 
8.  Experience
 
8.1 Experience as debenture trustee
(Name of the body coperate, on whose behalf the applicant has acted as debenture trustee, particulars of
debenture issue, size of debenture issue, when trust deed is signed, remuneration/fee received.)
 
Details where applicant  has resigned as Debenture Trustee or have discharged therefrom, give full details
and reasons therefore.
 
 In case of resignation or discharge as the case may be whether the applicant has vacated the office before
the  appointment of successor.  If so, give reasons and full details.
 
Whether the applicant has ensured that security has been created in the stipulated time in respect of
debentures it acted as Debenture Trustee.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
Whether the applicant has taken steps like appointment of nominee directors in case of the debenture issue of
any company.
 
DECLARATION
 
THIS DECLARATION MUST BE SIGNED BY PRINCIPAL OFFICER/S
 
I/We hereby apply for GRANT OF CERTIFICATE IF REGISTRATION by the Board.  I/We warrant that
I/We will carryout my/our duties in accordance with the Act, Rules and Regulations.
 
I/We state that I/We have truthfully and fully answered the questions above and provided all the information
which might reasonably be considered relevant for the purposes of my/our grant of Certificate for registration
and I/We will promptly notify the Board of any changes in  the  information during the period that my/our
registration is being considered and if my/our registration is accepted, thereafter.
 
I/We understand that misleading or attempting to mislead the Board shall render the applicant liable to
disciplinary proceedings.
 
I/We certify that the above information and information supplied in the application form is true, complete
and correct.
 
“We hereby declare and undertake that
 
the applicant company, its directors or Principal Officers is/or has not at any time been convicted for any
offense involving moral turpitude or been found guilty of any economic offense (including those concerned
with the securities market).
 
 no person directly or indirectly connected with the applicant has applied or been granted registration by the
Securities and Exchange Board of India to act as Debenture Trustee.”
 
For and on behalf of
Name of Applicant                                                                 Name of Applicant
 
PLACE:                                                                                  PLACE:
DATE:                                                                                    DATE:
 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION SHEET: (in case of application for  renewal of registration)
 
1.         Whether the applicant has  complied with the terms and conditions mentioned in the registration
letter?
 
2.         Whether the applicant has complied with the SEBI (Debenture Trustee) Rules and Regulations and
the guidelines issued by SEBI from time to time.
 
Whether any of associate/group company of the applicant is also registered with SEBI under any
Regulations, and if so the following details are to be furnished
 
1 2 3
        Name of the     
company/concern
SEBI Regn. No. Any warning given/penal action
taken/investigation/
enquiry initiated/pending
 
Whether any investigation/enquiry has been initiated/is pending against the applicant.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
Whether the applicant has submitted all the quarterly report.
 
Any warning given/penal action taken against the applicant.
 
Whether the applicant has  paid the fees due to SEBI in the last 3 years.  Give details of payment.
 
Details of public/right issue for which the applicant acted as Trustees in the last 3 years.
 
In case of any defaults, specifically state the action the applicant has taken to protect the interest of
debenture-holders and whether penal interest has been paid to the debenture holders.
 
List of debenture issues for which the applicant was acting as Debenture Trustees under earlier registration
where defaults by the issuers in terms of delays/non-payment of interest/principal have occurred.
 
Company                  Details of issue             Details of defaults
 
Whether the applicant has obtained auditors certificate for end-use of funds for all public/rights issues.
 
Investor grievances relating  to the debentures of companies for which the applicant acted as debenture
trustees.”
 
{F.No. SEBI/LE/3032/2000}
D.R. MEHTA, Chairman
 
Foot Note:
 
The principal Regulation was notified in the Gazette of India on December 29, 1993 vide S.O. No.
SEBI/LE/12/9.
 
Securities and Exchange Board  of India (Debenture Trustees) Regulations, 1993 was subsequently amende-
 
on January 5, 1993 by the Securities and Exchange Board  of India (Debenture Trustees) (Amendment)
Regulations, 1998 vide S.O. No. 16 (E).
 
(B)       ON SEPTEMBER 30, 1999 BY THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA
(DEBENTURE TRUSTEES) (AMENDMENT) REGULATIONS, 1999 VIDE S.O. NO. 795 (E).
VI
 
THE HANDLOOMS (RESERVATION OF ARTICLES FOR PRODUCTION) RULES, 1986.
 
            The  Committee examined the Handloom (Reservation of Articles for Production) Rules, 1986 and
some  points were referred to the Ministry of Textiles for their comments/clarification on June 21, 1999.
Comments on the points referred were received on the 28.4.2000.  The points referred and the comments of
the Ministry of Textiles  thereon are   as under:-
 
I           POINT REFERRED
 
WHETHER  THESE RULES HAVE BEEN LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE RAJYA SABHA; IF SO THE
DETAILS IN THIS REGARD?
 
MINISTRY’S REPLY
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

YES, THESE RULES WERE LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23RD APRIL, 1986 AND
ON THE TABLE OF THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29TH APRIL, 1986.
 
II          POINT REFERRED
 
IN G.S.R. 505 (E) PUBLISHING THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE ACT IT HAS BEEN MENTIONED
THAT THE ACT HAS BEEN NOTIFIED IN EXERCISE OF THE POWERS CONFERRED BY SUB-
SECTION (1) OF THE HANDLOOMS (RESERVATION OF ARTICLES FOR PRODUCTION) ACT,
1985.  BUT IN FACT THE ACT IS SUPPOSED TO BE NOTIFIED UNDER SUB-SECTION (3) OF
SECTION 1.  WHETHER ANY CORRINGENDUM HAS BEEN ISSUED TO THIS EFFECT; IF SO THE
DETAILS IN THIS REGARD AND IF NOT THE REASONS THEREFOR?
 
            MINISTRY’S REPLY
 
THE ORIGINAL GAZETTE NOTIFICATION G.S.R. 505 (E) DATED MARCH 17, 1986 CLARIFIES 
THE POSITION. NO CORRIGENDUM IS REQUIRED TO BE ISSUED.
 
III        POINT REFERRED
 
IN G.S.R. 506 (E) PUBLISHING THE ABOVE NOTED RULES IN THE GAZETTE OF  INDIA IT HAS
BEEN MENTIONED THAT THE RULES HAVE BEEN FRAMED IN EXERCISE OF THE POWERS
CONFERRED BY SUB-SECTION (19) OF THE ACT.  BUT IN FACT IT IS SUB-SECTION (1) OF
SECTION 19 WHICH GIVES POWERS TO THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO MAKE RULES. 
WHETHER ANY CORRIGENDUM HAS BEEN ISSUED TO THIS EFFECT; IF SO THE DETAILS IN
THIS REGARD AND IF NOT THE REASONS THEREFOR.
 
MINISTRY’S REPLY
 
THE ORIGINAL GAZETTE NOTIFICATION  G.S.R. 506 (E) DATED MARCH 17, 1986 CLARIFIES
THE POSITION.  NO CORRIGENDUM IS REQUIRED TO BE ISSUED.
 
IV        POINT REFERRED
                    RULE 1(2)
 
SHORT TITLE AND COMMENCEMENT.
 
*                      *                      *                      *
 
THEY SHALL COME INTO FORCE ON AND FROM THE 31ST DAY OF MARCH 1986.
           
SUB-RULE (2) OF RULE 1 PRESCRIBES  THAT THESE RULES SHALL COME INTO FORCE “ON
AND FROM” THE 31ST DAY OF  MARCH, 1986.  THE USE OF WORDS “AND FROM” IN THE SUB-
RULE IS NOT DESIRABLE AS THE COMMON PRACTICE OF LEGISLATIVE DRAFTING IS THAT
IN THE COMMENCEMENT CLAUSE IT IS ALWAYS “IT SHALL COME INTO FORCE ON”. 
THEREFORE WHETHER THERE IS ANY OBJECTION IN DELETING THE WORDS “AND FROM” IN
THE SUB-RULE?
 
MINISTRY’S REPLY
 
THE RULES SO FRAMED WERE AFTER DUE CONSULTATION   WITH THE LEGISLATIVE
DEPARTMENT OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE.  THE MINISTRY, HOWEVER, MAY
HAVE NO OBJECTION IN DELETING THE WORDS “AND FROM” IN THE SUB RULE (2) OF RULE
1, IF IT IS WORTH CONSIDERING.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

V         POINT REFERRED
                   RULE 3(1)
 
ESTABLISHMENT AND CONSTITUTION OF ADVISORY COMMITTEE-
 
THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE TO BE CONSTITUTED UNDER SUB-SECTION (1) OF SECTION 4 OF
THE ACT SHALL CONSIST OF A CHAIRMAN AND SUCH OTHER MEMBERS, NOT EXCEEDING
THIRTY, AS MAY BE NOMINATED BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT.
 
THE COMMITTEE CONTEMPLATED UNDER RULE 3 IS QUITE A BIG ONE.  WHETHER VARIOUS
INTEREST GROUPS ARE ADEQUATELY REPRESENTED IN THE COMMITTEE;  WHAT HAS BEEN
THE CONSTITUTION OF THE COMMITTEE DURING THE PAST  5 YEARS?
 
MINISTRY’S REPLY
 
THE LIMIT PRESCRIBED FOR THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE UNDER SUB RULE (1) OF RULE 3
OF THE RULES IS THE UPPER LIMIT.  THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT FROM TIME TO TIME
HAVE BEEN TAKING PRECAUTIONS TO ENSURE ADEQUATE REPRESENTATION  FROM
VARIOUS INTEREST GROUPS. 
 
VI        POINT REFERRED
        RULE 3(2)
 
THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE SHALL NORMALLY HAVE A TENURE OF THREE YEARS.  
PROVIDED THAT IF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT IS  OF   OPINION   THAT  IT  IS    NECESSARY
OR EXPEDIENT SO TO DO, IT MAY RECONSTITUTE THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE EARLIER
THAN THE AFORESAID PERIOD OF THREE YEARS.
 
KEEPING IN VIEW THE PRINCIPLE OF LEGISLATIVE DRAFTING AND THE PRACTICE BEING
FOLLOWED, THE USE OF THE WORD “NORMALLY”IN SUB RULE (2) IS NOT REQUIRED 
PARTICULARLY IN VIEW OF THE PROVISO WHICH AUTHORISES RECONSTITUTION OF THE
COMMITTEE EARLIER THAN THREE YEARS?
 
THE PROVISO TO SUB-RULE (2) EMPOWERS THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO RECONSTITUTE
THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE EARLIER THAN THE AFORSAID PERIOD OF THREE YEARS. 
THERE IS NO SUCH PROVISION IN THE ACT WHICH GIVES SUCH POWERS TO THE  CENTRAL
GOVERNMENT.  IT WOULD HAVE BEEN MORE APPROPRIATE IF SUCH A PROVISION IS
SPECIFIED AND AUTHORISED IN THE STATUTE ITSELF.  WHAT ARE THE COMMENTS OF THE
MINISTRY IN THIS REGARD?
 
MINISTRY’S REPLY
 
(I)        THERE HAD BEEN   OCCASION ON WHICH CENTRAL GOVERNMENT WHERE IT COULD
NOT RECONSTITUTE THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE, FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REASONS, ON
EXPIRY OF NORMAL PERIOD OF 3 YEARS I.E. THE TENURE OF ADVISORY COMMITTEE
CONSTITUTED ON 18.8.93 EXPIRED ON 17.8.96.  BUT THE SUBSEQUENT ADVISORY
COMMITTEE COULD BE CONSTITUTED  ON 22.4.97, AFTER A GAP OF  8  MONTHS.  UNDER
THESE CIRCUMSTANCES THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT MAY HAVE THE DISCRETION UNDER
EXTRAORDINARY CIRCUMSTANCES EITHER TO EXTEND OR REDUCE THE TENURE OF THE
ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON NEED BASIS TO FULFILL THE OBJECTIVES UNDER THE
PROVISIONS OF THE ACT.
 
SUB-SECTION (1) OF SECTION 19 OF THE ACT ENABLES THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO
MAKE RULES FOR CARRYING OUT THE PURPOSES OF THIS  ACT WHEREUNDER THE
PRESENT RULES HAVE BEEN FRAMED FOR SERVING THE PURPOSES OF THE ACT AND SUCH
POWER IS VESTED WITH THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT VIDE RULE 3  OF THE AFORESAID
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

RULE.  IF THE SAME WOULD BE INCORPORATED IN THE ACT ITSELF, IT WOULD BE
REPETITION AND HENCE MAKE THE ACT BULKIER ONE.
 
VII       POINT REFERRED
                    RULE 4(3)(B)
 
THE TESTING LABORATORY OR INSTITUTION OR PUBLIC ANALYST AFORESAID SHALL
PERFORM THE NECESSARY TESTS EITHER BY CHEMICAL ANALYSIS OR BY ANY OTHER
METHOD, AS DEEMED FIT, TO DETERMINE WHETHER THE SAMPLE SENT BY THE
AUTHORISED OFFICER WAS MADE ON HANDLOOMS OR POWERLOOMS AND REPORT THE
FINDINGS TO THE AUTHORISED OFFICER.
 
AS PER THE ABOVE PROVISIONS, THE TESTING LABORATORY OR INSTITUTIONS, ETC. HAS
TO REPORT ITS FINDING TO THE AUTHORISED OFFICER.  WHETHER THE MINISTRY HAVE
ANY OBJECTION IN SPECIFYING THE MAXIMUM TIME PERIOD FOR THE PURPOSE SO AS TO
AVOID ANY DELAY?
 
MINISTRY’S REPLY
 
            THERE ARE VERY LIMIT NUMBER OF TESTING LABORATORIES NOTIFIED FOR THE
PURPOSE OF CARRYING OUT NECESSARY TESTS/CHEMICAL ANALYSIS.  THE TESTING
LABORATORIES ARE ALSO PREOCCUPIED WITH  OTHER ACTIVITIES.  THE MINISTRY IS OF
THE OPINION  THAT IF THE TIME LIMIT IS PRESCRIBED FOR SUBMITTING TEST REPORTS, IT
WOULD ADVERSELY AFFECT THE INTEREST OF GOVERNMENT.
 
VIII      POINT REFERRED
         RULE 4(7)
 
THE AUTHORISED OFFICER, AFTER SEARCH AND SEIZURE, SHALL ALSO REPORT THE
MATTER TO THE OFFICER IN CHARGE OF THE LOCAL POLICE STATION HAVING
JURISDICTION TO INVESTIGATE THE CASE.
 
AS PER THE ABOVE PROVISIONS, THE AUTHORISED OFFICER IS REQUIRED TO REPORT THE
MATTER TO THE OFFICER IN CHARGE OF THE LOCAL POLICE STATION.
 
            WHETHER THE MINISTRY HAVE ANY OBJECTION IN QUALIFYING THE PROVISIONS  
BY    ADDING   THE  WORDS  LIKE “FORTHWITH” OR “ AS    SOON   AS POSSIBLE” SO AS TO
RULE OUT DELAY ON PART OF THE AUTHORISED OFFICER IN TAKING NECESSARY ACTION
IN THE MATTER?
 
MINISTRY’S REPLY
 
THE AUTHORISED OFFICERS ARE DUTY BOUND TO REPORT THE MATTER TO THE OFFICER
INCHARGE OF LOCAL POLICE STATION AFTER SEARCH AND SEIZURE.  INDUCTION OF
WORDS LIKE “FORTHWITH” OR “AS SOON AS POSSIBLE” WOULD SELDOM SERVE PURPOSE. 
THE DISTANCE BETWEEN THE PLACE OF SEARCH AND SEIZURE AND THE POLICE STATION
CONCERNED, AVAILABILITY OF THE OFFICER INCHARGE OF THE  POLICE STATION,
TRANSPORT PROBLEMS, CALAMITY ETC. MAY HAVE THE BEARING AS A RESULT OF WHICH
THE MINISTRY IS OF THE OPINION THAT FIXING TIME LIMIT WOULD HAVE LITTLE IMPACT
OR AT TIMES ADVERSE IMPACT.
 
IX        POINT REFERRED
 
THERE IS NO PROVISION IN THESE RULES UNDER WHICH AN AUTHORISED OFFICER AFTER
SEARCH AND SEIZURE SHALL REPORT THE MATTER TO THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT. 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

WHETHER THE MINISTRY HAVE ANY OBJECTION IN INCORPORATING SUCH A PROVISION IN
THE RULES?
 
MINISTRY’S REPLY
 
MINISTRY, HOWEVER, MAY HAVE NO OBJECTION IN INCORPORATING A PROVISION IN THE
RULE FOR REPORTING THE MATTER BY AUTHORISED OFFICE AFTER SEARCH AND SEIZURE. 
THE AUTHORISED OFFICE COULD EITHER BELONG TO CENTRAL GOVERNMENT OR TO
STATE GOVERNMENT.  THERE IS NO OBJECTION EVEN IF THE MATTER IS REPORTED EITHER
TO STATE GOVERNMENT OR TO CENTRAL GOVERNMENT.
 
 X        POINT REFERRED
 
RULE 5 OF THE RULES PROVIDES FOR DISPOSAL OF FORFEITED ARTICLES.  BUT THE RULE IS
SILENT ABOUT THE PROCEDURE FOR EVALUATION OF THE ARTICLES. WHAT IS THE
PROCEDURE FOR EVALUATION?  WHETHER IT IS POSSIBLE TO INCORPORATE THE SAME IN
THE RULES ITSELF?
 
            MINISTRY’S REPLY
 
NO PROCEDURE  FOR EVALUATION OF FORFEITED ARTICLES HAS SO FAR BEEN ADOPTED. 
HOWEVER, IT IS POSSIBLE TO ENTRUST THE EVALUATION JOB TO AN EXPERT EVALUATION
COMMITTEE,  COMPRISING OF TECHNICAL OFFICERS, BEFORE DISPOSAL AND TO
INCORPORATE THE PROCEDURE IN RULES ITSELF.
 
XI        POINT REFERRED
 
WHAT IS THE LATEST LIST OF ARTICLES RESERVED FOR THE HANDLOOM SECTOR?
WHETHER THERE HAVE BEEN ANY ADDITIONS/DELETIONS IN THE LIST, IF SO, THE DETAILS
THEREOF FOR THE PAST THREE YEARS ?
 
Ministry’s reply
 
The Ministry informed that the earlier Handloom Reservation order, S.O. 459 (E) dated 4.8.1986 reserved 22 
textile articles namely:
 
  Saree, Border
 Kotah Doria Saree
 Tie & Dye Saree and material
 Dhoti
 Gamcha and  Angavastram
 Lungi
 Shirtings
 Crepe Fabrics
 Towels
     (10)  Khes, Bed Sheet, Bed Cover, Counter Pane & Furnishings        including (Tapestry)
     (11)   Table Cloth, Table Mat & Napkins
   Duster and Basta
   Chaddar
     (14)    Jamakkalam Durry or Durret
   Bukram Cloth
     (16)    Mashru Cloth
 
  Lowreed pick cloth
  Silk
  Kambal or Kambolies
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

  Barrack blanket
  Shawl, Loi Mafflers Pankhi
  Woollen Tweed
 
The present Reservation Order, S.O. 557 (E) dated 26.7.1996 reserved 11 textile articles namely :
 
 Saree
 Dhoti
 Towel, Gamcha and Angavastram
 Lungi
Khes, Bedsheet, Bedcover, Counterpane, Furnishing.  (including tapestry, upholstrey)
Jamakkalam Durry or durret
Drees Material
Barrack Blankets, Kambal or Kambles
Shawl, Loi, Mufflet, Pankhi etc.
      (10)  Wollen Tweed
      (11)  Chaddar, Mekhala/Phanek
 
This Order was amended vide Handloom Reservation Order S.O. 408 (E) dated 2.6.99 as under:
 
“In the table of the said Order, for Serial Number 8 and entries relating thereto, the following shall be
substituted, namely:
 
Barrack Blanket, Kambal or Kamblies
 
Barrack blanket means a thick fabric made of wool of average 34 micron or coarser, with fibrous surface
produced by milling and raising; and included barrack blankets made by using hand spun or mill spun wollen
yarn from natural grey or black wool or its combination and produced in any size and in any weave.
Kambai or kamblies means a thick fabric made a wool of average 34 micron or coarser, with fibrous surface
produced  by milling and raising; and included kambal or kamblies made by using hand spun or mill spun,
worsted, woollen yarn or its combination in plain stripe or check design.
 
Nothing in items (a) & (b) shall apply to barrack blanket, kambal or kamblies made out of shoddy yarn, that
is, a cheaper class or woollen yarn made from reused or recycled wool and synthetic rags.”
 
2.         THE SUBJECT MATTER WAS TAKEN UP FOR DISCUSSION WITH THE REPRESENTATIVES
OF THE NATIONAL HANDLOOM DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION  AND THE MINISTRY OF
TEXTILES AT COIMBATORE ON THE 3RD JULY, 1999. THE FOLLOWING EXTRACTS FROM THE
MINUTES OF THE ABOVE DISCUSSION WERE FORWARDED TO THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES
ON THE 15TH OCTOBER, 1999: 
 
“The Committee expressed its satisfaction that the Ministry of Textiles have agreed to the suggestions given
by the Committee on rules 1(2), 3(2), 4(7), and 5.  The Committee was also satisfied that the Ministry have
agreed to incorporate in the rules a provision under which the “authorised officer” after search and seizure
shall report the matter to the Central Government.  As regard rule 4(3) (b) the Committee was of the view
that the Ministry  should have no objection in prescribing a time limit for submission of report by the testing
laboratory in the rules so that unnecessary delay in this regard is avoided.  The Committee felt that as the
testing labs were under Government  Control, there could be no problem for timely procurement of report
from them.  In rule 4 (7) the suggestion of the Committee to define the level of authorised officer in the rule
itself was accepted by the Ministry of Textiles after some discussion.”
The Ministry vide their O.M. dated 28.4.2000 had  furnished a copy of the Notification G.S.R. 340(E) dated
18.4.2000 (Annexure) notifying  the Handlooms (Reservation of Articles for Production) (Amendment)
Rules, 2000 effecting the amendments  based on the suggestions/recommendations of the Committee in the
light of the discussion held in Coimbatore.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

            4.         The Committee considered the subject matter further  at its meeting held on June 20, 2000.  It
notes with satisfaction  and appreciation that the Ministry of Textiles have carried out all  its
suggestions/recommendations expeditiously by amending Rule 1 (2) regarding commencement of the  rules,
Rule 2 (b) regarding level of the ‘authorised officer’,  Rule 3 (2) regarding tennure of the ‘Advisory
Committee’ Rule 4 (3) (b)  regarding the period for reporting of findings by the testing laboratory; Rule 4 (7)
regarding reporting of matter to the local police after search and seizure  and Rule 5 regarding disposal of
forfeited articles.
ANNEXURE-I
[Vide Para 3-Page-82]
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES
(Office of the Development Commissioner for Handlooms)
(Enforcement Wing)
Notification
New Delhi the 18th April, 2000
 
G.S.R. 340 (E)-In exercise of the powers conferred by sub section (1) of section 19 of the Handlooms
(Reservation of Articles for Production) Act, 1985 (22 of 1985), the Central Government hereby makes the
following amendments in the Handlooms (Reservation of Articles  for Production) Rules, 1986, namely:-
 
Short title and commencement:-
 
(1)        These rules may be called the Handlooms (Reservation of   Articles for Production) (Amendment)
Rules, 2000.
 
They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the official Gazette.
 
            2.         In the Handlooms (Reservation of Articles for Production)    Rules, 1986-
 
in rule 1, in sub-rule (2) for the words “on and      from”, the words “on” shall be substituted;
 
in rule 2, for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
 
“ (b) ‘authorised officer’ means any officer subordinate to the Central Government or to the State  
Government   not    below   the   rank    of Assistant Director, or by whatever name called or to any authority
as may be   authorised  by the Central Government under Section 15 of the Act,”
 
in rule 3, in sub rule (2), the word “normally” shall be omitted;
 
in rule 4, in sub rule (3) , in clause (b), at the end, the following words shall be added, namely:-
 
“within a period of two months”,
 
in rule 4, in sub rule (7), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:-
 
“(7) (a) The authorised officer, after search and seizure, shall as soon as possible report the matter to the
officer incharge of the local police station having jurisdiction to investigate the case.
 
(b)The authorised officer shall also repot the matter to the Central Government or the State Government as
the case may be explaining the action taken by him.”
 
(vi)       In rule 5, in the proviso, for the words “provided that”, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
“provided that the authorised officer shall hold a meeting of the Evaluation Committee comprising of
representatives of the aforesaid agencies for evaluation and disposal of the forfeited goods through them:
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

“ provided further that.”
 
(F.No.18/4/88-DCH/CEO(99)/Vol.III)
ARUN GUPTA, Addl. Secy.& Development Commissioner (Handlooms)
VII
 
THE  COURIER IMPORTS AND EXPORTS (CLEARANCE) REGULATIONS, 1998 -
EXAMINATION BY THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA.
           
The Courier Imports and Exports (Clearance) Regulations, 1998 framed  under section 157 of the Customs
Act, 1962 were examined and some points were referred  to the Ministry of Finance on 12.5.99 for their
comments/clarifications.
 
2.         The requisite comments were furnished by the Ministry on May 17, 1999 and thereafter the subject  
matter was discussed with the representatives of the Customs Commissionerate, Calcutta  and the Ministry of
Finance at Calcutta on June 19, 1999.
 
The study note on the above discussion  was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance for necessary action and
they  had furnished the action taken note  on 26.11.99.
 
The point referred, Ministry’s comments and the Committee’s observations thereon alongwith action taken
by the Ministry are reproduced below:
 
I           Point referred
           
Whether the courier Imports and Exports (Clearance) Regulations, 1998 have since been laid on the Table of
both the Houses of Parliament.  If so, the details in this regard?
 
            Ministry’s Comments
 
THE COURIER IMPORTS/EXPORTS(CLEARANCE) REGULATION, 1998 HAVE BEEN LAID
ON THE TABLES OF LOK SABHA AND RAJYA SABHA VIDE O.M. NO. 450/120/97-CUS.IV IN
THE WINTER SESSION OF THE PARLIAMENT ON 4.12.98 AND 1.12.98, RESPECTIVELY.
 
COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATIONS
 
THE COMMITTEE NOTED THE REPLY OF THE MINISTRY
           
II          Point referred
           
            What had been the compelling circumstances including the background which necessitated the
Government to  frame the Courier Imports (Clearance)  Regulations, in the year 1995  and now the latest
regulations covering both imports and exports?
 
            Ministry’s Comments
 
PRIOR TO 1995 THE GOODS OF EMERGENCY NATURE WERE BEING BROUGHT BY THE
COURIER COMPANIES THROUGH AIR.  SUCH GOODS WERE BEING CHARGED AT FLAT RATE
OF DUTY APPLICABLE TO CUSTOMS BAGGAGE UNDER HEADING NO. 9803.  THE EFFECTIVE
RATES FOR BAGGAGE WERE INVARIABLY HIGHER THAN THE GENERAL RATES AND WERE
BETWEEN 345% AND 150-200%.  THERE WERE REQUESTS THAT THIS RATE OF DUTY ON THE
GOODS IMPORTED THROUGH COURIER MAY BE CHANGED AND GOODS MAY BE CHARGED
THE RATE OF DUTY APPLICABLE TO THOSE GOODS ON MERIT BASIS.  AS A PART OF 1995
BUDGET, IT WAS DECIDED BY GOVERNMENT TO CHARGE THE GOODS IMPORTED THROUGH
COURIER TO DUTY ON MERITS UNDER THE RESPECTIVE HEADING OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

TO THE CUSTOMS TARIFF ACT, 1975 BY INSERTING SUB PARA ( C ) TO NOTE 4 OF CHAPTER 98
OF THE CUSTOMS TARIFF.
 
            The Conference of the Commissioners held on 19.4.95 alongwith the representatives of Air Cargo
Courier Agents Association of India (Forerunner of Present Express Industry Council) recommended that the
clearance of consignments imported through the courier mode may be regulated through a set of regulations
which could prescribe simplified forms of Bill of Entry or clearance of documents, gifts, etc.  On the basis of
these recommendations Courier Import Regulation, 1995 was framed.
            The above regulation only regulated import of goods through courier.  Requests from the Express 
Industry Council and Ministry of Commerce were received to frame  a regulation for export of goods through
courier mode also.   Accordingly by amalgamating the requirements  for import and export a common
regulation namely:  Courier Imports and Exports (Clearance) Regulation, 1998 have been framed.
 
            Committee’s Observations
 
THE COMMITTEE NOTED THE REPLY OF THE MINISTRY.
 
III        Point referred
       Regulation 2 (2) (b)
 
These Regulations shall not apply to:
 
            *                      *                      *
            *                      *                      *
the good where the weight of the individual package exceeds 32 kgs;
 
            According to the sub-clause (b) of clause (2), these Regulations are not applicable where the weight
of the individual  package exceeds 32 kgs. What is the logic behind this provision?  Why not 40 kgs or 30
kgs more or less?
 
            Ministry’s Comments
 
The Courier import regulation had been modelled on the regulations operating at Heathrow Airport, U.K.  
As an international practice, as is operating there and also at many other places the limit of 32 kgs had been
kept.  This limit has been fixed in the light of difficulties in handling if the weight of the package becomes
higher and necessitates use of fork lift trucks.   In  addition, the present examination hall being very small the
use of fork lift crane in the small area would be extremely difficult.
 
            Presently there is no special counter terminal except a very small one operated by Express Industry
Council at Sahar Airport.  Therefore the limit has been internationally kept with the understanding that if and
when spacious separate courier clearance halls are created and operated by the Express Industry Council the
increase in the limit in weight of the packages would be considered.
 
            Committee’s Observations
 
            THE COMMITTEE WAS INFORMED THAT THERE WAS NOTHING  VERY SACROSANCT
ABOUT FIXING THE LIMIT OF 32 KG BUT THE REASONING BEHIND WAS THE FACT THAT
GOVERNMENT DID NOT HAVE ADEQUATE INFRASTRUCTURE TO HANDLE PACKAGES
WEIGHING MORE THAN 32 KG.  BESIDES, MANY OTHER COUNTRIES ARE ALSO ADHERINGTO
THE WEIGHT LIMIT OF 32 KGS.  THE COMMITTEE NOTED THE REPLY OF THE MINISTRY.
 
            Action taken
 
            Although  there was no specific suggestion  by the Committee  for increasing the weight limit of
packages, but considering the demand of Trade and Ministry of Commerce, the Department vide Notification
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

No. 54/99-Cus.(NT) dated 21st September, 1999 has enhanced the weight limit of packages brought through
courier to 70 Kgs.  A copy of notification GSR 645 (E) dated 21.9.99  is enclosed  (Annexure-I).
 
IV        Point referred
       Regulation No. 2 (2) (c)
 
These Regulations shall not apply to –
 
*                      *                      *
            *                      *                      *
 
*                      *                      *
*                      *                      *
 
the goods which require specific conditions to be fulfilled under any other Act for the time being in force or
any rule or regulation made thereunder.
 
            What are the type of goods contemplated by the Ministry which require specific conditions  to be
fulfilled under clause (c)?  Whether it is possible to enumerate them by suffixing a schedule to the existing
rules?
 
            Ministry’s Comments
                       
The courier regulation works under the Customs Act and the imports/exports have to fulfil the conditions of
restriction or prohibition notified u/s 11 of the Customs Act, and other allied acts to like Foreign Trade
Development Regulation (FTDR) Act, Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, Prevention of Food
Adulteration Act, Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, etc.  It may not be convenient to list all the Allied Acts
and the conditions under the said acts by an annexure to in this regulation.
 
            Committee’s Observations
           
THE COMMITTEE NOTED THE REPLY OF THE MINISTRY.
 
V         Point referred
        Regulation 3 (C)
 
Definitions- In these regulations, unless the context  otherwise requires:-
 
“samples” means any bonafide commercial samples and prototypes of goods supplied free of charge of a
value not exceeding ten thousand  rupees for exports or two thousand rupees for imports which are for the
time being not subject to any prohibition or restriction on their export out of or import into India and for
which no transfer of foreign  exchange is involved;
What are the criteria for deciding about bonafide of a sample and in case of doubt who  will decide that the
sample is bonafide?
 
            Ministry’s Comments
The Assistant Commissioner is the authority to decide the bonafide nature of the sample which is being
imported or exported.  The main criterion  is that the goods which are being sent or received by the persons
in the same trade and that they are not being repeatedly imported or exported to circumvent payment of duty
during import or bringing in foreign exchange during export.  This is ascertained by the appraisers or
assessing officers by general surveillance by intelligence gathering.
 
Committee’s Observations
            The Committee noted the information furnished by the Ministry but observed that it would be more
appropriate if a record is maintained in this regard which would facilitate the proper check.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
            Action taken
 
Necessary instructions to field formations have been issued by the Board vide Circular No. 78/99-Cus. dated
19th November, 1999(Annexure-II).
 
VI        Point referred
       Regulation No. 3 (d)
 
“free gifts” means any bonafide gifts of articles for personal use of a value not exceeding rupees twenty-five
thousand in a financial year in case of export goods and rupees two thousand for each consignments in case
of import goods which are not subject to any prohibition or restriction on their export out of or import into
India and for which no transfer of foreign exchange is involved;
            What is the justification  for  putting restriction on gifts in a financial years and what is the
mechanism for keeping a record of free gifts for ensuring compliance of this condition?  Further, there being
no restriction on value of samples supplied in a financial year.  What is the mechanism to check that free gifts
do not go out of the country in the form of samples?
           
Ministry’s Comments
           
            The export of goods in form of gift  in courier mode upto Rs. 25000 without filing GR form have
been kept in  line with the limit prescribed by RBI in Exchange Control Manual vide GOI notification No.
F1/67/EC/73-1 and No. F1/67/EC/73-2 (as amended) read with para 11.4 of Export Import (EXIM) Policy,
1997-2002.  Similarly the limit of duty free import of  gifts has been kept upto Rs. 2000  per consignment in
line with notification No. 171/93-Cus., dated 16.9.93 as amended which prescribes duty free import of gifts
upto Rs. 2000. 
 
            Committee’s Observations
 
            The Committee observed that the reply furnished by the Ministry of Finance does not cover all the
issues raised in the questionnaire.  The Committee could not get any answer on the point regarding the
mechanism to check that free gifts do not go out of the country in the form of samples.  The Committee
desired that information may be sought for from the Ministry in this regard.
                                   
Action taken
 
The definition of the free gift as given in the regulation has been changed vide Notification No.54/99-Cus.
(NT) dated 21st September, 1999 by substituting the words ‘Rs. 25000/- in a financial year’ by ‘Rs.25000/-
for a consignment’.  As the limit of export of free gifts in a year has been removed from the courier
Regulations, so chances of exporting of free gifts in the guise of samples are ruled out.
 
VII      Point referred
 
In regulations 5 and 6 the word “proper officer” has been used quite frequently but at the same time the level
of officer who will perform the duty of ‘proper officer” has not been defined any where in the regulations. 
Whether it is possible to define the level of officer in the regulation itself?
 
            Ministry’s Comments
           
            THE “PROPER OFFICER” IS DEFINED IN SUB-SECTION (34) OF SECTION 2 OF THE
CUSTOMS ACT, 1962 AS “IN RELATION TO ANY FUNCTION TO BE PERFORMED UNDER
THESE ACTS MEANS THE OFFICER OF CUSTOMS WHO IS ASSIGNED THOSE FUNCTIONS
BY THE BOARD OR THE COMMISSIONER OF CUSTOMS”.
           
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

Taking into account the number and level of officer present in an Airport, quantity and nature of the work the
Commissioners assign the function to be performed by either Assistant Commissioners, Appraiser or
examiner or preventive officers. The Commissioners have assigned such proper officers at different airports. 
It may not, therefore, be necessary to define the level in the regulation itself.
 
Committee’s Observations
 
The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry.
 
VIII Point referred
Regulation 5(2) (a) (b)
 
Clearance of import goods:- In case of import of goods through courier, the following procedure shall be
followed, namely:
 
The courier bags containing the imported goods shall not be dealt with in any manner except as may be
directed by the Commissioner of Customs. No person shall, except with the permission of proper officer,
open any packages of imported goods brought by  officer, open any packages of imported goods brought by
an on-board courier the person in-charge of aircraft.
 
According to clause (a) the bags containing the imported goods shall not be dealt with any manner except as
directed by the Commissioner of Customs whereas as clause (b) empowers “Proper Officer” to allow
opening of any packages of imported goods.  There appears to be some contradiction in the two clauses. 
Whether the Ministry would like to explain the overlaping jurisdiction of the officers in the  mater and make
it more precise.
 
Ministry’s Comments
 
Under clause (a) the Commissioner of Customs may prescribe the manner in which the courier bags would
be handled i.e. place of handling level of persons authorized to handle it, and other general principles.  Under
clause (b) however the officer present at spot permits representative of the individual courier company to
handle the said packages and open the said packages for inspection or examination wherever necessary.  He
is also authorized to entrust this work to any other person.  The officer in the spot does not decide any
principle as such, but being the person on the spot decides who will handle the consignment, so that there is
no hold up because of absence of a particular representative.
 
            Committee’s Observations
 
THE COMMITTEE NOTED THE REPLY OF THE MINISTRY
 
IX        Point referred
       Regulation 5 (5)
 
Any imported goods which are not taken clearance, shall   be  detained  by    the  customs   and   shall   be
disposed of after the expiry of a period of thirty days of the arrival of the said goods and the charges payable
for storage and handling of such goods shall be payable by the Authorised Courier.
 
The regulation provides that imported goods detained by customs authority shall be disposed of after the
expiry of 30 days.  Whether there is any objection in giving a notice to the authorised courier before
disposing of the goods as has  been provided in regulation 6 (5).  Further, the regulation is silent about the
procedure to be followed in evaluating and disposing of the goods.
 
Ministry’s Comments
 
            THIS REGULATION OPERATES UNDER THE CUSTOM ACT. THE ACT. U/S 48, CONTAINS
THE PROVISIONS FOR AUCTION OF THE GOODS BY THE CUSTODIAN WITHIN 30 DAYS, IF
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

THEY ARE NOT CLEARED OR LITTLE IS RELINQUISHED. UNDER SECTION 48 OF THE ACT THE
CUSTODIAN HAS BEEN AUTHORIZED TO AUCTION ALL THESE GOODS AFTER NOTICE TO
THE IMPORTER.  IN THIS CASE THE IMPORTER IS THE COURIER COMPANY AND THEREFORE
THE COURIER COMPANY WOULD GET THE NOTICE AS PER THE PROVISION OF THE ACT. 
THERE ARE ESTABLISHED INSTRUCTIONS FOR EVALUATION OF SUCH GOODS BY THE
APPRAISERS  OF CUSTOMS AND SALE BY AUCTION WHICH ARE PRESENTLY BEING
FOLLOWED BY THE CUSTODIAN, PORTS AND AIRPORTS AND ICDS/CFS. THE SAME
PROCEDURE WOULD BE FOLLOWED IN THIS CASE.
 
            COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATIONS
           
            THE COMMITTEE NOTED THE REPLY OF THE MINISTRY.
 
X         Point referred
               Regulation 8
 
Condition to be fulfilled by the applicant:-  The person applying for registration as an authorised courier  
shall   disclose  to  the   satisfaction   of    the  Commissioner of Customs that he is financially viable and in
support thereof he shall  produce to the said Commissioner of Customs a certificate issued by a scheduled
bank  or such other proof acceptable to the Commissioner of Customs evidencing possession of assets of a
value not less than five lakh rupees.
 
The words “other proof acceptable to the Commissioner of Customs” used in the regulations are not precise. 
What could  be the other proof in the circumstances?  Whether the Ministry would like to explain?
 
            Ministry’s Comments
 
            The applicant can, in addition to the certificate from the bank, provide other proof of financial
viability like possession of assets in the form of land and building or fixed deposits or national saving
certificates, etc. This being an additional option to the applicant the nature of the asset which would be
acceptable is left to the discretion of the Commissioner.  The Commissioner being sufficiently senior officer
it is expected he will exercise due discretion while evaluating financial viability of the applicant.
 
Committee’s Observations
 
THE COMMITTEE NOTED THE REPLY OF THE MINISTRY.
 
XI        Point referred
              Regulation 10
 
Regulation:- (1) If on scrutiny of the application filed by a person under regulation 7, the Commissioner of
Customs is satisfied that the applicant fulfils the requirements   of    the  registration, the said applicant  may
be so registered as an Authorised Courier.  Provided that the number of the Authorised Couriers so registered
shall not  exceed the number determined by the Board for a Custom House from  time to time.
 
(i)         The regulation does not provide for the maximum time limit by which the application of a person for
registration as authorised courier shall be accepted or rejected by the Commissioner of Customs.  Whether
the Ministry would like to prescribe a time limit for the  purpose?
 
(ii)        What is the justification of restricting the number of authorised courier for a Custom House and what
is the optimum number in respect of any Custom House?
 
            Ministry’s Comments
 
11 (I) (i) The maximum time limit for deciding an application has not been fixed in the regulation. However
if the Committee desires, the Ministry may fix a time limit.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
(ii)   The number of authorized couriers, who are in the nature of service providers have been modeled on the
line of Custom House Agents Licensing Regulation, 1984.  The CHA regulation also has a similar regulation
for regularizing the number of agents operating in a Custom House.  This CHA regulation has been examined
by the Supreme Court many times and has been found to be reasonable.  In the Courier Import/Export
Regulation by instruction, the Board has determined that minimum number of Couriers operating in an
airport should be 10 or the present number operating in the airport whichever is larger.  Presently in an
airport like Calcutta only two Courier Companies are operating whereas in Mumbai more than 20 companies
are operating.  It has further been instructed that if the Commissioner feels, because of increased workload,
there is a need for increasing the number of authorized couriers, the Commissioner would make such a
recommendation to the Board and the Board would increase number of couriers for the Custom House.
 
Committee’s Observations
 
            THE COMMITTEE NOTED WITH SATISFACTION THAT THE MINISTRY HAVE AGREED TO
PRESCRIBE A TIME LIMIT FOR THE ACCEPTANCE OR REJECTION OF AN APPLICATION FOR
REGISTRATION AS AN AUTHORIZED COURIER.
 
Action taken
Necessary instructions have been issued by the Board to the field formations vide Circular No.78/99-Cus.
dated 19th November, 1999 (Annexure-II).
 
XII      Point referred
              Regulation 11
 
Execution of bond and furnishing of security:- The Commissioner of Customs shall require the applicant to 
enter into a bond in such form with a security of five lakh rupees in cash or in the form of postal security  or
National Savings Certificate in the name of the Commissioner of Customs for complying  with the provisions
of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) and the rules and regulations made thereunder.  The condition of the
said bond shall also be that the applicant shall agree to pay the duty, if any, not levied or short levied, with
interest if applicable on any goods taken clearance by the Authorised Courier if in the opinion of the
Assistant Commissioner of Customs the same cannot be recovered from the importer or the exporter.
 
The regulation envisages that applicant shall be required to enter into a bond at the time of registration with
certain terms and condition contemplated under it.  Whether there is any particular form of this bond, if so,
whether it is possible to append the same in the regulation itself?
 
Ministry’s Comments
 
            The bond is normally a lengthy legal document and is drafted in consultation with the Ministry of
Law. Its form is adopted by Commissioner of Customs and the bond is executed by him.  In case of other
regulations the form of the bond is not appended to the regulation.  It would not be convenient, through it
may be possible, to append the same to the regulation.
 
Committee’s Observations
 
            The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry.
 
XIII Point referred
Regulation 13-Obligation of Authorised Courier - An              Authorised Courier shall-
 
*                      *                      *                     
 
maintain records and accounts in such form and manner as may be directed from time to time by an Assistant
Commissioner of Customs and submit them for inspection to the Assistant Commissioner of Customs or an
officer authorised by him, wherever required;
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
Whether any form has been  prescribed by the Collectorate of Calcutta for maintaining  records/accounts. 
What are norms for their inspection?
 
            Ministry’s Comments
           
            No records or accounts have yet been prescribed under provisions of Regulation 13 (g) by the
Commissioner of Customs, Calcutta.
 
            Committee’s Observations
           
            The Committee noted with satisfaction that the Custom Commissionerate agreed to maintain the
records/accounts in case of authorised couriers.
 
Action taken    
 
            Necessary instructions have been issued to field formations by the Board vide Circular No.78/99-Cus.
dated 19th November, 1999. (Annexure II).
 
XIV Point referred
Regulation 14 (c)
           
Deregistration:- (1) The Commissioner of Customs may revoke the registration of an Authorised Courier and
also order forfeiture of security on any of the following grounds namely:-
 
                        *                      *                      *
            *                      *                      *
 
(c)        a misconduct on the part of the Authorised Courier;
 
The word “misconduct” has not been defined or explained in the regulation what kind of act would constitute
misconduct.  Whether the Ministry have any objection in defining the term misconduct?
 
            Ministry’s Comments
 
            The Ministry would not have any objection to define the word “misconduct” in line with the
regulation 21 (1) (c) of the Custom House Agents Licensing Regulation, 1994.  The provision of CHA
Regulation is as under:
 
“misconduct on the part of CHA within the jurisdiction of Commissioner or anywhere else which in the
opinion of the Commissioner renders him unfit to transact any business in the Customs Station”.
 
            If Committee desires the word “CHA” may be replaced by the word “Authorised Courier” and the
definition may be included in the regulation.
 
            Committee’s Observations
           
            The Committee noted with satisfaction that  the Ministry have agreed to define the word misconduct
in the regulations.
 
            Action taken  
            Regulation 14(1) (c) of the Courier Regulations has been amended vide Notification No.66/99-Cus.
(NT),  GSR 785 (E) dated 25th November, 1999  (Annexure-III) to define the word ‘misconduct’ in line with
the regulation 21(1) ( c) of the Customs House Agents Licensing Regulations, 1984. 
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

The Committee considered the subject at its meeting held on June 20, 2000. The Committee notes with
satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance has agreed to Committee’s suggestions with regard to Regulation 3
(c) for maintaining a record of import of bonafide samples imported through Courier in order to have a
proper check on import of such samples,  Regulation  10  regarding   fixed time period for disposal of
application for registration as authorised Courier, Regulation 13 regarding maintenance of records/account in
case of authorised couriers and Regulation 14 (c) for defining word ‘misconduct’ and have also implemented
the same by amending the regulations through Gazette notifications as well as by issue of necessary
administrative instructions. The Committee also notes that the Ministry have amended regulation 2(2) (b) for
enhancing the weight limit of packages brought through courier from 32 kg to 70 kg in line with the weight
limits prevailing in other countries.
ANNEXURE-I
[Vide Para-4 Page - 88]
 
 
MINISTRTY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE
 
New Delhi, dated the 21st September, 1999.
 
NOTIFICATION
No. 54/99-CUS (NT)
 
G.S.R. 645 (E) In exercise of the powers conferred by section 157 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), the
Central Board of Excise and Customs hereby makes the following regulations to further amend the courier
Imports and Exports (Clearance) Regulations, 1998, namely:-
 
(i)  These regulations may be called the Courier Imports and    Exports (Clearance) Second Amendment
Regulations, 1999.
 
They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the official gazette.
 
In the Courier Imports and Exports (Clearance) Regulations, 1998 (hereinafter referred to as the said
regulations),-
 
in regulation 2, in sub-regulation (2),-
 
in clause (b), for the figures and letters “32 kg”, the figures and letters  “70 kg” shall    be substituted;
 
in Clause (e), to sub-clause (v), the following proviso shall be added, namely:-
 
 “Provided that the limit of rupees twenty five thousand as provided in this sub-clause shall not apply to such
export consignments where the G.R.   wavier or specific permission has been obtained from the Reserve
Bank of India.”;
 
in regulation 3,-
 
in clause (c), for the words “two thousand rupees for imports”, the words “five thousand rupees for imports”
shall be substituted;
 
 in clause (d),-
 
for the words “ in a financial year”  the words “for a consignment” shall be substituted;
 
for the words “rupees two thousand”, the words “rupees five thousand” shall be substituted;
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
in regulation 5, for sub-regulation (5), the following sub-regulation shall be substituted, namely:-
 
“(5) Any imported goods which are not taken clearance, shall be detained by the customs and shall be
disposed of after issuing a notice to the authorised Courier after the expiry of a period of thirty days of the
arrival of the said goods and the charges payable for storage and holding of such goods shall be payable by
the Authorised courier.”;
 
in regulation 6, in sub-regulation (5), after the words “on arrival of such  goods into such area”, the following
words shall be inserted; namely:-
 “or within such extended period as permitted by the  Proper officer in case of delay due to such reasons
which the proper officer considers to be beyond the control of the concerned courier,”.
 
in regulation 10, in sub-regulation (1), the portion beginning with the words “provided with” and ending with
the words “from time to time” Shall be omitted;
 
in regulation 11,
 
for the words “five lakh rupees”, the words “two lakh rupees in case of major international airports of
Mumbai, Delhi, Calcutta and Chennai and one lakh rupees in case of other airports” shall be substituted;
 
After the words “postal security”, the words “or bank guarantee” shall be inserted;
 
 In Form Courier Bill of Entry-IV (CBE-IV) appended to the said regulations, in “Declaration”, in clause (ii),
for the letters  and figures  “Rs. 2000”, the letters and figures “Rs. 5000” shall be substituted.
 
(SRINIVAS TATA)
 
UNDER SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
 
 
F.NO. 450/120/97-CUS.IV
 
Note:  The principal notification No. 87/98-Customs (NT), dated the 9th November, 1998 was issued under
G.S.R. No. 662 (E) dated the 9th November, 1998 and was last amended by notification No. 28/99-Customs
(NT), dated the 28th April, 1999 issued under G.S.R.. No. 286 (E), dated the 28th April, 1999.
 
ANNEXURE-II
[Vide  Para-4 Page-90]
 
Central Board of Excise and Customs Circular  dated 19.11.99
 
All Commissioners of Central Excise
 
Subject:- Assessment and clearance of goods  imported/exported through courier mode-Courier
Imports and Exports (Clearance Regulation, 1998-regarding-
 
Sir,
 
I am directed to refer to Courier Imports & Exports (Clearance) Regulations, 1998  dated 9th November,
1998 issued by the Government of India vide notification No. 87/98-Cus. (N.T.) dated 9th November, 1998
and subsequent amendment vide notification No. 54/99-Cus. (N.T.) dated 21st September, 1999.  The said
regulation has been examined by Committee on Subordinate Legislation of Rajya Sabha and certain
suggestions had been received from the Committee.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
2.         The suggestions have been examined by the Board and it has been decided that-
 
All the Customs formations responsible for courier clearance will maintain a record of import of bonafide
samples imported through the courier mode in order to have a proper check on import of such samples.
 
 The Commissioners will take decision on an application for registration as an authorised courier within 30
days of the receipt of such application alongwith all the relevant documents. All the Commissionerates
should prescribe records and accounts to be maintained by registered authorised couriers and they should
ensure that these records/accounts are checked  by customs at regular intervals.
 
3.         These instructions may kindly be brought to the notice of all officers by way of issuing suitable
standing orders.  The difficulty, if any, in implementation of this circular, may, kindly be brought to the notice
of Board.
 
Kindly acknowledge receipt of this circular.
 
ANNEXURE-III
[Vide Para -4 Page-100]
 
MINISTRY OF  FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
NEW DELHI,
THE 25TH NOVEMBER, 1999
 
NOTIFICATION
NO. 66/99-Cus. (N.T.)
 
            G.S.R. 785 (E) In exercise of the powers conferred by section 157 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of
1962), the Central Board of Excise and Customs here by makes the following regulations further to amend
the courier Imports an Exports (clearance) Regulations, 1998 namely:-
 
(1) These regulations may be called the Courier Imports and     Exports (Clearance) Third  Amendment
Regulations, 1999.
(2)   They shall come into force on the date of their publication    in the official Gazette.
 
In the Courier Imports and Exports (Clearance) Regulations, 1998, in regulation 14, in sub-regulation (1), for
clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
 “ (c) misconduct on the part of Authorised Courier whether within the jurisdiction of the said Commissioner
or anywhere else,  which in the opinion of the Commissioner renders him unfit to transact any  business in
the Customs Station.”
 (RAJENDRA SINGH, Under Secretary)
F.No. 450 /120/97-CUS.IV
 
Note:     The Principal notification No. 87/98 Customs (N.T.) dated the 9th November, 1998 was  issued 
under GSR No. 662 (E) dated the 9th November, 1998 and was last amended by notification No. 54/99-Cus.
(NT) dated 21st September, 1999 issued under GSR No. 645 (E) dated the 21st September, 1999.
VIII
 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
 
(I)
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

GENERAL INSURANCE (RATIONALISATION OF PAY SCALE AND OTHER CONDITIONS OF
SERVICE OF DEVELOPMENT STAFF) SCHEME, 1976.
 
            THE COMMITTEE  NOTES WITH SATISFACTION, THE  POSITION ON ALL THE POINTS
THAT WERE  UNDER CORRESPONDENCE WITH THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE. THE COMMITTEE
ALSO NOTES THE COMMENTS FURNISHED BY MINISTRY OF FINANCE ON THE SUBJECT OF
REPRESENTATION OF THE UNIONS/ASSOCIATIONS IN THE GIC IN DECISION MAKING ON
SERVICE MATTER ETC.
 
(II)
                            
Tuticorin  Port Employees’ (Classification, Control and Appeal) Regulations, 1979
 
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have since notified the amendments  in
regulations 7 (3) (a), 8, 10 (2), 13 and 18 in the Tuticorin Port Employees’ (Classification, Control and
Appeal) Regulations, 1979 as suggested by it.
 
(III)
 
Industrial Development Bank of India (Employees’ Provident Fund) Regulations, 1981-Implementation of
123rd Report of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha
 
            The Committees notes  with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance  have carried out the necessary
amendment  in regulation 20 (iii)  as per its  recommendation by providing therein a definite time period of 6
months for satisfying the Bank regarding utilisation of the money for  the purpose it was withdrawn.
 
 (IV)
 
SECURITIES  AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA  (DEBENTURE  TRUSTEES) RULES, 1983.
 
THE COMMITTEE NOTES WITH SATISFACTION THAT THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) HAD ALREADY IMPLEMENTED THE COMMITTEE’S
SUGGESTIONS WITH REGARD TO SUB RULE (1) OF RULE 3 BY INCORPORATING SUITABLE
TIME FRAME FOR SPEEDY DISPOSAL OF AN APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION AS
DEBENTURE TRUSTEE AND HAS NOW  ALSO MODIFIED THE FORMAT OF APPLICATION FOR
OBTAINING THE CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION AS DEBENTURE TRUSTEE.  THE
COMMITTEE, HOWEVER, EXPRESSES ITS UNHAPPINESS THAT THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE
HAD TAKEN MORE THAN THREE AND HALF YEARS FOR IMPLEMENTING THE COMMITTEE’S
SUGGESTION WITH REGARD TO MODIFICATION OF THE FORMAT OF APPLICATION.  THE
COMMITTEE HOPES THAT THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE WOULD IN FUTURE TAKE PROMPT
ACTION ON THE COMMITTEE’S  RECOMMENDATION.
 
(V)
 
HANDLOOMS (RESERVATION OF  ARTICLES FOR PRODUCTION)
Rules, 1986.
            The Committee  notes with satisfaction  and appreciation that the Ministry of Textiles have carried
out all  its suggestions/recommendations expeditiously by amending Rule 1 (2) regarding commencement of
the  rules; Rule 2 (b) regarding level of the ‘authorised officer’;   Rule 3 (2) regarding tennure of the
‘Advisory Committee’;  Rule 4 (3) (b)  regarding the period for reporting of findings by the testing
laboratory; Rule 4 (7) regarding reporting of matter to the local police after search and seizure  and Rule 5
regarding disposal of forfeited articles.
 
 (VI)
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
Courier Imports and Exports (Clearance) Regulation, 1998.
 
 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance has agreed to Committee’s suggestions
with regard to Regulation 3 (c) for maintaining a record of import of bonafied samples imported through
Courier in order to have a proper check on import of such samples; Regulation  10 regarding fixed time
period   for disposal of  application  for registration as authorised   courier;  Regulation 13 regarding
maintenance of records/account in case of authorised couriers and Regulation; 14 (c) for defining word
‘misconduct’ and have also implemented the same by amending the regulations through Gazette notifications
as well as by issue of necessary administrative instructions. The Committee also notes that the Ministry have
amended regulation 2(2) (b) for enhancing the weight limit of packages brought through courier from 32 kg
to 70 kg in line with the weight limits prevailing in other countries.
 
IX
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION,
RAJYA SABHA
II
 
SECOND MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on  Tuesday September 8, 1998  in Room No.  126-C,  Parliament House,
New Delhi
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Miss Saroj Khaparde ¾Chairperson
2.     Shri Satyanarayana Dronamraju
Shri  Brahmakumar Bhatt
Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani
Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat
Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
Shri  S. Ramachandran Pillai
Prof. A. Lakshmisagar
Shri Ish Dutt Yadav
      10.    Shri Sanjay Nirupam
      11.    Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri  S.C. Agarwal,  Deputy Secretary
Shri  Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary
Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
           
MEMORANDUM NO. 14/98 INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INDIA (EMPLOYEES’
PROVIDENT FUND) REGULATION, 1981
 
The Committee considered the comments furnished by the Ministry   of   Finance   on   the  various   points  
arising   out   of    the examination of regulations  6, 7 (iii) (a) & (b), 20 (iii)  and 22 (i).  The Committee
accepted the  Ministry’s view point on regulations 6, 7 (iii) (a) & (b).  It noted with satisfaction that the
Ministry have accepted the Committee’s view point on regulations 20 (iii) and 22 (i).
 
The Committee had already accepted the Ministry’s view point in so far as the regulations 15 (1) (b), 19 (ii)
(f) & 19 (iv), (a) & (b) were considered.
 
The Committee decided that the matter may be reported to the House.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
                        *                      *                      *         
                        *                      *                      *
                        *                      *                      *
                        *                      *                      *
 
The Committee adjourned at 4.15 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on September 18, 1998.
 
_________________________________________________________
            * Relates to matters not included in this Report.
XVI
 
SIXTEENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 10.30 A.M. on Saturday July 03, 1999 in Legend Hall of Hotel Residency, Coimbatore
and held discussion with the representatives of the Ministry of Textiles and the National Handloom
Development Corporation on the Handloom (Reservation of Articles for production) Rules 1986.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Miss Saroj Khaparde  ¾ Chairperson
Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani
Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat
Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
Shri Sukh Dev Singh Dhindsa
Shri N. Thalavai Sundaram
 
SECRETARIAT
 
1.         Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
2.     Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
 
WITNESSES
 
I           Representatives of Ministry of Textile
 
Shri C.K. Mishra, Addl Development Commissioner & CEO (Handlooms) New Delhi
Shri Y.M. Sonekusaley, Director, Weavers Service Centre, Chennai
3.    Shri  A.N. Murthy, Dy. Enforcement Officer
4.     Shri  S. Arumngham, Regional Enforcement Officer
 
II         Representatives of National Handloom  Development  Corporation
 
1.  Shri V.K. Goyal, M.D.
2.  Shri N. Jayraman, Senior Manager Commercial
3.  Shri O. Bhaskaran, Manager Commercial
 
The Chairperson welcomed the representatives and informed them about the functions of the Committee on
Subordinate Legislation and the purpose of the visit of the Committee.  The Additional Development
Commissioner informed the Committee about the objectives of the Handloom (Reservation of Articles for
Production) Act 1985 and rules framed thereunder.  The Addl. Development Commissioner also informed the
Committee about the steps taken by the Ministry of Textiles to protect the handloom sector. Thereafter the
Committee discussed the agenda and expressed its satisfaction that the Ministry of Textiles have agreed to
the suggestions given by the Committee on rules 1(2), 3(2), 4 (7) and 5.   The Committee was also satisfied
that the Ministry have agreed to incorporate in the rules a provision under which the “authorised officer”
after search and seizure shall report the matter to the Central Government.  As regard rule 4(3)(b) the
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

Committee was of the view that the Ministry should have no objection in prescribing a time limit for
submission of report by the testing laboratory in the rules so that unnecessary delay in this regard is avoided. 
The Committee felt that as the testing labs were under Government   Control,    there   could   be     no  
problem    for    timely
procurement of report from theM.   In  rule 4(7) the suggestion of the Committee to define the level of
authorised officer in the rule itself was accepted by the Ministry of Textiles after some discussion.
 
The Committee thereafter discussed its future programme and decided to visit Mumbai in the first week of
August 1999 in connection with certain rules/regulations under its examination and authorised the
Chairperson to take necessary permission  of Hon’ble  Chairman, Rajya Sabha in this regard.
 
The Committee then adjourned at 12.15 P.M.
 
XVII
 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday July 19, 1999 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House,
New Delhi
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Miss Saroj Khaparde ¾Chairperson
Shri Satyanarayana Dronamraju
Shri Radhakishan Malaviya
Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani
Shri Onkar Singh Lakhawat
Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah
Prof. A. Lakshmisagar
Shri Ish Dutt Yadav
      10.   Shri N. Thalavai Sundaram
      11.   Shri Sukh Dev Singh Dhindsa
      12.   Shri Sanjay Nirupam
 
SECRETARIAT
 
1.   Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
2.   Shri R.B. Gupta, Under Secretary
3.   Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
           
                        *                      *                      *
 
Memorandum No. 29/99 regarding Tuticorin Port Employees’ (Classification, Control and Appeal)
Regulation, 1979.
 
The Committee considered the above memorandum and noted that the Ministry have since notified the   
amendments    in  the above cited
_________________________________________________________
            *** Relates to matters not included in this Report.
 
regulation as suggested by the Committee.  The Committee decided that the matter may be reported to the
House.
 
                        *                      *                      *
           
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

2.         The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M.
 
_________________________________________________________
            *** Relates to matters not included in this Report.
 
II
 
SECOND MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday  the  20th June, 2000 in Room No. 126-C,  (Committee
Chairman’s Room),  Third  Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.     Shri Dipankar Mukherjee ¾¾ Chairman
2.     Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt
3.     Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
4.     Dr. A. R. Kidwai
5.     Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
6.     Shri  Lajpat Rai
7.     Shri  Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
8.     Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
9.     Shri  R. Margabandu
     10.     Shri Suresh A. Keswani
 
            SECRETARIAT
 
1.         Shri Deepak Goyal,  Deputy Secretary
       2.     Shri Ram  Behari   Gupta,     Under Secretary
       3.     Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
             
                        The Committee considered the following memornada:-
 
    I         Memorandum No. 24/2000 regarding Industrial Development 
              Bank of India (Employees’ provident Fund) Regulation, 1981
 
            The Committee noted that the Ministry of Finance has amended regulations 20 (iii) and 22 (i) based
upon the Committee’s   suggestions in its 123rd Report.  The Committee, however, felt that the Ministry has
taken a long period in amending the regulations and decided that the matter may be reported to the House.
 
                        *                      *                      *
 
III        MEMORANDUM NO. 26/2000 REGARDING SEBI  (DEBENTURE TRUSTEE) RULES, 1983
 
            The Committee noted that the Ministry of Finance has carried out necessary amendments I the SEBI
(Debenture Trustee) Rules, 1983 by (i) incorporating a time frame in  the rules for speedy disposal of work;
and (ii) revision of the format of application for obtaining certificates on the lines suggested by the
Committee and decided that the maater may be reported to the House.
 
IV        Memorandum No. 27/2000 regarding Handloom (Reservation 
       of Articles for Production) Rules, 1986
 
            The Committee noted that the Ministry of Textiles  has promptly carried out necessary amendments in
the Handloom (Reservation of Articles for Production) Rules, 1986 on the lines suggested it.  The committee
decided that the matter may be reported to the House.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
                                    *                      *                      *
                                    *                      *                      *
_________________________________________________________
   *** Relates to matters not included in this Report
 
VII   Memorandum No. 30/2000 regarding Courier  Imports  and
             Export (Clearance) Regulation, 1998
 
            The Committee noted that the Ministry of Finance has taken necessary action on the suggestions
made by the Committee and decided  that the matter may be reported to the House.
 
                                    *                      *                      *
                                    *                      *                      *
           
The Committee adjourned at 4.25 P.M.
_________________________________________________________
 *** Relates to matters not included in this Report.
 
IV
 
FOURTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on  Tuesday, the  11th July 2000 in Room No. 126-C,  (Committee
Chairman’s Room),  Third  Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.   Shri Dipankar Mukherjee ¾Chairman
2.   Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt
3.   Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
4.   Dr. A. R. Kidwai
5.   Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
6.   Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
7.   Shri  Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
8.   Shri  H.K. Javare Gowda
9.   Shri R. Margabandu
      10.   Shri Suresh A. Keswani
 
            SECRETARIAT
 1.   Shri Deepak Goyal,  Deputy Secretary
 2.   Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
 
2.   The Committee considered its draft 129th Report and after some discussion adopted it. The Committee
decided to present the Report to the Rajya Sabha on the 26th July 2000.  The Committee authorized the
Chairman and in his absence Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt and Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane to present the
Report.
 
                        *                      *                      *
                        *                      *                      *
The meeting adjourned at 4.00 P.M.
_____________________________________________________ 
 *** Relates to matters not included in this Report.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF