    COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE  LEGISLATION 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi      
February 
                             TWO HUNDRED AND F 
 
THE HOURS OF WORKING OF LOCO RUNNING STAFF IN THE 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE  LEGISLATION 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi                                
February , 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED AND F IFTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
 
THE HOURS OF WORKING OF LOCO RUNNING STAFF IN THE 
INDIAN RAILWAYS 
 
resented to the Rajya Sabha on 19 th  February, 
 
      
REPORT 
NO.  
215 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE  LEGISLATION  
                                                                   
REPORT  
THE HOURS OF WORKING OF LOCO RUNNING STAFF IN THE 
 2014) 

C O N T E N T S 
      
                                                     PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION  OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
2. INTRODUCTION   
3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT ON THE HOURS OF WORKING OF LOCO RUNNING 
 STAFF IN THE INDIAN RAILWAYS 
 
 
I        BACKGROUND 
 
II        EXAMINATION OF  RULES AND OBSERVATIONS/    
          RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
III DISCUSSION WITH IRLRO  
 
IV       DISCUSSION WITH THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS  
 
 V        DISCUSSION WITH THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR 
           &   EMPLOYMENT 
 
 VI    ANALYSIS / OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS   
 
 SUMMARY OF OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATONS 
           OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
 ANNEXURE-II 
 
 ANNEXURE-III 
 
*MINUTES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 INTRODUCTION 
 
 
         I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Sub ordinate Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on i ts behalf, this Two Hundred and 
Fifteenth Report of the Committee.  
 
2.  The Committee examined matters that came up whi le scrutinizing the issue of 
hours of working of loco running staff in the India n Railways along with the Railways 
Servants (Hours of Work and Period of Rest) Rules, 2005 in the context of regulation 
of hours of work and period of stay, limitation of hours of work and powers to make 
rules. 
 
3. The observations and recommendations of the Comm ittee are contained in the 
Report. 
 
4.      The   Committee   considered and adopted the draft Report in its meeting held on 
the 18 
th  February, 2014.         
           
                                                                                                                             
Dr. NAJMA A. HEPTULLA                                                                     
     Chairperson  
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation,                                                                                        
Rajya Sabha  
 
 
N
EW DELHI  
February 19, 2014 
 
 
 
(ii ) 
  

 
REPORT 
ON 
HOURS OF WORKING OF LOCO RUNNING STAFF IN THE INDIAN RAILWAYS  
 
I  BACKGROUND 
The Committee received a representation from the In dian Railway Loco Runningmen 
Organization (IRLRO) on the issue of  hours of working of loco running staff in Indian Railways 
on 26 
th  September, 2011.  The representation was forwarded  to the Ministry of Railways and the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment for their comments/  clarifications.  The Ministry of Railways 
furnished their comments/ clarifications on the 4 h November, 2011 (Annexure-I)  which was 
duly forwarded to IRLRO on 21 st  November, 2011.   The Ministry of Labour & Employm ent 
also furnished their comments on the representation  of IRLRO on 12 th  November, 2012 
(Annexure-II). This was also forwarded to IRLRO on 20 th  November, 2012.  In the meantime, 
IRLRO in August, 2012 submitted a rejoinder on the reply of the Ministry of Railways which 
was again forwarded to that Ministry for their comm ents/ clarifications in September, 2012. The 
Ministry of Railways again furnished their comments /clarifications on the rejoinder on 28 th  
September, 2012 (Annexure-III). This was also forwarded to IRLRO on 11 th  October, 2012.   
The Committee also heard the representatives of IRL RO, the Ministry of Railways and Ministry 
of Labour & Employment on the subject on 4 th  October, 2013.  Minutes of the meeting are 
enclosed at Annexure-IV . 
 
II EXAMINATION OF RULES AND OBSERVATIONS/  RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
2. The issues raised by IRLRO and the comments/ cla rifications of the Ministry of Railways 
and the Ministry of labour & Employment received th ereon were examined at length by the 
Committee.  Section 130 under Chapterof the Railway s Act, 1989 contains provisions for 
‘Regulation of Hours of Work and Period of Stay.’  The entire Chapter XIV of the Railways Act 
covers this issue.  Section 132 of the Act ‘Limitat ion of Hours of Work’ is more specific while 
Section 136 of the Act provides for powers to make rules.   Preliminary examination of these 
Rules suggested that the Ministry of Labour are an important stakeholder on this issue.  The 
Committee, therefore, decided that for harmonious i nterpretation and application of these Rules, 
it was important to hear both the Ministry of Railw ays and the Ministry of Labour & 

Employment on the issue.  The Committee, accordingl y, held discussions on the subject matter 
with the representatives of IRLRO, Ministry of Rail ways and the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment on the 4 th  October, 2013.   
 
III DISCUSSION WITH  IRLRO     
 
3. During the course of discussion, IRLRO submitted  before the Committee that the first 
item and first subject allotted to the Ministry of Labour in the Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 
is the “Hours of Employment of the Railway Employee s (HOER), other than Factory Act.”  In 
1946 and again in 1969, it was the Labour Ministry which appointed the Chairman/ Labour 
Tribunal, respectively, on the issue of duty hours of railway employees including Loco Running 
men.   Chief Labour Commissioner- Central (CLC(C ))  Ministry of Labour has declared itself as 
Authority on Hours of Employment on the Ministry of  Labour’s  website.  Also, the Regional 
Labour Commissioner- Chennai (RLC (C )), Chennai ha s categorically declared itself as 
Appellate Authority on HOER-2005 for classifications.   
 
4. In IRLRO’s opinion, the High Power Committee ann ounced by the Ministry of Railways 
consisting of Ex-Secretary of the Ministry of Food Processing Industry as Chairman and three 
retired Railway officials as Members is contrary to  policy decision taken in the NC/JCM (JCA).   
The Administrative Committee constituted by Railway  Board on the 25 
th  May, 2011 is totally 
against the said Agreement notified by DOPT.   
 
5. On being enquired by the Committee about their e xact grievance and the redressal they 
wanted, IRLRO submitted that they were not getting weekly compulsory rest as per the ILO 
C001 Convention of 1919.   IRLRO listed out their g rievances as follows: (i) No fixed upper 
limit of Duty Hours; (ii) No compulsory weekly rest  at present; (iii) No Break during duty hours 
for having food, refreshments and attending to natu re’s call; and (iv) No upper limit for night 
duties in a month/ week at present.   IRLRO requested for the following possible solutions: (i) To 
fix upper limit of Duty Hours to maximum of eight h ours per day normally; (ii) To fix 
compulsory weekly rest by devising a suitable mechanism for all drivers; (iii) To issue directions 
for defined and compulsory Break of half an hour ev ery five hours during normal working; and 

(iv) To issue directions for defined and compulsory  limit of 2-3 nights continuous working and 
maximum ten nights in a month.    
 
6. The Committee notes that IRLRO is not recognized by  Railway Board.  However, 
they are registered with the Ministry of Labour und er the category of Trade Union and 
represent around 7000 employees including drivers a nd assistants.   At the same time 
Committee feels  it cannot turn its back to the genuine grievances o f the loco running staff 
in the Indian Railways and has decided to take a ch aritable view in the matter.  The 
Committee observes that out of a total sanctioned s trength of around 88,000 posts for 
drivers in Indian Railways, 20% of posts were lying vacant .   
 
IV DISCUSSION WITH THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS  
 
7. The Ministry of Railways in their submission bef ore the Committee clarified that the 
decision to constitute the High Power Committee had  been taken by the Ministry of Railways, 
Railway Board keeping in view the minutes of the NC / JCM with the approval of full Board and 
Hon’ble Minister of Railways in consultation with t he recognized Railway Labour Federations.  
Railway Ministry is the competent authority in all matters of rail transport, especially in regard to 
Regulation of the Hours of Work & Period of Rest of  railway employees in terms of Chapter 
XIV of the Railways Act, 1989.  As per Rule 4 of th e Railway Servants (Hours of Work & 
Period of Rest) Rules, 2005, the appeals against th e classification of railway servants are 
preferred with the Appellate Authority, the Ministr y of Labour & Employment.  Decisions 
delivered by Regional labour Commissions (RLCs) are not final. Any railway servant or Railway 
Administration aggrieved by a decision of RLC may p refer an appeal with the Appellate 
Authority, i.e. the Ministry of Labour & Employment .  Working hours of running staff are 
regulated in accordance with the provisions contained in the Railways Act, 1989 and the Railway 
Servants (Hours of Work & Period of Rest) Rules, 20 05 have been framed with the approval of 
the Ministry of Labour & Employment.   
 
8. The Committee observed that there was not a singl e representative from the Labour 
Ministry in the High Powered Committee appointed by  the Railway Ministry.  In Committee’s 
view, Labour Ministry is the nodal Ministry to impl ement the labour legislations in the 

country not only for the Railways, but also for the  entire country.  The Committee failed to 
understand, that when under their own initiative, t he Railway Ministry were convinced 
that the workers are really having certain grievanc es regarding their working conditions, 
lunch/ break time, maintaining of the rail time-tab le, etc., what prevented them from 
taking a  pro-active action and avoiding this kind of unrest.  The Committee failed to 
understand why Railway Ministry did not take pro ac tive action rather than going for 
appeal or law.   In Committee’s view, Railways should not accept ill egitimate demands at 
the cost of the efficiency of the Railways and inco nvenience of passengers, but, this should 
not prevent them from taking a pro-active stand and  solving their problems at their own 
level.   
  
9. Railway Board informed that when the High Power Committee was appointed, need was 
not felt to call people from outside.  Railways was  in a position to carry out a lot of things 
required to be done and need was not felt to seek c ooperation/ consultation with   other 
Ministries.  Railway Board stated that based on the recommendations of the Committee, Railway 
Ministry would hold consultations with other Ministries.  Regarding pro-active role, the Ministry  
stated that each driver was given a specific train link based on the train time-table schedule with 
his approval.   Regarding shortage of drivers, the Committee was informed that 25% of drivers 
were kept on reserve by way of leave or rest-giving  period.  In this sense, there was shortage of 
18% in the over all ‘safety category’ and shortage for loco pilots was less than this.  104 duty 
hours was the upper limit and it did not cross the average of 91-92 duty hours.  In case of railway 
accidents, the Commissioner of Railway Safety appoi nted to look into the matter first checked 
whether the limit of hours of duty of the driver ha d not been crossed and whether he had been 
given proper rest.   
 
10. The Committee, however, expressed distress over the  lack of sensitivity showed by 
the Railway Ministry towards their loco drivers.  I n the Committee view, public perception 
was, while drivers are over fatigued, they are also  human beings.  The Committee 
expressed anguish that the Ministry of Railways had  come before the Committee 
unprepared on the issue at hand and did not even ha ve information on the number of loco 
driver posts vacant at present.   The Committee des ired to take a charitable view in the 

matter taking into account the efficiency of Railwa ys.  Loco runners and signal staff are 
very important for the railways.  Keeping in view t he grave situations under which they 
have to work and the fatigue and mental stress/ strain that the Loco Running Staff undergo 
while on duty- which have a direct affect on their health –these are problems that have to 
be reviewed periodically to lessen the physical and  mental stress that they are put to.  The 
Committee impresses upon the Railways and expects t hem to take a pro-active stand and 
solve the problems at their own level.   The Committee disapproves the Railway Ministry’s 
lethargy in responding to the genuine grievances of  its staff and expects the Ministry will 
come out with possible solutions to these grievances.      
 
V DISCUSSION WITH THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYME NT   
 
11. The Ministry of Labour & Employment in their su bmission before the Committee stated 
that in terms of Sections 135, 7 and 9 of the Railw ays Act, 1989 and Rules 3, 5 and 14 of the 
Railways Servants (Hours of Work and Period of Rest ) Rules, 2005, officers of the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment are bestowed with certain power s and duties, and, quoted from the 
Allocation of Work Rules, 1961 which states that in  respect of Union Railways- Payment of 
Wages, Trade Disputes and Hours of Work for Employe es- these subjects come under the 
Ministry of Labour.  The 1961 Rules clearly mention  that “Government means the Central 
Government in the Ministry of Labour and Employment ”.  Not only in Railways, but also in 
mines, steel and power, working conditions of labou r and hours of work was governed by 
Labour Ministry.  In case of appeal, dispute goes t o Labour Ministry which takes the final 
decision.  Railways only have right to implement th e recommendations.  Also, in case of 
amendment to the rules, Labour Ministry is to be consulted.    
 
12. In the opinion of the Ministry of Labour & Empl oyment, the Chief Labour Commissioner 
(Central) who is heading the Central Industrial Relations Machinery (CIRM) who are responsible 
for maintaining harmonious relations between the Ma nagement and Unions should also be 
associated as a Member of the Committee.  The Ministry further suggested inclusion of a suitable 
representative from Ministry of Health for proper s tudy of fatigue and mental stress/strain 
undergone by the loco running staff. To have a broa d-based consultation on tri-partite basis, the 
Ministry also recommended having representatives of  the recognized Railway 

Unions/Federations in the High Power Committee to f acilitate meaningful examination of issues 
which would, in the long run, ensure harmonious industrial relations in the Railways.  
 
VI ANALYSIS / OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS   
 
13. The Committee observes that pursuant to the pro visions of Section 136 of the 
Railways Act, 1989, Ministry of Railways in consult ation with Ministry of Labour  framed 
the ‘Railways Servants (Hours of work & Period of R est) Rules, 2005.  The Ministry of 
Railway has contented that fixing of duty hours as per the Act and Rules framed 
thereunder comes within their jurisdiction.  Howeve r, when these Rules were framed, 
Ministry of Labour was also consulted.  Thus, in Co mmittee’s view Ministry of Labour is 
also a stakeholder.  Also, in the ‘Railways Servant s (Hours of Work & Period of Rest) 
Rules, 2005’, Ministry of Labour have also been bes towed with certain powers and duties 
under these Statutes.  
 
14. Based on the views of both the Ministry of Rail ways and the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment, the Committee observes that both these Ministries are in agreement that the 
Ministry of Labour is the Appellate Authority, and in case, the unions/ federations are not 
satisfied with a rule framed by the Railways, they can take up the matter with the Labour 
Ministry.   The Committee is happy that there is no  dispute on the law side between these 
two  Ministries.   
 
15. The Committee is further in agreement with the views of the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment which states as under: 
‘The Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) who is hea ding the Central Industrial 
Relations Machinery (CIRM) who are responsible for maintaining harmonious relations 
between the Management and Unions should also be as sociated as a Member of the 
Committee.  The Ministry further suggests for inclu sion of a suitable representative from 
Ministry of Health for proper study of fatigue and mental stress/strain undergone by the 
loco running staff. To have a broad-based consultat ion on tri-partite basis, the Ministry  
recommend to have representatives of the recognized  Railway Unions/Federations in the 
High Power Committee to facilitate meaningful examination of issues which would, in the 
long run, ensure harmonious industrial relations in the Railways’.  
 

 The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Mi nistry of Railways and the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment should strive towards this goal in letter and spirit.   
 
 
 
SUMMARY OF OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
16. The Committee notes that IRLRO is not recognize d by Railway Board.  However, 
they are registered with the Ministry of Labour und er the category of Trade Union and 
represent around 7000 employees including drivers a nd assistants.   At the same time  
Committee feels  it cannot turn its back to the genuine grievances o f the loco running staff 
in the Indian Railways and has decided to take a ch aritable view in the matter.  The 
Committee observes that out of a total sanctioned s trength of around 88,000 posts for 
drivers in Indian Railways, 20% of posts were lying vacant .   
 
17. The Committee observed that there was not a single representative from the Labour 
Ministry in the High Powered Committee appointed by  the Railway Ministry.    In 
Committee’s view, Labour Ministry is the nodal Mini stry to implement the labour 
legislations in the country not only for the Railwa ys, but also for the entire country.  The 
Committee failed to understand, that when under the ir own initiative, the Railway 
Ministry were convinced that the workers are really  having certain grievances regarding 
their working conditions, lunch/ break time, mainta ining of the rail time-table, etc., what 
prevented them from taking a  pro-active action and  avoiding this kind of unrest.  The 
Committee failed to understand why Railway Ministry  did not take pro active action 
rather than going for appeal or law.   In Committee’s view, Railways should not accept 
illegitimate demands at the cost of the efficiency of the Railways and inconvenience of 
passengers, but, this should not prevent them from taking a pro-active stand and solving 
their problems at their own level.   
 
18. The Committee, however, expressed distress over the  lack of sensitivity showed by 
the Railway Ministry towards their loco drivers.  I n the Committee view, public perception 
was, while drivers are over fatigued, they are also  human beings.  The Committee 
expressed anguish that the Ministry of Railways had  come before the Committee 

unprepared on the issue at hand and did not even ha ve information on the number of loco 
driver posts vacant at present.   The Committee des ired to take a charitable view in the 
matter taking into account the efficiency of Railwa ys.  Loco runners and signal staff are 
very important for the railways.  Keeping in view t he grave situations under which they 
have to work and the fatigue and mental stress/ strain that the Loco Running Staff undergo 
while on duty- which have a direct affect on their health –these are problems that have to 
be reviewed periodically to lessen the physical and  mental stress that they are put to.  The 
Committee impresses upon the Railways and expects t hem to take a pro-active stand and 
solve the problems at their own level.   The Committee disapproves the Railway Ministry’s 
lethargy in responding to the genuine grievances of  its staff and expects the Ministry will 
come out with possible solutions to these grievances.     
 
19. Section 130 of the Railways Act, 1989 contains provisions for ‘Regulation of Hours 
of Work and Period of Stay.’  The entire Chapter XI V of the Railways Act covers this 
issue.  Section 132 of the Act ‘Limitation of Hours  of Work’ is more specific while Section 
136 of the Act provides for powers to make rules.  The Committee observes that pursuant 
to the provisions of Section 136 of the Railways Ac t, 1989, Ministry of Railways in 
consultation with Ministry of Labour  framed the ‘R ailways Servants (Hours of work & 
Period of Rest) Rules, 2005.  The Ministry of Railw ay has contented that fixing of duty 
hours as per the Act and Rules framed thereunder co mes within their jurisdiction.  
However, when these Rules were framed, Ministry of Labour was also consulted.  Thus, in 
Committee’s view Ministry of Labour is also a stakeholder.  Also, in the ‘Railways Servants 
(Hours of Work & Period of Rest) Rules, 2005’, Mini stry of Labour have also been 
bestowed with certain powers and duties under these Statutes.  
 
20. Based on the views of both the Ministry of Rail ways and the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment, the Committee observes that both these Ministries are in agreement that the 
Ministry of Labour is the Appellate Authority, and in case, the unions/ federations are not 
satisfied with a rule framed by the Railways, they can take up the matter with the Labour 
Ministry.   The Committee is happy that there is no  dispute on the law side between these 
two Ministries.   

 
21. The Committee is further in agreement with the views of the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment which states as under: 
‘The Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) who is hea ding the Central Industrial 
Relations Machinery (CIRM) who are responsible for maintaining harmonious relations 
between the Management and Unions should also be as sociated as a Member of the 
Committee.  The Ministry further suggests for  incl usion of a suitable representative from 
Ministry of Health for proper study of fatigue and mental stress/strain undergone by the 
loco running staff. To have a broad-based consultat ion on tri-partite basis, the Ministry  
recommend to have representatives of the recognized  Railway Unions/Federations in the 
High Power Committee to facilitate meaningful examination of issues which would, in the 
long run, ensure harmonious industrial relations in the Railways’.  
 
  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the M inistry of Railways and the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment should strive towards this goal in letter and spirit.   
 
 
  

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
 
IX 
 Ninth Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 3.30 pm on Tuesday, the 18 th  February, 2014 in Room No.126-C 
(Committee Chairperson’s Room), Parliament House, New Delhi.   
Present 
1. Dr. Najma A. Heptulla    Chairperson 
Members 
2. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
4. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
5. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
6. Shri Lalhming Liana 
7. Dr.Bhalchandra Mungekar 
8. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
 
Secretariat 
1.  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
3.  Shri R.S.Rawat, Joint Director 
4.  Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director 
5.  Shri R.P.Shukla, Assistant Director 
6.  Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Memb ers of the Committee to the meeting.  
The following draft reports were taken up for consideration and adoption by the Committee: 
• Draft 213 
th  Report on Statutory Orders Laid on the Table of th e Rajya  Sabha 
during its 229th  Session 
• Draft 214 th  Report on the Marble Development and Conservation Rules, 2005; 
and 
• Draft 215 th  Report on the Hours of Working of Loco Running Sta ff in the Indian 
Railways 
3. The Committee unanimously adopted its draft 213 th , 214 th  and 215 th  Reports and decided 
to present these Reports to the House on the 19 th  February, 2014.  Accordingly, it authorized its 

Chairperson, and in her absence Shri Vijay Jawaharl al Darda and Shri Ali Anwar Ansari, 
Members of the Committee, to present the Reports to the House. 
4.   *   *   * 
 
5.     The meeting adjourned at 4.00 p.m. 
 
________________________ 
*** Relate to other matters. 
 