COM.I • 123 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION 
HUNDRED AND SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
;II 
Cuunlln& or Past ~rvl~-e Cor Pensionary Dt'llefiiS on Mobility ur Employoe~ 
b<tw~n Ctntrol Conrnment Departments and Central and State 
Autonomou• Bodlts and viet versa 
(Presented 0 11 JUJft 12, 1998) 
_.., 
RAJYA SABHA SECilETARlAT 
!oOEW DE.UIJ 
/u,., 19981/V<Iurllo-.4-noo. 1'120 (S.ka) 

I. 
2. 
3. 
CONTENTS 
CoMPOsmos OF Tire CoMMfTITI! 
RePORT ON Coui<YlNG oF PAST SERVIa: FOR 
PE:<SIONARY BU~EF~TS ON MOBILITY OF EMPLOYEES 
BETWEEN CE.~<TRAL GOVERNMENT DUARlloiEI<TS .v<D 
CENTRAL AND STATE AIITONOMOUS BODIES At'D VIC£ 
VERSA 
MII•IJTES OF TilE MEETTNOS OF THE COMMITrE£ 
4. ANNEXURE$ I TO VIII 
I. Representation of Shri M.K Sharma 
II. Representation of All India Insurance Employees' 
Association 
IlL Office Memorandum dated 7.4.97 of Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
IV. Extracts from the 38th Repcn of rhe Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs. 
V. Representation of Punjab National Bank Officers' 
Association 
VI. Representation of Bank Employees Federation of 
India 
VIr. Questlonnrure on rhe subject 
VIU. Office Memorandum dated 3.10.97 of Mimslry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
[){ Office Memorandum dated 11.3.98 of Mmistry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
WSRSIF-t-A 
PAGEs 
(i) 
1-20 
21-24 
25--37 
38--40 
41-58 
59 
60--62 
63--66 
67-70 
71-74 
75--78 
1., 
,, .. 
epa 

• 
• 
COMMITI'EE ON SUBORDINA1E LEGISLATION 
(1997-98) 
'1. Shri Dipankar Mukherjec-Cbairma.o 
••2. Vacant 
3. Sbri John F. Femande& 
''4. Vacan1 
.. S Vacant 
6 Sbri Shiv Charan Singh 
7. Sbri Narain Prasad Gupta 
8. Pror. Ram Bakhsb Singh Vanna 
9. Sbrimati lla Panda 
10. Shri S Mu1bu Mani 
.. 11. Vacant 
12. Shri Adhik Shirodkar 
13. Shri M.P Abdussarnad Samadani 
14. Shri R.N . Arya 
15. Shri Nabam Rebio 
SECRET AJUA T 
I. Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri S.C. Agarwal, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer 
" N.......,led ., Member lftd 0Wrm.u w d . IS.• 1998 rio< Sbri M.k Baby who CU&cd 10 
be Me.mbt.t and Cbail'lni.D ol tbt Committu coostql.tC"Dt oa his rctarc..mat frOGI «!!t 
n><ml><nbip of die HOUk 011 H.1998 . 
•• v..,.., oc -.r of ,...,..,.., of SISI>n Ballrir Sin&)l, SaldDdaoaa<la , 0 . Pr ,.PI 
Reddy aad Tora Cltarao Majwn<lar flam tbc .,.mbcnbip of tbc Hou.< 
(i) 

• 
• 
REPORT 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on S11bordinate Legislation, having 
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its beball, do 
hereby present this Hundred and Seventeenth Report of the Committee . 
1.2 The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting 
held on June 10, 1998. 
1.3 The matters examined by the Committee arisjng out of tbe Scrutiny 
of variOU5 Reprcsenlations, Memoranda, Suggestions received from indi· 
viduals, certain Employees' AssociationsiFerderations relating to Banking 
and Insurance Sectors alongwith the comments of tbe Government 
received thereon. and the observations and recommendations wbicb, in the 
opinion of the Committee, should be brought to the notice of tbe House, 
are contaaned in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report . 

COUNTING 01' PAST SERVICE ON MOBILITY OF EMPLOYEES 
BETWEEN Tim CENTRAL GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS AND 
CENTRAL AU'I"ONOMOUS BODIES OR STATE AUTONOMOUS 
BODIES AND VICE VERSA 
Facts ol the Case 
2.0 Shri Sompal, the then Cilainnan of the Depaltnlcnt-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs bad forwarded vide 
his letter dated December 13, 1996 to the Cilainnan, Committee on 
Subordinate Leg.slation, a representation dated November 13, 1996, 
received from Shri Mebendra Kumar Sharma of B-n. Anand Vihar, 
Delho-110092 (Annexure-!) regarding counting of past Kmce for 
pensionary purposes of CenlTal Government Employees who moved to 
statutory corporations in the Banking and Insurance Seeton and viee-
t-'Cf"U. 
2.1 The representation was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance and the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions for Comments. 
2.2 In rile meanwhile, another representation dated 1.1.1997 (Annexurc-
11) was received from Shri R.P. Mancbanda, President, AU India Insurance 
Employees' Association, Cbennal raising substantially the same ossues as in 
the rcpreo;entation of Shri Sharma. Tbis rcpreo;entation too was forwarded 
tu the concerned Ministries for comment<. 
2.3 Subsequently, the Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Economic Affairs 
(Dankong Division) vide their O.M. No. 7/413197-IR dated February 
14, 1997 furnished the following comments on the representation of Shri Shorma:-
" ..... as per the instructions issued by the Department of Pensions 
and Pensioners' Welfare vide their O.M. dated 30.5.95, service 
rendered by a Government Employee before joining a public 
sector bank hns not to be considered as qualifying service for the 
purpose of pensionury benefits. Similarly service rendered by a 
Dank Employee before joining the Centr.ol Govemment is also not 
con.<idered ns quaiUying service in Government of India for 
pensionary benefits. However, these employees are free to S« 
tenninal benefits for the service rendered in Govcrnmenl'llank 
from the concemed Government Depanmeni'Public Sector Bank 
as per rules applicable in these institutions. In view of the above, 
Punjab Nationnl Bank cannot accede to the request made by Sbri M K. Shanna ." 
2.4 Thereafter, the Ministry of Personnel. Public Grievances and 
Pensions, (Deptl. of Pension and Pensooners' Welfare) vide their O.M. No. 
2&697-P&PW (B) dated 7.4 1997 fumishcd their detailed comments 
(Annexure-tO) on the representatoons referred to them. 
2.4.1 At this stage it was brought to the notice of the Committee that 
2 

3 
the Parliamentary Standing Commiuee on Home Affairs to its Twenty 
Eighth Repon presented to the Rajya Sabha on May 2, 1997 dealt with the 
subject matter of the representations and made cenaio observations and 
recommendations (Annexure-IV). 
2.S Then, the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, 
Insurance division vick their O.M. No. 4(1)1ns.llli97 doted July 3, 1997 
furnished the f91lowing comments with reference to the· representation of 
Shri Manchanda:-
" .... The matter wos examined in detail in consultation with Depn. 
of Pension and Pensioners' Welfare and request for counting the 
Central Government Service for pension purposes u proposed by 
All India Insurance Employees' Association cannot be acceded to. 
However, Rajya Sabha Secretariat may take up the matter afresh 
with Depu. of Pension and Pensioners' Welfare, which is the nodal 
Ministry dealing with pensions cases, under intimation to this 
Department." 
2.6 Subsequently, two more representations were received by the 
Chairman of the Committee on the subject -one received from Shri K.D. 
Khcra, General Secretary, All India Punjab National Bank Officers' 
Association. New Delhi dated August 14, 1997 (Annexure-V) and anotheT 
from Shri Harisb Sharma, Joint Secretary, Bank Employee$' Federation of 
India, Calcuua dated August 21, 1997 (Annexure-VI). These two 
representations while repeating tbe issues raised in the earlier 
representations also brought tnto focus certain legal and constitutional 
points. 
2.7 The matter was re-examtned in the Secretariat and a detailed 
Questionnaire (Annexure-VII) on the subject was forwarded to the 
Minl~tty of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions for their comments 
vide Secretariat OM dated September 5, 1997. 
2.8 The said Ministry responded vide their OM No. 2816197-P&PW(B) 
dated October 3, 1997 (Anncxure-VUI). Here it may be pointed out that 
the Ministry in the said OM had more or less repeated the comments 
furnished by them ill their earlier OM dated April 7, 1997 (Annexure-ill) 
nnd had not replied to the specilic points raised in the Questionnaire. 
2.9 Subsequently the Committee in its meeting held on March S, 1998 
heard all the petitioners and office bearers of various AS$0Ciations and 
Federations in the Insurance and Bankmg Sectors. 
3.0 On being pointedly asked to furnish specific replies to the 
Questionnaire (Annexure- Vll), the Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions (Department of Pensions and Pensioners' 
Welfare) vide their OM dated March 11, 1998 (Annexure-IX) furnished 
their responses to the Questionnaire. 
3.1 The Committee then in its meeting held on March 16, 1998 heard 
the Secretaries ill the Legislative Department, the Department on Legal 
Affairs in the Ministry of Law and Justice and the Secretary, Ministry of 
Personnel. Public Grievances and Pensions. 

4 
hsues raised by the Petllloners 
3.2 Since the introduction of pension as a terminal benefit for the civil 
servants during the colonial period, counting of service on mobility 
between the provincwl!State Governments and the Central Government 
had been taking place. The system has continued thereafter Addltion51 
modifications have been made to the extant rule~ with a view to making 
the package more facilitative and attractive . 
3.3 With the establishment of mony organ.isatlons under different Acts or 
Parliament and of the State Assemblies and under the Socieues registration 
Act for the purpose or carrying out the multi-dimensional funcuons of the 
weUare state on the post independence era, a necessity was kit that the 
employees of these organisations too on mobility from these bodies to the 
Departments of the Government of vice versa or on mobility from one of 
such bodies to another simtlar body should carry the benefit of past service 
alongwilh them for the pu~ of pensionary benefits in the new 
orgamsation. Two important official memoranda had been issued in 1984 
and 1986 in this regard. O.M. No. 20110184-Pension Unit dated 29.8.1984 
provides that on mobility of personnel between the Central Government 
Departments and Central Autonomous Bodies, service for the purpose of 
pension in the earlier organisation shall count for that purpose in the latter 
organisation. O.M. No. 28(10)184-P&PW dated 7.2.1986 took this 
unification pr~ss hitherto confined to the Central regime to a step 
forward and provided that the benefit shall also extend on such mobility 
from a department in the Central Government or a Central Autonomous 
Body to a State Government or a State Autonmous Body and ¥tee vers1. 
This has been done with a view to achieve that on mobility of a person 
from any of the departments of a State Government or any of the State 
Autonomous Bodies to a Department of the Central Government or a 
Central Autonomous Body, such person shall carry alongwith him the 
benefit of his past service !or the purpose or penSIOn tn the Iauer 
organisation and vice versa. The net effect of this is that services rendered 
in the Government proper, whether Central or a State Government, any of 
the corporations or bodies created under an ACI of Parliament or an Act 
of Assembly or a society or a similar body whose expenses are 
substantially met from the finances provided by the Central Government 
or a State Government, from part of a common pool where in movement 
from one organisation to another organisation, whether under the Central 
Government or under a State Government, does not result 10 loss of 
service rendered at any stage. 
3.4 The Department of Pension and Pensioners' WeUare bas issued 
O.M. No. ~P&PW(B) dated 30.5.1995 providing that the 
nationalised bank$ including the Reserve Bank of India and the State Bank 
or lodia and its subsidiaries, the Life Insurance Corporation of India and 
the General lnsuTanoe Corporation of India and iu four subsidiaries are 
not to be treated as Central autonomous bodies !or ·the purpose of 
pensionary benefit on movement or employees !rom any of these 
org~nisations to a Department of the Central Government or a State 
Government or State autonomous body and vice veru. It further provides 

5 
that these statutory organisations shall continue to be treated as Central 
autonomous bodies for the purposes of pro-rota pensionary benefits 
admissible under Miniltry of Finance O.M. No. 261(18)EV175 dated 
8.4.1976. Thus all the statutory corporations in the insurance and banking 
sectors have been taken out or the vast federation numbering in thousands 
comprising of the Central Government (including seven Union Tcrrnorie>), 
25 State Governments, statutory corporations/bodies created under more 
than 100 Acts or Parliament, Statutory corporations/bodies created under 
different Acts or State Assemblies and societies. charitable tru<ts and 
various similar bodies created or established for different purposes 
tncluding rendering education and health services etc. and where expenses 
of such societtes, trustS and bodies arc substantially met from the funds 
provided by the Central Government or the State Governments . 
3.5 Tbe following socio-economic and legal consequences flow out of the 
action of the Central Government in segregating these few corporations tn 
the insurance and banking sectors:-
(i) Since the O.M. dated 30.5.1995 intends to provide that 
corporations in the insurance and banking sectors shall not he 
deemed to be Central Autonomous Bodies for the f""~''"" uf 
COUnting Of paSt service for penSIOnary benefits, the CniJ'IU}CC\ uf 
all other CentraVState Statutory Bodies, for example. the Airporr. 
Authority of India, Tbe Damodar Valley Corporation, the Tc~ 
Board, the Tamil Nadu Housing Board, the lucknow Mumciral 
Corporation and tens or hundreds of other similai bodies, any 
gront·in·aid school or college tncludlng those run by religious 
bodies shall continue tO have the benefit of counting their service 
on mobility from a Department of the Government. whether in the 
Central Governmen t or the State Government, to any of these 
bodies or vice versa. However, the employees of any of these 
corporations in the insun~nce and banking sectors shall not be able 
to participate in the common pool and enjoy the benefit of 
counting of past service for pensionary entitlement on such mobility. 
{ii) O.M. No. 2011Qi84.Pension Unit dated 29.8.1984 provides that on 
movement from one Centnl body to the other Central 
autonomous body, the service rendered in the former shall count 
for the purpose of pension in the laner organisation. In view of the 
benc6t having been extended in relation to State autonomous 
bodies through O.M. No. 28(10)184.P&PW dated 7-2·1986, the 
movement from State autonomous bodies to the Central 
Government or the Cenrnl autonomous bodies and vice versa 
involves no loss of pensionary benefits. Since corporations in the 
insurance and banking scctor1 are not to be treated as Central 
Autonomous bodies, the service rendered in one of these 
corporations shall not count on mobility to any of the other 
corporations in the insurance and banking sectors too. 

6 
(iii) 0 M. No. 20/10184-Pens•on Unit dated 29.8.1984 defines Centrnl 
Autonomous Body to include a Ccntial Statutory Body i.e. a 
body/ corporation created umlcr an Act of Parliament. The scope 
of pensionary benefit on mobility having been c~tended to the 
State autonomous bod1cs under O.M. No. 28(10Y84·P&PW dated 
7.2.1986. a similar definitiOn of a 'State Autonomous body' by 
reference, has been provided under that O.M. Since aU of the 
nattonaliud banks induding Rc'l<!rve Bank of India, State Bank of 
India and its <ubsidiarie<. the LIC of India and the GIC of India 
and its four subsidiaries are the creation of different Acts of 
Parl•ament, any interpretation/clarification whicb ,. contrary to 
literal and settled meaning of the definition provided in the basic 
instrument, namely, the O.M. No. 201!0184-P&PW dated 
29.8.1984 is unjust and legally not tenable. Thus the interpretatiolll' 
clarification provided vide O.M dated 30.5.1995 IS liable to be • 
~truck down 
(iv) The 1mpugned action on the part of the Central Government is 
uhrn vtrcs of the provisions of 3Iticle 14 in general and anicle 16 • 
in parllcular of the C<lnstitution. II discriminates between one set 
of corporatiOTIS tn the na11onalized sector i.e., all the corporatioru 
m the msurance and banking sector vis-a-vis the other similarly 
placed statutory bodies, i.e. the statutory corporations/bodies 
created under the Acts of Parli3Incnt which arc more than 100 10 
the Central sphere and run into thousands in the State sphere 
which are Stmilarly circumstanced. 
(v) Havtng recognized the weakness of their basis of providmg vide 
0 M. No 28i.!4194-P, P&W(B) dated 30.5.1995 that 
the nntionalized banks, etc. are not to be treated as the CentmJ 
Auwnomous Bodies, the Department has come out with an O.M. 
No. 2!l/24/94-P.PW(B) dated 13.9.1996 issuing a clanfication that 
since O.M. dnted 29.8.84 dots not provide for counting of service 
rendered 1n a Public Sector Undertaking, the clarificauon provided 
vi(/c O.M. 28124/94-P&PW(B) dated 30.5.1995 should be taken as 
clarification to the effect that these organisations, namely. 
notionalizcd bnnk•. etc. are to be treated at par with public sector 
undcnakings . 
(vi) Tt is well settled proposition in law that for the purposes of 
applicability of the provisions of Part-IJI of the Cons!Jtutioo, 
the definition of the expression "the State" under 3Iticle 12 of that 
Pan includes all statutory corporations and does not include a 
Government company registered under the Companies Act. The 
said dichommic interpretation wtth all force t<jually applies in 
rclatton to the meaning or a body created under an Act of a 
Jegt<lature and a company registered under the Companies Act for 
the pu~ of understanding distinctioo between an autonomous 
body and a public sector undcnaldng . 
(vii) The view that nationalized banks, etc. are the central autonomous, 
bodies and shall continue to be so treated for the purpose 

7 
of emitlement of pro rata pension and the nationalized banks. etc . 
shnll not be treated as central autonomous body for the purpose of 
counting of service as provided by O.M. dated 30.5.1995, is a legal 
contradiction The same set up employees for the purpose of the 
same entitlement, that is pension cannot be construed to belong to 
different genes, namely, for one purpose as the central 
autonomous body 811d for another public sector undenaking. It " 
nothing but an interpretation of convenience . Executive 
instructions which supplement statutory rules. that is. C.C.S. 
(Pension) Rules cannot be construed in a whimsical and arbitrary 
manner 
Analysis or Issues by Committee 
3.6 TiU August, 1984 Central Government employees on permanent 
ttansfer to Central autonomous bodies were entitled only for the benefit 
of pro rau pension for the service rendered in Central Government . 
Nationalised Banks, etc. were treated as central autonomous bodies . 
3.7 O.M dated 29.8.1984 provided counting of service for pension on 
mobility of personnel between Central Government Depanmcnts and the 
Central Autonomous Bodies and on mobility of personnel between one 
Central Autonomous body to another Central Autonomous Body. Central 
Autonomous Body has been defined in the said O .M. to include nil 
Central Statutory Bodies. 
3.8 Since February, 1986 State Autonomous Bodies have also been 
covered in maller of counting of service as referred to l!bove. Thus. all 
statutory bodies (a bod)llborporation created through an Act of Parliament 
or a State Legislature), bodies registered as societies like the Kendnya 
Vidyalaya Sangnthnn, etc. and grants·in-aid schools and colleges constitute 
a huge community or autonomous boidcs. 
3.9 Central Government bad been counting scrv1ces rendered in 
defferent Central statutory bodies including those in the Insurance and 
Banking Sectors till O.M. No. 2S2494-P&PW(E} was issued on 30.5.1995 
to clarify that for the purpose of counting of service rendered in the 
Central Autonon1ous Bodies, such corporations in the Insurance and 
Banking sectors shall not be tteated as Central Autonomous Bodies. 
However, such corporations shall continue to be treated as Central 
Autonomous Bodies for the purposes of pro rata entitlement of pension 
vide O.M. No. 261(18)1EB75 dated 8.4.1976. 
4.0 O.M. dated 8.4.1976 provided that the Central Government 
Employees on permanent transfer to Central Autonomous Bodies were to 
be g1vcn benefit of pro rata pension. 
4.1 O.M. dated 14.5.1986, 3.4.1987 and 10.11.1987 again clarified that 
Reserve Bank of India, State Bank of India and its subsidiaries, all 
nahonalited banks, the L.I.C. of India and the G.I .C. of India and its 
subs•diaries are to be treated as central autonomous bodies for rhc above 
purpose i.e . pro rata pension. 

8 
4.2 O.M dnted 13.9.96 trta1S the statutory bodies in the Insurance and 
Banking Sectors at par with public sector undertakings. A new concept was 
introduced for tho: first time without mentioning any criteria for making 
such cl=ification. 
4.3 AU Central Statutory Corporations (more than 100), various bodies 
registered under the Societies Registration Act shall continue to be treated 
as Central Autonomous Bodies for the purpose of counting of past service 
for pension excepting for the corporations in the Insurance and Banking 
sectors includong the Reserve Bank of lndia, a body vested "'ith exercise of 
sovereign functions. 
4.4 These orgonisations 10 the Insurance and Banking sector shall 
continue to be treated as Central Autonomous Bodies for the purpose of 
entitlement of pro rata pension and not for the purposes of counung of 
past service for pension for which they are 10 be treated M par with public 
sector undcrtakJOgs. 
4.5 On mobility from the statutory corporotion in the Insurance of 
Banking Sectors 10 another statutory corporation in eother of these sectors, 
the services for the ;>urpose of pension too shall not count. 
4.6 Various Office Memoranda issued from time to lome supplement the 
CCS (Pension) Rules.-- the basic Rule framed under the proviso to An. 
30<). How can the OM of 30.5.95 which is an executive order in exercise of 
powers under Art. 73 supplant the substantive Rule i.e. the CCS (PeMion) 
Rules? How con a public policy codified in unambiguous terms and which 
has been in vogue for nearly II years, be modificdr.oltercd substantoally by 
a clarifocatory order without assigning any reason what<cx:ver? 
4.7 Bodies Joke Aorports Authority of India, Food Corporation of India, 
Warehousing Corporation of India, Tea Board, Brahamputra Board and 
more than 100 similar organisacioM shall continue to be members of o vast 
pool of organisations, created through successive OMs of 1984 and 1986. 
4.8 Exclusionary provision contained tn the O.M. dated 30.5.1995 has 
been confined only 10 the nationalised statutory corporations in the 
insurance and banking segments of economy and is unrcawnable. 
4.9 Treating these corporations as Central Autonomous bodies for the 
purpose of entitlement or pro-rata pcnsoon and not treating them so for the 
purpose of counting of earlier service IS bad as a personnel policy as well 
as in law since the undetlyong purpose - entitlement of pension - in both 
cases happens to be alike. Executive onstructions which supplement 
st11u1ory rules, i.e. CCS (Pension) Rules. ought to be construed with 
utmost care and circumspection. 
5.0 The proposition that those having been allowed the benefit and since 
retired before 30.5.1995, that is the date of the said OM. shall continue to 
enjoy the benefit and those still in service and to whom the benefit has 
been allowed shall be deprived of the same is discriminotory. 
5.1 All the statutory corporations in the insurance and banking sectors 
have been taken out of the vast federation numbering in thousands 
comprising of the Central Government (including seven Union Territories), 

9 
25 State Governments, statutory corporationS'bodics created under more 
than 100 Acts of Parliament, Statutory corporatiollS'bodics created undet 
different Acts of State Assemblies and societies, charitable trum and 
various similar bodies created or established for dofferent purposes 
including rendering education and health services etc. and where expenses 
of such societies, trust and bodies are substantially met from the funds 
provided by the Central Government or the State Governments. 
5.2 Since all of the nationalised banks including Reserve Bonk of India, 
State Bank of India and its subsidiaries. the LIC of India and the GIC of 
India and ots four subsidiaries, arc the creation of different Acts of 
Parliament, any interpretatioM:Iarification wllich is conttary to literal and 
settled meaning of the definition provided in tile basic instrument, namely, 
the O.M. No. 2010'84-Pew;ioo Unit dated 29.8.1984 and 0 M. No. 28(10y 
84·P&PW dated 7.2.1986 is unjust and untenable. 
Analysis of replies of IM Ministry 
5.3 Mlnistry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Department 
of Pension and Pensioners' Welfare had in the first instance sent two 
Office Memoranda dated April 7, 1997 and October 3, 1997 to the 
Secretariat in response to the representations under consideratiOn of the 
Committee. Upon scrutiny of the first O.M. a detailed quc£tionnoire 
containing specific queries was sent to the Mmistry for rephes Ho.,.ever, 
in their second communication dated October 3, 1997. the Mmostry more 
or less repeated the contents of their earlier O.M. dated April 7, 1997 and 
evaded specific replies to the Questionnaire. The Commmee took a serious 
view in this regard and directed the Ministry to fum1sh specific rcplic~ 
which they did vide O.M. dated March II, 1998 (Annexurc·!X) 
5.4 The replies of the Mlnistry dated 11.3.1998 to tile spc~ific questions 
were carefully examined. 
5.5 Views arrived at by the Committee on each of the response of the 
Ministry to the Questionnaire are stated as under seriatim:-
(a) Expressions in Rule 37, of the CCS (Pension) Rules. 1972 
namely, "a corporation or company wholly or substantially 
owned or controlled by the Government" and "body controlled 
or financed by the Government" are so widely worded that they 
contain in them any institution owned or controlled by the 
Government including RBI, etc. OM dated 8 4.76 through 
nowhere provides a well crafted definition of central 
autonomous body as was done in OM dated 29.8.84 uses the 
expressions, namely, body corporate owned or controlled by 
Government, quasi·Governmcnt, corporate body, etc. to denote 
Central autonomous bodies and the PSUs which cannot surely 
keep RBI, etc. beyond their purview. O.M. dated 8.4 1976 
provides vitk para 5, benefit of pro-rata pension on movement 
from the Central Government to autonomous bodies on one's 
own volition, Expressions 'autonomous bodies' and 'PSUs' in 
that OM have been used in contradistinCto<:,, to each other. 
Three Office Memoranda of 1986-87 (14.5.86, 3.4 .87, 
10.11.1987) have been issued in the context on OM dated 

10 
8.4.1976. Department of Personnel chose to clarify that RBI. 
etc. are central autonomous bodies. [f RBI, etc. were similar to 
PSUs, nothing deterred Department of Personnel to say them 
a• PSUs as movement to PSUs also entails benefit of pro-rata 
pcnsion~ry benefit 
Three Office Memoranda dated 1986 and 1987 provide that the 
RBI. etc . are to be treated as Central autonomous bodies of the 
purpose of OM dated 8.4 .76 OM dated 8.4.76 provides that on 
movement of an employee from a department of the Central 
Gove rnment to a Central autonomous body. pro-rata 
pc nsu>nary benefit for the service rendered in the Central 
Government shall be given It appears that the mode of their 
incorporation. through Acts of Parliament thus being statutory 
bodies, and the functions performed by them, that lS, being 
soverc1gn. governmental and public welfare in concept, had 
been Important elements about the structural character about 
these corporations which influenced the Cenlral Government in 
declaring them as the Central autonomous bodies . Incidentally, 
these corporations do not admimstrativcly fall within the control 
of the Bureau of Public Enterpnses of the Central Government . 
These trappings around these corporations do not get era.~d on 
making provisions for the counting of serv1ce on such mobility. 
Hence, any suggestion that these corporations are central 
autonomous bodies for the purpose of entitlement of pro-ra/a 
pcn<oonary benefit and are not so for the counting of service Is 
patcmly unacceptable. 
(b) OM dared 8.4.1976 does not contain any definition of the terms 
"central autonomou.< body" or "publ ic sector undertaking" llS is 
the CAse wilh OM dated 29 8.84 which contains a nearly crafte~d 
specific definition of the term "central autonomous body" In 
view of this, for understanding the meaning of "central 
autonomous body" for the purpose of OM date-d 8.4 .76, help is 
to be tukcn from the background material relating thereto, 
namely, rule 37 of the CCS (Pension) Rules , 1972. earlier OMs 
ISsued on the subject, the expressions like "body corporate 
owned or controlled by Government" used in OM dated 8.4 .76 
itself and of all the most important OMs of 1986-87 puttJng the 
whole lot beyond doubt 
(c) Department of Personnel has rightly said that tbc definition 
given in para 5 of OM dated 31.3.87 is in further elaboration of 
definition given OM dated 84.76 and OM dated 29.8.84. DOP 
has through three Office Memoranda dated 14.5.86 , 3.4 .87 and 
10 11.87 clarified that for the purpose OM dated 8.4 .76 central 
autonomous body includes RBI , ere . These three OMs are 
unambiguous in their language to assen that RBI. etc . have all 
along been Central autonomous bodies (since these OMs are 
merely clarificatory to character) and no fresh decision to 
include them in the category of Central autonomous bodies bas 
been taken , OM dated 31.3.87 captioned "parity in lhe 

' 
11 
mauer of payment of pro-rata retirement benefiu to the 
Government servants permanently absorbed '" the Ccnual 
Public Sector Undertakings and Central aumnomous bodu:~" is, 
in so far it relates to Central autonomous bodies, only in che 
conccxl of OM dated 8.4.76 on lhe subjet:r. Thus dcfinocion in 
para S of OM daccd 31.3.87 (For lhc purpose of chcsc <>T<.krs. a 
Ccncral auconomous body ... ) is only in chc conlcxl uf meaning 
of Central aulonomous body as given 10 11 in OM dacc<l MA.7n 
which is in cbe conlcxt of RBI, cce 10 be read chrough chrcc 
OMs of 1986-87. Since DOP inns answer has said thai para 4 of 
OM dated 29.8.84 leods one 10 para 5 of OM dated ~I J.l\7 
which in cum leads to OM daccd 8.4.76 10 be seen lhrough lhc 
clariricacions given in OMs of 1986-87 Thus bv DOP'• own 
logic, "ccnual autonomous body" cannoc mean differcncly tn 
OM daced 8.4.76 and OM daced 29.8.84 
The reasoning above is further supported by the .chcme of OM 
duccd 29.8.84. Para 3 (b)(i) of 1ha1 OM provides inmucclons for 
counling of service where movcmcnc is from a Central 
Governmcnl escablishmcnl having pension scheme 10 a Ccn1ral 
auconomous body having nol a pension scheme. It provide~ thAI 
such employees will be eligible for gran1 of pro-rata pens1onary 
benefits in terms of OM daced 84 76 and such cases are 10 be 
decided in terms of that OM. sincx: "Cen1ral autonomous body"" 
as defined in para 4 of OM dated 29.8.~ means che same clung 
throughoul at QM including para 3 (b)(i), reliance ha• tu be 
placed on the proYlsions of OM daced 8.4.76 mcludong che 
meaning of Central auconomous t>ody for che purpose of thai 
OM. In view of the very scheme of OM dated 29.8.84. Cencral 
autonomous body in thai OM canno1 have diffctcnc mcaniug 
than thai in OM dated 8.4.76. 
(d) Office Memoranda have been issued in cxcrct<c of powers 
vested in the Union Executive (Cen1ral Govcrnmcnl) under 
article 73 of the Constitution. Powers of cbe Unoon Execuuve 
are co-extensive with the powers of che Union Legi~lacurc 
(Ram Jawaya Kapoor •· Slalc of Punjab, 1955-U S C.R. 225) 
implying that whatever bas been done chrough chc•c Office 
Memoranda could-Would have been done lhrough an Act of 
Parliament or by the President under Article 309 bf the 
Constitucion. Argument pul forch by DOP arc dcvo1d of any 
Iogie and utter negation of che provisions of che Conscitucion. 
Instead of marshalling the struccural-functional charactcrisci's of 
an organisation for determining ils character as a PSU or a 
Central autonomous body, it is being argued thai who 
administratively controls in the Ccmral Secrecariac shall 
determine its chan.cter. DOP belie,·es that RBI, etc. are PSUs 
but in order to give benefit as admissible in case of Cencral 
autonomous bodies (which benefic is also t·:wable '" relation 
to PSUs), they bad no alternative but to declare them as 
Centnl autonomous bodies. The argument being put forch after 

12 
the event runs contrary to the language of OMs of 1986-87 
whidt is unambiguously clarificatory in nature and as such ~ct no new n(.)rms. 
(c) llavmg gone to the extent of includi<~g all t ducational. health 
and social in<rllutions run by social, r~ligious and other cultural 
organi<oc•ons gelling more than 50% as maintenance grant 
within the ambit of autonomous bodies, exclusion of 30 and odd 
o rgani~atiOn< in the Government k<:tor stands to on reason "-' a 
pcr<nnncl polocy. 
(f) O .M. dated 31.3.87, para 5, provides clarification about the 
cunccpt of Central autonomous bodies. OOP has, on answer to 
carltcr question<. <aid para S of that O.M. is in relation to the 
dcfonilion of Central autonomous body for the purposes of OMs 
dated 8.4 76 and 29.8.84 but DOP has issued t..,o OMs. out of 
three OMs of 1986-87. on 3.4.87 and 10.11.87 clarifying that 
L!C and GIC and its subsidiaries arc the Central autonomous 
hodtes. that is, subsequent to the issuing of O.M dated 31.3.87. 
Three OMs nowhere say that for the purposes of O .M. dated 
29 ~ . 84 Central autonomous body shall incluc;le or shall not 
ondudc RDI, etc Since the neatly crafted definition of "central 
autnnomou~ l>ody" in para 4 of O.M. dated 29.8.84 is 
unanobiguotL< nnd is subject to no interpretation so as not co 
include ROI, etc , it would have been stating the obvious that 
that includes RBI, ecc. and since there was no doubt about the 
inclusionary provi~ions so as tCI include RBI, etc no mention 
therefor was made in the three OMs. 
100 and odd Aces of Parliamc,ll and thousa0¥1s in the State 
~phcrc nowhere provide that th~ profit shall be the motive of 
creati1>n of nny of these organisations . The route of 
C.lt.ohlishmcnt of u body or ct>rporation through an Act of 
Lcgo~lature is cho~cn only in those cases where there is a higher 
purpo~e in establishing those organisations mther thnn mere 
profit making. Acts relating to RBI, SBI. its subsidiaries 
naciunaliscd banks. UC and GTC and its 'ubsitliaries nowhere 
puc profit B.< motive. Rather, here entire capital has been 
provided by the Central Government, entire surplus is passed on 
to ohc Central Government . Surely. this is not the case in 
relation to grant-in-aid institutions since the ownerhip is relation 
there tu is not with the Central Government. Inversely, none of 
the Acts of Parliament establishing universities forbids profit 
m3king tO any of these universities. 
Since the succes.<ivc OMs of 29.8.84 and 7.2.86 have provided 
in. · r-connectivity in relation to tc•ns of thousands of independent 
organosations in the country. it is ridiculous to argue th•t all 
includetl have the same set of service conditions including pay 
scales. Even the State Governments intcr-se anti •i<·S·vis the 
Central Government do not have parity in tbis regaro 
(g) No Act of Parliament tncluding an Act establishing University 

13 
prohibits profit earning to a body, rorporation or a University 
created thereunder 
(h) Whh the assue on OM dated 29.8.84 and OM d•ted 7.2.86, all 
GovernmentS (Central and State) and tens of thousands of 
Central statutory bodies have been brought into a common 
fraternity through these two legally binding inmuments having 
behind then the force of article 73 of the Constitution. It tS 
sufficient to mcnuon that entering into a rttiprocal arrangement 
with all the tens of thousands of or~aniS3tions covered 
thereunder was impossible and has not been" done. It is doubtful 
whether the various Central Ministries in the Central 
Government dealing with different organisations were ever 
consulted before issuing the first OM in 1984. Acts of 
Parliament creating RBI. etc. vest the power in the Central 
Government to issue directions to RBI. etc. 
The fact of the matter is that the Acts of Parhament govormnt: 
these institutions arc on the statute book and the statutory 
control and responsibility of the Government towards these 
institutions is still in place. These are institutions both owned 
and controlled by the Government. ln conclusion. the 
Department of Personnel's argument> are not b"'cd uve>n 
ground rcalit11!-l 
(i) Since OM dated 29.8.84 has been issued in pursuance of powers 
Oowing from ar11cle 73 of the Constitution vesting the power m 
lhc Union Executive wh1ch is co-extensive with the powers of 
Parliament, the OM has co be interpreted as a statute IS 
interpreted. It Is well settled proposilion in law ch;tt the 
intlusionary provisions in a definition of a statute have an over· 
riding effect upon the general descriptive part of the definicion. 
It is notwithstanding anything conta10ed or explained 1n the 
general descriptive part. Hence, full effect is to be given t.O the 
inclusionary part of the definition which in the present context 
mean~ all Central statu tory bodies, namely, created under Acts 
of Parliament RBI. etc. squarely fall within this description 
(j) This is a glaring ease of gross misuse of power by the Executive 
The Legislative powers of the Legislature and of the 
constitutional heads of the Un1on and the State~ and the 
provisions of Part Ill of the Constitution have been <et at naught 
by the Department of Personnel. Suffice is to say that the 
mailing l~t maint&.ined by the Department of Public enterpriSes 
has become a basis for making a law in the nature of including 
or excluding certain Statutory bodies within the parameters of 
the legislation. 
(k) Suffice 1s to say that personnel policy in relation to institutions 
under the Government is not to be setUed oo the basis of 
maihng lists of organisations maintained by the Government . 
{I) Question raises 1mportant question of law about the OMs dated 
30.5.95 and 13.9.96. DOP has given quite an untenable answu 
2,1U~RS11-2·A 

14 
that though these organisations do not come within the purview 
of Depanment of Public Enterprises, but since that Department 
bas put these organtsations on its mailing list of PSUs. they treat 
them as the PSUs. Which too ts factually tncOrrect as all 
organisauons in the nattonaliscd insurance and banking sectors 
are not included in the mailing lisL 
Evidence oC S.crrtariu beCo..., the Committee 
5.6 The matter wns re-examined 111 the hght of the analysis made by the 
Committee and it was decided to take the oral evidence of the Secretaries 
ut the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions and Mintmy 
of Law. Justice and Company Affairs (Legislative Department and 
Department of Legal Affairs). 
5.7 Accordingly, the Secretaries to the Government of lndta in the $llid 
Ministncs were heard by the Committee on March 16. 1998. 
5.8 The submission made by them have been exammed and the views of 
the Committee on some of the submiSSions are stated below; 
Submission or Secretary, Department or Legal A!Tairs 
RBI and SBI do not perform s.melsovercign functions. They perform 
statutory functions. 
Views of the Commmu 
RBI issues currency and regulates the national economy In princtple. 
these are sovereign functions. RBI and SB! work as Government 
treasuries. This ;. a Governmental function. These functions have been 
prescribed for t)Jc~c organisalions under the statUies of Parliament In that 
sense, these are statutory Cuncttons There is no conOict 10 between 
soverctgn and statutory functions - a function can both be sovereign and 
statutory in character. 
Submissions or tht Stcrttary, D<pll. of Legal Affairs 
The Government has the power to tell its employees the specific 1cmu 
and conditions of employment. No employee can say that he will have 
panicuiar terms and conditions in respect of his employment No person 
c;an claim anything u a mauer of right. 
Views of the Commllltt 
Every executive instruction. a rule made under a law and an Act of 
Parliament is subject to the provisions of the Constitution including ?;on 
[IJ thereof. In the instant case. besides violating the clear dictate of right 
to equality under nnicle 16 of the Constitution by making a bad and 
hostile classification and thus being ultra vires, (i) in laying down that the 
RBI, etc. arc Central autonomous bodies for the purpose of pro-rata 
pensionary benefit and nol so for the counting of servioe for pension on 
mobility, (ii) in picking up only the two segments of the economy out of 
the whole lot, that is, the nationalised statutory bodies in tlie insurance 
and banking sectors and (iii) in providing that those who have retired 
before 30th May, 1995 will continue to enjoy the extended benefit und 
those who retire after that date, even though the benefit was allowed to 
them, shall be denuded of the extended benefit, the Government has given 

IS 
a meaning whtch is fallacious, patently wrong and contrary to the first rule 
of Interpretation, that is, rule of plain language meaning In matter of 
definuion of "central autonomous body" in para 4 of OM dated 
Augu>t 29, 1984 in laying down in OM dated 30th May, 1995 that the 
inclusionary provision therein does not include the RBI etc. 
Submi'Sion or S<(;rtlary, Department of Legal Affairs 
If a person who is entitled to receive pension wants to leave and JOin an 
organisation which does not bave pensionary benefiL~. he cannot claim or 
demand to have the same benefits in that organisation. It is simply because 
every organisation has us own terms and conditions for employment. 
Similarly, if a person comes onto Government employment from an 
organisation which has different terms and condiuons, he cannot insist on 
havtng those terms and conditions in Government employment too . 
Vi~ws oftht Comnuuu 
It is totally mtsconcetvec.l presentation of the provisions of OM dated 
29th r\uguu. 19R4 Th~ conceptual basts of that OM is that whatever be 
the obligation of earlier employer towards the rctiremenVterminal benefits 
of the empiO)CC (employer's contribution towards CP Fund and accrued 
mtcrcst thereupon or the prorortionate equivalent of pension) shall be 
pas.,cd on to the Iauer employer who shall be responsible for the ultimate 
rcltrcmcnt b<!ndits as per the ><heme in vogue in its establishment based 
upon combtncd <ervice 
Suhntissiun ur the Stcl Clary' Mini~try or Personnel, Publk Grie\'91lCCS and 
Pcn~lun~ 
Thts scheme (pro-rata J>enslonary benefit) was put into operation when 
these (ROI, LIC etc.) had no pension s~hemcs of their own. Secondly, the 
orgnnisattons where it hns been u two-way traffic, one can "'Y that they 
were non·conuncrctal organisations wluch did not have the requirement of 
having a profit. Also, non-commerctal organisations had, by and large, pay 
scales and pension schemes s•m•lar to Central Government. 
Views of lltt Commintt 
Many Other organisations, ltke grant-in-aid schools, colleges and \lther 
institutions getting assistance from the Government, the universittcs and 
other statutory bodies, did not have, and many still do not have, any 
pension scheme. Department of Personnel appears to have no objection in 
their inclusion. Para 3 of OM dated 29.8.84 is very clear in bringing aU 
organisauons including the Central Government. whether having a 
pensionary scheme or not, withm the coveroge of OM. Various 
departments of the Central Government have already counted service 
rendered in the grant·in·aid schools and colleges and the universiries on 
surrender of employers' contribution towards CP fund and the acrucd 
mtcrest thereupon. 
OM dated 30.5.95 only excludes 30 and odd corporations in the 
nationalised banking and insurance sectors which implies that all other 
numbering thousands, sratutory and non-statutory, are covered which 
surely must have numerous so-called commercial organisations Further, it 

16 
is more a qucsuon ollntcrprctotion of the dcnfinition "central autonomous 
l>ody" which continues to be untampered in para 4 of OM dated 29.8.84 
which clearly includes all statutory bodies. Having laid down legally 
binding provistons, it i< not left to the executive to give meaning to it All 
organisatinns, mcludmg the Central and State Governments. are 
mdependcnt of each other 10 matter of provtding for pay scales etc. It lS 
true that many organisations follow the pay scales, etc laod down by 
dtffercnt Government< To cite one example. in the sphere of untvc:>tt.cs, 
there are univc~itlcs with pensionary schemt-s. universirrc~ \lr&lh 
contributory provident fund schemes and the universilics wuh partly 
pen.,onary and partly comnbutory provident fund schemes OM d~tcd 
29 8.8-1 knows nO such classification It lays down rhat all the entttlcmcnu 
n> rctiremenr benefits which were obligatory upon the earlier cmplo)·cr lor 
the pan of service rendered with him are to be handed over ro the latter 
employer and the ulttmate drawtngs at tbe end of .servtce wuh the loiter 
employer shall be as per the employees entitlemcnrs with that employer 
Suhmi«iun nr tht Secrttary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Crievancts and 
Pension~ 
If somebody goes there (where p<:ruioo scheme is no1 avatlable) he goes 
with an open mind and he makes a choice. ThC"Te can. be different 
<lluation~ or fncilitics obtaining in different organisations It is open to ln 
employee, tt i~ hi'llher chotec whether to go there or not There i\ no compubion. 
Vrtw.< of rht Commll/ee 
Posilion or a Government servant including that of an employee of an 
a•Honoonous body is more of status than being of a contract. Once huvtng 
cntcrc<.l imo employment, he/she 1S entitled to and simultaneously is 
obligated to variou~ rules and instructions issued by the Government or the 
autonomous body, as the case may be. Any question of choice, as hM 
been contended, has no scope particu larly in the present context. Further 
all cxccu llve onstructions, rules made and Jaws passed arc to be subject to 
the provisions of the Constitution and any provision comrary thereto is 
un~usta i nnblc 
Submission of the Socrctary, Ministry ol Personnel, Publk Grltvances and Pensions 
In the Public Jector Undertakings in which the pay scales and orher 
factlitics have been regulated or fixed from time to time takmg mto 
account the fact that they do not have a pension scheme inspite of that, in 
the Ialit several years these vary organisations have thought about it, their 
employees have tltought about 11 and they have come op with the pension 
schemes whtch are peculiar to those organisations. 
Vitws of tht Commmtt 
Many organisations· in the Government proper and other spheres whicn 
are owned or controlled by the Government like Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi, D.D.A .. Kcndriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and thousands other did 
not have pension schemes. Rather. tbe pension schemes in RBI and SBI 
are much older than those in many other organisations. However, 11 is 

17 
mi,Jcoding Ia ~alk abou! !he organisauons having pension scheme~ and 
orgrmi•alions no! havang pension schemes. OM da!cd 29.8.84 brings within 
its S"'Ccp all, with pensionary and without pcnsk>nary, organisations . Since 
diHcrent Governmen!S and CentraJIState Autonomous Bodacs arc 
independent of each other and having distinel legal pcrsonaliay with the 
power 10 sue and be sued an their respective name., !bey arc cnutlcd 10 
have, and actually have, diffcrcn! pensionary schemes . 
Subml•llon ot lht S..:~tary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Gr1tvan<H and 
P<nslons 
Our role as abou1 the pension to the Go,ernmcnt employees . About !he 
persons goma from one PSU to a no! her. or GIC or LIC or •·•u vara, i1 i5 
beyond our role as we see il. 
Vie,..s of tilt Commmu 
h is no! correc1 to <ay so. O.M. da!cd 28.8.84 in Para 3(e). read "''h 
O.M da!ed 7.2.86, provides for counting of service on mobilily from one 
C.:n!rai/Sta!e Aulonomous Body to anolher Ccntrai/S!a!e Auronontou< 
Body. 
Submission or the S..:re!ary, Mlnls!ry of Penonnd, Public Grievances and 
Pensions 
Tho<e who have re1arcd were no! legally cmnled to have !he bencfir of 
the counlang or service If we wilhdraw the benefit. we will be accused of 
doang S<>. 
Views of tile Commitree 
Ministry owes ils obligation 10 the public cxche~ucr and !hereby to the 
na!10n nnd rhus is under a legal obligat ion to ensure rha! no unau!hon~cd 
paymen t is made ftod if any paymcnl has been so made as the Depanment 
has slated thot it wos wilhout authority of law (which actually it is no!) any 
omicipmcd crilicisnt should have not deterred l! in performing its duly cast 
upon il under low and !he ConsTitution. 
CONCLUSIONIRECOMME!'IDA TIONS 
S 9 llavlog cartfu11y considered the issues raised by the pe!llloners; the 
replil'S or lht Mlnl~!rles tbtrdo; having beard the views of the S~retarles In 
lite Mlnlslry ~r Pcrsonntl, Public Crinences and Pensions and Ministry or 
Law, Ju~lire and C4mpany Affairs (Leg. DepU. and Legal Alrnirs); and 
J>a•ln£ rqan1 ID aU the material facts and circumstances or the ease, !he 
G.e·lll~ bas arriftd at/made lilt: foUowlng eonclusionslreeommen· daUuns. 
6.0 In 1984 !he Gonrnmeot, with a view to providing prolecllon of 
~nice on rnoblli!y or personnel from Central Government 10 Central 
Aulunnmous Bodies and vl<e vnsa lssoeo a comprdttruive OM. The OM 
da!cd 29.8.84 provides various permutalions and combinations abou! lht 
lllOhill!y or the employees from tbe Ctnlral Governmenl lo Cenlral 
autonomous bodl"" or. In !be rtvt'ise direction or from one Cen!,.l 
aulonomous bod) lo another Ctolral aulooomous bod)'. II may Involve 
moHmenl or tmpiO)'«$ from one c~ntral Govtrnmenl IHpartmen! "here 
•there I• prn•lonary scheme to a C~tral autonomous body when there I< • 

18 
Contributory Provident Fund Scheme or from a Central autonomous body 
where there Is a Contributory Provident Fund scheme to a Central 
Covernmont Department where there is a pensionary scheme. All these 
evrntuallliO$ have been taken care or by the 1984 OM. then In 1986-87 thr~ 
different OMs we"' Issued In relation to Ufe OM doted 8.4.1976 providing 
for pro rata pensionary benefit to the Central Co>eroment employ<es 
movln& to the Central autonomous bodies. It was also made nallahle to the 
employees of the nationaUsed banking sector and thc insurance sector. 
These wen clariOcatory OMs as to whether tbi!Se organisations are includtd 
or not. The dariJkallon was that the statutory corporations in tho Bankln1 
and Insurance sector "•re Central autonomous bodies. Then in 1995 the 
Covrrnmtot bad como out with In OM dated 30.5.95 pro•iding lherdn that 
so far IS the pro nua pensionary benefit ,.as concerned, th.-se organisaUOM 
wen Central autonomous bodies, but in so far as the counth•g or sen!re 
WliS concerotd, these ,.ere not Central autonomous bodies. The OM dnttd 
29.8.84 bad been drarted tn such a manner that II prm·id~ an unamhi~:uous 
dellnilion or Central autonomous bodies. Which squarely Includes all these 
corporations tn Insurance and bankin~ sectors. 
6.1 In 1995, the Government came out ~<>ilh a O.M. dated Jo.~.95 saying 
that so far as O.M. dated 29.8.8-1 wa< concerned, thry were not central 
autonomous bodies, hut so rur as O.M. dated 8.4. 76 ""·' concerned, they 
were autonomous bodies. Aguln In OM dated 13.9.96 the Ministry st:ued 
thnt tlicse organisations ore treuted at par with puMie S<-ctor uuder12kinRS. 
6.2 There i• total discrimination In rtlutivn to the entitt.:mcnt of pt•n•ion, 
In t<loHon to the Government empiO)<tS and in relation to the sume OU:t or 
orgnnisaUons, 1.<. naUunolised bonlu, Reserve Bank or India, Stute Uank or India, etc. 
6.3 These OMs which buvc been issued, draw their su.<tcnuncc from 
artil"le 73 or the Couslilutlon. Arlkle 73 ur the Constitution tulk~ uhout the 
extent or executh·e powers of the Union. It says that executive powers of the 
Union shall be co-extensive with the power oF the Union iet;isiuture . Article 
3419 talks of re-cruitment and Conditions of ~en-ke of persons ><tvlng the 
Union or a Shllc. II s"y~ lhal the condilions nf ~enice oF l':onrnmcnt 
employtes may be determined by an Att or Parliament. 
6.4 There Is lntcrnul evidence in the O.M. dat<·d l9.8.R4. If th<·rc is u 
movement from lhe Central Ctn•ernmt•nt e'lablisbntl'Ul ~hl'rc· lht:rr i, a 
pension scheme and q ~rson monts tH Ct·ntraJ autonQmous btttJ> "lll'rc [.$ 
nu pen~lon scheme, fn lh:.l case ho"' tht couutin~ ur s.en·in~ is lu itt: dtHit·? 
The 01\1 says I hut sucb ca~cs are lu ht dclcrminl"<i rn an.·orll:mn: \\ ilh lhe 
pro\ i<ions or 0.!11. dated 8.4.76. Therefore, lht Central 3Uiunomuus body 
in rtlation to the 1976 O~f ond 19ll4 0.~1. cannot he djiT.rent 1><-cau-. if it 
bt so, the proptKitiou b<"COIII<> unworkable. 
6.5 It has lwtn cuntendtd by the peUiiouers that O.M. dat<-d Jll.$.95 is in 
the: nature or frt"Sh dl'c:h.iun-mqkiJJg. Tlu: D~.·pnrhn('JU or Pt.·rsmrnd bon .):lid 
that it Is mer•ly ur a darificatory ch•r•ctcr. The Commill<-.:'> ,·umidertd 
view h that it Is •lrtuully a rrcsh declsiun hy Dc(Jartmcnt uF P<n<>llnd. The 
O.~t. duted 30.5.95 S•)s thnt SO f•r •s CIIS<:S are coneerntd \4here tbr 
pc:-rsoru~ ba"t already rclir~d, such cases nero nor be n•optnt:d anrl pension 

19 
and otber bentOIS granted to them should not be withdrawn. In those cases 
wbere the Incumbents bave not rt!lred from the Government suvlce, Jbe 
benefits utended to them be withdrawn. 
6.6 Wben the Intention was not to Include all lbtse organisations ab 111itio 
and when II was a clarific.atory O.M. dated ~.5.95 whatever benefits have 
been &lven to those people wbo, have already retired did not have the 
authority or law. In the C8$C or those persons who have re!lred, ~II the 
bencfits have to be withdrawn. This por!lcular O.M. is not lntrln<lcnlly 
darificatory In nature. This fNsh declslon·moking noed.s to be rescinded, 
ab·initio. 
6.7 The Commlllet ls DOl satisfled wl!b the submissions or Secrtlary 
{Ptr$0ontl) In connection with the commercial asptlets or th...o organisations 
and their non-ln<luslon for the pensionary purposes as these or2anl<atlons 
bad no pension schemes or their o"'n during that timt. The Commillee 
knows many organlsallon.<AnsUlullons which did not ba,·e and many <till do 
not have pension scheme and DOP &Jli>Cars to have no objettion In their 
lncluslbn O.M. dated 29.8.84 clearly briiii!S all organisalim,.,lnsthutl<>ns 
whether bovine a pensionary scheme or not, wilhin the coverage or this 
O.M. Various departments ot the Central Govt. have already counted 
snvice rendered In the organisation.!iln<!ltution> on .>urrcnder of employers· 
contribution towards CP Fund and the acC'tlred inter.-! thereon. The<e 
organisations Ire the enations or Acts or Parliament. Acts rebting to RBI. 
SBI, LIC, and GIC nowhere put prone as moti•e. LICRBI perform 
function~ or the character of welfare or Go,·emmental. Entire surplu• of the 
LJC is passed on to the Central Govt. The Commiuee is. th•rdore, of the 
view lbat It Is totally unfair on the part or DOP to say that these 
organlsallon unnot be tnaled as the Central autonomou!o hodlcs for the 
purpcm or counting ot service In view of their commercinl n~pect<. 
6.8 The Committee, therefor e, reiterates the r('{:ommendatlnn made by 
the Committee on Home Affairs In para 53 or their 38th Report prc~cnted 
to tbe House on May ~. 1m that the matter be ~onsidered afrr>h and the 
benrOt or counting the past strvlct for pension be continued to be ollo"td 
to tmployees who ha•e joined Union Go>crnment Service aOtr puuing in 
sen>lce In nallonali.'led banlwl.IG(;IORBt-SBI and vice '"'"'"· 
6.9. In this context, the Commiu~ re<Oall• that ou a pninlcd que~ pu1 10 
the Secrttory (Personnel), ln Us meeting hctd on March 16, 1998, a~ to why 
the Ministry cuuld not reconsider Its itnnd of not treating the P'"' 'tnlce in 
the Insurance and banking sectors for pension in Central Stale Govel"lllnent~ 
Departments or vice versa, or upon illltr-se mobility in between I he CentraV 
State Autonomous Bodies, in view of the fact that all the hanking and 
Insurance companies have pension scheme in ,-.,gue, the Secretary replied 
that thty would certainly examine the maHer. 
7.0 The Commiuee recommends th•t the 1\tinl,try should rt\ic" II\ >!.lnd 
which il has bern maintaining 50 far and arrlvr at a dcci~iuu ~ithuut any 
delay and com• out with • fresh nrdcr redressing the grit•\·anrt•< or the 
aggric"ed employees. 

20 
7.1 The Commlltoe, accordlngly, direct the Ministry or Ptrwnnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions to Inform It of the action taken oo hs 
rocommtndations within 1 period of 3 months. 
NtwD~uu, 
Junt 10, 1998 
DIPANKAR MUKHERJEE 
Chairman, 
Comnullee on Subordinatt Legislation. 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
xvn 
SEVENTEE:"TH MEETIJ\G 
Th~ Commiuee met at 3.00 P.M on Thursday. March 5, J99S m Room 
No. 139. Fiut Aoor. Parliament Hou"' Annexe. Kc~< Dclht 
ME.'l0£RS PRESENT 
I. Shn Satchidananda-.n tht Chatr 
2 Shri Balbir Singh 
l. Shri John F. Fernandes 
4 Shn Shiv Charan Singh 
5 Shri Naratn Prasad Gupta 
6. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma 
7 Shrimnti Ita Panda 
8. Shri S. Muthu Mani 
9. Shri Tara Charan MaJumdar 
to. Shri 1\dhik Slurodkar 
II. Sh.rt M.P. Abdussamad Samndani 
SECRET A It! AT 
l. Shri Tnpan Chnucrjee, Dtpllly S<cr<tary 
2. Shn A. K. Gandhi. OJmmmu Officer 
Wm-:E:MES 
l. Shri Bhagwan Sawroop Sharma, Jomt Secrrrary. Tit,• All lm/i,, 
lnsllranct Emplo)·tts Association AJmcr 
2. Shri O.P. Bhatia, Offict SecrttDT), o\'urthi'fn Zone I!Hurana 
Employtts lhsociation, Ntw Dtllti. 
3. Shri Hamh Shanna. Joint StcrtlOTJ, Bunk £mplo.wes Fedtratmtt of 
India, Dtlhi 
-1 Shri Chandra Shekbar, Prtsidtnt, Rtstrw Bank of Jr.dta Emplo.ues 
A uncimwn. Ntw Dtlh1. 
21 

22 
5. Shri K.D. Khcra, General Secretary, All India PNB Officers 
Association, Pen.sion Department, PNB, New Delhi. 
6. Shri R.K. Anand, Zonal Secretary, All lnd/4 PNB 0/f~ers 
Association, New Delhi. 
7. Shri Rama Nand, General Secretary, All lnd/4 Bank Empla~u· 
Assoctation, Delhi Star., Delhi. 
8. Shri Mahendra Kumar Sharma. Ex-PNB Employu. 
2. In the absence of the Chairman. Shri Satcbidananda was voced co chc Chatr 
MEMORANDUM NO. J.98 
F rnmmation of representations rtgardmg counting of past service for 
t>tn.sif)nary benefits on mobility between C.,nrral Gov<rmment Departments 
and ally of the Statutory Corporations in the lnusuranct and Bunking Sectors. 
3. The Commiltec heard the witnesses in che context of consideration of 
the above Memorandum. Members sought clarificacions from the witnesses which were replied co. 
3.1 A verbacim record of the evidence was kept. 
3.2 TI1e Comminee chen decided to hear the Secretary, Miniscry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions and rbe Secretary, Ministry of 
Law and Justice (Legislative Depanmenc) in the mauer, in its nexr silting. 
The Committee also directed that the Miniscry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions may be asked to furnish specific replie• 10 rhe 
Questionnaire on the subject which was forwarded by the Secretariat to 
them on September 5, 1997 and also intimate the latest position of 
reconsideration of chc mauer at the instance of the recommendations of 
rhe Commiuce on Home Affairs contained in their Tbrity·Eighrh Report , 
4.0 • • • 
5.0 • • 
6. The Commiuec then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. to meet again at 2.30 
P.M. on Monday, March 16, 1998. 
• 

XVJU 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
The Commiuee mel at 2.30 r.M. on Monday, March 16, 1998, in Room 
No. 63, First Aoor, Parliament Ho~Ue, New Delhi. 
MEMB£1<S PRESE>tT 
I. Shri M.A Baby-ChoiTinan 
2 Shri Balbtr Singh 
3. Shri John F Fernandes 
4. Shri Satch1dananda 
S. Shri <r. Pratbapa Reddy 
6. Shri Shiv Charon Singh 
1. Shri Naram Prasad Gupta 
8. Prof. Ram Bakhsb Singb Varma 
9. Shrimali lla Panda 
10. Shri Tara Charon Majumdar 
11. Shri Adhik Shirodkar 
12. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani 
13. Shri Nabam Rebia 
SECR£TAIUAT 
1. Sh ri Tapan Chnuerjee, Deputy Secutary 
2. Shri A.K. Gandhi, Commillu Officer 
WrTN!iSSES 
l. Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice 
I. Dr. V.K. Agarwal, Stcrtlary, Deportment of Legal Affairs 
2. Dr. Raghbir Singh, Secretary, Legi.•lative Deportment 
3. Shri N.K. Namboolhiry, Deputy LegislatiVe Counul. 
II Rtpreunrativts of Ministry of Ptrsonntl, Public Grie>•ancts and Ptnstnns 
I. Shri Arvind Varma. Sec:reuuy 
2. Shri S. Lakshrninarayanan. Add/. SecrcLiry (Pensions) 
3. Ms. lndu Gupta, Dirutor (Pensions) 
MEMORANDUM NO . .W8 
Examination of the representations rrgardmg counting of ptut so-<-ice for 
ptnsionary btntfits on mobilrty buwun Central Govtmmtnt Departments 
and any of the Statutory Corporo.rums In the Insurance and Banking 
s~ctor.f. 
2. The C'nmmiuee. having heard 1be pc1i1ioners and others earlier •n the 

24 
-;untt:J(I of l:~lll\ll.,k'tall<'n of the above memorandum. heard the above 
witnc"C> Member~ sought clanficauon' from them whtch were replied 10. 
~ 1 i\ \crba11m rc,ord of the evidence was kepL 
2 2 11te c 'h•trrnan then slated that the maHer needed dctatlcd 
cxaminauon and analysts on the ba,is of the tnputs rccei,cd b~ the 
Commtttec from different quartel1l and dtrcctcd the Secretariat to prepare 
a draft repott for Commincc's constdcration. 
3 The Commtnce thereafter adjourned at ~.40 "·"· to meet again on 
\\'cdncsda)·, \fatch 15 and Thursday, March 26. !998 

• 
SO'irAL 
\i~tn~l o( r.riYINftC 
(R.AJVA ~AnHA) 
C'1fAJR\tA\ 
PAR.LIAML\ TARY STA:\01\G 
CO\t\Hnl L OS HO\tC AFfAIR\ 
O~>r Shn B~by , 
• 
I ---
A:"NEXURI:·l 
\C'W t>ctlu II :Jill l"tt J(i\.al~l 
)llll(O; 
~. t.nc.fill U!itc 'e'tf l\t'lfou 110 Ill) 
f'tl .s~.~.;~ h~ ~"'Yu~ 
I have recco•cd a reprt$Cnlalion frum Shri Mahendra Kumar Sharma. 
rio B·77, Anand Vihar, Delhi, rcprdmg wllhdrawal of ccrtam scrvocc 
bencfiiS holherto avaolabk to Cenual Govl. ofticoal\. which I> self· 
cxpl~naoory. 
I feel thJI lh" " a mJIIcr ~~<hocb comes unucr •our domaon as 
Chaorman of 1hc Cummlllcc un Sut>ordtnaoc lcgislauon ' t h(lpc you wall 
hove 11 cxamoned. 
Wioh rcgJTJs. 
Shri M.A Baby, M P. 
Chairman. 
Comnoiucc on Subordinate l.cgoslalion, 
126·A, Parliamcnl House. 
New Delhi . 
2$ 
Yours soncrrcly. 
Sdl· 
(SOM Pt\l) 

From 
To 
Mahendra Kumar Shan11a. 
8·77. Anand Vihar. 
Delhi-110092. 
Phone: 2150267. 2162837 
Shn Som Pal. 
26 
Date: 13th November. 1996 
Hon 'ble Chai!TIIan. 
Oepanment Related Standing Committee 
lor M-b llome Aflatrs. Mb Personnel. Pubhc 
Grievances & Pen>ions and 1\ikl Law & Justice. 
NEW DELHI. 
Sub.:-Mobihty ul personnel between Central Government Depanments 
and Aut~'nomous Dodte~ounting of service for pension. 
1 retired on superannuation from the Punjab National Bank as Chtcf 
Official l..angungc Department on the 31st December. 1995. Before joinnl£ 
the Bank on the 24th April. 1978, f worked in the Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board). Government ol India from the 20th September. 1956 to 
the 19th January. 1976 nnd the Bank of India (rom the 20th Januory. 1976 
to the 22nd April. 1978. 
2. 1 made representations to the PunJab Nati<,>nal Bank for cottnting my 
earlier serv•cc in the Ministry of Ratlways and the Bank of India towards 
my pensioner entitlement in pursuance of the Ministry of \lome Affairs 
OM No. 281101!4-Pension Unit dated the 29th August. 19S4 (Annexure I 
l'unJah National Bank vtde its leiter dated the 15th March. !996 mformed 
me that on mobihty between the Central Government and the central 
autonomous bod•cs. service rendered in financial instttuuons is not to be 
counted. Recently. on my further personal enquiries. I have been t<)ld that 
~rv,cc rendered tn the Government ol India is not to be oounted for the 
penstonary entulement in certain public sector financial institutions 
mcluding nationalised banks in view of clarification provtdcd vide 
Department of Pension. and Pensioner's Welfare OM Ko. 28124>94-
P&PW(B) dated the 30th May. 1995 (Anne~ure-11) . I mosl humbly submit 
that the pid O.M IS conuary tO !he hither policy pursued by the 
Government ol India in the matter of givmg the te!TII in benefits including 
pensionary benefits to the employees on thetr mobilily from the Central 
Government t<l the Central autonomous bodies and vice-versa. Funber, 
the decision 1S discnmtnatory against a secuon of the employees belongtng 
tO the Central autonomous bodies and statutory bodies. namely. the bodies 

27 
belonging to the banking and tbe insurance sectors. It smacks of hostility 
towards the employees of banking and onsurance sectors by singhng them 
out of the whole lot of employment under the Central autonomous and 
statutory bodies. I humbly seek your intervention in lbe matter in view of 
the facts explained in lbe following paragraphs. 
3. With the ushering in of the Welfare State in the post·independcnce 
era, more and more autonomous bodies have been created for carrying out 
the objectives of the State as cnvisugcd under the Constitution. These 
autonomous bodies have been created dther as statutory bodies under 
special statutes passed by the Parliament or the State Assemblies, as the 
case may be, or have been created and registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860. 
4 In order to provide experienced staff, particularly haVIng professional 
background in desired areas, Government either deputed persons on public 
interest or persons with requisite background of their own violition moved 
to these autonomous bodies. Somilar movements also took place in the 
reverse direction, that os, many employees of these autonomous bodies also 
have been leaving these organisatoons with a view to joon the Central 
Government Services 
5. The Centro! Government in 1960's feh the necessity of provtdong 
pensionary protection to those who left the Central Government services 
on permanent transfer to these autonomous bodies. Instruction< were 
issued from tome to time in this regard which were consolidated and ~ued 
as a single codified order vide O.M. No. 26(18)EV(B)I75 dated the 8th 
April, 1976 (Annexure ffi) providing for grant of pro· rata retircou, '" 
benefits (including pensionary benefits} In order to make the position 
clear and to avoid confusion, it was clarified vide O.M. No. ~·P&PW 
dated the 14th May, 1986 and No. 4123'87-P·PW dated the lOth November, 
1987 (Annexure IV) that the nationalised banks including the Reserve 
Bank of India, the State Bank of India and its subsidiaries, the General 
Insurance Corporation of India and its four subsidiaries and the Life 
Insurance Corporation of India, were to be treated as the autonomous 
bodies for the purpose of counting of pro-rata retirement benefits to the 
permanent Central Government employees who are absorbed by these 
bodies. 
6. The Central Government, with a view to further liberalist the 
pensionary entitlement of these employees, provided an alternative scheme 
vide O.M. No. 2MG-84·Pension Unit dated the 29th August, 19&4 
(Annexure I) that on mobility of personnel between the Central 
Government Departments and the autonomous bodies, the service 
rendered by the personnel with the earlier employer sllaU be counted for 
pensionary benefit with the latter employer. The said O.M., besides 
retaining the concept of Central Autonomous Body as available on the 
above referred O.M. dated 8th April, 1976 (Annexure ffi} for counting 
pro-rata retirement benefits, gave a definition "' tbe expression as 
follows:-
4. "Central autonomous body" means body which IS financed 

28 
wholly or subs1an1ially from cess or Ccmral Governmcnl grams. 
"Subswnlially" means lhnt more than 50 per cent of the 
cxpendilurc of lhe autonomous body is met through cess or 
Central Government grants. Autonomous body includes a Central 
statutory body or a Ccnlral Univcrsily but docs not include a 
public undcrt•king.' 
7 The Ccnlral Go>emmcnt all along after tisunace of I he 0 .M dated 
the ~91h Ausu"· 19!U ha; been allowing I he benefit of 1hc <cr-oce wolh the 
carhcr emplo•er for countmg toward< 1hc pensionary bcncfils wilh the 
Iauer employer rncluding lhe service rendered in the nallonali<ed !>:Inks, 
•he Rcscr-c Bank of lndoa, 1hc Stale Bank of lndoa and II< subsidiaries, 
1he General Insurance Corporation of India and ils four suosidoarics and 
lhe lrfc Insurance Corp oratron of India as an earlier or lau.-r employer, as 
the cas.: may be 
8. Oepartmenl of Pcn.,on and Pensooners Wclforc v1dc liS 0 M No. 21V 
24-94-P&.PW(B) dated the 301h May. 1995 (Annexure II) has l!.<ued a 
daroficauon thai lhe >ervoce rendered in the Central Government "'"' not 
to be counted for pensionary benefiiS on permanent ab<nrpuon of an 
employee on the natinnahscd banks, etc. and vicc-vcrs.o It has been further 
clanfied 1ha1 the orders contatncd on the O.M. l'o 2&(18}£V175 dnlcd 
the 8th 1\pnl. 1'176 relaung to the cntillcmcnt of the pro-rata pcn.,ion ~hnll 
conunue 10 have cffecl on rclatoon to absorptoon in the nauonali,cd hnnk, , 
etc . It has alsu been decided I hal all past cases whereon counung of service 
for pension under 1he O.M. daled the 29th Augusl. 1984 had been allowed 
may be withdrawn from lhosc employees who are slitl in .orvlce (emphasos 
mine) 
9 I humbly submol that lhe deCtSion of the Government of lndin v1dc 
O.M . No. 2812494-P&PW(B) dated lhe 301h May, 1995 referred 10 on para 
S is arbitrary, unJUSt and opposed to the notions of fairplay <on lhc 
following grounds:-
(il) The expression "autonomous bodies" canno1 have twCJ different 
rncanongs in rclalion to the similar sphere of opcra1ion, 1hnt is. 
Colotlcmcnt Of pensionary bcncfiiS in rclalion tU the SBnlc •cl of 
employers and employees. Under 1976 O.M. of the Central 
Government. such an cmployec is slill enlitled to the bcncfil of 
pro-rala pension . While providing an a!lcmaiJVc package in the 
same sphere and tn relalion to lhe same set of employers and the 
employees. lwo differenl yard~ticks ~annot be applied . 
(b) The expression "autonomous body" has been consostently and 
copiously used in lhc 0 M of 1976 and the O.M. of !994 . The 
<arne cannot have two different meanings on a simolar rontcxt. 
(c) The expression "Ccnlral autonomous body" as defined in 
paragraph 4 of lhe O .M dated 1hc 29th August, 1984 provides 
subs~amive dcfinilioo of the expression in lhe first s.:nlcnte, the 
clarificalory dcfinilion of tbe word "substantively~ in !he second 
sentence and an inclusive defini1ion of lbe words "autonomous 
body" in the third senteocc. Since il bas been provided that 
autonomous body oocludes a Ccnlral Stalulory Body, for all 
in1en1 and purposes, lbe expression Ccntnl autonomous body 

29 
must l>e construed accordingly. Bodies in the nature of nineteen 
nationalised l>anks constituted under the Banking Companies 
{Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act of 1970 ami the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transit~ of Undertakings) 
Act of 1980. the Reserve Bank of India constituted under the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the State Bank of India 
constituted under the State Banlc of India Act, 1955, the Life 
Insurance Corporation of India constituted under the Life 
Insurance Corporation of India Act, 1956, etc.. are statutory 
l>odies created by the Central Legislature, that is, Parliament of 
lndoa So O.M. dated the 30th May, 1995 which is in the nature of 
Provtding clarifocations to the extant instructions contained in 
pttnctpal O.M. dated the 29th August, 1994 cannot arrest, mutilate 
and digress from the natural, literal and judicially well settled 
meaning of the definitional paragraph in relation to expreuion 
"Central autonomous l>ody" of the O.M. dated the 29th August, 
1984. 
(d) it is judicially well settled that tbc executive orders in the 
nature of 0 .Ms affecting tbe righiS and cntitlemcms of the 
employees are to be construed in the same manner as provisions of 
statutes are construed. As such no different meaning can be 
omputed to the clear and unambiguous definition of "Central 
auto11omous l>ody" as provided in prargrnph 4 of ().M. dated the 
29th August, 1984. It is also amply borne out of the hithcno 
practice ~nd policy followed by the G<>vernmcnt in thi~ regard. 
(c) Since O.M. dated the 30th May, 1995 specifically identifies 
certain sratutory organisations, it is explicit from the process of this 
idcntificalion that the other stnlutory oTganisations are excluded 
from the purview of that O.M. and they shall con1inue to be 
covcrc~ un~cr lhc provtsions O.M. dated the 29th August. 1984 
providing chat the service rendered by che personnel with thcor 
earlier employer sh•ll be counted .vith the latter employer in case 
of a mobility of such perwnnel between 1he Central Governmen1 
o1111.l 1hc uulnnomous bodies. There are numerous statucory bodies 
which have l>cen created under Aces of Par!J.mem (in bo1 h 
financial and non-financial sectors) with a c:Jear motive of, imcr­
alia. carnong profits. Proposed classification in the nature of nil 
statutory bodies (l>oth finanCial and non·fioancial excluding those 
on the bunkong and insurance sectors) on one stde and those in the 
banking and insurance sectors on the other side is a hostolc one 
•nd •~ discriminatory in character. 
In vkw or the above, it is humbly submincd that the Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions, Department of Pension and 
Pensioner' Welfare may· be directed to withdraw OM No. 2!1-24'14-
P&PW(D) dated the 30ch May, 1995. 
Thanking you, 
Yours foithfully, 
Sd/. 
(Mahendra Kumar Sharma) 

MINISTRY OF HOME AfFAIRSIGRlli MAI'-IRALAYA 
Dcpartrnenl of Personnel and Administrative Reforms 
(Knmtik Aur Prasbasnik Sudhar Vtbhag) 
New Dclht, the Z9th Aug. 1984 
OFFICE "i.EMORAI"DUM 
Sn<~EC'T- Mobtht~ of personnel between Central Government 
D~partmcnts and Autonomous Bodies-Counting of service for 
pCH'iiUO-
AS per C~I'Cing onJe~. '!tCOt\:C rendered outstde Central Go~ernmcnt 
uu.:s not count (or pcttSion tn Central Government except in the cdSe of 
SC1en11fic emplo~ccs of autonomous bodies financed or controlled of the 
Guvernntcnl, who on permanent absorption und~r the Central 
Gu't·erom~,;nt are allowed to count thcar prC:VtOU!i 5.ervicc for pcn~ion subject 
'" ccrcam condnums In respect of personnel ocher chan scicn11fic 
employees, who arc pcrmancnl m Ccnual Government. tn the event of 
thc11 $ut"cqucnt permanent absorption in public sector und~rtaking• '" 
""Y .tUitHtomous bmly, proportionate reuremen< benefits for the service 
rcndercJ 111 Government till che date of permanent absorption nrc allowed 
,. pee rule< tn force at che t1ntc of absorption. No such benefit Is allowed 
IU ICOIJlOI otr) CIII[IIOyccS going over 10 autonomouS body or undertaking. 
2 A numl>cr <>f Ccncrnl auconomouslstatucory bodies have also 
tntroduccd pcn<ICIII 5chemc [or I heir employees on the hncs of the pension 
scheme availuhlc H.l the Ccntri:ll Government employees It has, 1hcrdorc, 
~en urged by \uch •utonomous!statutory bodies that the service rendered 
by thelf omployccs unucr the Central Govcc nmcnt or other nutonomous 
t'!Odies before l'"""'S the autunomous hody may be allowed to be counted 
in contbcnntion wuh scrvtcc tn the autonomous boll~. fur the purpo•c of 
pension, subject to ccrtocn eomhhons. Similar provisions for employees ol 
autonomo~a body going over co Central Government have also been 
urged. In other words, the suggestion is that the benefic oi pension based 
on combined ~rvice should be introduced. 
3 This mauer has been considered carefully and the President has now 
been pleased 10 dcccde chat the case of Central Go,·ernmcnt employees 
goin& over to a Central autonomous body or '·icc-versa and employe" of 
the Central auconomo~a body movcng to another Central autonomous body 
may be rc~ulated as per cbe (ollowcog provisions: 
(a) In ca.s< of Autonomous 8od1<> what P<nsiOn SclttmJ! u tn op<ratwn 
(c) Where a Central Government cmplolce borne on pcn>~onable 
c<tabli<hmcnl i< allowed co be absorbed in an autonomous body, 
30 

~1 
the service rendered by him under the Government 'h;ill Ill: 
;tllowcd to be counted towards pension unde1 the autonomous 
l>ody irrcspecrhe of whether the employee wa5 rcmporJrv c•r 
pt·rmuncnr in Government The pensionary bendit~ wtll. howcvc1. 
accurc only if the temporary service is followed by confirmation If 
he rcurcs as a temporary employee in the atltonomou' bod)·. he 
will get terminal benefits as arc normally available ro tcmpornt) 
employees under the Government. The same pnx:cdure w11l appl) 
in the c·asc of employee of the autonomous bod•c• who .rc 
permanently absorbed under the Central Government 
The GovcrnmcnVautonomous OOdy wtll discharge n~ pcn~ion 
hab~ity by paying in lumpsum a< 3 OnC·timc pH)ffiCIIt, the ('rO·flltO 
pension/service gratuity/terminal gratuity and DCRG for tile 
<c:n·icc upto the date of absorption in the au:onomou' body 
Government, as the case muy be Lumpsum amount of the pro 
fiUi1 pcn~ion Vr>ill be determined with reference lu commut:uion 
t;1blc laid down in CC$ {Commutation of Pension} Rules JQSI, "' 
amended from ttme to time. 
(ii) A Central Government employee with CPF benefit< on permanent 
nh""P'"'" '" nn autonomous body will have the uption ctrlt<"l 10 
receive n•r benefits which have accntcd I<> him from the 
(iovc• nmcnt nnd stnrt h•s service afresh in that body or chno•c co 
count service rendered 111 Government a$ qualifying service foz 
pcns11t11 111 the nu t onomou.~ body by foregomg Governm1'nt\ 1horc 
of (PI· concrihuttUnS with Interest, which will be paid to the 
conn·m•cl auconomous body hy the concerned Go•crnm(nt 
OcpiHtnh:Ht. The <rption .sh311 be c:xcrdf;C within om: J'<.iTr ft\HJJ the 
tiM<' of Jb~urpliort. If no option is cxt•rcisrcl within slif'lll;rtr 
f'<'tiw/, l'lltp /c>yCC >hal/ be deemed tO /t3• C OJ'!CCJ to r<'Cc'IVL' rrF 
i><'JJr/lt.< Tile option once cxcrei<cd shall be Jln.11. 
(b) A Ul1>nm11ou 1 body w/Jerc the Pensi·>n Scheme i~ not tn Uf)< 1 aticlll 
(i) A pcrnwncn t Cen tral Govcrn mcn1 employee borne on pt..:n .. ionahlc 
cst.1bli1hmcnt. on absorp tion umlct such autonomou• hody will he 
cligihlc for pro-rata retirement benefits in accordnnre with the 
prov~>ion' of tl1e Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 26(18)EV(n)/75 
datecJ the Rth April 11176, as amended from time to ume In c>•c of 
qunsi·pc• manent or temporary employees. the terrnlll:tl grntull) as 
may t>c admissible under the TUics would be actually payabic to the 
individual on the date when prtrrata retirement benefit< to 
pcrmuncnt employees b(COme payable. However, in the ca<e or 
ah<al'l'tion of a Government employee with C\'f benclit•. m •ucl\ 
an auHtnnntou' organisation, the amount of hi' suhsc:ripll<>ns and 
the Government's conuibuuon, if any, togethcr with inter(<! 
thereon shall be transferred to his new Provident Fund ael:ount 
with the con!><:nt of that body. 
{ii) An employee of an autonomous 'lOdy on permanent absorption 

32 
under the Ccntrtll Government will have the option either to 
receive CPF benefit which buve accured to him from the 
autonomous body and $\art his service afresh in Government or 
choose to count service rendered 111 that body as qualilying 
service fo~ penston tn Government by foregoing employer's 
chare of conlributory ProY1den1 Fund contributions with interest 
thereon, which will be: paid to the roncerned Government 
Oepanment by !he autonomous body. Tbe option shall be 
exercised within one year from the date of absorpuon . If no 
option is exercised within stipulated period. employee sbal! be 
deemed to have opted to receive CPF bendits. The option 
once exercised shall be final. 
(c) Absorpt•oo of employees of one Central Autonomous bod.! Ul 
Another Central Auronomou.c body Tbc above procedure will be 
followed mutatu mutaodic in respect of employees gomg from 
''"C autonomouJ body to another . 
.; "Central autonontous body" means bcxh which is financed wholtv 
or substantially (rom cxSJ or Central Govemmenl grant; 
"'Substanttally" means that more tb.an 50 per cent oi the expenditure 
or the autQnomous body ts met through cess or Central Government 
grants. Autonom('IIIS body includes a Central statutory body or a 
Centnll Univentty but docs not tnclude a public undenaking 
Only such servtcc whkh qualifies for pension under the relevant 
rule~ ot GovernmenVAutonomous t>odv shall be taken into account for 
this purpo". . 
5(1) The employee• of n Central autonomous body or Central 
Government, as the case ruay be, who have already been sanctit•nctl or 
have received pro·rata retirement benefit or other terminal benefits for 
their past service will have the option eithcr:-
(a) to retain such benefits and in that event their past service will 
nul qualify for pension under the auton~>muus lx>dy or the 
Central Government as the case may be; or 
(b) to have the p.1st ~rvtce counted as qualifying semce for pension 
under the new organisation in which = the pro-rata retirement 
ur other terminal benefits, il already received by them. will have 
to be dcpostttd along with mtercst thereon from tbe date of 
receipt of those benefits ttll the date of depostt with the 
autonomous txxly or the Central Government, as the case may 
be. The right to count previous service as qualifying service shan 
not revive unlit th< whole amount has been refunded. ln other 
cases. ..·here pro-rata retirement benefits ha,·e already been 
loanctioned hut have nol yet berome payable. the roncerned 
authoriti<J •halt cancel the sanction as soon as the tndividual 
concerned opts for counrmg of this preVIous service lor pension 
and inrorm the tndtvtdual in "'ntin! about accepung bis option 
and cancellauon of the sanction . Th~ option shalt be exercised 
wnhtn a pcnod of ''n< year from the date of issue of those 
orders. If no op11on ·~ e•ercised by sucb employees wilhin the 
f 
l t 

0 
e 
s. , 
I 
a 
il 
II 
e 
33 
prescribed time· limit, they will be deemed to have ortcd fllf 
retention of the benefit already received by them. The option once 
exercised shall be fino!. 
(2) Where no terminal benefits for the pre,ious scMce have ~en 
received. the previous service in such =• -..ill be counted as qoalifyt~g 
service for pension only if the previou~ cmplo)er accept$ pension liability 
for the serviox in accordance with the principles laid down in this Offia 
Memorandum, lo no case pension contribution/liability shall be accepted 
[rom the employee coru:emed. 
6. These orders will be applicable only where the transfer nf the 
employee from one organisation to another wa<lis with the consent of the 
organisallon under which he wa., serving earlier, including cases where the 
tndividual had secured employment dircclly on his own volition provtdcd 
he had applied through proper channcVwith proper permission of the 
1\dministrative authority concerned 
7. These orders • ..,// r3ke cffccl from rhc dare of i~ue and the revised 
policy as enunciated above woll be applicable to those employee> who 
retire from Governmentlautonnmous llo<ly ~rvice on or after the date of 
ossue of these orders. 
The provtStons contained tn the Mtmstry of Finan,e Office 
Memorandum No. 26(\S)EV(B)/75 dated the 8th April 1976 and Office 
Memorandum No. 25(\)EV/83, dated the Stb September \983 or any 
other orders shall. in so far as it pro•·tdcs for any of the matters contatncd 
tn this Office Memorandum, cca<o to operate. 
8. The Ministry uf Educauon and Culture etc. are requested to advtse 
the autonomous/statutory bodies under their adminsitrative control. wuh 
specific directions to the Financial Advisers concerned, to ensure to make 
necessary provisions in their Rules and Regulations/An ides of Association 
on accordance with the provisions contained In this Office Memorandum . 
In cases where any practice otherwise thnn enumerated above IS presently 
betng followed the same may be revised in accordance "'-ith the provisioru 
of this Office Memorandum so that uniformny 1s maintained m such 
matters in all the org>nisauons. 
9. In so far as persons servong m the Indian Audn 3nd Accounts 
Department are concerned these order> tssue after coruullauon wnh t~ 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
$d.' 
SR. AHIR, 
Drputy Srrrttnry 
tn tlu Govrmm<nt ol India 

"!CLEO~ 
A~ 
BHAR) 
Prcsidcj 
R. p 
Gencr 
N. M . 
Shn M 
Cbairml 
Rajya ~ 
Subord1 
New D 
Sir. 
We c 
taken b 
industrj 
to thes 
on sue 
persons 
was pr~ 
that, 01 
cmplo~• 
this OJ 
allow in~ lcnov. n 
P&PW 
mobilil 
the nati 
tnlllleml 
8.4.1976 
sen• let 
b'as furt 
No.231494-P&:PW(B) 
Government of India 
Department of Pension & Pensioners Welfare 
••••• 
New Delhi, the 30th May, 1995 
OF'FJCF. MEMORANDUM 
SUB: Grant of pro rata retirement benefits to the permanent Central 
Government employees who arc ab'l>rbcd in the Nationalised 
Banks. Generallnsuranc~ Corporatio n and its subsidiarics·Ouestion 
regarding. 
The undersigned is directed to reier to this Department's O.M.Nos W 
84-P&PW dated 14th May, 1986 & No. 4o23-'87·P&PW dated lOth 
November, 1987 on the wbject mentioned abo'e and to say that >nquiries 
ha>e been made to the eflect whether the benefit oi counung of >ervice for 
the purpose oi p<:n•10nory bendots, as admissible in terms of this 
Department'> O.M.No.21Vli}&I-Pen~ion Unit dated the 29th August, 1984, 
i> to be allowed in the ca<e of mobility of personnel irom Go,unment to 
:"\at•onaliscd Banks and financial institutions like Life Insurance 
Corporation of India & General Insurance Corporation etc. and vice-versa 
z. 1bc mauer ha. been considered in the ligltt of instructions ISS\tcd by 
this Department in regard to mobility of personnel between Government 
and non·Governmcnt Organisations incluiling Public Sector Undenaklngs 
and Autonomous Bodies. The orders contained in this Departn\Cnt's 
O.M.No ~P&PW dnted 14th Moy. 1986 and O.M.No.4o23'87·P&PW 
dated the lOth November, 1987, stated that the Nationali~ed Banks 
includintt the Reserve Bank of India and the State Bank of India and its 
four subsidiaries are to be treated as Autonomous Bodies for the purpose 
of grant of pro-rate retirement benefits to the permanent Central 
Government employees who are absorbed by these Bodies on the terms 
and conditions envisaged 10 Mimstry of Finance. Department of 
Expenditure O.M.No.Zb{I8)1EW75 dated 8th April. 1976. 3$ amended 
!tom time to time. It is clarified that •uch emplO)ceS are not entitled to 
CI>Unt the serv1ce rendered in Government for the purpose of pension on 
absorption in the Kation3!iscd Banks including the Reserve Bank of India 
and the State Bank of lndm and it ~ubsidiarics and other financial 
in.rnut•ons including Life Insurance Corporat •on of India, General 
ht>urunce Corporntion and Hs <ut>siuinrics as per our 0 M.No.2S'I0.8~· 
Pcn~ion Unit dated the 29th August, 1984 referred to above 
3 CcmraJ Government employees who have rendered service in the 
Nationalised Banks as well as other financial institutions including Life 
Insurance C:orporatiun of India/General Insurance Corporation prior to 
their appointment in the Central Go,·crnmcnt arc nlso not entitled to count 
<uch scrv.ce for the pcnsionory benefits under the Central Government. 

ry, 1995 
Central 
onalised 
)uestion 
.Nos.W 
:d !Otb 
nquiries 
rvice for 
of this 
;t, 1984. 
men! to 
>SUTance 
':e·versa. 
sued by 
~ mment 
rtak ings 
rtment's 
'-P&PW 
Banks 
and its 
PUI'J>OSe 
Central 
c terms 
-ent of 
:nended 
itled to 
sion on 
>! India 
nanciaJ 
}eneral 
81G-S4-
in lhe 
1g Life 
rior to 
) count 
"nmeot. 
35 
They are, however, free to seek terminal benefits as adm1ssible under the 
relevant rules from the concerned Nat1onalised Banks and such other 
institutions in which they had rendered service before bcmg appornted in 
the Central Government. 
4. Ministry of Defence, etc., arc requested to clarify this posihon to ~II 
concerned authorities under the~r admintstrative control The past cases 
dcetdcd otherwise than the procedure clarified above may be revtcwcd tn 
ca'iC the concerned employees are still in servJce 
S. In so far as per><>ns serving in the Indian Audn •nd A<counts 
Department are concerned, these orders are issued after eonsultahon with 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of lnd1a. 
To 
Sd­
(S.C BATRA) 
JJ.\· 5uutar)' 
~·o tht Go\'CTI'Jmcnt of /ndta 
All Minimies/Dcpanmcnts of the Government of lndm 
(As per standard m3tling lists). 

l'crmuncnl Transrer or C<ntral Government Servants 10 Aulonomous Bodies 
[Government of India, Ministry of Finance, Office Memorandum No. 26 
(IS)·E. V (B)I75, dat~ the 8th April, 1976.] 
A need has been felt for some time past of consolidating at one place, 
the instrucuons.brden ISSUed from time to time and still in force on the 
subject of srantmg rctiremenl benefits to Central Government servants Otl 
permanent transfer to autonomous bodtes. Accordingly, it has been 
decided, ill supersession of all the orders issued on the subj~ so far by 
this Ministry and the Depanment of Personnel, lo bring out the salient 
features of the e.i>tmg instru"ions in this O.M. This may please be 
brought to the notice of all Adminl!trati•e authorities in or under the 
Ministry of Home Affair>, etc., for information, guidance and compliance. 
The proVJs•ons of lhese consohdatcd orders are applicable to the 
permanent Central Government employees permanently absor~ in thr 
Central Public Sector Undenakings also where the permanent absorption 
in the public sector undenakin&$ has taken place pnor to 8th November, 
1968. Cases of permanent absorption in the public sector undenakinp 
from 8th November, 1968 onwards are regulated by separate set of orders 
mued by the Bureau of Public Enterprises from time to time 
fO.I., M.F., O.M. No. 26 (18)E. V (B)IIS. da1ed the 10 Fobrutry. 1977.) 
In order 10 make the position clear and to avoid confusion h is clarified 
thaa the Nationalised Banks including Reserve Bank of India and Stale 
Bank of India and its subsidiorv Banks are to be treated as autonomOILS 
bodies for the purpose of grant of pro-rata retirement benefits to the 
~!'nl&nent C.:ntral Government employees who are absorbed in these 
Bodies .on the terms and conditions envisaged in these orders as amended 
!Tom time to lime. Ministry of Defence, etc .. are requested to keep this in 
mind and decide the cases of grana of pro-rata retiremenl beaefits to the 
permanent Central Government employees absorbed in Nationalised Banks 
including Reserve Bank of India and State Bank of India and ias subsidiary 
Banks, aocordingly. 
(C I. O.rt ol P .t P \lo • O.M. No. 4~P &P W • dated the 14th May, 1\0l!6) PR·26 
NOTE 2.-The underment10ned organisations/bodies should be treated 
as 'Cenlral Aulonomous Bod•es' for abc purpose of grant of pro-rata 
retirement btnchts 10 the permanent Central Government employees who 
arc absorbed therein on the terms and conditions envisaged in M.F., O.M. 
No. 26(18)·E V (B)/75, dated the Slh April. 1976 [Order (3) in this 
36 

37 
Section] as amended from lime to time and Department of Pension and 
Pensioners' Welfare, O.M . No. 4 (12)185-P. & P.W .; dated the 31st 
March, 1987 [Order (I) m this Section) 
{a) The Nationalised Banks including Reserve Bank of India and 
State Bank of India and its subsidiary Banks. 
(b) The Life Insurance Corporatoon of India. 
(e) The General Insurance Corporation of India and its fo11r 
subsidiaries, viz., National Insurance Company Limited, tbe New 
India ~urance Company Limited, the Oriental Insurance 
Compeoy Limited and the United tndia Insurnnee Company Limited. 
(0 1., O.po of P A P.W .. O .M. No. ~P. A P W., doll'd lh< 1<1<~ Moy, t986; O .lol. 
No 41611.5-P A P. W , dated lbc 3r4 Apni , 1987 •nd O.M. No. 4'US7-P It P W., dated 
Ill< ll)g NO"<mb<r, 1987.( 

TELeGRAM 81MAKAR!>11. MADRAS 
ANNEXURE-II 
TELEPHONE AS~7 
AND FAX . 
ALL INDIA INSURANCE EMPLOYEES' ASSOCIATION 
lliiARAT INSURANCE BUILDING (ANNEXE). 93 MOUI'\'T ROAD, 
MADRAS-600 002 
President 
R P MANCHANOA 
General Secretary· 
N M SUNDARAM 
Shn M.t\ Baby. 
Chnirman. 
Rajyo Sobha Commillcc on 
Subordtnatc Lcgtslauon. 
t\cw Delhi, 
Str. 
We draw your kmd ancntion to a recent personnel policy dcctston 
13ken by <he Central Government in ma11er of insurance and bankmg 
industry. II \macks of an ISOlationist and ~grcgative behaviour '" relation 
to thc~c vital nationalized scc1ors of the economy. 
2. Wt1h the bcginnmg of establishment of the >tatutory corporations In 
the nationalized sectors. purliculnrly in insurance and banking sectors, 
aCtcr independence, a necessity was felt that on mobility of persons from 
the departments of the Central Government to the nationalised statutory 
corporations and vice versa, protection to such persons in the matter of 
their terminal benefits should be given. Serie5 or in~lr~~lions ~ulminating 
in O.M. No. 261(18)/EV/76 dated 8.4.1976 were issued to provide that, 
on such mobility. protection of pro-rata pensionary bcncfiiS to •uch 
persons be given. With a view to further liberalize the entitlements, it 
W3S provided vide O.M. No. 2&/10/S~Pension Unit dated 29·8-/984 
that. on such movement benefit of counting of service in the earlier 
employment be afforded in the later employment . Sance the issuance of 
this 0 M., different Ocpanmcnts of Central Govemmem have been 
allowing counting of service on such mobllny However. for rca.,on' bcM 
kno~>n to the Central Government, through 0.\f ~o . 28 '24194· 
P&PW(B) dated 30·5·1995, a clarification bas been provided that on 
mobility in between a Department of the Central Government and any of 
the nationalized corporations in the insurance and banking sectors , the 
tntlllement or pro-rata pension as has been available under 0.;\l. dated 
8.4.1976 shall continue to be a•allable and the fadlit} or counlln& ot 
strvl.., as exttndtd •Ide O.M. dated 29.8.1984 shall not be ••,.liable. lr 
has further b..,n <larlned that In all those cas ... where already such btntnt 

39 
Of COUnting of service has been allowed to Certain employet'S, the same be 
withdrawn forthwith. However, In case an employee has already retired and 
such n roclllty has been extendtd to him, the same shall not be withdrawn. 
3. We feel that this decision of the Central Government with a VlCW to 
single out the nationalized corporations in the insurance and banking 
sectors is patently erroneous, smacks of ulterior motives and is viulativc or 
the provisions of the Constitution. It further docs not augur well as a 
personnel policy to exercise untouchability vis-a-vis a particular segment of 
economy. that is, nationalised insurance and banking sector. The new 
instructions are also not sustainable on the following grounds: 
A O.M No. 2811QI84.Pension Umt dated 29.8.1984, under "'hich 
services on mobility of persons between Cemral Government 
Mtnistries/Departmcnts and autonomous bodies are to be counted for 
the pensionary benefits, defines the term "Central Autonomous 
Body" as to include all Central statutory bodies. The expresston 
"Central statutory body" unambiguously means any corporate body 
which has been created under an Act of Parliament All of the 
nationalised insurance corporations and banking corporations arc the 
crenlion of Acts of Parliament. 
B h is a well settled proposition 1n law that all exccuuve instructions 
regulating the service conditions of Government employees are to be 
interpreted as statutes are interpret~d. Thus. the term "Central 
Autonomous Body'' in the above referred O.M is to be construed 
accordingly. 
C. Specific exclusion of organisations In the nature of nationalised 
insurance and banking sectors through OM dated 30.5.1995 maintains 
the rest of Central statutory bodies covered within the ambit of 
autonomous Central bodies. Such a clarification. without doubt, is 
discriminary in character having no nexus to the objects sought to be 
achieved and is thus opposed to the principle of equality under the 
Constitution. 
D O.M. dated 30.5.1995 provides the clanfication that for the purpose 
or OM dated 29.8.1984, the expression 'Central autonomous body' 
shall not tncludc the nationalised insurance and banking corporations 
"'hercas for the purposes of OM No. 261(80)/EV A/75 dated 8.4.1976 
shall conunuc to include the nationalised insurance and banking 
corporations. It is submitted that the OM dated 29.8.1984 and OM 
dated 8.4.1976 both relate to the pensionary entitlement of employees 
on mobilny from Central Government to the Central autonomous 
bodies and vice versa. The former is in relation to the counting of 
services on such mobility and latter 10 relation to the prn:-rata 
entitlement of pension on such mobility Such a classification in the 
same area, that is, pensionary entitlement of employees of the same 

4"0 
set ur orgnni~atitJM is bad m Jaw and is opposed to the conSlitutional right or equality. 
E. OM dated 30.S.I99S proYides that all past cases wherein counting of 
servoce for pension under the OM dated 29.8.1984 had been allowed 
may be withdrawn from tho<e employees wbo are still in service. h 
intplics that all those ea.cs "'here the persons haYC alre11dy retired 
before 30.5 1995 arc not to be opened and thetr added pensionary 
entnlement granted to them is not to be disturbed This classification 
too is bad in law and IS agaonst the canons of the Constitution 
4 Conditions of servocc of the Central Government employees arc 
regulated under llfticle J09 of the Constitution. ProVJSO to that arttcle 
cnobles the Pre,.dent to make rules regulating such wnduoons of service 
until provisions on that behalf ts made by an .o\cl of Parliament. The 
~ntral Government from lime to time had been making rules on thil 
regard It had been funhcr ossuing executive instructions including 
in•tructions of the nature under issue in the present representation from 
time to lime These executive instructions supplement the rules framed by 
the President under proviJo to article 309 They arc, for all intent and 
purposes, the statutory provisions within the ambit of article 309 having 
the same force of law. The Commil!ec on Subordinate Legislation had 
been from lime to tome cxamimng the rules made under proviso to article 
309. We humbly submit that this Commillee has a necessary junsdiction to 
make an examination of different OMs ossued by the Cencral Goverornent 
for counting of past service for pensionary benefits on mobility from and to 
the Centrnl Government C$tBblishmcnts. 
In view of the above. we mo&t humbly request your honour to get the 
maner examined and make your suitable recommendation to the Central Government. 
Thanking you. 
Yours laithfully 
Sd;; 
(R.P. MANCHANDA) 
PRESIDENT 
• 

'lrnl ~ 
~·~~'"~~ ~. ~ ftot4it<ld 1l'llT • ~ 
'11~ 
ANNEXURE-Ill 
COVERN!I1E:'IT OF INDIA 
m:PARThfENT OF PENSION A:W PE.NSIONERS' 
WELFARE !ltL'lJSTRY OF PERSO!\NEL PUBLIC 
GRIEVANCES ,\.,"0 PENSIONS, 
NEW OELIU 
3rd Floor. Lolc Nayak Bhawnn, 
Khan Market. New Delhi-1101XJ3. 
7th April . 1997. 
OmCF. MEMORANOU!It 
SUB: RepresentatiOn of All India Insurance Employees AS50Ciation and 
Slui t.bhendra Kumar Sharma regarding counting of scmcc of 
pen•111nary benefits on mobility between Central Government 
Oepllttmcnts and any of the n:tiunaliscd corporation in the 
lnsurtr"c and Banking sectors . . . . . 
A reference i~ Invited to Rajya Sabha Stell 's O.M. No. 5(1)197-Com. I 
dated the 14th January, 1997 and 27th Janunry. 1997 on the subject cited 
above. In both the representations a question has been raised that service 
of such Central Government employees who moved to financial institutions 
like nationalised banks and LICIGIC etc., after submilling resignation, 1S 
not coumed for pension purposes in the new organisation and similarly a 
person moving from these organisations to Central Govcrnmc nt 
Department~ is not allowed the benefit of counting of past service together 
with Central Government service. 
2. Commen~: Prior to 1986, a person muving from Central Guvernmcnt 
Departments to Central autonomous bodies and I' ice· •·ersu was allowcJ the 
benefit or counting of paM service for pension purposes under the 
provisions of D.lAR's O.M. No. 2&110184-PU d>tcd 29-&-1984 Further a 
Central Government employees resigmng thctr job to take up appointment 
in public sector undertakings with proper permis.<ion were allowed benefits 
ol payment of pro-rata pensionary b<:nefits to them under !he orders 1>-<ucd 
by DP&AR/Ocpartment of Pcn,ion l< Pensioner. Welfare. The 
nationliscd banks including RBltSBI anJ Life Insurance Corporation 
i<w:luding GIC and its subsidiaries did n >t figures specifically in those 
cwders Due 1.0 the above reasons, a Central Go~emmcnt employee 
moving to tbc nationalised banks including SBI and RBI and UC including 
GIC were not setting entitled £or counting or past service nor they were 
JlCIIing entitled to pro-ra&a pensionary benefits. In view or this and to 
facilitate th.: Central Government employees moving to Nationalised 
4t 

ANNEXURE-Ill 
"""' ll'f<P'{ 
~ ~ ~ "'ril ~ f<i'IPl 
~. m "14i1Qri l!WI ~ ~ 
"'~ GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
DF.PARD1ENT OF Pf::-iSlO:-i AND PENSIONERS' 
WELFARE MINISTRY OF PERSO:>iNEL PUBLIC 
GRIEVANCES ,\.'<0 PE~SIONS, 
NEW DELUI 
3rd I'Joor, Lok Nayak Bhawan, 
Khan Market. New Delhi-110003. 
7tb April, 1997. 
OFFICE ME:'>10RA1'iDUM 
SUB: Rcprcscmacion of All India Insurance Employees Association and 
Shri M3hcndra Kumor Sharma regarding counting of service of 
pen<onnary bencfiu on mohilicy hctwccn Cencral Govcmmcnc 
DepurcmcniJ and any ,,f the n ~ li<>Miiscd corporacion in chc 
Insurance and Banking sc"Ns. . . . . . 
A rcferentc b inviccd to Rajyo Sabha Stclt.'s O.M. No. 5(1)/'J7·Com I 
dated chc 14th January, 1997 and 27th January. 1997 on lhc subjccc ciccd 
nbove. In boch chc representations a question has been raised that service 
of such Central Goventmcnl employees who moved to financial institutions 
like nationalised banks and LIC/GIC etc. after submitting rcsignacion, is 
noc coumcd for pension purpose~ u1 che new organisacion and similarly a 
person moving from lhcS~: org~pi.<atinns to Central Government 
Dcparlmenco is not aiiowcd che benefic of councing of past service togcch~r 
wich Cencral Govcmmcnl 5ervtcc 
2. Comments; Prior to 1986, u person mvving !rom Ccntr~l Government 
Department• 10 Cencral autonomou~ hodic.> and •·rce-l'vsa was aiiowcd the 
benefic of councing of pas! servtcc for pension purposes under the 
provisions of D&.AR's O.M. No. 18110184-PU dnted 29·8-191!4. Furcher a 
Central Government employees resigning thctr JOb to t3kc up appomcmcnc 
in public scttor undertakings wnh proper permission were >llowcd bcncfics 
oC paymenc of pro-rata pensionary lx;ncfils to chcm under the orders i>..<ucd 
by DP&AR/Dcp~rtmcnl of Pcn>Oou & Pcnsinncn Welfare. The 
03tionlised banks including RBIISBI anj Life Insurance Corpor~cion 
i<u:luding GIC and its iUbsidiari~ did n )I figures spceifically in chose 
orders. Due 10 the above rca.<nns, a Central Gowmmcnc employee 
moving to che nationalised banks including SBI and RBI and UC including 
GJC were not gelling entitled for counling of pas! service nor chey were 
&etting enciclcd co pro-r:lla pcnsionnry benefits. In view of this and co 
facilitate chc Central Govemmcnc employees moving to Nacionali.scd 
41 

42 
Banks and financial Institutions like LIC. the Dcparlmcnt of Pension & 
P W IS,ucd 0 M Ko. 4/8~P&PW dated 14.5 1986 wherein the 
t\nuonaliscd Banks were declared Cemral autonomous bodies for the 
>pccific purpose of allowong the benefit of payment of pro-rata pensionary 
b<:ncfits 10 such employees who resigned from Central Government service 
"'"h proper permission Subsequent!), sim1lar orders '"ere issued for other 
finand•l lnslltutions like LIC. GIC and its subsidiaries The above orders 
3hhou~:h ~~~ued on 1986 did not menuon about the applicabilny of mobility 
orders da1cd 29·8·1984 to public sector banks and Fmanc1al lnstnutions 
hke LIC etc due to the fact that these financ1al orgamsations arc similar to 
pubhc sector undcnakmgs and may have their own set of rules rcgard1ng 
P•l) rncn1 of pensionary benefits to their employees, which arc different 
from tho<c follo ... ed by Centro!. Government Depanments and Central 
autonomu~~ bod1cs Further. thc_sc organisations do not fulfil the criteria 
lan.l down'" para·~ of the 0 M. dated 29.8.198:1 which prov1des that more 
than 50% of the expenditure of the autonomous body shall be met from 
Central Government Grants or cess. 
3. Later on, when it came to the knowledge of tltis Deptt that some 
Central Government Departments out of confusion arc allowmg the 
benefll Of counnng Of past SCTVICC to some employees who have JOined 
Central Government service after pulling in ~ervicc in BankYLIC' etc. 
onspite of the fact that neither the O.M. dated 29.8.198-1 nor the 
subsequent orders dated 14.5.1986. 3.4.1987 and 10.11.1987 provided for 
coun1ing of scrvtcc rendered in nationalised B<onkYLIC etc. together wnh 
Ccntr~ l Government service and vice-versa, it was considered essential 10 
clar~fy 10 all admini>trativc authorities that Central Government employees 
on absorption in Nationalised Danks and Financial Institutions like LlC 
and vicc-versn arc not entit led to counting of past service for pension 
purposes together with service in Iauer organisation. Accordingly this 
Department issued clarifications vide O.M. No. 28/24/94·P&PW(B) dated 
."10·.1·1995 ond 13.9.1996. 
4 Cup1C! of relevant orders as per list 
I. N1>. 28110/84-PU 
2 r-io. 4/8/84-P&PW 
3 No 
4 No 
S. No 
6. 
4114/SS-P&PW 
4123187-P&PW 
28124194-P&PW(B) 
·do-
below arc enclosed for pcrusal: 
dated 29 8.1984 
14.5.1986 
3.4.1987 
10.11.1987 
30.5.1995 
13.9.1996 
5 It may be seen from the above that Nationalised Banksii..IC have 
status s1m1lar 10 the public sector undertakings. The service rendered in 
PSUs rs not treated as qualifying service for pension under CCS(Pension) 
Rules. These either have no Pension Scheme or have Pension Scheme 
whoch are different from those followed by Central Government 
Depanment!Central Autonomous Bodies. Further, the benefit of counting 
or service is being allowed on mobility of personnel from Central 
Government Oeptts • to Central Autonomous Bodies which generally non 

43 
profn makmg organisalions and expenditure of these is met to the tunc of 
more thnn 50% from Central Government Grants or cess which is not the 
ca'c with l'ationaliscd Banks and Financial Institutions like LIC. Due ro 
the above reasons. the ,;crvice rendered in nationalised banks and LIC etc. 
cnnnor be counted for pension purposes in the Government. 
Tu 
Rn1ya Sabh.1 Secretanat. 
Parham.:nt House Anncxe, 
NEW DELIII·JIOOOI. 
Sd '· 
(INDU GUPTA) 
DIRECTOR(FP l 
TELE: 4624802 

GOVERNMENT OF INDIAIBHARAT SARKAR 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRSIGRlli MANTRALAYA 
Dtparlnltnl or PusoDMI and Admlolslralive Reforms 
(l(armlk AUJ' Prashasnll< Sudbar Vibhag) 
New Delhi, the 29th Aug. 1984 
OFFICE MEMORANDUM 
SvruEC"r Mobility of pe.-.onnel between Central Government Depanmenu 
and Autonomous Bodi.,.......Counting of service for pension-
As per existing orden, service rendered outside Central Government 
does not count for pension lD Central Government except in the case of 
scientific employees of autonomous bodies financed or controlled of the 
Government, who on permanent absorption under the Central Govern· 
mcnl are allowed to count their previous service for pension subject to 
certain conditions. In respect of penonncl other than scientific employees, 
who are permanent in Central Government. in the event of their 
subscquelll permanent absorption in public sector undertakings or any 
autonomous body, proportionate retirement benefits for the serv1ce 
rendered in Government till the date of permanent absorption are nllowcd 
as per rules in force at the time of absorption. No such benefit is allowed 
to temporary employees going over to autonomous body or undct1aking. 
2. A number of Central autonomouslstatuory bodies have also intrl'· 
duccd pen~ion scheme for their employees on the lines of the pension 
scheme available to the Central Government employees. It has, therefore, 
been urged by such autonomous I stalutor)· bodies that the scrv1ce rendrcd 
by their employees under the Central Government or other autonomous 
bodies before joining the au10nomous bo<ly may be allowed to be counted 
in combmation with service 10 autonomous body. for the purpose of 
pension, subject to certain condiuoos. Similar provisions for employees of 
autonomous body going over to Central Government have also been 
urged. In other words. the suggestion is that the benefit of pension based 
on combined service should be introduced. 
3. This matter h:u been considered carefully and the President hos no"' 
been pleased to decide thai the case of Central Government employees 
gomg over to a Centr~l autonomous bod)· or vie>:·•·etsa a.od employc<:s of 
44 

45 
the Central nuconomow; body moving to anoUtcr Central autonomous body 
may be regulated os per the follov.1ng provisions: 
(a) In cast of Autonomous Bodies witrr~ Pension Schtmt is in 
opl'ration 
(1) Where 1 O:ntr3l Government employee borne on pen.<ionable 
e$t~blishmenl t. ollo .. cd to be absorbed in an autonomous body, the 
service rend.:red by him under the Government shall be allowed to 
be counted towards pcrmon under the autonomous body irr~'P"'""' 
of whrth<r tlu: ~mploru "'"' tnnporary or permantnl "' 
Go••trnm<nt. The pc"'10nary benefits w1ll, however, atture only if 
the temporary :<C~ICe is follo"cd b~ eonfirmotion Iff>,: rettreS as I 
t~mpornry employee '" the autonomous body. he wlll get tcrm1nal 
bene tits as ~rc normally ~vatlablc:- to temporary employees under the 
Government. The same procedure will applt in the ca."' of 
emplo)·ee of the nutonumous bodies who are permanently abSorOCd 
under the Ccntrnl Govcrnm<nt. 
The 0nvcmmenVautonontous bod)' will di!;chargc its pcnsivn 
liability by poying in lump;;um as a one-time payment. the pr<>-ratQ 
pcnsiontscrvu:c gratuity/terminal gratuity and DCRG lor the 'en;,.., 
up to the date of ab<orpt1on in the autonomous body I Go,·cmmcnt. 
as the ~a~ ma) be Lumpsum amount or the pro-rata pension will 
be dctcnnincd with reference to commutation table latd down m 
CCS (Commutation o! Pct~<tnn) Rules', 1981, as amended from time 
to t1me. 
(ii) A Ccntml Gnvcrnmcnt employee w1th CPF bc.nefits on permanent 
nbotption in nn .mtnnumous body will have the opt>un cirhc·r to 
receive CPF beufits whkll huvc accrued to him from the 
Government and Slart hll .crvice alrcsh in that body or choose to 
wunt service rendcrcJ in Government a~ qualifying scf\ icc (or 
ptnsion in the autonomnu< bndy b)' foregoing Government's share 
<•I C"I'F oontribnuon~ wnh tntercst. whkh will t>c p>id tu concerned 
aut<>nomous body by the concerned Government Oepanmcnt Tlrr 
option lhu/1 M r.urciJc wil!lin one yrur from 1hr Jarr of dbsorptton. 
If no op11on rs ~xt• ciscJ w111Jm stitoulal' p~r~od. <mplo}te shall be 
drtmcd ltJ hav~ optrcl lo rtCI<\'t Ci'F i><n<{ils Thi (lplion tmu 
txamcd sloe// bt finn/. 
(b) Auronomous b<>dy, whut rhc Prn.uo11 Schm•r is not m oprrutwn 
(i) A permanent Centr.tl Government W~ployce borne on pensionable 
c:stabUshment on absorptton w1tkr such autonomous body wiD be 
eligible for pro-rata retirement benefits in a«ordance "'ith the 
provisions of the Ministr)· of Finance O.l\.L No. 26(18)EV(B)/7S 
dated the Sth April 1976, M amended from time to time. In ca>c of 

46 
quasa-pcrmanent or temporary employees. the terminal gratuity as 
may be admt.sible under the rules would be actually payable to the 
md~Vtdu~l on the date when pro-rata retirement benefits to 
permanent employees become payable . However, 10 the case of 
ab<Orpuon of a Government employee wtth CPF benefil5, tn such 
an autonomous organisation, the amount of his subscriptions and 
the Government's contnbution. if any. together wllh interest 
thereon shall be tran<fencd to his new Provident Fund account 
wtth the consent of that body 
(it) An employee of an autonomous body on permanent ab!.orption 
under the Central Government "'ill have the option cirhcr to 
rccctvc CPF bencfi" whtch have accrued to h1m from the 
autunomou< body and start b1s scrvt« afresh 1n Government or 
chuosc to «>unt service rendered 10 that body as qualifying service 
for pen<1on 10 Government be foregoing employer's share of 
Contributory Provident Fund countnbutions with interest thereon. 
"'h"h v.1ll be pa1d to the concerned Government DepartmcOI by 
the autonomous body. The option shall be excenscd within one 
year from the date of absorption. If no option is exccrciscd w1thin 
st1pulatcd period. employee shall be deemed to have opted to 
receive CPF benefits. The option once exercised shall be final 
(c) 1\bsorpii<JII 11/ tmploytts of onr Ctntral Awonomous body 1n anoth~r 
Cemrul Auf()nomr>u.f body. ~ 
The 11,bovc procedure will be followed mutatis murandi5 in re~pect or 
employees going from one autonomous body 10 nnothcr 
4. "Central autonomous body" means body which ts financed wholly or 
substnnually from cess or Ccntr:JI Government grants. "Sub>t:tntially" 
means that more thun 50 per cent of the expenditure of the autonomous 
body is met through cess or Central Government grants . Autonomou~ 
body indudcs a Cen tral sta tu10ry body or a Central University but docs 
not include a public undertakmg. 
Only such serv1cc which quo lilies for pension under the relevant rules of 
Government/Autonomous body shall be taken into account lor this 
purpo~c. 
5(1) The employees of a Central autonomous body or Central 
Government. as the case may be. who have already been sanctioned or 
hnvc received pro·rata retirement benefits or other tenninal benefits lor 
their past scrv1ce wtll have the option either:-
(a) to retain such benefits and in that event their past service will not 
qualify for pension under the autonomous body or the Central 
Government. as the case may p.:; or 
(b) tO have the past service countel.fs qualifying service for pension 
under the new organisation in which case the pro-rata retirement 
or other terminal benefits. if already received by them, will have 
to be deposited along with interest thereon from the date of 
receipt of those benefits till the date of deposit with the 
autonomous body or the Central Government. as the case may be 

47 
The nght to count prcvtous service as qualifying •~rvice 'holl not 
rcl'ive until the whole amount has been refunded In other caJ:Cs. 
where rro .. rato. retirement bcncfils have alrcad~ been sanctlnnctl 
but have not }tt become payable. the concerned authorillc' 'hall 
cancel the <anctoon as soon as the ondividual concerned opts for 
cou~ung of this previous service for pcn~1on and onform the 
imlivodual in wnung about accepting hi~ option and cancellation uf 
the sanction. The option sh•ll be cxcrc .. cd wothon a pcnod of one 
~car from the date of tSSUe of those orders. If no optton " 
cxerctsed by such emplo~ees wothin the prescribed ttmc limot, they 
"ill be deemed to have opted for retencion of the 1'-cndit already 
recel'cd hy rhem The option once c•crcucd ~hall lk: final 
(2) Where no terminal benefit fur the pre-.ous >cr-tcc h.l>c been 
received, the previous scrvtce in sudt ca.<cs wdt be counred a.< quahf~tng 
service for pension only if the previous employer a.:c>!pt< p.·nsaon habtlirv 
for the service in accordance \lootb the pnnciplcs laid do" n in this Orricc 
Memorandum. In no case pension conrributioo1iabiliry sh:.ll be acccprcJ from rhe employee concerned. 
6. These orders will be applicable only where rh~ transkr ur th~ 
employee from one organi$atoon to anurh~r was-is wllh the con>Cill uf the 
organisation under which he was scrvnog Cllrlicr. tncluding ruses where the 
tndividual hod secured cmploymcnr directly on h1s own volillon pt<lvtdcd 
he had applied through proper chunncl-Wirh proper pcm•isS~on of rhc 
adminimotive auJhority concerned 
7. These orders will rakt tffccJ from rilt dau of iswe anu the t'Cv.,cd 
policy as enunciated above will he applicable ro those employees who 
rerirc from Government auronomous both service on or aflcT ch~ Jure of issue of rhese orders. • 
The provisions contained tn the Montscry of Finance Office Memorandum 
No. 26(18) EV(B)I75 dated lhc 8th April, 1976 and Office \!cmor.tndum 
No 25(1)EV-s3. dated the 8th September. 1983 or any ocher orders shJII, 
in so far 8\ it provides for any of the mailers concamcd in chis Office Memorandum, cease to operacc 
8. The MtnJStry of Education and Culture etc. arc requested to advtsc 
rhc auconomo~tarutory bodies under thcor administrative control, v.orh 
Specific direeuons to the Financ1al Advisers concerned, co ensure to make 
necessary provi.ltons on rheor Rules and RcgulationVArticlcs of Association 
in accordance v.uh the provostons contained in chis Office Mcmor.tndum. 
In cases where any pracuce othc..,.ise 1han enumerated above is presently 
being followed rhe same may be tc•~S<:d 10 accordance with rhe pro•i~ions 

of this Oflice Memol'l\ndum so that uniformity is maintained in such 
mailers in all the organisations. 
9. In so far as pe~ons serving in the lnllian Audit and Accounts 
Department are concerned these orders issue after consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of lndia. 
56'. 
(S.R. AHIR) 
Deputy Secretary to tbe Go•t . of India. 

• 
No. ~P&PW 
Government of India 
Ministry of Persoooel, P.G. & Pensioos 
(Department of Peosion & Pensioners' W.;Uue) 
6th Floor. f'lirvaeban Sad an, 
l'ew Delbt-110001, the 14·5·81>. 
OffiCE MEMORANDUM 
SuBJECT:-Grant or pro-ra~ retirement benefits to the permanent Central 
Govt. employees who are absorbed in the Nationalised Banks 
-Question regarding. 
The undersigned is directed to say that the pro·rata retirement benefits 
on absorption in public Jector undenalcings are regulated in accordance 
with the orders which were issued by the peptt. of Public Enterprises nod 
the pro-rata retirement bcnefiu to permanent Central Govt. employees on 
absorption in Central Autonomous Bodies are regulated by the orders 
issued by the Deptt. of Pension & Pensioners' Welfare. 
2. Doubts were raised in cenaio quaners whether the Nationalised ba~ks 
arc to be treated as Public Sector Undenaking,s or autonomous bodies for 
the purpose of grant of retirement benefits to the Govt. servants 
permanently absorbed therein. In otder to make the posttion clear and to 
avoid confusion it is clarified that the Nationalised Banks including 
Reserve Bank of India and State Bank o( lndja and itS subsidiary Banks 
arc to be trcOJtd AS autonomous bodies for the purpose of grant of pro-rata 
retirement benefits to the permanent Central Govt. employees who are 
absorbed in there Bodies on the terms and conditions envisaged in the 
Ministry of rmanee (Dcpll. of Expenditure) O.M. No. 26(18)'£V(B}?5 
dated 8.4.1976 as amended from time to time. Ministry of Def~ee etc, arc 
requested to keep this in mind and decide the cases of grant of pro-rata 
retirement benefiu to the permanent Cenrral Govt. employees absorbed in 
Nationalised Banks including· Reserve Bank of lodia and State Bank of 
India and its subsidiary Banks, accordingly. 
49 

50 
3. In •o far 3$ persons scrvmg m the Indian Audtl and Accounts Ocpu 
arc concerned the« orders assue after coosuh3hon w1th 1hc C<~mptrollcr 
.md Auditor General of India. 
(I hndi vc '""n i1 encl<>"'d) 
ro 
Sd/· 
(Hazara Singh) 
Deputy Secretary to the Govt of India . 
All M nlstncs'O,partmcnl\ oi t~c 
Govt oi lnd1a ct~ 
Ko ~~-r.uw 
C<>p} (orwardcd to the Comptroller and Auditor General of lnd1a, New 
I>dlu tv.1th 4r)() ~pare copies). 
Copv also forv.ardcd to:-
1 1\ll State Governmen" and Umon Territory Admmistrauon• 
2. President'' Sccretnnat, 
1 Vice-President's Secretariat. 
~ !'rune Minister'' Offiu: 
~ Lol. Sahha Se.rcwriat 
n Ran·a Subhn Secretariat 
7 Parliament Library (wllh five spare eop1cs) 
~ Cabinet Secretariat 
'1. Un1011 Public Service Commissi11n. New Delhi. 
Ill Supreme Court of India 
II P.lccl1on Commi~ion 
11. Plamung (\>mmiSSIOI\. 
P Sc,·r<tunul of Gt)vcrnorS'Ll. Governors of all StatcS'\Jnaon Tcrmor ies. 
14. All India ServK<' Division, Dcpu. ol Personnel & Trg (Shri V.R . 
~•in)va<dll, Un1kr Secretary) 
"· s.:crci.U\' Stall SIJC, Nauonal COUI>CII of JCM. 13-C. Firot-\hah Ro3d, 
New Oclhi. 
1~. ~lut""Y of Odcncc, U<l'cnsion(Scrvu:cs} 
17 Muu>try nl Railv.ays (Railway Board) Shri K.B Lal, Dcput) D~reclor, 
rmauce ( F.,u ). 
1 . .;, Min"'') nll.a", Ju,licc and C./\ (CSPO Scc1ion} "1th 5 spare copies. 
1'1 All lncetralco Financial Ad,•iscn; to Ministrics-Dcpanmcnts (II spare 
l1 r•cs) 
1l C..>ntrollcr Genna! of Accounts (10 copies) 
{Shu ~I.K Jatn. Oy C G A ). 
21 Concrollc; C.cncral uf Accounts (Code ~cction). 11 Janpath. Rajendra 
Barrack<, Kcw Delhi 
2l t h•cf Controllc~C'onlrollers-Princtpal Accouncs Officer.> of Minastri& 
Ocp.ltl me nts 
~' All ott•chcd and 'ubordtnatc oificcs <>f the /\too Pcrs. &. Trg; AR&PG 
ami Pcnsiom~lll ,\ 
24 All Of!:ccrs om! Sections oi the M'o Pcrs . .!< Trg; AR&PG and 
Pcn''l aoo.M H A 

51 
25. JCA Scclion, Ocpn. of Personnel & Trg. 
26. Shri P MUihuswamy. 'Gilanjali'. No. 6-G, Kusuan Beach Slreet. 
Scnlhome, Madras-4. 
27. Economic Administralive Reforms Commission. 
28. Minislry or Finance (Ocpn. of Expenditure) EV Branch (10 spare I 
copies) 
29. Secretary, Fourth Pay Commission. 
30. Reserve Bank or lndia. Bombay. 
su-­
(Hazara Singh) 
Deputy Secretary to 1hc Go•l. of India 

No. -1. 74l\5-P&PW 
Gnl'nnment n' ln<.ha 
M111t<ICI uf P~r!.Onnd, P.G & Pcn5ion• 
ncpo·1mn1 of Pension & Pc "~•onrrs' Welfare) 
]';C" Dcllu, lho 3rd -\pnl 1~57 
On ICE MEMOR.\.'il>l'M 
Sum T -Gr. 11 of pro r.ua rclirrmcnr l:>cncfns 10 the pcrmanr11 Central 
Go• rnployccs who arc •b>arbcd in lhr l'C--qucs11on regaro.hng 
The ~~llentgnc:d is d~r~ctcd 10 say lhnt rhc pro-rat> rclJ•cmcn ~.>cnofit< 
on abso~ptton m the public sector undcnaL:-:n.I:"' art" rc:gul.1tcd in .a:cordan(c 
With th, orden wlu.:h were wuc:d w the Department of Public 
Ent(rp Jscstlcparrmcnt of Perwnnel & Tr.uning (Em Ol\1"on) The 
P•)ment of pro-rat I rcllremcn! benefits to the perm on en! c~nrr;ol Govr 
c:mplt..lj'C.:CS who are eb'\orbed an Central otutcmomou..c: bod1~~ arc r.:g• lah.~d 
b) the oro1rr• 1S$11cd by the l>cpu ol Expenditure and the 1\.!m• 1 ., of 
Pcaollncl, P.G. & Pcn<ton< 
2 Doubts were raised in ccrram quarters wh~thcr the LIC' ,. to oc 
trcntcd "' pubhc \CCit>r nnderta~ong ur an autonomous body fur the 
purp11sc ,,f grant of 1etucmcnt benefit to the Govt. scrv>rns pc manontly 
ubsorbcd therein T'u avoid an confuston it is clarified in consulration with 
the Oepu of l'ubh< Erncrpri;cs nnd the Mmistry of Finance. Dcpu or 
Ecvnumoe Affuiro (lt\Sur;~uce Dlvismn) that the Ltfe ln>ur.Jnce Corpornrron 
Of fnr.h;, ll W be lrCUtCd as an aUIOilOOIOUS bL>dy for the f'UtpOSC Of grunt 
of pr<.Natn retirement bcnefns If' the permanen: Ccnttal Govt employee• 
who Jrc a~~ull>cd thereto on the terms and conditions en\'isagc<l in the 
Minimy of Finoncc (Dcptt. of Expcnditur~) OM No. 26(18)-EV(B)'l.S dt, 
8th April. 1976 111 nm,•nded from time to tune "'1inistry of finan,·e ct< arc 
requested It> J..ecp thil rn view while dedchg the cases of grant of i'r<>-rata 
rcttrcmcnt bcncfrt~ to the pcrmanenl ~~~ 111 Govt emplo)'ccs absorbed in 
the life lnsur3nce Corporotion 
1. In so f•r u pcrsons scrvrng in t:1: Indian Audu and Accounts 
Oef>AIIIncnt arc conternrd these 01dcrs ;l>uc after consuha11nn with the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
!Iandi versron ts eoclo1cd) 
Sd.,L 
To 
(HAZARA SINGH) 
Deputy Secretary ro tbc Go•t. of Indio 
All Monistric~tpanments of the GoVI. of Indio. 
-(u per ~tandard lilt) 
52 

53 
No . .:.14'85-P&PW New Delhi, the 3rd April, 1987. 
Copy forwarded to:-
(i) Office of the Comptroller & Auduor General of India, New Delhi 
(wnh 400 spare copies) 
(ii) Office of the Controller General of Accounts, New Delhi (with 30 
spare copies) 
Cc.py also forwarded to:-
1. President's Srcretanat. 
2 Va..:r·Prc~idc:nt'.s Scac:tariat. 
3. l'nme Moni>ter ~ Office 
4 Lok Sabha Secretariat. 
5. Ran> Sabha Secretarial. 
6. Cabtnct Sew. 
7. IJnton rubhc Sel"'tCC Comm~ton. 
~. ElcctJ<>n Comm~>\lon 
9 Planning. Comm,.<inn. 
10. Central Vtgalancc Commission 
II. Suprcm~ t'ourt o! lndi~ 
12. Sccrct.lly, Founh Central Pay Commt~ton, Vigyan Bhawan Annexe, 
New Dclht 
13. Reserve 8nnk of India, Bombay. 
14. JCA s~cuon. Deplf. of Pers. & Trg 
15. AIS Otvt~ton. Depu. of Pcrs. & Trg. 
16. All Oili.:crs & Sccunns of the DcpLt. of Pcrs. & Trg. 
17 J\11 Officers & Sections of the Depu. of A.R. & P.G. 
18 All Officers & Sections of the Dcpu of Pensions & PW. 
19. 1\11 nuathcd & subordinate offtccs of the Minimy of Personnel, P.G. 
& Pensions. 

Ko 4123/87·P&PW 
Government of India 
M1n1Mry <•f Personnel. Public Grievances & PcMions 
(Dcpartmcm of Pclt\mn &: Pcnstoners'. Welfare) 
Kirvachan Sadao, 
Kc"' Delhi. the lOth Nov . 1987 
OHICE :'>IBIORA:-IOUM 
Subject - Grant uf pr.>-rata retirement benefits to ~rmancnt Central 
Go't. cmployee5 on absorption in the General Insurance 
Corpn of India and its subsidiaries viz. National Insurance 
Co. Ltd .. the New India Assurance Co. Ltd the Oriental 
Insurance Co. Ltd and United !nella Insurance Co. Ltd. 
Th.: umkr<ign.:d ·~ dtrcctcd to <ay !hat the grant of pro-rata retirement 
benefits un ilh<orption in the public <ector undertakings arc regulated 1n 
Jccordancc w111t the orders •s~ucd by the Dcpu of Publtc Entcrpri..,>l 
Dcp11 of Personnel & Training IEstt. D1vision). The pavment of pro-rata 
retirement benefits to the permanent Central Govt. employees who ore 
absorbed 1n the Central autonomous body arc regulated hy the orders 
bsucd by the Dcptt. of Expenditure ~nd the Department of Pension & 
Pcnstoncr>' Welfare 
2 Doubt< were raised In certain quarters with regard 10 the status of the 
General ln"lfancc Corpn. of India and its four subsi<Jiarie~ as to whether 
these organ"ations should be treated as Central Autonomous bodies for 
the purpo~c of grant of retirement benefits to the Cen1ral Govt employees 
on permanent ab~rption thercm. It •s clarified in consuhation with the 
Dcpn. of Public Enterprises and the M/o finance, Depu oi EC(lnomic 
Affairs (Insurance Division) that the General Insurance Corpn. of India 
and its 4 subsidiaries viz. Kational Insurance Co. Ltd .. the New lndta 
,\ssurancc Co. Ltd., the Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd., and United India 
Insurance Co . Lid . arc 10 be treated as Central autonomous bodies for the 
purpose of grant of pro-rata retirement benefits to the permanent Central 
Gov1 employees who are absorbed therein on the terms and conditions 
en••sagcd on the M/ o Finance. Deptt. of Expenditure O.M . Ko 26(18)/ 
EV(B)I7S dt. 8th Apnl. 1976, as amended from time to t1me and the 
Dcpu of Pen~ion & Pensioners' Welfare O.M Ko. 4(12)/ 85-P&PW dt 
31st \larch , 1987 M/ o Finance etc are requested to keep 1h" m view 
"'hilc dccidmg the ca•cs of jtr3nt of pro-rata retirement bandits 10 the 
permanent Central Govt. employees absorbed in the General Insurance 
Corpn . or lnd1a and its four subsidiaries. 

55 
3 In ~o far as persons servmg on the Indian Audit and Accounts Dcpll 
arc cuncerned, these orders o~suc after eon.<uhation with the Complrollcr 
and Auuowr General of India 
(I Iondo ve!'ion " enclosed) 
Sd/· 
(HAZARA S!NGII) 
Dy. Secretary to the Govt of India 
To 
All Ministries/Deptu. of the Govt of India (as per standard !lSI) 
No. 4/23187-P&PW New Delhi. the lOth No• , 87 
Copy fON<arded ro:-
(i) Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India. :-:e"' Delhi 
("irh 400 spare copocs) 
(ii) Office of the Controller General of Accounrs. New Dclho (wnh 311 
spare copocs). 
Copy al"' fol"'ardcd to:-
1. President's Secretariat 
2. Vice-Pres ident's Secretariat. 
3. Prime Minister's Office. 
4. lok Sabha Sccrctanat. 
5. Rajyn Sabhu Secretariat. 
6. Cabinet Secretariat. 
7. Union Public Service Commissoon. 
8. Election Commission. 
9. Planning C<,nunission. 
10. Centro! Vigilance Commission. 
11. Supreme Court of India. 
12. Secnary, Founh Central Pay Commission, Vigyan Dhawan Anncxe. 
New Delhi. 
13. Reserve Bank of India, Bombay. 
14. JCA Section, Dcpu. of Pcrs. & Trg. 
IS. A!S Division, Oeptt. of Pcrs. & Trg. 
16 All Officers & Sections of the Dept!. of Pees & Trg. 
17 All Olficers & Sections of the Deptl of A.R & P.G 
18. All Officers & Sccttons of the Deptt. of Pensions & PW 
I'J. All a11achcd & Subordinate offices of the Mini<trv of Personnel. P G 
& Pension•. · 
211. UT Division. M/o Home Affaors. 
21. All Officers & Sections of the M/o Home Afiairs. 
2~ ;\II altached & Subordinate office of the MHA. 
2~ . E.V. Branch. Depll of Expenditure. Min. of Finance (with 10 spare 
copies) . 
24. M/o Defence, (0/Pension) (with 5 spare copies) 

56 
25. M/o Def.:nce, (0/Civ. I) (with 5 spa re copies). 
26. M/o Defence, (D/Civ. ll) (with 5 spare copies). 
27. Controller General of Defence Accounts, R.K. Puram, New Delhi. 
28 Controller of Defence Accounts, (Pension), Allahabad 
29. Army Headquanc~. 
30. Naval Headquarters . 
}l. Atr Headquarters. 
12. Ratlway Board. 
33. Mlo Law &. J~ttce (CSRO Sechon) (wllh 5 spare eoptes) . 
34. Parliament Ltbrary lwitb S spare copies). 
35. Controller General of Accounts (Code Scclloo), lith Janpatb, 
RaJCndra lhrracks , New Delbt. 
'16. Chtd ControlleutContnlllers/Principal Accounts Officers of 
MintstricvDeptts 
37 ,\11 Integrated Ftnan~tal Actvtsers to Ministries/Deptts. (wnb 6 spare 
coptes) 
38. All State Govts IUT Admtnimatioos. 
19 Sccrctartat of Governors/l.t Governors oi all States/UTs 
40 Secretary, N>ll<'nal Council of JCM (Staff side) 13·C, FcroL,hah 
Road, Sew Delhi 
41. All Members of the Staff Side of the Kauon•l Council of JCI\V 
l'lepartmentJl CounLil. 
42 Shri P Muthuswamy, C/o Swamy Publishers. Sandhya Mansion, P.B. 
Ko 2468, R.A Puram, Madras·600028 . 
13. Smt Satya Choudhari, P.O . Lnkhimder, Dtst. Hoshtarpur, Punj3b. 
+I Controller of Accounts, Delht '\dm tnistration B Dluck, Vikos 
Dhawa11, New Delhi·ll0002 
~5 . N3tt0ll~l Ex·scrvic.:men Co·ordina uon Commiuee, 24, Neelakandnn 
$1. Choo laimcdu, Madros·600094. 
o\6. Edttor. Pensioner's Advocate, H-115/3, 33 Cross Street, Besant 
Nagor, Madtas-600090 
47, Shri Riputlamnn Singh, C·22, Ntzamuddtn West, New Dclht 110013. 
Sdr 
(HAZARA SINGH) 
Deputy Secretary to the Govt of India 

New Delhi the 20th May, 199S 
OFFICE MD10RANDml 
Sub:- Grant of pro-rata retirement benelils to the permanent Central 
Government employees who are absorbed ll1 the Nationali.ed 
Bank, General lnsurance Corporation and its subsidiarics-
Que.tion regarding. 
The undcnigncd is directed to refer to this Department's O.M Nos. 
4/8184·P&PW dated 14th May, 1986 & No. ~r...3/Si·P&PW dated lOth 
November, 1987 on the •ubject mentioned above and to say that 
inquiries have been made to the effect whether the benefit of eououng 
of service for the purpose of pensionary benefits, as admisstble in term• 
of this Depanraent's O.M. No. 28/10/84-Pension Unit dated the 29th 
August, 1984, is to be allowed in the case of mobility of personnel from 
Government to Nationali~ed Banks and financial insututions hkc Life 
Insurance Corporation of India & Gcner:ll Insurance Corporattnn e.tc 
and vice versa. 
2. The matter bas been considered in the lijlht of instru<ll<'•t<S ~ucd 
by this Deponment in regard to mooihty of perM:mncl \l<!h'ee n 
Government lllld non·Govcmment Orgamsation$ including Publoc Sector 
Undertnkings and Autonomous Bodies. The order conta.nctl "' tht& 
Department's O.M. No. 4/8/84-P&PW dated 14th May, 1986 1nd 0 t>L 
No 4/23/87-P&l'W dated the lOth November. 1907, stated thnt the 
Nationalised Banks including the Reserve Ban~ of ludia and th< State 
Bank of India and its subsidiaries, the General Insurance Corporntwn of 
India and it~ four subsidiaries are to be treated as Autont>mous Bo.lics 
for the purpose of grant of pro·rata retirement t>cncfit, to the 
permanent Central Government employees who are ah,orh<d by the><: 
Bodies on the terms and conditions envtsaged tn Ministry of Fmanc<>, 
Department of Expenditure O.M. NO. 26(18)/EV/75 dated Sth A;uil , 
1976, as amended from time to trme. It is clarified that such empiO)'Ce> 
are not entitled to count the service rendered in Government for the 
purpose of pension on al)sorption in the Nationalised Bank> \Ocluding 
the Reserve Bank of todia and the State Bank of India and •'-' 
sub>idiaries and other financial institutions mcluding Life Insurance 
Corporal\on of India, General Insurance Corporation and t:S subsi<liaries 
as per our O.M. No. 28/10/84-Pension Unit dated Z'Jth ,\ugust , 19S4 
referred to above 
3. Central Government employees who have rendered ;crv\cc tn the 
Nationalised Banks :tS well as other financial institu(ion> includmg Lilt 
Insurance Corporation o! India/General lnsurancx · ·.,rporatton prior to 
their apporntment to the Central Govemment arc also oot entitled to 
count such servtce lor the pensionary benefits under the Central Govt 
57 

58 
They arc. huwcvc1. free to :.cck lcrnunal benefit• a~ <~dml"-<ihlc under the 
1clcvant rules from the concerned l'ialionaliscd Banl.s dnd ~uch other 
111~11tUIIOnS in which thcv had rendered service bcfClrC hc1ng arpointcd 1n 
the Central G<>vcrnmcnt. 
J, ~~'"""Y of Defence. etc, arc requested t<' d"nfy thts rosauun 10 all 
concerned authc,>rlliCS under their admmi..qrati"·c control The pa!!.t ca~cs 
dc<adcd otherwise than the procedure clarified abo'c may be rcvacv.ed tn 
'\lsc thC' concerned employees an: s1tJ1 in service. 
5 In >0 far as persons scrvang an the lndaan Audit and Accounts 
Dq>artmcnl arc concerned, these orders arc assued after consuhauon with 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of lnwa. 
To 
Sd-
(S.C. BATRA) 
Dy. Secretary to the Government of lndaa 
All 1\.hmstracVDepartmentl> of the Government of lndaa. 
(A• per scand.rd maihng la~l') 

A"''IFXl'IH-1\ 
f-:).tr:u:t rrum tht ~t'lh Ml.'porl of tht• SIJndin~ Cummitll't' Ull lluml" \fT:.~ir' 
• • • • 
51 1 he Ct,mnuucc um.Jcp.lanc,l-. th;,tl puur to I'JCJ5. ,, pa't'll mu'lll!= 
frum Ccn11.1l Covcrnmcnl Dcparlmcnl~ 10 ~tn~ vf the C~ntr.tl .mhJn,•n"u'' 
<"rgotruo..t11on ;tnd \ 1(\!' vcrl!i..a wa~ otllu\\ cd the hcncfi1 o! o,:uunun~ nf p;ht 
:\CI''JCC fur p:n,u•n purpc,,c~ C'cnu •I Gnvcrnmcnl cmplu\ ~.:..:' ll'"';mn~ 
lhclr Jnh IU t.tk.c up ·•PJ"Hntmcnl m puhlu: ~ctvr Wllk·u •• kwg' Ytllh p11or 
pcrma(,\JUil 'ACIC ;tJhmctl ra~mcnl uf ru•·titl.t f~.'U\IURdt) h.,.•rh,'flh fullh "r 
tu f.H.:ilit.tlc the Ccntr,tl Cit'"-'Crnmc.·nt cntplu~cc~ mo\'mg In tMilHt\.1111\.'tl 
ban~~ IUduchns Rc,~r\\.: nank nf 111\lia SBI. lht: n.aliun.tlill'U 1'\;ul~, 'AL'h. 
c.lc(:brcd Ccntr:tl .HIIClfl(.lO\OU\ Oodt\.'\ r,., th..: ... r .. ·cifk puq)tl .. (' ol dllcmm~ 
the p~t~ mrnl U( prO*f;t1;1 rcll~IUI1;Jl\ bcn-:fil~ Cll ~Udl <.:mpJH\1.:1..'" \\ hn 
fC\i~lh!ll rrnm (\:n II it I G~wcrnnh.~BI ~ .. ~n·u."C "tlh prh'[ p-crml, ... hlr\ 
Suh..,..:cru~.·nll~. <uml.ar nakr' , .. ~,.·rc "'ucJ f,,r • 'th~·r Finann;d lu'Citulu'll' 
lol.~ LIC (;I(' .u11l it< '"!"""·'''~' 
5~ I hl\\('q,·r. 'Ill~' llJ1)5 1h~ Cc-ntr.tl Gt)VI,"fllllh.:nl ~·mrl • •'~.:''' tiH 
nl'l~orptl •'n in n.,ltunalltcd h.ulk~ ;lfld fm:mnal ln"'IHUIIl'"' Ilk\' Ll( .uhl 
vh;\.· \\'1'·' ;II\,' "'" i.'OHih!l.l ~~· l'(lllllllll£ or pa~t SCC\'I(C f<l1 P'-"'"CO.tHII.It\ 
pUIJ'i""'' IH)!I.'Ihl!r w11h \C'I\'rt'l' HI l;tUC s uq;\tllJ\;,tinn. Th~ CHmnuu ... ·~,. at,~~,.·d 
I he ~111H,11'\ hi C\pJ:mt I hi! l.'lfi.'Unlc;.l;tri\;'C'"' Ulltkt ~ h1l'f1 lhC tkt'i~i; I Otl l11 1.1~1. 
UWi!~ lh\· \I,IIUliH~ rt~llf or f"CII" I ~)Il ••f Cmpltl\'Cl~c; w;,:- lot~<.:tt 
~.1 h '"" !>,.,., ,l,lll'\1 lw the Monl'lo v thai 0 ~I <J :u,·d :•> S I'J~.t "''~' 
fHH i)l'<'\'td1.· h\1 ";nu utul~ u{ :-.t·i ''lt:t..' rcnd"·n:d 111 u:,twn~lh"=cd h;ul~ ..... :lr tUI 
muhi iH\' lo 1 h~ \\'lllr.tl (i(.vt.·rnml" nl (H 1'rc f~· 1·n·m The C"tlrnnutiC.:: fuuh 
lhal p:;r.l .a ur lht..• \IIHI O.M PfH\Ith.::-. UdtJIIIHlll of lhc h'rm "C'Cilfll tl 
1\UitHHliiWU~ Bt•d~ ", It provide~ I)Wl It llh. lutk·~ a Ccn1mt M.tiUIOI) bod\ 
II du~~ thH (lltwidc (ur iudU~lUil m C'XChJ't"n of .tn~· spcdft\· l'Od\ 01 t:L.~, 
of hl>dtc~. Thu\ there I~ n(1 merit in I he :-thU\'t.' ~taccmcnt or lht..• Mml\ll \ 
The C'omnuttcc feel~ tluu in 1hc f:Kt ttf l:l~tn im:(u,at1n:lr~ prt,..d,IPri 111 II~~: 
dcfim11on :met 1hc tuthcno rnc3mn~ :\~nb~~ aauJ follow-ed an h'ltiiHU ll• 
the term 111 nHUicr of C'OUUiing t'f 't..'rv~~ .... tnd cntit1cmcnr of rrfH,tLI 
pcn<i,HHIIY t;.cncfic. there j, ncJ JU\1IItt.:.ti1Pr'l both 111 law and m fkl)~t:~ h•1 
~grcgouins notti<,nali~..S hank' and msurancc corpc'r.tiJUn.!<. '.tuch arc ;til 
unamhoguuu,l) >l:lluory bodie< The Comuui1C< os \Omewh;ot <urpri<~d lh.ot 
lhc ruk~ 1'1S·u·•·i., Central Government \C'n.mt~ muving. hl Cc.·ntr;tl 
Autonumou~ Dodic~ <lnd l'tc~·,·cr<u (u.:h as bank! ha\'c ~·en r.c_' tnlcrpH:h:-.1 
·'~ to cau<e unmen<e deprivation of pcn~ionary bencfll< I teo"~ the 
Commincc doc> not agree wuh the ex:-l~nliiOn <>ffercd l:o~ the Mono<lo! 
and recommend< that the matter be cou<odcrcd :ofre~h an<J the l>cncf11 of 
counting or past <ervicc for pcn$1011 be continued to be allowed tn 
emplo~ce< who have JOoncd Union Government Scr- a- afl~r rutton~ on 
scrvocc on n:ollonaliscd banlu/LJC and •·iu-o·trJII-
• 
S9 

' 
r 
l 
ANNEXURE-V 
ALL INDIA PUNJAB NAnONAL BANK OFFICER'S ASSOCIAnON 
!REGISTERED UNDER INDIA~ TRADE UNIONS ACT} 
(AFYII.JA TED TO AffiOC} 
Ref; AlPNBOAI 
Shn M.A Baby, 
Hon 'ble Chairman 
CENTRAL OFFICE 
FLAT NO. 306. THIRD FLOOR 
KlRTl MAHAL 19, RAJINDRA PLACE 
NEW DELHI • 110060 
Dated: 14-8'1997 
Commiuce on Subordmote I.egWation. 
Rajya Sabba Secretariat, 
New Delhi . 
Str. 
Subject: Counting of service on mobilily between the 
departments of the governments and autonomo~ 
bodic•. 
We beseech your mr.lulgcncc on an affair of for reachmg consequence 
10 the working of our constitutional ~ystem whereby the authority of 
Parliament and other legislatur~ and their commmees. more particularly 
the Committees on Subordinate Legislations, is being usurped 
2 Constitution provides for the legislative powers of the Parliament, 
the State Assemblies and other institutions in its various Pans beside$ in 
Part XI read with the Seventh Schedule. In matter of SC>"'ICCS under the 
Union and the States, detailed provisions are contained 1n Pan XIV, 
Article 309 in that Part. mter alia, Provides that Parliamt"nt may regulate 
the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed tO public 
services and posts in connection with 1hc affairs of the Union. It further 
prov1dcs lhat it shall be competent for the President or such person as he 
may di~t to malce rut~ to regula1e the recrmtment and conditions o( 
SC>"'IC:C of persons appomted to public services and posu under the Union 
till proviSion 10 that behalf 1S made by or under an Act of Parliament tt~d 
the rules so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any such 
Act. Bes1de., arbclc 73 provides that, subject to the provisions of tile 
Constitution. the exccuuvc power of the Union shall extend to the matten 
with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws. In 
60 

61 
exercise of this executive power, Govcrnmcnr of India in jts various 
Ministries/Depanm'ents including Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions has issued executive inslructions from time to 
time. Thek pro~lslont or the Constitution, as they are, particularly artlclt 
73, havt becomt 1 co•wenlent de>ise for th~ executive limb of th• 
Covernmtnt to avoid parliam•ntory scrutiny, both at the level of Parliament 
In mautr or prlnclpol l<&lslalioru and the Commln~ of Subordlnatt 
Leglslutlnn In matter of subordinate legislations. The hitherto constitutional 
development in India has witnessed an upsurge of movement. particularly 
in the regime of scrvioc regulations, of more and more reson to the dev":e 
of an1cle 73, instead of following the regular legislative route. by putting in 
place the regulatol)' norms through executive orders. 
3 Government of lnd1a t.<sucd O .M. No. 2MI}S4·Pension Un1t dated 
29.8.1984 "'"h a v1ew to prov1de the benefit of pa.st service in maner of 
pcns1on on movcmcnl between a dcpanmcnt of the Central Govcmmcnl 
and a central autonomous body and between a cenual autonomous body 
and another Central autonomous body. The term "central autonomous 
body" in the sa1d O.M . has been defined to include ccotial Stltutory 
bodies. The said definition of the term remains as originally placed till 
date . O.M l'Oo. 211(10}-S4·P&PW dated 7 2.1986 was issued with a v1cw to 
extend the benefit 1n rclauon to state autonomous bodies resulting mtn the 
benefiJ of entitlement on movement between a depanmcnl of the Central 
or n State Government, o central autonomous body and • Mate 
autonomous body Govetnmcnt of India Issued O.M 28'24-'14-P&PW(D) 
dated 30 S.I99S (couched in the language of a clarification) to the effect 
that all financird mstltution~ in the nntionlised banking and ln$urun<:e 
sector~ shnll not form pan of thi~ giant joint family so assilluously built up 
through succcs..<.ivc O.Ms dated 29.8.198-1 and 7.2.1986. It further sny~ thnt 
all those cases where such benefit has been allowed should be re-opened 
and the benefit allowed to be withdrawn and where the mcurnbcnt has 
already retired, he be allowed to have the continued enJoyment of the 
benefit. 
4. We, wnh a view to put the thing> brieny at this juncture und with a 
request tO allow us to submit further details through in writing and orally, 
make a humble ~ubmis~ion that the Government bas made u;c of its 
executive fiat under article 73 unmindful of the fact that the executive 
orders so issued are subject to the scruuiny of same judic1al tests as the 
laws made by partiameot and the tules framed thereunder arc . O.M. diued 
30.5.95 sufferes from all vices abhorem to the provisions of the 
Constitution particutton particularly Part Ill thereof. 
S We make a further submission that this Commmcc bas all necessary 
jurisdiction under rule W4 and rule 209 of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in the Council of States (Rajra Sabha) in order to 
ensure that the satd order (O.M.) should not be in conflict with the 
provisions of the Constttutton and the general scheme of C.C.S . (Pension) 

62 
Rules, \970 and the pensions ruleSII"egulations of various eentral-l;tate 
autonomous bodies covered under the successive O.M s of 1984 and 1986 
including those of nationalised banking and insurance corporations which 
have been excluded fhrougb O.M. dated 3()'.5.1995. Since the relevant 
O.Ms. have the cffeC1 of amendin~upplernenting the basic law relating to 
pensions, namely. the C.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1970 and analogous pensions 
rules of the State Governments and pensions ruleSII"egulations of aU 
eentrai•Mate autonomous bodies, any suggestion with a view to treat the 
matter as falling with the domain of pure uecutive action and unrelated to 
exercise of legislatrve power shall have the devastating effect of avoiding 
le&"lative scrutiny and an easy escape route for the executive. 
6. In v1cw of the above, we humbly submit that the Committee be kind 
enough to give us an audience to make further oral and wrinen 
submissions in the matter . 
ThankiD& you, 
Yours fa•thfully, 
Sdl· 
(K.O. KHERA) 
General Secretary 

ANNE"A'lJRE· Vl 
BANK EMPLOYEES FEDERATION OF t'iDIA 
PoSI Box No. 2932 
0 P.O. Calculta-700 001 
NM4-SpW7 
Shri M A Baby 
llon'ble Choarntan 
13 Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta 700 001 
Phone: 209232 
Reserve Bank Employees As..<ociauon 
Reserve Bank or India 
6, S>nsad Marg. Kcw Dclhi·IIO 001. 
August 21. 1997 
Ra1ya Sabha C<>mmittcc on Subordinate Legislation 
Sansad Dhswnn. 
NEW DELli! · 110 001. 
lion 'blc Su. 
We 'ubmit h~rcwilh our petition of cousi<.lcratiml Tcgarding tho 
nnponant JliCCc of Subordinate Legislation advcscly afrectillg the scrvtcc 
conditions more partilcular1y the Pensionary benefit> available to the 
Central Government Employees. Il is our considered opinion that the 
notlfic:uiC>n~ is~ued by the Government or India in rcspcot of the clas.~ of 
employees mcmioncd in Clur petition arc not only discriminatory in effect 
boll also cxcc"us the JUrisuiction vested in tlte authority issuing these 
notification~ throu&h different O.M 
We shnll be further than~rul if Jn opportunity is afforded to us rt>r 
elaborMing our vic" on the •object and suhst:lntiatc the same on facts and 
4;ircumstoncc~. 
Th3nking you. 
Encls:-2 Copie> of Petition 
63 
Yours Caithfully, 
Sdt­
(HARISH SHARMA) 
Joiut Secretary 

Koa 'lllc CllolnDIUI 
Jt1.b'a Sabb Commlll~ on Subordinat~ Legislation 
New !Hihl. 
Hon 'ble Sir, 
1\fobilily or Ptrsonnel - StlliT of Cen1ral Go><mmrnt 
O..partn~ents and AutooomoU> Bodies - Cuunling uf Past 
~nice 
We ha•c been ;hocked to learn that the Government oi lndoa, Dc;>artmcnt 
of PcMion and Pensooners' Welfare has on a policy dccrsion notified vodc 
O.M . No. 23124-94-P and PF (B) dated 13th September 1996, has by vortur 
of authority vested in the Government to issue notificatoons having tht 
effect of subordinate legislation, deprived ohe cmplo~tes of Natoonalised 
Banks And Kl\urance Corporations from beong treated at par woth other 
Central Go>crnmenl employees, Central Government Departmental 
employees and employees of different autonomous Bodies, •·i1. 
Univen.uie~ etc in the matter of countmg of •crvice rendered by them in 
their parent institution~ for the purpose of pensionary benefits. Not only 
that even the employees employed such institution which thrive on grant'· 
in-aid by the Governments are alo;o getting the benefit of counting of 
servocc for pension whereas only the employees on Nationnlised Banks and 
lnsurunce ~ector have been singled out for denia l of these benefits. Sir, thos 
type or discriminatoon is not only arbitrary but also an excrcosc to be 
411alificd as colourable exercise exceeding the jurisdiction vested in the 
authority exercising the power Thi~ negates the very objective of principal 
lcgoslauon to extend the benefits equally to all th'e employees under the 
umbrella of Governmental ownel1ihip. Only guidtng principle sbould be 
thllt all the employee! drawong thejr wage~alarics from the Government 
owned on<ututions be treated equally for the purposes of superannuation 
benefits 
2. After the banl:ong and insurance were brought under Governmental 
ownership ond statutory corporations became lc@al creatures to own entire 
Insurance, Reserve Bank of India, State Bank of Indm , lndU$trlal 
Development Bank or India, Unit Trust o! India etc., for optimum use of 
the services of expert mobility of personnel became mcvitable between 
Government and such corporations. Series of insiTUctions arc available m 
various office Memoranda for providing pro-rata protection of Pensionary 
benefits consequent tO such mobility (c.f O.M. No. 26 (18}£W75 elated 
8th April 1976 and O.M No 18111}8.1 Pension Unit daled 29th August, 
198-4). This could be: echieved only by counting the past servia: rendered 
by the pet$0nnel in the institutioM!epanment from where he shifted 

65 
lum,clf w the Government Department or vice-•••r.sa. On the authonty of 
ubrwc-rcfcrr~d to O.M various Government Departments were allowiOl! 
the counting of pn•t service on such mobility. After having decided the 
princ1plcs and objective~. it was surprising thaf by is~uc of an 0 M No. 28' 
2¥!4 ·P & PW (B) dated 30th May 1995, in the name of clarifications, the 
hcneftt or counting of service as was extended to the employees of 
llntionalised bank• and insurance corporations vide 0 .M dated 29th 
,\ugu<t, 1984 was wtthdrawn. 
3. We arc of the considcrc<.l opiruon that singling out ol bank and 
1nsurnncc employee• in StatutO!)' CorpordUOM is patently inC'Orrcct and 
''IOiauvc of con.citutional provtsions The Clarif~Cauom offered have u a 
matter of fac1 omcndcd the original notification which 1S ncnhcr 
permissible nor lcg~l . The following p<~ints need the consideration of 
Commntcc of SuD-ordinate Legislation for reviewing the clarificatory 
notification having the effect of amending the original Act:-
(i) Silence the orig103l nouficauon vide 0. ~1 . l'o. 2811Gil4-
Pcn'lon unit dated 29th :\ugust 1984 dearly states about the 
availability of benefit or counting of past .ervice of the cmrloyc~ 
of all ·Central Autonomous Bndi~'. and term Central 
Autonomou• Body has been defined 10 include all 'Central 
statutory Dndic.~· mean• and includes all statutory ccrporations . 
Banking and Insurance l>einJl incorporated by the Statute, ita 
employees cannot be deprived of the benefits. 
(ii) Exerci5C of authority to discrim•notc employee~ of 
nationali5Cd banks and insurance sector through O.M. dated 30th 
May, 1995 infringes the fundamental right of equahty cnshrimcd in 
Article 14 of Constitution ol India 
(iii) Vide O.M. dated 30th May 1995, all rast cases by which 
counting or service for pension was allowed, the benefit was 
ordered to be withdrawn wherea~ thi• was rctaine.d in respect of 
such employees who hat! already retired before 30th May, 1995 
The Clarification effected Is bad in law as it discriminates between 
one set and another of the same class or employees. 
(iv) We hove already stated earlier that in terms of coristituhonul 
authority Central Govemmcn1 makes rules to regulate the service 
conditionJ of employees 11thieb h•vc lhe force of legislation u the 
authority thereof is derived from the Article 309 of the ccnstitution 
empowering President to make laws to govern the employment 
under Government of India. Thus any executive tn'tructions 
notifted within the ambit of Anicle 309 h:1s the same force as is 
Inherent in an Act of Parliament in force 
lo v1ew nf the foregoing, it is our !tumble sul>mission that th~ Hon'blc 
Commiuce has the jurisdiction to revie"' all tltc O.M. i.<Sucd by the 
Government from lime to tim<: for counting past service for extendtng 
peruionory benefit! and 10 make its findtng known so that the defects in 
the piece or suD-ordinate legislation may be rectified and remedial 
measure• may be proposcd for bringing equality amongst alltlte employees 
under Govemm~ntal employment 

We .shall b~ much obliged if we are afforded an opportumcy to further 
suhMnnlive our views tn the matter 
We pray accordingly. 
Fatthfully Your.<, 
SJ. 
(HARISH SHARMA) 
Joint Secretary 

ANNEXURE-VB 
Teleanm, "PAIUSHAD" 
fax: (91 II) J0t25921.10JSS85 PHA 
(9t II) 3~7112913 PH 
Tdcpj!oo<: 
PARLIAMENT OF ll'<l>lA 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
No. RS S (I }'97-Com I 
PARUAMENT HOUSE ASNEXE, 
N!:W DELHI·IIOOOt 
Subject, 
September 5, 1997 
OFFICE MEMORANDUM 
Representation of All lndta Insurance Employees 
As-sociation and Shri Mahendra Kumar Sharma regarding 
counting of service of pensionary benefits on mobility 
between Centrnl Government Departments and any of the 
l'.'ationaliscd Corporation. in the Insurance and Banki~g 
Scctol'!l-cxanunation by the Committee on Subordinate 
Legts lation, RaJya Sabha. 
The undersigned is directed to refer to Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions (Depanment of Pen.~ion and Pensioners' Welfare) 
O.M. No. 2&1W7-P&PW (B) dated the 7th April. 1997 on the subject 
cited above and state thai the matter has been re-examined and a 
Questionnaire has been prepared for commenu of the Ministry. 
2. It is, therefore. requested that the requisite comments may kindly be 
furnished at the earliest for consideration of the Committee on 
Subordinate Lcgulalioo, Rajya Sabha. 
3. The receipt of this O.M. may kindly be acknowledged. 
67 
Sdi­
(TAPAN CHATTERJEE) 
Deputy Secretary 
Te.l· 3034347 (0) 
6469328 (R) 

To 
68 
'fbe Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, 
(Dcpu of Pension. & Pensioners' Welfare), 
Smt Indu Gupta, Director (FP) 
Jrd Floor, Lox Nayak Bhawan, 
Khan Market 
l'cw Delhi. 
I The Ccnltal Government issued three different O.Ms m 1986 and 
1987 conveymg a decision that the Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank 
of lndiJ and its subsidisrics, the Nationalised Banks, the L1fe Insurance 
Corporauon of India and the GenerAl Insurance Corporation of India sod 
us subsidoaries are "the central autonomous bodies". What criteria was 
followed to declare the!e organisations as "the central autonomous 
bodies'"! Do the mode of their incorporation, their functions as reflected 
through the statute.s under which they were created and the structural 
charoctemues of employment therein have any contributory significance m 
dec1dmg so'! 
2. 0 Ms of 1986 and 1987 provide that the Reserve Bank of India, etc. 
are to t>e treated as central autonomous bodies for the purpose of pro-rata 
pcm1onary ~ncfit under O.M No. 26(18)/EV(B)/75 dated 8.4.1976. 
Docs the O.M. dated 8.4.1976 in any way provide a definition of the term 
"eelllrul autonomous body" as it has been provided in O.M. No 28110/84-
PU dated 29.8.19847 ln the alternative, docs it provide any guideline~ for 
undcrstandmg the scope of a central autonomous body' 
3. Is-the explanatiOn about "central autonomous body" given 10 para 5 
of O.M. No.> 4(12)185-P&PW doted 31..}.1987 is in the COntext of "central 
nutonomou~ hody" referred to In O.M. No. 26(18)/EV(B)/75 dated 
8.4, 1976'1 
4. llnvlng put un organisation in a c;ategory, for example, the central 
autonomous body. ish legally tenable to put the same organisation in the 
category of public sector undertaking as is sought to ~ done VJdc O.M. 
No. 21!124194-P&PW(D) doted 13.9.19%? How does an organisatiOn w1th 
the ~arne Structural chnractensucs. namely, mode of its Incorporation its 
fun"'""' nnd the cmplo~mem thereunder be classified as both the 
autonom<)US body und the public scctur undena,king? 
· 5. Para 4 of 0 M No. 28/10/84-PU dated 29 8.1984 read with O.M . 
1'\o 2S'(IO)I84·1'&PW dated 7 2.1986 provides, mter olia, that "the 
centraV,tate autonomous body" means body which IS financed -.holly or 
sub<tanually from cess or the CcmraVState Government gl1lnts Does the 
term include the privately run schools. colleges, madrasas etc run by the 
rehgiou~ OL SO<:ial organisahons. incorporated as societies, trusts or other 
corporate structures and in rece1pt of 51'Ya or more 1owards ma1ntcnance 
cxpense.s as grants-in-aid from the Central or the State Govcrnmcnt1 
6. h it nccc•sary that profit carnmg should be specifocally prohibited for 
an orgamsation to be a centr•l autonomous bod~ in thc1r chaner/ 

mcmur"noum of as.<ociarion or or her sim1lnr document of mcorporahon1 If 
onv of rhc•c organisations is able ro musrer any profu as reflected through 
its annual income and expendicure account, will it make any difference 
abour such an organisarion bcmg H¢arcd as CcnrraVSratc au1onomous 
body? 
7 Are chcre any Ccncral sratutory bod1cs (mduding the un.-erslllc•) 
wherefor profil earning is specifically prohibired under the Acts v.hcre 
under chey have been consriruced? 
8 Para 4 of O.M dared 29.8.1984 provrdes lhc tlefinlla>n oi the term 
"central autonomous body" in three parts, namely, the general dcfin111on, 
inclus1onary dcfin1110n and exclusionary definition. Having provided chat 
"chc autonomous body" includes a statutory body, 15 11 legally pcrrmss1blr 
lhac rhc inclusionary definition, in face of its specific over-rioong provos1oo, 
should draw shade from che general defin1110n and that way bc 
subordinated tO rhe general descripcive definition? 
9 Besides inscruetions contained under 0 M No 2812~19• P.>.rw 
daced 30.5,1995 and O.M. No. 28/2.VV4-P&PW(B) da1cd 13.9 1996 
detailing ouc thar the Reserve Bank of lmlia, ere arc not che ccnrral 
auconomous bod1es for counting of <erv1cc, is there any other 0 M 
ctlntaimng SJmil:ar instructaon~ m rc)oalion tl) any other statutC'r}· ltody nr 
cia~ of Sial ulory bud1cs? 
10. O.M. No 28114/94-P&PW(B) date<.l 13 Y IY'Jn, :n para 5. rcters to 
an expression "the Nacionalisetl Bank• JnJ other Government F1nanc1al 
Ins111u1ion•" In what conlext, che mi<cdlaneous Bank\ etc. huvc been 
referred ro as chc Government ln<IIIUiiun<"' h 11 bccnusc all uf lbcm arc 
owned and c<mcrullcd by the Govcmmenl? Js i1 because of che face !hal, 
pract•cnlly in rclucion co all che encore capi1nl has been provided by the 
Govcrnmcnc? Js 11 because of chc fnc1 thn1 ac the annual book cl<>sing, chc 
nee profic, If cherc be any, u paid n< d1v1dend 10 chc Cemrnl Govcrumenl 
in concradlscincllon to che granHn·a1d schools, colleges, ere. wherein che 
tneomc, if any, ac the end of the year belongs to rhe social or relig1ous 
cruse mnnagong cho inslirurlon? I~ 11 because of rhe fact chac these financ1al 
1nstirutions also perform ccrcain governmemal and sovereign funclions? 
ll O.M daccd 13.9 1996 again 10 para 5. menuons that "lhese 
organi<auons (naln)naliscd banks etc.) are rrented ac par with public seccor 
undcnakings"'. Are chcre any Government inscrucrion~ or any scacutory 
prov1stons in che realm of labour·managemenl relations dcscnbing any of 
lhcse insucucions belonging to as a public seecor undcnalung cxccpcin_g for 
chrcc 0 Ms of 1986 and 1987 whereunder nalionaliscd banks. ere have 
been decided 10 be belonging to as lhe eencral •uronomous bodies~ 
12. O.Ms. dated 29 8.1984 and 7.2.1986 (serv1ce rendered 1n Central and 
Slarc auconomous bodies 10 be counced on mobilicy), chrce OMs of 1986 
and 1987 (nauonalised banks, ecc. are ccncral auconomous bodies) and 
OMs doled 30.5.1995 and 13.9.1996 (nationalised banks. elc. are nol 
ccnual auconomous bodies and are public seccor undercakings) are 
supplemcncal 10 chc prOviSiOns of che C.C.S (Pension) Rules, 1970 and 
rhus are mlegral pare of chose rules. Is 1t legally permissible and a.s a 
personnel policy ralional 10 provide cwo differenc meanings for che same 

10 
onuty, that 1S, autonomous body in the unified and thus being the same 
legal instrument having the force of law as an Act of Parliament has, that 
is, the C.C.S. (Pension) Rules, 1970 integrated with the above referred 
O.Ms? 
J 
• 

Subject 
-~ ~om~..wn~~ 
~. ~ ~ 11'11 ~ ~ 
'If~ 
Go•ernment of India 
ANNEXURE· VIII 
DepJnmem of Pension and Pensioners' Welfare 
Monistrv of Personnel. Public Grievana:s 
a'nd Pensions, L.N Bhawan. 
l'e" Delho 
3rd October. 1 997 
OFFICE !I!EMORAI\DUM 
Representation of All India IMurancc Employees Associallon 
und Shri Mahendra Kumar Sharma regarding counting of 
service for pensionary benefns on mobilitv between Ccntr•l 
Government Departments and any of the NationJ!o~cu 
Corporation in the Insurance and Banking sector~ -
examination hy the Commiucc on Subordin~tc Leg~< l ~tmn . 
Rajyn Sabha 
A reference is invited to Rajyn Sabha Secrctari~t O.M. No. RS , ~( I ) 'V7· 
Com, I doted the 5th September, 1997, encl11sing a QuestionnJuc. In the 
Qucstionnaorc the issue raised is that service of such Central Government 
employees who moved to financial onstotutions like nationalised honks nnd 
LICIGIC etc., after submitting rcsignntioel, is not counted for pcnsmn 
purposes in the new organisation and similarly a person moving from these 
organisations to Central Government Departments i; not allowed the 
benefit or counting of rast sec-icc togcthcrwith Ccntoal Govcrumcnr 
service 
2. This Dcpartnocnt had given ib comments on this issue carhcr vJ<k 
O.M. No. 2816197-P&PW(B) dated the 7th April. 19'17. However the 
comments arc being given again 
Commtnrs . 
(i) Prior to issue of the instructions during March. 1960, there was no 
provosron for countong of service rend~red by an employee in an 
autonOmOUS orsanisntiOn for the purpose of pension on QbSOrption 
under Central Government. Howe•·er, with a view to encourage 
mobility of scientific personnel from the semi-Government 
autonomous in.titutions to the Government organisations. the 
benefit of counting of past service was extended to such employees 
on their appointment to a pensionable post •·id• orders issued in 
March, 1960. Subsequently, this facility was cktcndcd to ;cicntific 
71 

emp loyees of the Cent ral Government on the.r absorption in 
autonomous bodJes w.e.f. 22.1.1%6. 
(11) The conc(pt for pa)mcnt of pra-rara pens>Onary b~nefits to 
permanent Government servant. on absorptiOn m a Central Public 
Sc"or Undcn"~IAg/Central autonomou; body (individual cases of 
ub>orption) came mto force w .e.{ 16.6.67 v.ith the tssuc of the 
DcpJrtmcnt of E.<pcndiiUrc 0 M 1'\o. F. :'4 IZ)·E-V 66 dated 
16 6 67 Even though tht' Department of Pubhc Fntcr;msc:s (OPE) 
and the DOPT had tssued separate sets oi mstruwon• 'uosequently 
tor p3)mc:nt of pro·rara t:'COSlonary bcncfal~ c~o a'"'"s rpuon m a 
PSU/r\utonomous Bod~, no orders bad ~ccn 1'-llled by the 
Government ttll August, 198-1 for counting of pa>t SCf'ltC rendered 
by a non-setcnh!ic employee under Go,ernmcn• for penSion tn an 
auronomous body or v;cr.,:er53 
(111) A person moving from Central Government Departments to 
Central autonomous bodic> and VII:C·VCTS/1 was allo-..ed the benefit 
of counting of past .crvicr lor pension putposcs under the 
pnw"ions of D&AR'' 0 M No 28110/&~·Pl' dated 29.1!.1984. 
Funher Central Government employees rcsagnmg thclf J<>b to t3ke 
up nppotntmcnt tn public sector undc.nakmg' "•lh proper 
pcrmi5ston were allowed benefits of payment of pw-ratu pcn,iunary 
bctlcfits to them under the orders hy DP&AR/Department o! 
Pcnston &. T'ens!oncrs Welfare The natronaliscd banb mcluding 
RDI/SDI and Life Insurance Corporat ron includmg GIC and tts 
subsidiaries did not figures specifically tn those <>rders Due to the 
llbove rca.sons, a Centra l Governme nt emp loyee moving to the 
nnunna llsed b~n k s inclu d ing SBI and RBI 3nd I.IC includmg GIC 
were not geuing entitled for counting of pa.~t <crvicc nor they were 
gcu ing enti tled 10 pro·rala pensionary benefit,. In vtcw of this and 
to facilitate the Ccntrnl Government crnpluyccs moving to 
Nauonaltscd Dan ks and Financial Institutions like LIC, the 
Department of PenSion & P W ISSued O.M No. 4ifVH4·P&PW 
dated 14 .S. 1986 wherein the N•tkmahsed Banks were declared 
Central autonomou• bod ies for the specific purpose of allowing the 
benefit of payment of pro-rata pcosiooary benefits to such 
empiO)Ccs "'ho resigned from Central Govt. scr>oio:: with proper 
permission. Sub.~equently, similar orders were is.<ued for other 
FiMncial Institutions like LIC, GIC and its substdianes The above 
orders although tssued tn 1986 did not mention about the 
applicabtlity of mobihty orders dated 29.8.1984 to public sector 
banks and Fmaneial Institutions like UC etc. due to the fact that 
these financial org3nisations are similar to public sector 
undertakings and may ha•e thetr own set of rules r.:garding 
payment or pensionary benefits 10 lheu employees. which are 
dtfferent from thase followed by Central Government Departments 
and Central autonomous bodies. Further, these or~anWltions do not 
• 
' 

73 
fulfil the crttcn~ laid down in pllra-4 of the O.M. dated 29.8.1984 
whtch provides that more than 50o/o of the expenditure of the 
nutonomous body shaU be met from Central Government Grants 
or ccs.-; 
(Jv) LJter on, "hen II C.lme to the knowledge or this Depll. that some 
Central Government Oepanments out or confusion are allowing the 
benefit of counting of past servtce of some employees who have 
JOtned Central Government servtce after puuing in service tn Banks/ 
L!Cs etc. inspire of the fact that neither the O.M dated 29.8.1984 
nor the subsequent orders dated 14 5.1986. 3 .. 1.1987 and 10.11.1987 
provnk:d for counting of scr.·ice rendered in Nationalised Banks/ 
L!C etc . togetherwith Ccnltul Government service and via· vasa. 11 
w~ considered e=nual to clarify to all administrative authorities 
that Central Government employees on abwrption in Nationalised 
Banks and Finunctal lnsutuuons hke LIC and ••itt-versa are not 
entitled to counting c! past service for penston purposes together 
with service in Iauer orsnmsauon Accordingly this Depanment 
issued clarific~tions Vldt 0 M No 2&/2.li94-P&PW(B) dated 
30.3.1995 und 11 9 I QC}Ii 
(v) Coptc$ ot rck,ant order> • .s per list below arc enclosed for 
pcru•al.-
1 No 2811111!!4·PU 
2. No 4i!IIM4· P&PW 
3. Nu. 41141\lS·I'&PW 
4. No. 4123/87-P&PW 
S. No. 28124194·P&PW(Bl 
6. --<lo-
dared 
29.8.1984 
14.5.1986 
3.4.1987 
JO 11.1987 
:W.5.1995 
13.9.1996 
(vi) It may be seen from the above that Nationalised Banks/LIC have 
status similar to the Public Sector Undertak ings. The service 
rendered in PSU~. is not treated as qualifying service for pension 
under CCS (Pension) Rules. These either have no Pension Scheme 
or have Pension Scheme which are diUerent from those followed by 
Central Government Depanmenr/Central Autonomous Bodies. 
Funhcr, the benefit of counting of service is being allowed on 
mobility of pel'5onnel from Central Government Deptts., to Central 
Autonomous Bodies which generally non-profit making 
organi,ations and expenditure or these is met to the tune of more 
than 50% (rom Central Government Grants or cess which is not the 
case wttb Nationalised Banks and Financial Institutions like LIC. 
Due to the above reasons, the service rendered in nationalised 
banks and LIC etc. cannot be counted for pension purposes in the 
Government . 
3. Thi• ~,>sue was al•o raised in the 38th Parliamentary Standing 
Commutee on !lome Affairs on the demands for grant~ c! the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions for the year 

74 
1997·98. AI rhc mslance of rhe Committee rhis issue is bemg re-examined 
in consuhnrion wirh lhc Department of Expenditure. Ministry of Finance 
and the Depanmcnt of Economic Affairs. Any decision whenever taken 
will be communicated 10 lhe RaJya Sabha Secrerariar. 
To 
Rdjya Sabha Sccrcrariat, 
Parliament llouo;e Anncxe, 
NEW DELJII-110 001. 
Sdf. 
(INDU GUPTA) 
DIRECTOR (FP) 
Telc; 4624802 

OFFICE MEMORANDUM 
ANNEXURE-IX 
Dated U.3.98 
Sub: Representations regarding counting of past service for pensionary 
benefitS on mobility between Central Govt. Departments and any of 
the Statutory Corporations in fnsuranee and Banking 
sectors-Examination by the Committee on Subordinate Legislation. 
Rajya Sabha. 
The undersigned is directed to refer to Rajya Sabha Secretariat's letter 
No. RS. S (1)197-Com. I dt . 6th March. 1997 on the subject cited above 
J and to say that views of this Dcpanmcnt on points raised in Questionnaire 
sent with Rajya Sabba Secn.'s O.M. dated 5.9.1997 are as under:-
(i) Prior to issue of O.M . dated 14 5.86 and 3.4.87 the Central Govt 
employees "'oving over to Public Sector Undenakings ,.,ith proper 
permission 'NCrt entitled for payment of pro-rata pensionary benefits 
and Central Govt. cmrloyees moving over to Central autooomom 
bodie• were enwlcd for grnnt of pro-rmu pensionary benefits or the 
counting of serv•cc as opt<'d by them. The Central Govt employees 
moving over tO Nallonali,;cd Banks. RBI/SBI and Insurance Corpn. 
were neither entuled fur pro-rara pensionary benefits nor were 
entitled !nr counting of service as these organisations were neither 
treated u Public Sector Undertakings nor as Central autonomous 
bodies These organisations could not be declared as public sector 
undcrtnkings because although the working and administratiVe <ct 
up of these organi~ation~ wu~ similar to public sector undertakings 
but these Financial Inslitutions did not come under the purview of 
D/o Public Enterprises and the terminology PSU could only be 
used !or the organisations coming under the purview of above 
Department. The above organisation• could not be treated as 
Central autonomous bodies for the purpose of counting of servie~: 
because these did not fulfil the definition laid down in O.M. dated 
8.4.76 and 29.8.84 for same. Funher, as these organisations were 
similar to public sector undertakings it was decided in 1986-87 to 
treat them M Central autonomous bodies for the specific purpose of 
payment of pro-Mra pensionary benefits to Central Govt. employees 
moving over to these organisations with proper perm•s.•ion on the 
lines being paid to public sector undertakings. It may be mentioned 
here that the Statutory bodies which fulfil the definition la1d down 
in O.M. dated 29.8.84 arc treated as Central autonomous bodic.• for 
purpose of counting or past service either way. 
(ii) The O.M. No. 26(18)/E.V . (B)f75. dt. 8.4.76 provide• definiuon for 
autonomous body in para 20 wbich provides that "semi Govt 
Institution which is financed wholly or mainly from cess or Central 
Govt. ,rants•. The above defmition has been 'further elaborated in 
O.M. 28110184-PU, dt. 29.8.84 to make mainly clear that more than 

lo 
50 IX' cent of the expenditure of autonomous body shall be met 
from cess or Central Govt. grants and it clarified that Central 
Statutory Dodies or Society Registered under Societies Rcgistralion 
Act, 1860 and Central University satisfying above criteria will be 
treated "' Central autonomous body. The public 5tttOr 
undcrtakin&s were excluded because these cannot fulfil the criteria 
rcgardmg meetmg of more 1han 50 per cenl of expenditure from the 
cess or Central Gov l . granls. 
(iio) The definnion of Central aulonomous body g"·en in para 5 of O.M. 
No. 4(12YS5-P&PW, dated 31.3.87 is in further elabora1ion of 
definnion given on O.M No 26(18)/EVns.pu, dt 8-4-1976 and 
O.l\1 Ko. 28-10-84-PU. dated 29.8.1984. 
(iv) 11 has also been clarified above 1bat Public Sector Bonks and 
Fmon .. al lns111u11ons like LICIGIC although these have working 
and administrauve set up similar to public sector undenakmgs but 
C'dnnot be declared as public sector undertakings because these do 
not c<lrne under the purview of D/o Public Enterpmcs whoch gives 
above terminology for organisations coming under !lS purvocw. ll 
ha• already been stated that to give bcnefi1 to the Central Govt. 
employees JOining 1hese organisa tions with proper permossion lhe 
henefit of pro-rata pensionary benefits there was no alternative but 
tt> declare these orga.nisations as Central nutonomou• bodies for the 
specific purpose of payment of pro-rata pensionary benefits on the 
lines being. paid to emp loyees moving over t<l puhllc sect"' 
undcrtakong•. 
(v) Only aided Schools/Universities are treated as Cen1ral autono mOU$ 
bod ies which are re<:eoving more 1han 50% grant from Centra l or 
Stare Govts and have substamial control of Ccn1ral or Swte Govt. 
and whose Memorandum of Association/bye law. etc. contain 
provision for c-omplying WJlh Govt. directives for carrying out their 
business in achieving the objectives for which the organisation' were 
cstnbli>hcd The other Schools arc not treated as nuwnomous 
bodic< for the purpose of 0 M dated 29 .8.~~-
(vil Thh Department O.M dt. 31.3.81 provides thai Central 
autonomous body is generally non-profit making organisa1ion 
Generally commercial organisations like pubhc sector undertakings 
or Public Sector Danks. LIC. etc. which are consodered to be profit 
making organisallons have admimstrative set up 4nd service Rules 
lor employees tneludiog Pa)' Scale, e1c. different from those beins 
followed by Central Govt. Departments and Central au1onomOU1 
bodic$ and <!$ such these cannot be treated at par with ~ntral 
Govt DepartmenL'Y'Central autonomous bodies for purpo<e ol 
counting of service. 
(•i•) Tht5 Department has no information wherein Sta1u1ory Body 
oncludin~ Universities ha,·e been prohibited to earn profit under tht 
ACI. 
(vm) The part "B" of th<o deftoition wluch is ;tatod as mclusoonary part 
flows from part "A" which is stated as general definilion 

I 
77 
Independently the wording "Central Autonomous Dody include• 
Central Statutory Body" will have no meaning because to maLe pan 
"B" effective, lhc pan "A" i.e. general definition will have to be 
satisfied- Hence Public Sector Banks. RBI. SBI. LIC/GIC. etc 
cannot be treated as Central autonomow. body because these do not 
satisfy the firs1 ponion of the definition wherein limiiS rclatmg tu 
substantial control of Oovt. over autonomous body hn• l>ccn 
prescribed. · 
(ix) All the instructions issued by this Department regarding st~tu• of 
the above Fi03ncial Institutions arc based on O.M. of the 
Oepanment of Public Enterprise wherein, wbilc forwarding li<t of 
public sector undenakings it was stated that Financial Con1panicv 
Financial Institutions have been in the mailing list of public sector 
undertak ings but these do not fall under purview or order$ issued by 
Bureau of Public Enterprises. This Department have not issued anv 
specific orders for any other Sta1utory Body or class of Statutory 
Bodies as only those Statutory Bodies arc treated as covered under 
mobility orders for benefit of counting of past service which fulfil 
the definition laid down in orders. 
(x) Nationalised Banks, etc. have been referred to as Oovt. lnwtuuon• 
because Government holds the major share therein. Be<id~s at><"~· 
to bring any new sector under the policy of counting of serv•cc 
togetherwitb OoV1. service and ••a-versa, reciprocal arrangement i• 
required to be made bBSCd on scrvic<: rules. etc of thc<e 
organisations. With the existing G•IVt. policy aimed ot \tructurnl 
reform in financial and industria l sectors, chcre appears to be no 
room for reciprocal arrangement in the case of Public Sector Dank< 
RBI, SBI, LIC and PSU~. etc 
(xi) A copy of office of Comptroller & Auditor General's 0.0 lcucr 
No. 4092-N .3/20-84-Vol. II. dated 28.11 1985 is enclosed where in 
O.M. dated 30.7.1983 from Bureau of Public Enterpri$C ha~ been 
enclosed. The BPE ha.< listed Financia l Compan icVFinanci: tl 
Institutions as Public Sector Undertaki1tgs althou gh thcs~ <lo not 
conte under the purview of orders of that Dep~rtmem. 
(xii) It has already been clarified in preceding paragr~phs that nlthough 
Nationalised Banks, RBI, SBI, LIC, etc. do not come under the 
purview of Department of Public Enterprises b\lt these 
organisations have working and administrative set up \in11lar to 
Public Sector Undenakings and •• such arc treated at par with 
Public Sector Undcrt3king< for 1 he purpose of CCS(P) Rules. 1972 
or related orders. 
'2. The representations dated 14.8.1987 and '21.8.1997 from Shri K I) 
Khera and Shri Harish Sharma hove be•:o examined and all the i.suc' 
rni.scd in their represcntotiOIIS have been Jarified above. It may also be 
mentioned here that contention of Shri K.D. !<hera and Shn Hnrish 
Sharma that "Nationalised Bonks and lm umncc Compaoics" have been 
excluded through O.M. No. 281241'.>4·P&I'W(B), dated 30.5.95 from the 
purview of O.M. No. 28110184-PU dated 29.8.1984 ls not correct. 
Nationalised Banks including LIC , RBI. SBI, etc ., were never brought 
under the purview of O.M. doted 29.8.1984. On receiving mformation thnt 
emp loyees join ing Central Oovt. service after rendering service in nbovc 
organizations nrc being given benefit of counting of service hy <orne 

78 
Departments by mtsmterpreting the ordeB, this Department issued 
clari!icatory O.Ms dated 30.5.1995 and 13.9.1996. 
3. As regards reply to recommendation of Parliamentary Standing 
Commincc on Home AffaiB in 38th Report, the maner has been 
examined m consultation with Minisll"V of Finance and is still under 
consideration . · 
4. Hindi version will follow. 
To 
The Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
(Shri Tapan Chauerjcc, Dy. Secretary) 
Parliament House Anncxc, 
NEW DELHI-110 001. 
Enclosure 20 Copie.oJ. 
Sdl· 
{INDU GUPTA) 
DIRECTOR (FP) 