COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
 
HUNDRED AND SIXTY-NINTH REPORT
 
(Presented on --------------, 2007)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
-------, 2007/-------- (Saka)
 
C O N T E N T S
                                               
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
  
2.INTRODUCTION
  
3.REPORT
  
I. The Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules, 2002.
  
II. The Delhi Advocates’ Welfare Fund Rules, 2001.
  
III. The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Conditions of Services of
Officers and Other Employees) Regulations, 2000.
 
 
IV. The Transport Handling and Storage of Dangerous Goods in Bombay Port
Regulations, 1994.
 
 
V
 
 
 
The Small Industries Development 
Bank of India (Pension) Regulations, 2002.
  
4.SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
  
5.MINUTES*
 
* To be enclosed later
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(CONSTITUTED ON THE 4TH SEPTEMBER, 2006)

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
         
         
1.         Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla                Chairperson
2.         Prof. P.J. Kurien
3.         Dr. Radhakant Nayak
4.         Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
5.         Ms. Mabel Rebello
6.         Shri Vikram Verma
7.         Shri Surendra Lath
8.         Mahendra Mohan
9.         Shri Penumalli Madhu
10.       Shri N. Jothi
11.       Shri  M.V. Mysura Reddy
12.       Shri Ali Anwar
13.       Shri  Harendra Singh Malik
14.       Shri  R. Shunmugasundaram   
15.      Shri Abani Roy
 
         
          SECRETARIAT
 
1.       Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
2.       Shri Deepak Goyal, Director
3.       Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Deputy Director
4.       Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Assistant Director
5.       Shri R.P. Shukla, Committee Officer
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
1.       I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been authorized by the
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Hundred and Sixty-Ninth Report of
the Committee.
 
1.2
       The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the ______, 2007.
 
1.3     The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various Rules/Regulations and
issues, relating to them along with the comments received from the Government.   The observations and
recommendations of the Committee are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.
 
 
NEW DELHI
----------, 2007
DR. (SHRIMATI) NAJMA A.
HEPTULLA                                                            
                                                                                                        Chairperson
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation,
                                                                                                                  Rajya
Sabha

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
 
 
 
 
 
 
     I
 
Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules-2002
 
          The Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules, 2002 framed under the Securitisation  & Reconstruction of
Financial Assets & Enforcement of Security Interest Ordinance, 2002 were examined and a questionnaire was
forwarded to the Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) on the 24th November, 2003, to which the Ministry replied
on the 7th May, 2004. The Committee considered the Ministry’s reply at its meeting held on 17 th November, 2005
and decided to seek further clarification on point No.1 (Rule 2 (d) defining ‘Approved Valuer’). The Ministry vide
their communication dated 29 th November, 2006 provided the requisite clarification and also gave details of the
changes carried out by the Ministry on the other points on Committee’s suggestion.
 
2.       The points referred to the Ministry, their comments/clarifications and their Action Taken on each point are
reproduced below: -
 
1.       Point raised- Rule 2(d) -
“Approved valuer” means a valuer  as approved by the Board of Directors or Board of Trustees of the
secured creditor, as the case may be.
Should the approved valuer  not be duly qualified; what is the justification for giving full discretion to the
secured creditor in this regard?
 
          Ministry’s 
comments : (7.5. 2004)
Approved valuer means the professional who is qualified to value the property for a fee.  It is difficult to
work out clear-cut definition making exhaustive list of approved valuers  in different fields and types of properties
that are to be valued.   It is, however, suggested that banks and financial institutions may be advised to utilize the
services of valuers through Institution of Valuers  who claimed to be the only registered body in the country and
their members are bound by code of conduct prescribed by it.  They are covered by fee prescribed by the
Government under Rule 8C of the Wealth Tax Act and also by CBDT.
 
 
Action Taken by the 
Ministry : (29.11.2006)
In terms of Rule 8(5) of Security Enforcement Rules, 2002, before effecting sale of immovable property, the
authorized officer is required to obtain valuation of the property from an approved valuer and in consultation with
the secured creditor, fix the reserve price of the property.  Chapter VII-B (Section 34 AB) of Wealth Tax Act, 1957

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
provides for registration of valuers.  Any person who possesses the qualifications prescribed under Rule 8A of
Wealth Tax Rules, 1957, may apply to the Chief Commissioner or Director General for being registered as a valuer
under the Wealth Tax Act, 1957.  In terms of Rule 8A ibid, different qualifications have been prescribed for valuers
of different classes of assets (like for agricultural land, for plantations, for forests, for mines & quarries, for plant
and machinery, for immovable property other than agricultural land, plantations etc.).  We may not have objection
in suitably modifying the definition of Approved Valuer, “to mean a person registered as a valuer  under Section 34
AB of Wealth Tax Act, 1957 and approved by the Board of Directors or Board of Trustees of the secured creditor,
as the case may be”.
 
2.       Point raised- Rule 4(1)
Where the possession of the secured assets to be taken by the secured creditor are movable property in
possession of the borrower, the authorized officer shall take possession of such movable property in the presence of
two witnesses after a Panchanama drawn and signed by the witnesses as nearly as possible in Appendix-I to these
rules
Are these two witnesses, the witnesses, of the secured creditor or they are the public/independent witnesses;
should the rule not clarify on this point?
 
          Ministry’s 
comments : (7.5. 2004)
Witnesses could be any one.  Flexibility in this matter is desirable and is recognized by the legislation as well
as judiciary.   No clarification in the Rule is necessary, as the present provision does not confine witnesses to
specific classes of persons.
 
3.       Point raised- Rule 4(3)
The authorized officer shall keep the property taken possession under sub-rules (1) either in his own custody
or in the custody of any person authorized or appointed by him, who shall take as much care of the property in his
custody as an owner of ordinary prudence would, under the similar circumstances, take of such property.
                            
 
This rule involves further delegation of power by the authorized officer to any person authorized or appointed
by him without fixing any responsibility either to the authorized officer or the person so authorized or appointed by
him in case there is any damage to the movable property in custody inadvertently.   Should the rule not vest ultimate
responsibility on the authorised officer even in case where he has authorized some body in this behalf?
 
Ministry’s comments : (7.5. 2004)
In terms of Rule 4(3), the Authorised  Officer shall take as much care of the property in his custody as owner
of ordinary prudence.  Further as per Rule 4(4), the Authorised Officer shall take steps for preservation and
protection of secured assets and insure them, if necessary, till they are sold or otherwise disposed of.  Therefore
even though the Authorised Officer is empowered to entrust the possession to others; he is still responsible for acts
of the custodian appointed by him to keep the assets.  Moreover, in terms of Section 19 of the Act, if the DRT or
DRAT holds the possession of secured assets by the secured creditor as wrongful and directs the secured creditor to

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
return such assets to the borrower, such borrower shall be entitled to payment of such compensation and costs as
may be determined by the DRT or DRAT.  Hence, no specific provision, as contemplated by the Committee is
necessary.
 
4.       Point raised- Rule 5
Valuation of movable secured assets: After taking possession under sub-rule (1) of the Rule 4 and
in any case before sale, the authorized officer shall obtain the estimated value of the movable secured
assets and thereafter, if considered necessary, fix in consultation with the secured creditor, the reserve
price of the assets to be sold in realization of the dues of the secured creditor.
While the rule envisages consultation with the secured creditor; why the borrower is not involved at all in
fixing the reserve price of the assets to be sold in realization of the dues of the secured creditor?
 
          Ministry’s 
comments : (7.5. 2004)
In the light of the Supreme Court observations in Haryana Financial Corporation V.Jagadamba  (2002) 110
Comp. Case 20 (SC), notice of intended sale to the defaulting borrower is sufficient and any procedure requiring the
defaulting borrower to be associated or consulted in every stage in the sale of secured assets will place unnecessary
restrictions in the exercise of the powers vested with the secured creditors.   Further, in terms of Rule 6(1), the
Authorised Officer is expected to secure the maximum sale price of the property to be sold.
 
5.       Point raised- Rule 6(3)
Sale by any methods other than public auction or public tender, shall be on such terms as may be settled
between the parties in writing.
Shouldn’t the settlement between the parties before being finalized be conveyed to the borrower; Secondly
should the terms settled between the parties not be required to be kept open for the sake of transparency?
 
          Ministry’s comments : (7.5. 2004)
As at 4 above.  To add, the Rules 6 and 9 provide for sufficient transparency of the transactions of sale.  The
authorized officer is expected to secure the maximum sale price and shall serve to the borrower a notice of thirty
days for sale of secured assets including public notice in Newspapers in case of public auction or invitation of
tenders from public.  Further, borrower or secured creditor is not prohibited from participation in the sale process,
i.e. he can bid and purchase the secured assets.
 
6.       Point raised- Rule 8(2)
The possession notice as referred to in sub-rule (1) shall also be published in two leading
newspapers, one in vernacular language having sufficient circulation in that locality, by the authorized
officer.
The rules does not specify within how much period of taking over possession of the property the possession
notice shall be published in the newspaper; Whether Government have any objection in prescribing about this
aspect in the rules?

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
 
          Ministry’s comments : (7.5. 2004)
In view of the last para of the Appendix IV prescribing the form of the possession notice to the borrower and
possession notice in two leading newspapers for the public in general for cautioning against dealing with such
property, these notices are required to be given simultaneously.   For clarity purpose, this can be considered to be
provided for it in the Rule.
 
Action Taken by the Ministry : (29.11.2006)
The Notice regarding taking over the possession of the property should be issued as soon as possible but not
later than 7 days from the date of taking over possession of the property.  The Rule may read as follows:
Rule 8(2)
“The possession notice as referred to in sub-rule (1) shall also be published as soon as possible but in any
case not later than 7 days from the date of taking possession,  in two leading newspapers, one in vernacular
language having sufficient circulation in that locality, by the authorized officer.”
         
7.       Point raised- Rule 8(3)
In the event of possession of immovable property is actually taken by the authorized officer, such
property shall be kept in his own custody or in the custody of any person authorized or appointed by him,
who shall take as much care of the property in his custody as a owner of ordinary prudence would, under
the similar circumstances, take such property.
 
This rule involves further delegation of power by the authorized officer to any person authorized or appointed
to any person authorized or appointed by him without fixing any responsibility either on the authorized officer or
the person so authorized or appointed by him in case there is any damage to the immovable  property in custody
inadvertently. Should the rule not vest ultimate responsibility on the authorized officer even in case where he has
authorized somebody in this behalf?
         
Ministry’s comments : (7.5. 2004)
In terms of Rule 4(3), the Authorised officer shall take steps for preservation and protection of secured assets
and insure them, if necessary, till they are sold or otherwise disposed of.  Therefore even though the Authorised
officer is empowered to entrust the possession to others; he is still responsible for acts of the custodian appointed by
him to keep the assets.  Moreover, in terms of Section 19 of the Act, if the DRT or DRAT hold the possession of
secured assets by the secured creditor return such assets to the borrower, such borrower shall be entitled to payment
of such compensation and costs as may be determined by the DRT or DRAT.  Hence, no specific provision, as
contemplated by the Committee is necessary.
 
 
8.       Point raised- Rule 8(4)
The authorized officer shall take steps for preservation and protection of secured assets and insure

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
them, if necessary till they are sold or otherwise disposed off.
Can the Authorised Officer not be made responsible for preservation and protection of secured
assets rather then merely saying that he shall “take steps”?
          Ministry’s comments : (7.5. 2004)
In terms of Rule 4(3), the Authorised officer shall take as much care of the property in his custody as owner
of ordinary prudence.   Further as per Rule 4(4), the Authorised Officer shall take steps for preservation and
protection of secured assets and insure them, if necessary, till they are sold or otherwise disposed of.  Therefore
even though the Authorised officer is empowered to entrust the possession to others; he is still responsible for acts
of the custodian appointed by him to keep the assets.  Moreover, in terms of Section 19 of the Act, if the DRT or
DRAT holds the possession of secured assets by the secured creditor as wrongful and directs the secured creditor to
return such assets to the borrower, such borrower shall be entitled to payment of such compensation and costs as my
be determined by the DRT or DRAT.  Hence, no specific provision, as contemplated by the Committee is
necessary.
 
9.       Point raised- Rule 8(5)
Before effecting sale of the immovable property referred to in sub-rule (1) of rule 9, the authorized
officer shall obtain valuation of the property from an approved valuer and in consultation with the
secured creditor, fix the reserve price of the property and may sell the whole or any part of such
immovable secured asset by any of the following methods.
Will it not be reasonable to include the borrower also in the process of fixing the reserve price of the
property?
 
          Ministry’s comments : (7.5. 2004)
In the light of the Supreme Court observations in Haryana Financial Corporation Vs. Jagadamba (2002) 110
Comp. Case.20 (SC), notice of intended sale to the defaulting borrower is sufficient and any procedure requiring the
defaulting borrower to be associated or consulted in every stage in the sale of secured assets will place unnecessary
restrictions in the exercise of the powers vested with the secured creditors.  Further, in terms of Rule 6(1), the
Authorised Officer is expected to secure the maximum sale price of the property to be sold.
 
10.     Point raised- Rule 8(6) proviso (c)
 Provided that if the sale of such secured assets is being effected by either inviting tenders from the public or
by holding public auction, the secured creditor shall cause a public note in two leading newspapers one in
vernacular language having sufficient circulation in the locality by setting out the terms of sale, which shall
include,
     (c) reserve price, below which the property may not be sold.
The word “may” should be replaced by the word “shall” to make the provisions certain that the property shall
not be sold below reserve price.
Ministry’s comments : (7.5. 2004)
In terms of second proviso to sub-rule (2) of Rule 9, if the Authorised office fails to obtain a price higher than

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
the reserve price, he may, with the consent of the borrower and the secured creditor effect the sale at such price.  
Otherwise, by virtue of first proviso to sub-Rule (2) of Rule 9, no sale of immovable property shall be confirmed, if
the amount offered by sale price is less than the reserve price.   The exception to sale below the reserve price with
the consent of the secured creditor as well as borrower is to meet the situation when the property is not likely to
fetch the price reserved in view of the market condition.   The purpose behind having the word “may” is that it
would enable the secured creditor to sell the property and realize the dues.  It would not be possible if the word
“shall” were used.  Using the word “shall” will mean that property shall not be sold below the reserve price.   As
regards any protection for such sales, it is held that protection to secured creditor is the consent given by the
borrower.  Hence, the use of the word ‘may’ in the Rule is apt.
11.     Point raised- Rule 8(8) 
Sale by any methods other than public auction or public tender shall be on such terms as may be
settled between the parties in writing.
Should the settlement between the parties before being finalized be conveyed to the borrower; Secondly
should the terms settled between the parties not be required to be kept open for the sake of transparency?
 
 
 
          Ministry’s comments : (7.5. 2004)
          As at 4 above.  To add, the Rules 6 and 9 provide for sufficient transparency of the transactions of sale.  The
authorized officer is expected to secure the maximum sale price and shall serve to the borrower a notice of thirty
days for sale of secured assets including public notice in Newspapers in case of public auction or invitation of
tenders from public.  Further, borrower or secured creditor is not prohibited from participation in the sale process,
i.e. he can bid and purchase the secured assets.
 
12.     Point raised- Rule 9(1)
 Time of sale, Issue of sale certificate and delivery of possession, etc. – (1) No sale, of immovable
property under these Rules shall take place before the expiry of 30 days from the date on which the
public notice of sale is published in newspapers as referred to in the proviso to sub-rule (6) or notice of
sale has been served to the Governor.
Different newspaper may publish the public notice on different dates.  
How the period of 30 days is computed
in such cases?
          Ministry’s 
comments : (7.5. 2004)
The sale of immovable property can take place only after the process of serving/publication of notice is
completed.  Hence, the period of 30 days will be reckoned only from the notice last served or published, as the case
may be.
13.     Point raised- Rule 9(4)
The balance amount of purchase price payable shall be paid by the purchaser to the authorized
officer on or before the fifteenth day of confirmation of sale of the immovable property or such extended
period as may be agreed upon in writing between the parties.

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
It is not possible to prescribe a fixed time limit instead of providing for such extended period as may be
agreed upon in writing between the parties so as to complete the transaction within specified period thereby not
leaving any room for uncertainty?  The time limit within which the parties should decide should also be specified.
Ministry’s comments : (7.5. 2004)
This is a discretion provided to the secured creditor to accept payment for sale of immovable property even
after the statutory period of 15 days depending on the merit of the case.  Otherwise, the fixed period may, in some
cases, fail the sale transition even if the case merits extension of time for payment beyond prescribed time limit.  
Hence, the flexibility.
14.     Point raised- Rule 9(7)
Where the immovable property sold is subject to any encumbrances, the authorized officer may, if he thinks
fit, allow the purchaser to deposit with him the money required to discharge the encumbrances and any interest due
thereon together with such additional amount that may be sufficient to meet the contingencies or further cost,
expenses and interest as may be determined by him.
(a)  If the property sold is subject to any encumbrance, why the purchaser has been made liable to pay for
discharging such encumbrances?
(b) The rule confers wide discretion upon the authorized officer in determining additional amount that may be
sufficient to meet the contingencies of further cost, expenses and interest without any approval or control of either
the Board of Directors of the secured creditor; should there not be some checks to avoid its misuse?
          Ministry’s 
comments : (7.5. 2004)
(a )  The person, who purchases the property, takes it subject to the subsequent encumbrances, if any, it
possess, with the full knowledge thereof.   Hence, if he desires to have the property free of encumbrance, he shall
take steps to get the encumbrance discharged.  This is, therefore, an enabling provision.  Also, it may be noted that
in terms of sub-Rules (8) to (10), the authorized officer, who received the payment to the party entitled to the
payment pursuant to release of encumbrance, deliver property free of encumbrance (known to the secured creditor)
to the purchaser and issue sale certificate indicating the sale free of any encumbrance known to the secured.  Thus,
it is the choice of the purchase to purchase the property subject to encumbrance or free of encumbrance.
(b ) The suggestion of the Committee can be considered i.e. to provide for approval of the secured
creditor as to the additional amount required from the purchaser to discharge the subsequent encumbrance.
Action Taken by the Ministry : (29.11.2006)
The authorized officer is a responsible officer who will discharge his functions strictly in accordance with
law.  When a property is sold subject to any encumbrances, there may be some expenditure to discharge the
encumbrances and to meet contingencies of further costs.  The authorized officer must have the discretion to
determine the amount.  To make such determination subject to the approval of the Board of Directors or the Board
of Trustees would only mean further delay and adding another layer of decision making to what is a normal
administrative matter.  Government is of the view that there is no need to add a layer of approval by the Board of
Directors or the Board of Trustees in order to check possible misuse.  If, in any case, misuse is brought to the notice
of the Board of Directors or the Board of Trustees, they could always revise the order of the authorized officer or
take suitable action against him.  We should not add more and more layers to decision making in what are purely
administrative matters.  The only safeguard that we may add to Rule 9(7) is making a proviso that if any money

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
remains unspent out of the deposit made by the purchaser, after meeting the cost of removing encumbrances and
contingencies, that amount shall be returned to the purchaser.  It is therefore, suggested that following proviso may
be added below sub-rule (7) of Rule 9.
“Provided that if after meeting the cost of removing encumbrances and contingencies there is any surplus
available out of the money deposited by the purchaser such surplus shall be paid to the purchaser within 15 days
from the date of finalisation of the sale”
 
15.     Point raised- Rule 9(8)
On such deposit of money for discharge of the encumbrances, the authorized officer may issue or cause the
purchaser to issue notices to the persons interested in or entitled to the money deposited with him and take steps to
make the payment accordingly.
Should the word “may” in the above stated rule not be replaced by the word “shall” to make it obligatory for
the authorised officer or purchaser to issue notices to the interested or entitled persons?
          Ministry’s comments : (7.5. 2004)
The suggestion of the committee seems to be reasonable and can be considered.
Action Taken by the Ministry : (29.11.2006)
In the Rule 9(8), the word ‘may’ may be substituted by the word ‘shall’.
16.     Point raised- Rule 10(1)
The Board of Directors or the Board of  Trustees, as the case may be, may appoint in consultation
with the borrower any person (hereinafter referred to as the Manager) to manage the secured assets the
possession of which has been taken over by the secured creditor.
(a)  Should the word “may” not be replaced by the word “shall” in the rule to make it obligatory for the secured
creditor to associate the borrower also in the appointment of the manager?
(b) Should some qualifications not be prescribed for the person to be appointed as Manager?
          Ministry’s comments : (7.5. 2004)
(a)      The suggestion of the Committee may be accepted for a limited extent of consultation.   Association, in the
sense of his approval, will be an hindrance to the process of appointing the Manager.
(b)     The suggestion of the Committee can be considered.  The qualifications, as prescribed in sub-section (1) (b)
(i) of section 10 of the B.R.Act can be considered.
          Action Taken by the Ministry : (29.11.2006)
Sub-Section (1)(b) (i) of the Section 10 of the B.R.Act specifies that a banking company shall not employ or
continue the employment of any person who is, or at any time, has been adjudicated insolvent, or has suspended
payment or has compounded with his creditors, or who is, or has been convicted by a Criminal Court of an offence
involving moral turpitude.  Other than the above no qualification has been prescribed to be appointed as “Manager”.
The Rule may read as follows:
Rule 10(1)
“The Board of Directors or the Board of Trustees, as the case may be, may appoint in consultation with the
borrower any person (hereinafter referred to as the Manager) to manage the secured assets the possession of which
has been taken over by the secured creditor.

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
“Provided that the Manager so appointed shall not be a person who is, or at any time has been, adjudicated
insolvent, or has suspended payment or has compounded with his creditors, or who is, or has been convicted by a
criminal Court of an offence involving moral turpitude”
 
 
 
17.     Point raised- Rule 10(2)
The Manager appointed by the Board of Directors or Board of Trustees, as the case may be, shall be
deemed to be an agent of the borrower and the borrower shall be solely responsible for the commission
or omission of acts of the Manager unless such commission or omission are due to improper intervention
of the secured creditor or the authorized officer.
The Manager is appointed only in consultation with the borrower and seemingly he is not exercising any
control over him.  In such a case fixing the sole responsibility for the acts of commission or omission of Manager
on the borrower seems to be unreasonable; what are the documents of Ministry in this behalf?
 
          Ministry’s 
comments : (7.5. 2004)
Although the Manager is appointed by the secured creditor to manage these secured assets, the possession of
which is already taken by the secured creditor, the secured creditor continues to be the mortgage only and the
ownership remains with the borrower.  However, since the control over the property passes with the possession to
the secured creditor for realization of dues, very little control remains with the borrower to deal with the property.  
Hence, there is a merit in the suggestion of the Committee, particularly when only consultation and not approval of
the borrower is required for appointment of a manager.  Hence, the provision need reconsideration.
         
Action Taken by the Ministry : (29.11.2006)
The Rules as it stands, carves out an exception where any acts of omission or commission are due to the
improper intervention of the secured creditor or the authorized officer and in such a case the borrower is not
responsible.  The provisions contained in sub rule (2) of rule 10 are on the lines of the provisions contained in sub
section (3) of section 69A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.  The said section was inserted by an amendment
Act 20 of 1929 and the Government is of the view that there is no need to change the existing provision.
 
18.     Point raised- Rule 11(1)
An application for recovery of balance amount by any secured creditor pursuant to sub-section
(10) of Section 13 of the Ordinance shall be presented to the Debts Recovery Tribunal in the form
annexed as Appendix VI to these rules by the authorized officer or his agent or by a duly authorized
legal practitioner, to the Registrar of the Bench within whose jurisdiction his case falls or shall be sent
by registered post addressed to the Registrar of Debts Recovery Tribunal.
It has not been stated specifically in the rule as to who will appoint the duly authorized legal practitioner?
 
          Ministry’s 
comments : (7.5. 2004)

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
An application for recovery of balance amount by any secured creditor shall be presented by authorized legal
practitioner or authorized officer or his agent.  Hence, only the secured creditor can appoint the legal practitioner.
 
3.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) have accepted
most of its recommendations and has taken necessary action upon them as under:
·        Rule2 (d):    By agreeing to add the words “to mean a person registered as a valuer  under Section 34
AB of Wealth Tax Act, 1957 and approved by the Board of Directors or Board of Trustees of the secured
creditor, as the case may be”, and there by specifying the qualifications of the 'Approved Valuer'.
·        Rule8 (2):   By agreeing to add the words " as soon as possible but in any case not later than 7 days
from the date of taking possession", thereby specifying the time period for publishing the possession
notice after the taking over of the property.
·        Rule9 (7):   By agreeing to add the following provisio below the rule in order to check the misuse of the
excess money:
“Provided that if after meeting the cost of removing encumbrances and contingencies there is any
surplus available out of the money deposited by the purchaser such surplus shall be paid to the purchaser
within 15 days from the date of finalisation of the sale”.
·        Rule9 (8):      By agreeing to substitute the word "shall" with "may", so as to make it obligatory for the
authorised officer or purchaser to issue notices to the interested or entitled persons.
·
        Rule10 (1):    By agreeing to add the following proviso in order to specify the qualifications of the
'Manager' :
“Provided that the Manager so appointed shall not be a person who is, or at any time has been,
adjudicated insolvent, or has suspended payment or has compounded with his creditors, or who is, or has
been convicted by a criminal Court of an offence involving moral turpitude”.
 
4.       On the rest of the points, the Committee noted the explanation furnished by the Ministry.
 
5.       The
 Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) should carry
out the modifications in the Rules agreed to by them as above, at the earliest.
 
II
Delhi Advocates' Welfare Fund Rules, 2001.
 
          The Delhi Advocates' Welfare Fund Rules, 2001 framed under the Advocates' Welfare Fund Act,
2001 were examined and a questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of Law & Justice
(Department of Legal Affairs) on the 17th January, 2003 for furnishing their comments. The Ministry vide
their communication dated the 12th May, 2005 furnished their comments.
 
          The Committee considered the subject matter at its meeting held on 24 th October, 2005. The points
raised and Ministry's comments are as follows: -

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
 
1)      Point referred (Rule 9(8) )-
 
"The Chairperson or the person presiding over a meeting shall have and exercise a second or a casting
vote in all cases of equality of votes."
Would it not be more appropriate if the Chairman does not exercise voting right in the normal course
but votes only to remove the tie?
          Ministry's Comments (12.05.05):-
The suggestion that the Chairman, who exercises the voting right only to remove the tie, is
appreciated. The casting vote in all cases of equality appears to be vague.
 
 
2)      Point referred (Rule 9(12) )-
 
"Meeting of the Trustee Committee shall, ordinarily, be held at its Office."
 
          The word 'ordinarily' used in the Regulation appears to be vague. Under what circumstances, meeting
of the Committee may be held at the places other than its office?      
Ministry's Comments (12.05.05):-
          The Rule as it exists appears to be in order. Of course, it impliedly gives the power to hold the
meeting at any other place other than its office if it is not ordinarily possible to hold the meeting at its
office.
 
 
 
3)      Point referred (Rule 12(1) )-
 
"The Bar Council of Delhi may issue a certificate of recognition in Form IV, after such enquiry as it
deems necessary, on the application, made under Rule II."
          Rule 12(2)- "The Bar Council of Delhi may recognize more than one association of advocates
functioning at a particular court, tribunal or other authority."
          Rule 12(3
)- "The Bar Council of Delhi shall prepare list of recognized association of advocates and
update the same from time to time."
 
(a)      Whether the Ministry have any objection in prescribing a specific time period within which
certificate for recognition may be issued to the association of advocates.
(b)     There is no provision in the rule for appeal/review if the application for recognition is rejected. The
Ministry may please comment.
          Ministry's Comments (12.05.05):-
(a) A period of four months initially may be prescribed for issuing a certificate for recognition.
(b) It would be appropriate if appeal can be prescribed, for which adjudicating authority may be the

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
State Bar Council of each State.
 
 
4)      Point referred (Rule 13(2))-
 
 "An advocate having membership in more than one association of advocates shall so apply from any
one of them."
Why Rule 13(2) contemplates membership of more than one association of advocates, when an
advocate can apply only through one association? Should the rules not prohibit membership of more than
one association by an advocate?
          Ministry's Comments (12.05.05):-
          The Rule appears to be clear that an advocate can apply from any one of the associations. The Rule
appears to be reasonable and requires no change.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5)      Point referred (Rule 14)
-
 
"Application for re-admission as a member of Fund. An advocate shall apply for re-admission as a
member of Fund, under sub-section (7) of section 18, in Form VI.
          Is there any maximum period beyond which re-admission is not possible. Further, there is no
provision to charge interest on arrears at the time of re-admission. What is the mechanism to ensure
continuity in the membership of the fund by the advocates?
          Ministry's Comments (12.05.05):-
          A period of re-admission may be prescribed which ordinarily should not be more than 6 months. It
would be appropriate that interest on arrears at the time of re-admission may be prescribed, which should
not exceed 3%.
          A period of 15 days may be prescribed to ensure continuity of the membership of the fund and in case
member fails to respond, the membership may be discontinued.
 
 
6)      Point referred (Rule 15)-
 
          "The Trustee Committee shall issue a certificate of membership in Form VIII'.
 
          Whether the Ministry has any objection in prescribing a suitable time period for issuance of certificate
of membership to the fund.
          Ministry's Comments (12.05.05):-

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
          It would be worthwhile to prescribe a period of 6 months to issue a certificate of membership of the
fund.
 
 
7)       Point referred (Rule 16)-
 
"Reduction of amount on failure to intimate removal or suspension-
 
(1)       Every member of the fund shall within fifteen days of his removal from the State roll under
Section 26 A of the Advocates Act, 1961 or suspension of practice, intimate the same to the Trustee
Committee.
(2)                If a member of the Funds fails to intimate under sub-rule (1), the amount payable to him
under the Act may be reduced, under sub-section (12) of section 18, only after conducting a suitable inquiry
and the reduction shall not exceed twenty-five percent of such amount.
 
(i)      The period of 15 days specified in Rule 16(1) seems to be on the lower side. Can this not be initially
increased to 30 or 45 days so as to avoid financial loss under Rule 16(2).
(ii)      The words "suitable inquiry" are not clear. How a suitable inquiry would be conducted?
(iii)     The extent of reduction up to 25% of the payable amount appears to be on a higher side. Whether
government would consider reducing it?
          Ministry's Comments (12.05.05):-
(i)                The suggestion that the period of 15 days be increased to 45 days is                          
appreciated.
(ii)              The period of 30 days may be prescribed for conducting an inquiry. We feel that it may be left
to the trustees to conduct a "suitable inquiry"
(iii)            As a matter of fact, we feel that this rule is not appropriate to be retained. Subscription at the
moment prescribed is only Rs. 50/- p.a. and any reduction appears to be unjustified.
 
 
8)      Point referred (Rule 19)-
 
 "An application claiming ex-gratia  grant under section 19 or any benefit under any scheme under
Section 24, after being satisfied about the genuineness of the claim, shall be disposed of by the Trustee
Committee within thirty days of the receipt thereof.
          How the word "genuineness' would be determined by the Trustee Committee? Whether any criteria
have been prescribed to judge genuineness of the case? Further, would the Ministry have any objection to
substitute the word 'thiery', which is a typographical error?
          Ministry's Comments (12.05.05):-
          There is no objection to substitute the word 'thirty'. The genuineness of course includes several factors
and it may depend on facts of each case. The only safeguard that may be provided is that the Trustee

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
Committee should dispose off the claim after giving valid reasons. Satisfaction may be qualified by valid
reasons.
 
 
9)      Point referred
         
          Section 16 of the Act deals with recognition of the associations of advocates by the State Bar Council.
          What is the role of association of advocates in carrying out the objective of the Act and why the work
cannot be accomplished by the State Bar Councils and the Trustees Committee?
          Ministry's Comments (12.05.05):-
There should be only one window clearance so that the advocates do not have to run from one place
to the other. The State Bar Council and the Trustee Committee should be the authorities to carry on the
objectives of the Act.
2.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Law & Justice (Department of Legal
Affairs) have reached favourably on the various points that were referred to them for
comments/clarifications. The Committee notes that the Ministry have agreed to take action as follows in
pursuance to its suggestions:
 
          Point 1 (Rule 9 (8)):
  To provide that the Chairperson presiding over the meeting, exercises his voting
right only in cases where there is a tie in the votes cast, for the purpose of resolution of the same.
          Point 3 (Rule 12(1)): (i) To provide a specific time period of 4 months for issuing a certificate for
recognition in Form- IV.
          (ii) To provide for an authority for appeal/ review if the application for recognition is rejected which
may be the State Bar Council of each State.
         
Point 5 (Rule 14):
  (i) To prescribe 6 months as the period for seeking re-admission as a member of
the fund and by fixing the interest on arrears at the time of re-admission at not exceeding 3%.
          (ii) To prescribe a period of 15 days to ensure continuity of the membership of the fund and that the
membership may be discontinued if the member failed to respond.
          Point 6 (Rule 15
):  To prescribe 6 months period for the issuance of certificate of membership to the
fund.
          Point 7 (Rule 16):
 To increase the period from 15 to 45 days for intimating the removal/ suspension
of a member from the State roll to the Trustee Committee.
          Point 8 (Rule 19): 
To substitute the word 'thiery ' with the word 'thirty', thereby rectifying a
typographical error.
 
3.       On rest of the points the Committee notes with satisfaction the explanation furnished by the Ministry.
 
4.       The Committee, however recommends that the Ministry of Law and Justice should carry out
modification in the Rules as agreed to by them, expeditiously.

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
III
The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Conditions of Service of Officers and other
Employees) Regulations, 2000
 
          The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Conditions of Service of Officers and other
Employees) Regulation, 2000 framed under the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act,
1999 were examined and a copy of the questionnaire was forwarded to the Ministry of finance (Insurance
Division) of the 27th July, 2001, for which comments/clarification were furnished thereon, by the Ministry,
which were placed before the Committee.
 
2.       The points referred to the Ministry and their comments/clarifications thereon are reproduced below: - 
Q.No
. 1:- (27/07/2001)   
          The Regulations are meant to regulate the conditions of service of officers and employees of
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority. The word 'employees' has been defined in Regulation
3(1) (e) what is meant by "other employees" as appearing in the short title as well as at other places in the
Regulations?
Ministry’s Comments :- (
14/03/2002)
          IRDA has reported that the word "other employees" means Class II, III and IV employees i.e. other
than officers as specified in the regulations, The language has been taken from Section 12(2) of the IRDA
Act, 1999.
 
Q, No.2:-
 Regulation 4(2) classification of Officers and other employees: (27/07/2001)   
          " The number of posts, their classification, scale of pay, age limit, education and other qualifications,
period of probation, method of recruitment, composition of selection committee or departmental promotion
committee shall be such as may be determined by the authority."
          Why these details have not been mentioned in the regulations itself. Whether Ministry has any
objection in defining them in the regulations it or whether any other set of regulations will be framed for the
purpose?
Ministry’s Comments
:- (14/03/2002)
          IRDA has reported that details of number of posts, their classification, scale of pay, age limit,
education and other qualification, period of probation, method of recruitment, composition of selection
committee of departmental selection committee have not been mentioned in the regulations as these will
form part of administrative orders to be issued from time to time. The Insurance Advisory Committee which
was consulted at the time of framing of these regulations felt that necessary flexibility should remain with
the Authority to attract, retain and reward talent. In addition, keeping in mind the dynamic nature of work
involved, the staffing requirements of the Authority would vary and any watertight classification may
hinder its effective and efficient functioning.
Q.No
. 3:-  Regulation 10 Promotion against sanctioned post: (27/07/2001)   
(1)     All promotions of the officers and other employees shall be against vacancies in sanctioned
posts declared by the Authority and shall be based on-

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
(a)     Merit, suitability and seniority in cases of Class I and II posts:
(b)     Seniority and merit in cases of Class III and Class IV posts:
Provided that in assessing the suitability of officers and other employees to promotion posts, the
Competent Authority shall take into consideration the performance of the officer or other employee e in the
post from which he is being promoted.
Provided further that the competent Authority may require the incumbents holding the post in the
feeder grade to qualify in a departmental test to be conducted by the Authority for promotion to class III
post:
The basis for promotion to various categories of posts does not seem to be very clear and it is also at
variance with the general guidelines of Government of India on the subject. Further, in case of class III and
IV posts even 'suitability' has been done away with. What is meant by "suitability" in Government of India
'merit' and seniority are the words that are used; what is the justification for deviations from general
guidelines of Government of India in case of promotions?
Ministry’s Comments
:- (14/03/2002)
          IRDA has reported that word "suitability" has been included deliberately in the regulations as a
situation may so arise that a person in spite of being meritorious and senior in a particular cadre may not be
possessing the necessary skills and temperament to handle certain specialized assignments. Technical skills
are also to be predominantly available with a person to function effectively. Posts in the regulatory authority
shall require technical as well as administrative skills, Combination of both will decide on the "suitability"
of the candidate. In the case of Class III and IV employees, the work involved being of routine nature,
emphasis has been placed only on seniority cum merit.
 
Q.No
. 4:-  Regulation 10(3)  (27/07/2001)   
          In exceptional cases where the minimum number of years of service prescribed above has not been
completed, an officer or other employee may be promoted to the next higher grade on the specific
recommendation of the Chairperson and the approval of the Authority.
          The sub regulation gives a wide discretion; whether the Ministry have any objection in qualifying the
exceptional cases by prescribing certain conditions or circumstances under which this relaxation could be
given? Secondly, this provision should not be made available when officers with required qualifying service
is available.
Ministry’s Comments
:- (14/03/2002)
          The IRDA has been set up in April, 2000. They have reported that in the initial years, to fill up the
posts there cannot be a blind insistence on the number of qualifying years of service to be put in. Hence an
exception has been prescribed. In order to reward and retain good performers, an exception has been made
keeping in mind the overall interest of the organisation . Necessary safeguards have been put in place
whereby the Chairperson has to make specific recommendation and take approval of the Authority, which
comprises of both full-time and part-time members. If officers having the prescribed qualifying service are
available, their cases will undoubtedly by considered by the Authority.
 

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
Q. No. 5:-   Regulation 11 Reversion of officer or other employee : (27/07/2001)   
" An officer and other employee promoted from one grade to another may be reverted during the
probationary period without notice by the Competent Authority after recording the reasons therefore."
          This regulation gives wide power to Competent Authority and this power may be misused. Whether
an officer/employee so reverted should not be given an opportunity to explain his side? What are the
comments of Ministry in this regard?
Ministry’s Comments
:- (14/03/2002)
          IRDA has reported that sub-regulation is meant for officers and other employees during their
probationary period after promotion and is normally found in all administrative bodies. An appeal against
such an order may be possible under regulation 58.
Q.No. 6:-  Regulation 20: Production of medical certificate for medical leave: (27/07/2001)  
 
The Competent Authority may require an officer and other employee, who has availed himself of
leave on medical grounds for more than five days, to produce a medical certificate of fitness to the
satisfaction of the Competent Authority before he resumes duty even though such leave was not initially
granted on a medical certificate.
          The regulation does not provide the status/level of the Doctor for issue of medical certificate.
Whether government has any objection in specifying the same?
Ministry’s Comments
:- (14/03/2002)
          IRDA has reported that the regulation will be amended to provide for the level competence of the
medical authority from whom the certificate has to be produced.
 
Q.No. 7:-   Regulation 21 (Casual leave): (27/07/2001)   
An officer and other employee shall be eligible for casual leave upto a maximum of twelve working
days in each calendar year:
Provided that no officer and other employee shall take casual leave for more than five working days
at any one time:
Provided further that public holidays may not be combined with such leave in such a way as to
increases the absence at any one time beyond ten days.
Casual leave shall not be suffixed or prefixed to any other kind of leave.
No casual leave may be availed of, except with prior permission of the Competent Authority.
Provided that if for any sufficient reason, it is not possible for an officer and other employee to obtain
such permission in advance, he shall intimate his absence to such Competent Authority within twenty- four
hours:
Provided further that, such Competent Authority may condone the delay, if any, in this behalf if he is
satisfied that an officer and other employee was not in a position to intimate his absence reasons beyond his
control.
          Under regulation 21 (1) casual leave upto a maximum period of 12 working days admissible; while
under the CCS (Leave) Rules casual leave upto a maximum period of only eight days is admissible.
Whether Government has any objection in bringing parity?

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
Ministry’s Comments:- (14/03/2002)
          IRDA has reported that employees of the Authority are not eligible to any 'restricted holiday' facility
that is available to government servants. The concept of special casual leave and compensatory leave is not
available under the regulations. Hence the eligibility of casual leave has been fixed at 12 days. IRDA also
feel that no parity on this issue, need to be established with Government Service.
 
Q.No. 8:-  Regulation 23 (Earned Leave): (27/07/2001)   
          (5) The period of earned leave, which can be taken at any one time by an officer and    other
employee, is ten months.
          Under regulation 23(5) an official can avail earned leave upto ten months at a time. While under CCS
(Leave) Rules and official can avail EL upto 180 days only at a time and under exceptional circumstances
upto 240 days in case of group A&B officers, if at least the quantum of leave in excess of 180 days is spent
out side India. What is the justification for allowing officials to avail EL upto 10 months as of right and
without any preconditions? Whether Government. has any objection in bringing parity?
Ministry’s Comments
:- (14/03/2002)
IRDA has reported that regulator's office establishment has to adopt practices prevalent in other
regulatory establishments like RBI and SEBI and the insurance industry. While the sib-regulation makes it
possible for an employee to be on earned leave for a period of 10 months, Regulation 17 (3)} also provides
that leave is not a matter of right and the grant of leave by the Authority is subject to exigencies of service.
 
Q.No. 9:-   Regulation 26(1) (Maternity leave): (27/07/2001)   
Maternity leave, which shall be on leave pay, may be granted to a female officer and other and other
employee upto a period of ninety days on full pay at a time and not more than one hundred and eight days
during the entire period of service.  
(i)      Under the regulation a female officer/employee is entitled for maternity leave upto 90 days at a
time and upto 180 days during entire service, while under the CCS (Leave) Rules a female employee is
entitled for such leave upto 135 days at a time and twice during the entire service. Whether Government has
any objection in bringing this parity?  
(ii)      The Regulation does not mention any provision about Paternity leave. What is the position in
this regard?
Ministry’s Comments:- (14/03/2002)
          IRDA has pointed out that entitlement has been made on the basis of similar regulations in the
industry and other regulators in the financial sector. The concept of paternity leave has not yet gained
strength in our country. The Authority will look into it at the appropriate time
          The Ministry of Finance generally agrees with the views expressed by the IRDA.
 
3.       While considering the Ministry's replies at its meeting held on the 7 th May, 2003 the Committee
observed that the Ministry, while framing the Regulations, had deviated from the Central Government
norms in the name of flexibility and improved efficiency. The Committee further held the view that merit
and seniority should appropriately be the criteria for promotion. In view of these observations, the

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
Committee decided to have an oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance as well as the
Insurance Regulatory Development Authority for further clarification in the matter.
 
4.       The Committee heard the Secretary, Financial Sector along with the Chairman, Insurance Regulatory
Development Authority on the 17th September, 2004. Based upon the deliberations the during the course of
oral evidence, the Ministry of Finance submitted their observations vide  O.M. dated 12/07/05. The
Committee's observations and the Ministry's point-wise comments thereon are reproduced below: - 
 
          Point-1: Committee's observations:-( 17/09/04)
          The Committee desired to know whether Government's reservation policy is being followed in
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority and requested for category wise information on the issue.
          Ministry's Comments:-( 12/07/ 05)
          Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Conditions of Service of Officers and other
Employees) Regulation, 2000 has come into force in August, 2000. Till then, mostly Officers and staff has
been drafted on deputation from public sector insurance companies and other Govt. organizations.
Regulations also provided that officer and employees who are holding post in the Authority at the time of
the commencement of Regulations, and are willing to get absorbed in the Authority may exercise their
option to get absorbed. The rule of reservation does not apply to those absorbed.
          Regulation 4 also empowered the Authority to determine the number of post, their classification, age
limit, and method of recruitment etc. The Authority at its meeting held on 2 nd July, 2004, notified the
qualification and method of recruitment etc. which, inter alia, included a decision regarding the application
of the Govt. orders on reservation of post and relaxation of age and qualification in recruitment and
promotion.
          Accordingly, in December 2004, when the Authority initiated process for recruitment to some of the
post s, the Govt. of India's orders on reservation, relaxation of ages etc. have been followed. The
recruitment is still in progress.
 
          Point-2: Committee's 
observations:-( 17/09/04)
          The Committee desired to know the pattern of roster being maintained by the Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority and also details of policy followed in this regard.
          Ministry's 
Comments:-( 12/07/ 05)
          The roster as prescribed by the Govt. of India is followed.
 
          Point-3: Committee's observations:-( 17/09/04)
          The Committee desired that the Ministry/ Insurance Development Regulatory and Authority should
reconsider use of the word ' Suitability' as used in the regulation pertaining to recruitment. The Ministry had
agreed to consult the Securities and Exchange Board of India in this regard and let the Committee know of
the deliberations.
          Ministry's Comments:-( 12/07/ 05)

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
          IRDA had considered necessary to incorporate the word ' Suitability' in regulations pertaining to
recruitment. This matter has been taken up with the SEBI. Even in the SEBI (Employees' Service)
Regulations, 2001, ' suitability' is one of the criteria along with the seniority and merit for the consideration
for promotion in the case of officer cadre and the secretarial cadre. SEBI has also intimated that no
significant problems have been experienced by them in using "suitability" as a criterion.
 
6.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that IRDA have taken a decision to implement the
Government orders on reservations for the reserved category persons and allow to them suitable relaxation
in age, educational qualification, experience, etc. The Committee recommends that the policy decision of
IRDA should find a clear mention in their Regulation, so that the policy gets a statutory recognition. As
regard to the autonomy conferred upon IRDA in the matter of recruitment and promotion, the Committee
feel that the justification given for the autonomy may no doubt sound appealing, but vesting of wide 
discretion  in any authority is always liable to be misused.
 
While the Committee appreciates the need for autonomy as projected by the IRDA, but in the
Committee’s view, subordinate legislation in the form of Rules/ Regulations should be codified to the
optimum, particularly when they are to regulate the recruitment/promotion policy of an organization which
has a bearing on its manpower. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that IRDA may review their
regulations to see to what extent they can do away with the element of subjectivity, of course without
compromising with their efficiency standards.
 
IV
The Transport, Handling and Storage of Dangerous Goods in the Port of Bombay Regulations,
1994.
 
          The Transport, Handling and Storage of Dangerous Goods in the Port of Bombay Regulations, 1994
framed under the Major Port Trust Act, 1963 were examined and a questionnaire on the subject was
forwarded to the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, (Department of Shipping) on the
24
th June, 2003 for their comments/clarifications thereon.
 
2.       The subject matter was taken up for discussion by the Committee with the representatives of the
Ministry and the Mumbai Port Trust during its visit to Mumbai on the 5 th July, 2003.  The relevant extracts
from the study note were forwarded to the Ministry on the 29th April, 2004 for action taken note.  The
points referred to the Ministry, their comments/clarifications and the Committee’s observations thereon
during its visit to Mumbai are reproduced below:-
 
Point-1
          Whether the Transport, Handling and Storage Regulations, 1994 have been laid on the Table of both

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
the Houses? and if, so the date of laying thereof.
Ministry’s reply
          The Regulations have been laid on the table of both the Houses of Parliament.   They were laid in the
Rajya Sabha on 14.12.1994 and in the Lok Sabha on 19.12.1994.
Committee’s observation
          The Committee pointed out the considerable delay on the part of the Ministry in framing of
Regulations which could have been framed much earlier.
 
Point-2:Regulation 1,0- Title
          “These regulations may be called “The Transport, Handling and Storage of Dangerous Goods in
Bombay Port Regulations, 1994” and are framed under the provisions of clauses (f) and (n) of section 123
of Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963) made by the Port of Bombay”.
The date of commencement of these regulations has not been indicated which is an essential
component of any rule/regulation.   The Ministry may please indicate the date of commencement of these
regulations in the regulations itself.
Ministry’s reply
          The date of commencement of the regulations is 7 th October, 1994 when the regulations along with
Government’s sanction thereto were notified in the official gazette.
          According to section 124(1) of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, the regulations became effective after
publication in the official gazette following approval by the Central Government.   For the sake of
convenience, it would be desirable to indicate the commencement of these regulations in the regulations
itself.
Committee’s observation
          The Committee noted that its suggestion for incorporation of the commencement clause in the
regulations has been accepted.
 
Point-3: Regulation 4.4 (iii) – Dangerous Goods
          “Dangerous Goods mean goods which by reason of the nature, quantity or mode of storage of such
goods are either singly or collectively liable to endanger the life or the health of the persons within the port
limits or on a vessel or to cause damage to property within such port limits and includes such goods
contained in a receptacle, portable tank, freight container or vehicle as defined in the IMDG Code.  The
term includes an empty receptacle, portable tank or tank vehicle which as been previously used for carriage
of dangerous goods unless such receptacle has been cleaned and dried or when the nature of the former
contents permits such carriage with safety and allow the containers to be closed securely.
Dangerous goods include all substance
(i)
               Having properties coming within the classes listed in the IMDG Code;
(ii)             Substance defined as explosive as defined by the Explosive e Act, 1884 and /or the Explosive Rules,
1983;
(iii)          Any other goods which the competent authority may specify as dangerous goods;

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
(iv)           Hazardous chemicals listed in Schedule-1 of the Manufacture, Storage and Import of Hazardous
Chemicals Rules, 1989”.
The regulation gives discretionary powers to the competent authority to specify and good as
dangerous one.  Whether such powers are exercised judiciously and are not liable to be misused?
Ministry’s reply
          Classification of the dangerous goods is based on International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code
(IMDG Code).  However, new types of hazardous chemicals are being manufactured, transported and
traded.  Thus, Port may be called upon to handle new chemicals before they are classified and listed under
IMDG Code.  Hence, the Port has been vested with discretionary powers to handle such chemicals.  
However, these powers are exercised judiciously as the decision is based on the chemical composition
details of such goods obtained from the manufacturers and the importers/exporters.   Under the
circumstances Competent Authority has been assigned some discretionary powers.
Committee’s observation
The Committee noted the explanation given by the Ministry.
 
Point-4:Regulation 4.8 – Inspector of dangerous goods.
          “Inspector of Dangerous goods for the purpose of the regulations means a person appointed by the
Competent Authority to ensure compliance with these rules at any handling, storage, disposal or transport
of the dangerous goods coming to this port”
          Should any technical/professional qualification/practical experience not be prescribed for the person
to be appointed as Inspector of Dangerous Goods?
Ministry’s reply
          The Asstt. Manager (Hazardous Cargo) has been appointed as the Inspector of Dangerous Goods
under these regulations and he is responsible for carrying out the responsibilities under these regulations. 
For appointment to this post, the requirements are laid down and include minimum post graduate
qualification in Chemistry and experience of 5 years in handling, stowage and storage of dangerous and
hazardous chemicals in a factory or a manufacturing industry.  Besides, the incumbent is also given training
from time to time to keep pace with the new developments with regard to dangerous cargo, their safe
storage and transportation, etc.
 
 
Committee’s observation
          The Committee desired that the technical/professional qualifications/practical experience prescribed
for appointment of Inspector of dangerous goods should be indicated in the regulations itself.
 
Point-5 :Regulation 4.11 – Responsible Person
          “Responsible Person – Responsible person means a person appointed by the Owner and/or Master
and empowered to take all decisions relating to the tasks of transport, handling and storage of dangerous
good and having the necessary knowledge and experience for that purpose”.

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
Whether there is any mechanism to see whether the person having necessary knowledge and
experience is appointed as “Responsible Person”? What would be duties/responsibilities and liabilities of
such person and the authority to whom he would be responsible?
Ministry’s reply
          On board the vessel, the Master of the vessel is generally the responsible person.  The Master has the
necessary knowledge and experience to carry dangerous goods in compliance with IMDG Code as he is
certified by the Maritime Licensing Authority of the country from where he has obtained his Certificate of
Competency as Master.  The Master is thus responsible for the tasks of storage, handling and transport of
the dangerous goods.  The Master, through the shipowner, is responsible to the owner of the goods.
          In the event the Master is not available, he can delegate the duties to some other officer on board the
ship. Generally, all the officers including the Master have to undergo mandatory training with regard to
storage, handling and transportation of dangerous cargo if they work on ships carrying such cargo. 
Committee’s observation
The Committee noted the explanation given by the Ministry.
 
Point-6:Regulation 6.7
          “Details of goods marine pollutants”.
          Whether Government have any objection in adding the word “comprising” before the words
“marine”?
Ministry’s reply
          There is no objection to the addition of the word ‘comprising’ before the words ‘marine pollutants’ as
suggested.
Committee’s observation
          The Committee noted that its suggestion was accepted by the management of the Port to add the word
“comprising” before the words “Marine pollutants”.
 
Point-7:Regulation 10.2(5) – Reasonable Person
          “maintain efficient and effective communication with the reasonable person on the shore”.
The word “reasonable person” has not been defined anywhere.  Whether the Ministry have any
objection in defining the above term in the regulation itself?
 Ministry’s reply
          This is an error.  The mistake is regretted.   The reference is to the “Responsible Person” which is
already defined.
Committee’s observation
The Committee noted the explanation given by the Ministry.
 
Point-8:Regulation 11.3
          “If any case/receptacles of dangerous goods is damaged or start leaking during handling in the Port,
preventive measures as may be indicated by the Competent Authority shall be followed”.

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
Whether it is not reasonable to prescribe the preventive measures beforehand as the nature of the
goods require immediate remedial steps in case of damage or leakage and seeking indications from the
Competent Authority may lead to wastage of time and aggravate the problem further? Alternatively should
an expert crisis management group be always deputed on site to tide over the crisis immediately?
 Ministry’s reply
          Preventive measures for different types of dangerous goods are prescribed in regulations 19 to 93 of
the said regulations.  These are based on the preventive measures laid down in the IMDG Code, which is the
international regulation applicable to all countries.   These preventive measures are comprehensive.   In
exceptional cases and in unforeseen situation when it may not be possible to follow instructions in the
regulations, it may be necessary for the Competent Authority to issue instructions.   The Competent
Authority, as defined in regulation 4.3, is the Dy. Conservator of the Port.
Committee’s observation
The Committee noted the explanation given by the Ministry.
 
Point-9:Regulation 12.0
          “Obligation to be taken precautions”.
          The meaning of the words “obligation to be taken precautions” is not clear.  The Ministry may please
clarify?
Ministry’s reply
          This is a typographical error.  The mistake is regretted.  The regulation title reads as “Obligation to
take precautions”.
Committee’s observation
          The Management of the Board had accepted the Committee’s suggestion to rectify the typographical
error.
 
Point-10:Regulation 15.2- Competent Person
          “If any dangerous substance within the area constitutes an unacceptable hazard the competent
person may order the removal of such substances or packages, freight container, portable tank vessel or
vehicle containing it to any other place or to sea as considered necessary.
Whether the Ministry have any objection in defining the term” Competent Person”?
Ministry’s reply
          Competent Person is intended to be the same as Competent Authority which is already defined in the
regulations.  Necessary correction will be made.
Committee’s observation
          The Management of the Board had accepted the Committee’s suggestion for defining the term
“Competent Person”
 
Point-11:Regulation 15.4
          “Only one class of cargo will be handled at a time”.

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
          Whether Government have any objection in substituting the word ‘Will’ by ‘Shall’?
Ministry’s reply
          There is no objection.
Committee’s observation
          The Management of the Board had accepted the Committee’s suggestions for substituting the word
“will” by the word “shall”.
 
Point-12:Regulation 16.1
“Any person may appeal with respect to any order issued by the Inspector of Dangerous Goods of the
Port or by the Competent Authority.  Such appeal shall be heard by the Chairman and his decision shall be
final”.
(i)                   The words “any person” may be replaced by the words “the person aggrieved”;
(ii)           The regulation has not specified the time frame within which the appeal is to be made
against any order; and
(iii)                The regulation also does not specify time period within which the appeal shall be heard and
decided by the Chairman.
Whether the Ministry have any objection in prescribing a time frame for the purpose?
Ministry’s reply
The suggestions are accepted.   The time period for making the appeal may be 15 days from date of
decision of Inspector of Dangerous Goods or of the Competent Authority.  Time period for decision by the
Chairman may be 30 days.
Committee’s observation
The Management had accepted the Committee’s suggestions (i) for replacing the words ‘any person”
by the words “the person aggrieved”; (ii) for specifying a time frame for appeal; and (iii) for specifying a
time period for hearing and deciding the appeal.
 
Point-13:Regulation 16.2
“The Chairman on advice of the Competent Authority may in exceptional cases exempt conditionally
or unconditionally any person or consignment of dangerous goods from all or any of the provisions of these
rules”.      
On what grounds or materials a case will be treated as exceptional case to qualify for exception?
Whether it is not possible to specify the exceptional cases in the regulation itself qualifying for exemption
conditionally or unconditionally from all or any of the provisions of these rules? The power to exempt vests
wide discretion and may be misused and defeat the purpose of these regulations.
Ministry’s reply
          The power to exempt is used only in the case of defence cargo in the National interest.
Committee’s observation
          The Committee desired that the word “Rules” may be substituted by the word “Regulations”; the
Committee further desired to know the justifications for allowing exemptions for the Defence Cargo as the

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
same could be dangerous.  The concerned agencies must conform to all the security measures and the
concerned agency should also take responsibility for the handling activity.
 
Point-14:Regulation 17.1 –Penalties
          “Any Person who commits a breach of any regulation shall be liable to pay a penalty of Rupees Ten
thousand and if the breach continues, a further penalty of Rupees One thousand per day or part thereof for
period during which the said breach continues to the respective Port Trust.  The penalty as aforesaid shall
be in addition to any action that may be taken under applicable to port regulations”.
(i)                Keeping in view the purpose of the rules, will it not be reasonable that while imposing a
penalty of Rs.10,000 for breach  of any regulation for the first time a warning notice may also be given
simultaneously thus not allowing the breach to continue for a long period or till the time the Competent
Authority decides to remove the vessel as provided in Regulation 17.2 ?
(ii)      Whether the amount of penalty of Rs.10,000 is adequate enough to prevent further breach or
the Ministry propose to impose a higher penalty as deterrent measure ?
Ministry’s reply
(i)      The importers are expected to know the regulations and the safety requirements for handling of
the dangerous cargo they are importing/ exporting.   The requirements prescribed are applicable
internationally and based on the IMDG Code applicable at all ports.  Besides, any breach of regulations for
hazardous/dangerous cargo can cause considerable damage to life and property and thus carry a risk.  Under
the circumstances, penalty has been prescribed for breach of the regulations.
(ii)      The amount of penalty is considered adequate.
Committee’s observation
          The Committee impressed upon the Management of the Board to examine the feasibility of an
increase in the amount of penalty.
 
Point-15;Regulation 19.0
          “The Owner/Agent will abide by all the instructions as specified by the Competent Authority”.
The word “will” should be replaced by the word “shall” to make it obligatory for the Owner/Agent to
abide by all the instructions of the Competent Authority.
Ministry’s reply
          The suggestion is accepted.
Committee’s observation
          The Management of the Board had accepted the Committee’s suggestions for replacing the words
“will” by the word “shall”.
 
Point-16:Regulation 19.1
          “So far as fabrication fittings, marking, colour code labeling on cylinders manufactured in India are
concerned, they shall conform the requirements of Gas Cylinder Rules, 1981 if the capacity exceeds 1000
litres.  Cylinders imported shall in compliance with the IMDG Code be marked to indicate that the

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
appropriate authority has tested and certified the same”.
          Which is the appropriate authority referred to in this regulation?
Ministry’s reply
          The appropriate authority for testing and certifying the cylinders imported into India is defined for
each country and is indicated in the IMDF Code.
 
Point-17:Regulation 30.0 – Precautionary Measures
          “The Owner/Agent will abide by all the instructions as described by the Competent Authority”.
          The word “will” in the regulation should be replaced by the word “shall” to make it obligatory for the
owner/agent to abide by all the instructions.
Ministry’s reply
          The suggestion is accepted.
Committee’s observation
          The Management of the Board had accepted the Committee’s suggestion for replacing the word
“will” by the word “ shall”.
 
Point-18:Regulation 31.0
          “The liquids in this class are liable to polymerise and liberate dangerous gases and heat, possibly
resulting in rupture of the receptacle.   Therefore, utmost precautions and care should be taken when
handling the container/receptacles holding these liquids. They shall not be dropped, bumped, rolled or
otherwise mishandled”. 
(i)
                Whether it is not possible to state in the regulation itself the extra precautionary measures to be
taken in case of handling of flammable liquid?
(ii)              Who will supervise handling of this class of goods? Will it not be reasonable to appoint an
expert supervisor for this purpose?
Ministry’s reply
(i)      The precautionary measures in respect of these cargoes are provided in regulations 31 to 39 of
these regulations.
 (ii)     Loading/unloading of the dangerous cargo is supervised by the Master of the vessel on board
the ship and by the Inspector of Dangerous Goods (Asstt. Manager (Hazardous Cargo) on the shore.  In case
of such flammable liquid cargo, fire brigade is kept standby during the handling operations.   Since the
Master of the vessel and the Asstt. Manager (Hazardous Cargo) have the necessary knowledge and training
in handling, storage and transportation of such cargo, it is not considered necessary to appoint any outside
agency for the purpose.
Committee’s observation
The Committee noted the explanation given by the Ministry.
 
Point-19:Regulation 34.0
          “All personnel working in this area or near vicinity are prohibited from bringing matches, lighters or

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
flints, any other material likely to cause ignition or spark”.
          Whether the Ministry have any objection in substituting the word “are” by words “shall be” for the
purpose or strict adherence of the precautionary measures?
Ministry’s reply
          There is no objection.
Committee’s observation
          The Committee desired that the word “are” should be replaced by the words “shall be” which was
accepted by the Management of the Board.
 
Point-20:Regulation 36.0
          “Barring exigencies, these goods shall be only handled during day light hours”.
          Is it not possible to prescribe exact time in hours for handling of these goods during day light to avoid
any confusion and allowing the handling to complete before or at the time so specified so that no task
remains incomplete?
Ministry’s reply
          The daylight hours keep changing according to season which makes it difficult to fix the exact
daylight hours.
Committee’s observation
The Committee noted the explanation given by the Ministry.
 
Point-21:Regulations 49.0 & 59.0
          Regulation 49.0
“Regulations from 41.0 to 45.0 shall be applicable to this class also.  In addition, they will be subject
to the following restriction.”
          Regulation 59.0
“Special restrictions on Ammonium Nitrates, Ammonium Nitrate to be brought to the Port should be
certified to be free from organic impurities, as specified by the IMDG Code.  A certificate of purity issued
by the Competent Government Authority in the country of manufacture will have to be produced before such
cargo or vessel is allowed inside the dock.  These rules will not apply to Ammonium Nitrate of fertilizer
grade.”
Whether the Ministry would replace the word “will” by “shall” wherever it exists?
Ministry’s reply
 
The suggestion is accepted and necessary changes will be carried out.
Committee’s observation
The Management of the Board had accepted the Committee’s suggestion for replacing the word
“will” by the word “shall”.
 
Point  -22:Regulation 79.0
          “Action to be taken in the event of any Accident involving Poisonous Substances.

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
          In the event of any receptacle/case of any poisonous substances getting accidentally damaged, leaky
during handling or transit storage”.
          Regulation 79 enumerates the action to be taken in the event of an accident involving poisonous
substance.  But it is not specified who has to take the action.  Should regulation not indicate this also?
Ministry’s reply
          The Inspector of Dangerous Goods has been entrusted with the responsibility of ensuring compliance
with these regulations.  Therefore, he is required to take necessary steps for compliance with regulation79.
Committee’s observation
The Committee noted the explanation given by the Ministry.
 
3.       Meanwhile, the Ministry vide
 their O.M. dated the 4 th August, 2005 informed the Committee as
under:-
          “The amendment proposals incorporating the suggestions made by the Parliament Committee are
being placed before the Mumbai Port Trust before the Board of Trustees for approval. Thereafter, the same
will be forwarded to the Ministry for according requisite approval. As and when the amendments in
question are approved & notified in the official Gazette, the same will be intimated to the Committee in due
course”.
 
4.       Thereafter, the Ministry were requested to let the Secretariat know the specific amendments that are
being processed by the Mumbai Port Trust, to which the Ministry replied that they are pursuing the matter
with the Mumbai Port Trust. Meanwhile, the Committee decided to take up the matter again with the
representatives of the Ministry and the Mumbai Port Trust during its visit to Mumbai on the 7 th February,
2005.
 
5.       During the visit the Committee noted with satisfaction that the Port Trust has proposed amendments
in 12 regulations, as per the Committee’s suggestion. In addition to this, the Port Trust has reviewed the
entire regulations, as desired by the Committee and proposed amendments in 3 more regulations, namely,
regulation 31, 79, and 89.  On the 29 th April, 2005 the Ministry vide their O.M. informed the Committee
that the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) have suggested the supersession of the
principal regulation as incorporation at this stage would give these regulations retrospective effect , which is
legally untenable. The Ministry further informed that they have accepted the line of action as suggested by
the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) and have accordingly requested the Mumbai Port
Trust to take necessary action in the matter.
 
6.       Meanwhile, the Committee forwarded the relevant extracts of the study note pertaining to its visit to
Mumbai on the 8 th February, 2005 to the Ministry for action taken by them on amendment of the
commencement clause of the regulation as advised by the Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law
and Justice. After repeated reminders, the Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 22 nd March, 2007 furnished a
copy of the Notification G.S.R 115 ( E), which is the new revised set of regulations on the subject namely

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
the Mumbai Port  Trust (Transport, Handling and Storage of Dangerous Goods)Regulations, 2007
(Annexure- I).
 
7.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways,
(Department of Shipping) have taken necessary action on almost all of its recommendations as follows:
          ·   Reg 1.0: By inserting the commencement clause in the title of the Regulation.
          ·  Reg 10.2(5):  By replacing the term “reasonable person” with “responsible person”, which has
already been defined in the regulations.
          ·  Reg 12.0:  By substituting the words “to be taken” with “to take”, thereby rectifying the
typographical error.
          ·  Reg 15.2:      By replacing the word “competent person” with “competent authority”, which has
already been defined in the regulations.
          ·  Reg 15.4:         By substituting the word “will” by the word “shall”, thereby making it mandatory to
handle only one class of cargo at a time.
          ·  Reg 16.1:      By amending the provisions as follows
“The person aggrieved by any order of the Inspector of Dangerous Goods of the Port or Competent
Authority may appeal to the Chairman within 15 days of the said order. Such appeal shall be heard and
decided within 30 days therafter”.
The Committee had desired that the rule should provide for a specific time frame for appeal  and a
time period for hearing and deciding the appeal. Also in Committee’s opinion the word “any person” was
not specific.
·  Reg 16.2:   By rewording the regulation as - “such as in case of defence  cargo relax all or any of
the provisions of the Regulations provided that the agency handling the cargo shall fully comply with safety
measure and undertake full responsibility for handling of such activity”, thereby making the concerned
agencies responsible for all the security measures and the handling activity of dangerous cargos.
·  Reg 17.1:    By increasing the penalty amount to Rupees Twenty Thousand and to Rupees Two
Thousand, if the breach continues further, which in Committee’s opinion was desirable.
·  Reg 19.0, 30.0, 49.0, 59.0:    By substituting the word “will” with the word “shall” in these
regulations, thereby making it mandatory for the concerned parties to abide by these regulations.
·  Reg 34.0:    By substituting the word “are” with the word “shall be”, so as to  mandatorily  prohibit
the personnel working in the area from bringing matches, lighters or flints or any other material likely to
cause ignition or spark or fire hazard. 
·  Reg 79.0:    By adding the words “Inspector of Dangerous Goods”, thereby
clarifying as to who has to take action in case of accidents involving poisonous  substance.
          ·  Reg 89.0:           By substituting the word “should” with the word “shall” so as to strictly ensure
proper handling of receptacles/carboys.
V
The Small Industries Development Bank of India Pension Regulations, 2002.

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
 
          The Small Industries Development Bank of India Pension Regulations, 2002 framed under the Small
Industries Development Bank of India Act, 1989 was examined and a questionnaire was forwarded to the
Ministry of Finance on the 18 th June, 2003. The Committee discussed the subject matter with the
representatives of the Small Industries Development Bank of India and officers of Banking Division of
Ministry of Finance at Ahmedabad on the 1 st July, 2003. The Committee forwarded the extracts from the
study note on the above discussions on the 27 th April, 2004. The Ministry of Finance vide their
communications dated 10 th June and 27 th July, 2004 forwarded their Action Taken Notes on the Study
Note.
 
2.       The Committee while deliberating on the Action Taken Note furnished by the Ministry was not
satisfied with the replies of the Ministry regarding point Nos. 1, 2 (Regulation 2(7)), 3 (Regulation 2(8)), 4
(Regulation 2(10)), 6 (Regulation 5) and 7 (Regulation 9) and a communication seeking clarifications
thereon was sent to the Ministry on the 22 nd February, 2005. The Ministry of Finance vide  their
communication dated the 13th June, 2005 submitted their clarifications. Regarding point No. 7 (Regulation
9) the Ministry submitted that an Officer of the rank of Under-Secretary from the Ministry of Finance would
represent Government of India at the Pension Trust of SIDBI. The queries raised by the Committee,
Ministry’s replies, Committee’s observations, Ministry’s Action Taken reply, Committee’s further queries
thereon and clarifications tendered by the Ministry are as follows:-
1)      Point Raised:-
 
          The regulations under examination are in supersession of the pension regulations of 1993. What are
the considerations, which necessitated the enactment of a new set of regulations in supersession of the
earlier ones. Whether the pension scheme envisaged under the new regulations is at variance with the
prescribed in the superseded regulations, if so, what are the salient features of the new pension scheme?
Ministry's Reply (01.07.03):-
 
          SIDBI Pension Regulations, 1993 were not notified and, therefore, SIDBI Pension Regulations, 2002,
notified in 2002 were not in supersession of SIDBI Pension Regulations, 1993. It has been incorrectly stated
in the title of the notification that these had been issued in supersession of the SIDBI Pension Regulations,
1993. The action will be initiated to amend the title of the SIDBI Pension Regulations, 2002.
Committee's Observation (27.04.04):-
 
          The Ministry have admitted that the Committee had been wrongly informed that the regulations had
been issued in supersession of the SIDBI Pension Regulations, 1993. The Ministry promised to rectify the
position.
 
          Action Taken by the Ministry (10.06.04):-

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
 
          We propose to amend the title to the Pension Regulations, 2002 suitably by a Notification, which
would be published in the Official Gazette after getting approval of the Board of Directors of SIDBI. A
copy of the amendment would be forwarded in due course.
 
          Committee’s further Observations (22.02.05):-
 
          The Ministry have stated that the Small Industries Development Bank of India Pension Regulations,
1993 were not notified. The Committee desired to know the justification for not notifying the said
regulations.
 
          Ministry’s further Comments (13.06.05):-
 
          SIDBI was created out of IDBI w.e.f. April 02, 1990 as per SIDBI Act, 1989. Since its formation,
SIDBI is following the service regulations and all other rules relating to the service matters as that of IDBI.
IDBI Pension Regulations were notified in 1995 and have been made applicable w.e.f. November 01, 1993.
In terms of the sixth bi-partie settlement between the IBA and the unions/associations of the bank
employees, the pension scheme was introduced in the nationalized banks w.e.f. November 01, 1993, but
notified in 1995. SIDBI also formulated the Pension Regulations in 1993 in anticipation of approval of the
Government. During the course of the consideration of the pension regulations, the question of constituting
Pension Fund had arisen and it was considered that since SIDBI had been granted tax exemption, there may
not be any need of constituting a separate Pension Fund. On further consideration of the matter, it was felt
to explore the possibility of adopting the pattern of RBI & NABARD Employee Gratuity and
Superannuation Fund Regulations instead of having a separate Pension Regulations in line with IDBI,
which had become a tax paying corporate entity. It, therefore, necessitated an exercise afresh to draft the
SIDBI Employee Gratuity and Superannuation Fund Regulations in line with RBI Regulations. Due to the
above development and subsequent developments like divestment of shares of IDBI in SIDBI and other
allied developments, the Pension Regulations of SIDBI were revisited and SIDBI Pension Regulations,
2002 were notified. It may be pertinent to mention that due to the late notification of the SIDBI Pension
Regulations, the employees have not been affected in any manner as the said Pension Regulations cover
employees from the date of creation of SIDBI subject to fulfillment of conditions.
 
2)      Point 
Raised: 
 
          Regulations 2(7):-     Definition of 'Employee'-
 
          'Employee' means any person employed in the service of the Small Industries Bank on full time work
or on part-time work exceeding thirteen hours per week and who opts and is governed by these regulations,
but shall not include a person employed either on contract basis or on daily wages;

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
 
          What is the justification for treating part time workers rendering more than 13 hours duty per week as
an employee of the Bank for the purpose of pension?
 
         
 
Ministry Reply (01.07.03):-
 
          SIDBI was established as a subsidiary of IDBI under SIDBI Act, 1989 and came into being w.e.f.
2.4.90. As Section 33(2) of SIDBI Act, the employees taken on deputation from IDBI would be governed
by the same terms and conditions of service as were applicable to them in IDBI. Accordingly, the definition
of employee has been adopted from the definition of employee in IDBI Service Regulations.
         
          Now, after delinking of SIDBI from IDBI vide notification dated 10.10.2001, the matter would be
reviewed in the light of observations of the Committee.
 
          Committee's Observation (27.04.04):-
 
          The Ministry agreed to the Committee's suggestion for amending definition of 'employee'.
 
          Action Taken by the Ministry (10.06.04):-
 
          The Regulation has been adopted from a similar regulation in IDBI. As a matter of service condition,
a part time employee appointed on part time work exceeding 13 hours per week is paid half scale wages.
That is to say, service rendered on less than half scale wages should not be taken into account for the
purpose of ascertaining qualifying service for pension. The limit of 13 hours as minimum was fixed as per
the bipartite wage agreement with the Class III & IV union.
 
It may be mentioned here that SIDBI rarely recruits part-time employees. We, therefore, propose to
retain the wordings appearing in the pension regulations.
 
Committee’s further Observation (22.02.05):_
 
          The management of the Small Industries Development Bank of India, while discussing the
regulations on the 1st July, 2003 at Ahmedabad, had stated that the matter would be reviewed in the light of
the Committee’s observations. Now Small Industries Development Bank of India, proposes to retain the
existing provison in the regulation. The Committee desired to know the justification for retaining the
provision.
 

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
 
          Ministry’s further Comments (13.06.05):-
         
In the light of the observations of the Committee, the matter was reviewed in its entirety. In view of
the fact that RBI, NABARD & IDBI are also having similar provisions in the Pension Regulations, it has
not been considered advisable to deviate therefrom. The nationalized banks also have the provisions to
count the part time service as qualifying service in a graded manner. Since SIDBI is a Developmental
Financial Institution (DFI), the provisions in this PensionRegulations are on the lines of the other DFI’s.
 
3)      Point 
Raised :-
 
          Regulation 2(8):-    Definition of 'Family"-
 
          "Family means a) Wife in the case of male employee and husband in the case of female employee
provided the marriage took place before retirement of the employee;
b) Son who has not attained the age of twenty-five years and unmarried daughter who has not attained the
age of twenty-five years, including son or daughter adopted legally before retirement, but shall not include
son or daughter adopted after retirement; however a posthumous child is entitled for the grant of family
pension."
 
(i)      Should the definition of the term 'family' not be inclusive? If so, would it not be more appropriate to
prescribe that 'family includes' instead of 'family means'?
 
(ii)      What is the justification for excluding from the definition of 'family', spouse of an employee in case
the marriage has taken place after the 
retirement. What is the position in case there is a judicial separation
between the employee and his / her spouse?
 
          What is the justification for not including dependent unmarried daughter above 25 years, widowed
daughter residing with the employee, unmarried sister including step-sister, brother below 18 years
including step-brothers, married daughter, children of predeceased son and parents including adopted
parents and sons / daughters adopted after retirement in the definition of family as is the case under the
Central Government rules?
 
          Ministry's Reply (01.07.03):-
 
(i)      The usage of words "family" is in conformity with the narration in the Staff Regulations applicable to
the employees of SIDBI and specify such members that are covered in the definition of word "family" for
the purpose of pension. In the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, the same connotation has been used for the
definition of "family" for the purpose of pension.

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
 
(ii)      As regards the observation of the Committee seeking the position of a spouse of an employee in case
the marriage has taken place after the retirement and in case of a judicial separation between the employee
and his / her spouse, the issue will be considered keeping in view the observations of the Committee.
 
It is not, however, considered advisable to broad-base the definition of "family". In the case of
employees governed under CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, the members of the family, as observed by the
Committee, are covered for the payment of gratuity, but are not covered under the definition of "family" for
the purpose of pension.
 
Committee's Observation (27.04.04):-
 
          The Committee noted the Ministry's comments on Points 3(i) and (iii). The Ministry accepted the
Committee' suggestion on point 3(ii) for including within the definition of family, 'spouse' of an employee
in case marriage had taken place after retirement and also in case of judicially separated spouse of an
employee.
 
         
Committee’s further Observation (22.02.05):-
 
          The Committee was not convinced with the Ministry’s view point regarding the definition of the term
“Family”. The Committee felt that the Ministry’s view point on this issue was a discrimination on the basis
of gender and should be avoided. In the Committee’s opinion, if a married son could form part of the family
if he was less than 25 years of age, then why had a married daughter of less than 25 years of age been
excluded?
 
          Ministry’s further Comments (13.06.05):-
 
          The term ‘family’ is in conformity with the definition of the family in the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972.
RBI Pension Regulations, 1990 and other nationalized banks/DFIs. It would be desirable to have a uniform
approach in the matter in the case of DFIs.
 
4)      Point Raised:-
 
          Regulation 2(10): Definition of pay: "Pay includes:-
 
a)      Substantive pay
b)      Officiating pay
c)       Special pay

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
d)      Personal pay
e)       Special personal pay
f)       dearness allowance competent up to 1148 points (CPI 1960-100) in respect of employees who are on
the Small Industries Bank's roll as on November 1, 1993.
g)      any other emoluments which may be classified as pay by the Board of the Small Industries Bank."
 
(i)      Whether non-practicing allowance and stagnation increments are also considered for the  purpose of
calculating pension and, if so, whether these have been classified as emoluments under regulation 2(10)(g)?
 
(ii)      What is Special Personal Pay and what is the purpose for considering it as pay for the purpose of
pension, as per CCS (Pension) Rules?
 
(iii)     Whether SIDBI has declared any other type of emoluments to be included within the meaning of the
term 'pay' in terms of regulation 2(10)(g), if so, the details thereof?
 
          Ministry's Reply (01.07.03):-
 
(i)      In the pay-structure presently applicable in SIDBI, there is no such component as "Non-Practicing
Allowance". "Stagnation Increments" are also considered at par with other normal increments for the
purpose of calculation of pension.
 
(ii)      If an employee's pay including stagnation increment is more than the pay fixed on the higher grade
on promotion, the difference between the two is paid to the concerned employees as Special Personal Pay to
protect the present salary drawn by the employee and will be absorbed against the next increments in the
higher grade.
 
(iii)     CAIIB allowance, Personal Allowance, Fixed Personal Allowance are treated to be included in the
emoluments for the purpose of pension to the extent they are considered eligible for payment of Dearness
Allowance category wise.
 
          Committee's Observation (27.04.04):-
 
          The Committee noted Ministry's comments on point 4 (ii). On point 4 (i) the Committee desired that
stagnation increment should be included in the definition of “Pay”. On Regulation 2(10)(g) the Committee
desired that the emoluments which may be classified as pay by the Board should be specified in the
regulation itself.
 
         
 

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry (27.07.04):-
 
(i)      In the pay-structure presently applicable in SIDBI, there is no such component as "Non-Practicing
Allowance". "Stagnation Increments" are also considered at par with other normal increments for the
purpose of calculation of pension.
 
(ii)      If an employee's pay including stagnation increment is more than the pay fixed on the higher grade
on promotion, the difference between the two is paid to the concerned employees as Special Personal Pay to
protect the present salary drawn by the employee and will be absorbed against the next increments in the
higher grade.
 
(iii)     CAIIB allowance, Personal Allowance, Fixed Personal Allowance are treated to be included in the
emoluments for the purpose of pension to the extent they are considered eligible for payment of Dearness
Allowance category wise.
 
          Committee’s further Observation (22.02.05):-
 
          The Committee was not satisfied with the Ministry’s comments and desired that the emoluments
which may be classified as pay by the Board of the Small Industries Bank should be specified in the
definition of “Pay” in regulation 2(10) (g) itself. But the Action Taken Note as received from the Ministry is
a repetition of their earlier reply dated the 1st July, 2003.
 
          Ministry’s further Comments (13.06.05):-
 
          The clause 2(10) (g) in the Pension Regulations has been kept to take into account the allowances like
CAIIB Allowance (granted to employees who have passed the CAIIB examination conducted by IIB after
joining SIDBI), Personal Allowance (granted to employees who have joined the Bank before February 27,
1996 on completion of one year after reaching the maximum of respective pay-scale) and Fixed Personal
Allowance (granted to employees on completion of one year after reaching the maximum of respective pay-
scale) and also to take care of future unforeseen requirements of any allowance that may be treated as
component of ‘Pay’.
 
5)      Point 
Raised:-
 
          Regulation 2(12):-     Qualifying Service-
 
"Subject to other conditions in these Regulations, 'Qualifying Service' means service rendered

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
while on duty or otherwise which shall be taken into account for the purpose of pension under these
Regulation;"
 
The meaning of the words "duty or otherwise" is not clear. The Ministry may please clarify the
position.
 
          Ministry's Reply (01.07.03):-
 
          Duty as defined in SIDBI (Staff) Regulation, 2001 includes –
 
(a)  service as probationer;
(b) period during which an employee is on joining time;
(c)  period during which an employee is on casual leave or special casual leave duly authorised  by the
competent authority; and
(d) any other period specifically classified as duty by the Chairman.
 
It may be seen from the above that "duty" does not include period during which an employee is on other
type of leave (like ordinary leave, sick leave, maternity leave, EOL supported by medical certificate, special
leave granted for not attending duties on account of situation beyond the control of the staff member like
war etc. and study leave.). As these leaves are counted for the purpose of qualifying service beside the
service rendered on deputation the words "duty or otherwise" has been used.
         
Committee's Observation (27.04.04):-
 
          The Committee noted the comments.
 
          Action Taken by the Ministry (10.06.04):-
 
          Duty, as defined in SIDBI (Staff) Regulation, 2001 includes –
 
a)       service as a probationer;
b)      period during which an employee is on joining time;
c)       period during which an employee is on casual leave or special casual leave duly authorised by the
competent authority; and
d)      any other period specifically classified as duty by the Chairman.
 
          It may be seen from the above that "duty" does not include period during which an employee is on
other type of leave (like ordinary leave, sick leave, maternity leave, EOL granted supported by medical
certificate, special leave granted for not attending duties on account of situation beyond the control of the

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
staff member like war etc. and study leave.). As these leaves are also legal and justified leaves due to the
employees, such period is also to be counted for qualifying service. Thus, the words "duty or otherwise".
         
6)      Point Raised:-
 
          Regulation 5
 
          What is the background under which the provisions of regulation 5 have been incorporated? As may
be seen regulation 5 refers to the provisions of the pension regulations of the RBI, the IDBI, the Civil
Services Regulations, the Civil Pension (Commutation) Rules as well as the Family Pension Scheme for
Central Government Employees and even the public sector banks. Whether reference to the pension rules of
so many Statutory Government Bodies have not lent an element of ambiguity to the regulations which may
even lead to subjectivity in the decisions on different occasions. What is the justification for making a
reference to pension regulations of so many institutions / bodies in the SIDBI regulations and whether it
would be not appropriate that the regulations of SIDBI are self contained in all respects, it being an
autonomous statutory body?
 
          Ministry's Reply (01.07.03):-
 
          The Committee's observations are being considered.
 
          Committee's Observation (27.04.04):-
 
          The Ministry agreed to the Committee's Suggestion to make the provision self-contained in all
respect.
         
Action Taken by the Ministry (10.06.04):-
 
          Reference to pension regulations of many institutions has been made to have better flexibility in
operation of pension scheme. This will also ensure that the benefits from the improvements made in the
regulations referred to will automatically be made available to SIDBI employees. It is also understood that
the Pension Scheme itself was made first applicable in all such institutions by the GoI and RBI / IDBI
Pension Regulations, based on those institutions' rules as applicable to the existing pay structure in RBI /
IDBI, was then adopted. Hence, the mention of all these rules of these institutions have been made in RBI /
IDBI Pension Regulations and then adopted by SIDBI accordingly.
 
We, therefore, propose to retain the wordings appearing in the pension regulations.
 
Committee’s further Observation (22.02.05):-

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
 
          The Committee was not convinced with the comments furnished by the Ministry. The Committee
noted that the Ministry had, on the 27 th April, 2004, agreed to its suggestion to make the provision of
Regulation-5 self-contained in all respect but, later on, they have changed their stand and suggested for
retention of the provision without any change. The Committee felt that the Small Industries Development
Bank of India, being a statutory body, the subordinate legislation concerning it should be self-contained.
 
          Ministry’s further Comments (13.06.05):-
 
          As per the recommendations of the Committee, the entire Pension Regulations will have to be
redrafted. This will be an arduous and cumbersome exercise. Since the SIDBI Pension Regulations have
been drawn on the lines of IDBI and other DFIs wherein such references have been made, it is suggested
that it may be impressed upon the Committee not to insist on its recommendation.
         
7)      Point 
Raised:-
 
Regulation 9:-     "Board of Trustees"
 
(1)     The Board of Trustees shall consist of such number of persons not less than three and not more than
nine, as may be determined by the Board to be appointed by the Small Industries Bank.
 
(2)     The power to appoint the trustees shall vest with the Small Industries Bank and all such appointments
shall be made in writing.
 
(3)     The Small Industries Bank shall nominate one of these trustees to be the Chairman of the Board of
Trustees. The Small Industries Bank shall also nominate a trustee to be an alternate Chairman who shall
act as Chairman in the absence of the Chairman.
 
          There is a big variation between the minimum and maximum number of persons to be appointed in
the Board of Trustees. What is the justification therefor? Secondly, the regulation does not give any
guidelines as to who can be included in the Board of Trustees. Whether Government have any objection in
indicating the category of persons that can be or should be in the Board of Trustees; whether there is any
objection to provide for representation of employees / unions of the bank or Government representatives in
the Board of Trustees?
 
 
 
          Ministry's Reply (01.07.03):-
 

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
          The flexibility on the number of directors to be appointed facilitates induction of the persons having
experience in the different fields for better management of the Pension Fund Trust.
 
          The guidelines regarding appointment of trustees, their duties and responsibilities, vacation of post
etc. are given in the Deed of Trust.
 
          At present, Board of SIDBI Pension Fund Trust includes one SIDBI Board member, one
representative each from officers, Class III and Class IV, retired employees. Chairman of SIDBI becomes
Ex-officio Chairman of Pension Trust.
 
          Since, the Pension Trust belongs to SIDBI and is widely represented, the need for associating a
Government representative in the Board of Trustees has not been felt.
 
          Committee's Observation (27.04.04):-
 
          The Committee was not satisfied with the Ministry's comments and desired that representatives of
Government and Trade Unions should be provided a place in Board of Trustees.
 
          Action Taken by the Ministry (27.07.04):-
       
 
Adopted from IDBI.
 
          The variation in the number of trustees is to take care of the minimum working requirement on one
hand and future expansion in case of substantial increase in the staff of the Bank requiring broad basing of
the trustees, on the other.
 
          The guidelines regarding appointment of trustees, their duties and responsibilities, vacation of post
etc. are given in the Deed of Trust.
 
          At present, Board of SIDBI Pension Fund Trust comprises five officers and one Class III – Class IV
representative from SIDBI – Executive Director in charge of Administration is the Chairman while the
Chief General Manager of PF-Pension Cell is the Alternative Chairman.
 
          As the Pension Trust pertains to SIDBI, which has adequate representation, the need is not felt to
provide for Government representation. 
 
          Committee’s further Observation (22.02.05):-
 
          The Committee was not satisfied with the Ministry’s comments for not including representatives of

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
Government and the Trade Unions in the Board of Trustees. The Committee reiterated its earlier stand that
the representatives of Government and the Trade Unions should be included in the Board of Trustees.
 
          Ministry’s further Comments (13.06.05):-
 
          The constitution of the SIDBI Trust has been laid down in Regulation No. 9 of the SIDB Pension
Regulations. As per the Regulations, the composition of the Board shall not be less than three and not more
than nine. This regulation is similar to the regulations adopted by the other DFIs and nationalized banks.
Further, the Pension Trust is represented by different groups including representatives of Class III and Class
IV employees apart from other members. Regarding representative from the Government of India in the
Board of Trustees, the Government may take a view in the matter.
 
8)      Point 
Raised:-
 
          Regulation 15: "Pension subject to future good conduct"
 
          In regulation 15, pension or a part thereof may be withheld or withdrawn if a pensioner is convicted
of a serious crime or is found guilty of grave misconduct. The terms 'serious crime' and 'grave misconduct'
are capable of assuming varied interpretations. Whether Government have any objection in making the
provisions of regulation 15 specific?
 
          Ministry's Reply (01.07.03)
 
          It would not be possible to comprehend all types of serious crimes or grave misconduct which could
necessitate withholding or withdrawing pension or a part thereof whether permanently or for a specified
period. In the CCS Pension Rules applicable to the Central Government employees, similar provisions have
been incorporated without defining the terms 'serious crime" and "grave misconduct".
 
Committee's Observation (27.04.04)
 
          The Committee noted the Ministry's comments.
 
9)      Point Raised:-
 
Regulation 39:- Commutation
 
          "A pensioner may commute for a lump-sum payment, a fraction upto maximum of one-third of the
pension admissible to him. Such a pensioner will be entitled to the pension upto two-third portion of the
admissible pension. Commuted portion of the pension will be resorted after a period of fifteen years from

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
the date of commutation. The method of commutation shall be in accordance with the table enclosed hereto.
If commutation is sought after one year of the ate  of retirement, it will be granted only after medical
examination, by the Medical Officer of the Small Industries Bank."
 
          Under the provisions of this regulation, a pensioner may commute one-third of the admissible pension
while under the CCS (Pension) Rules, a pensioner may commute up to 40% of admissible pension. Whether
Government have any objection in maintaining parity in this regard?
 
          Ministry's Reply (01.07.03):-
 
          The subject regulation is exactly in line with similar such regulations applicable in IDBI and RBI. As
SIDBI shares the same parentage and as and when any revision in the Regulations of RBI and IDBI takes
place, SIDBI will consider the same principles for adoption.
 
          Committee's Observation (27.04.04):-
 
          The Committee was informed that the provision is exactly in line with the similar provision in IDBI
and RBI Regulation. The Committee desired the Ministry to review the relevant provisions of SIDBI, RBI
and IDBI.
 
Action Taken by the Ministry (10.06.04):-
 
          The subject regulation has been adopted from IDBI. However, it is understood that RBI has made a
reference to GoI for increase in the commutation percentage to 40%. We propose to initiate necessary steps
for the same.
 
10)    Point 
Raised:-
 
          There is a discrepancy in the numbering of the regulations. For example, in regulation 1 and 3, the
sub-regulations have been numbered as (i), (ii) etc. whereas in regulations 2, 6 and 9, these have been
numbered as (1), (2), (3) etc. Further, in regulation 8, the sub-regulations have been numbered as (a), (b), (c)
etc. an so on. Whether the ministry has any objection in correcting the number of the sub-regulations and
providing uniformity in this regard?
 
          Ministry's Reply (01.07.03):-
 
          The suggestions of the Committee are accepted.
 
          Committee's Observation (27.04.04):-

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
 
          The Ministry agreed to the Committee's suggestion to rectify the position.
 
          Action Taken by the Ministry:-
 
          We propose to make necessary changes for the sake of uniformity together with the other proposed
amendments to the regulations.
 
3.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance had accepted its suggestions as
under:-
 
(i)
                In Regulation 9, by indicating the different groups including representatives of Class III and Class
IV employees, and an Officer of the rank of Under Secretary from the Ministry of Finance   apart
from other members that can be or should be included in the Board of Trustees of the Bank. The
Committee had impressed upon the Government to indicate the category of persons that can or
should be included in the Board of Trustees.
 
(ii)
              In Regulation 39, by proposing to initiate necessary steps to increase the commutation percentage
in case of pensioners to 40% of admissible pension. The Committee had pointed out that under the
provisions of the present Regulations, a pensioner may commute one third of the admissible
pension while under the CCS (Pension) Rules, a pensioner may commute up to 40% of admissible
pension. It had suggested to the Government to maintain parity in this regard.
 
(iii)
            On the issue raised vide point no 10, by proposing to make necessary changes in the numbering
of the regulations. The Committee had pointed out the discrepancy in the numbering of the
regulations and had suggested correction therein for the sake of uniformity.
 
4.       The Committee is, however, unhappy to note the shift in the Ministry’s stand from time to time while
corresponding with it on various points in the questionnaire; like point nos. 1, 2, 3, and 6, to mention a few.
While the Committee agrees to some extent to the Government’s logic to keep in line with the Pension
Regulations of other financial institutions, but in that case they should not act as an obstacle and retard the
evolution in similar legislation that is taking place in other institutions/organizations of Government.  For
example, inclusion of part time workers within the definition of the term ‘employee’, Regulation 2(7) does
not go well with the present time.   In Committee’s view, SIDBI is a statutory body and it should have an
effective and efficient set of subordinate legislations to enable it to discharge its obligations responsibly,
and it should not feel constrained on any account, including the keeping of parity with other financial
institutions, in this endeavour  of theirs.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry to review
the regulations in the light of the Committee suggestions that have been put forth during the course of its
deliberations, keeping aside all constraints that have been pointed out so that Regulations are efficient and

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
relevant to the current times.
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
 
I
         
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) have accepted most of its
recommendations and has taken necessary action upon them as under:
·        Rule2 (d):    By agreeing  to add the words “to mean a person registered as a valuer  under Section 34 AB of
Wealth Tax Act, 1957 and approved by the Board of Directors or Board of Trustees of the secured creditor, as
the case may be”, and there by specifying the qualifications of the 'Approved Valuer'.
·        Rule8 (2):   By agreeing to add the words " as soon as possible but in any case not later than 7 days from the
date of taking possession", thereby specifying the time period for publishing the possession notice after the
taking over of the property.
·        Rule9 (7):   By agreeing to add the following provisio  below the rule in order to check the misuse of the
excess money:
“Provided that if after meeting the cost of removing encumbrances and contingencies there is any surplus
available out of the money deposited by the purchaser such surplus shall be paid to the purchaser within 15 days
from the date of finalisation of the sale”.
·        Rule9 (8):      By agreeing to substitute the word "shall" with "may", so as to make it obligatory for the
authorised officer or purchaser to issue notices to the interested or entitled persons.
·        Rule10 (1):    By agreeing to add the following proviso in order to specify the qualifications of the 'Manager'
:
“Provided that the Manager so appointed shall not be a person who is, or at any time has been, adjudicated
insolvent, or has suspended payment or has compounded with his creditors, or who is, or has been convicted by
a criminal Court of an offence involving moral turpitude”.
 
On the rest of the points, the Committee noted the explanation furnished by the Ministry.
 
The Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) should carry
out the modifications in the Rules agreed to by them as above, at the earliest.
 
 
II
 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Law & Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
have reached favourably on the various points that were referred to them for comments/clarifications. The
Committee notes that the Ministry have agreed to take action as follows in pursuance to its suggestions:
 
          Point 1 (Rule 9 (8)):  To provide that the Chairperson presiding over the meeting, exercises his voting

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
right only in cases where there is a tie in the votes cast, for the purpose of resolution of the same.
          Point 3 (Rule 12(1)): (i) To provide a specific time period of 4 months for issuing a certificate for
recognition in Form- IV.
          (ii) To provide for an authority for appeal/ review if the application for recognition is rejected which
may be the State Bar Council of each State.
         
Point 5 (Rule 14):
  (i) To prescribe 6 months as the period for seeking re-admission as a member of
the fund and by fixing the interest on arrears at the time of re-admission at not exceeding 3%.
          (ii) To prescribe a period of 15 days to ensure continuity of the membership of the fund and that the
membership may be discontinued if the member failed to respond.
          Point 6 (Rule 15
):  To prescribe 6 months period for the issuance of certificate of membership to the
fund.
          Point 7 (Rule 16):
 To increase the period from 15 to 45 days for intimating the removal/ suspension
of a member from the State roll to the Trustee Committee.
          Point 8 (Rule 19): 
To substitute the word 'thiery ' with the word 'thirty', thereby rectifying a
typographical error.
 
On rest of the points the Committee notes with satisfaction the explanation furnished by the Ministry.
 
          The Committee, however recommends that the Ministry of Law and Justice should carry out
modification in the Rules as agreed to by them, expeditiously.
 
III
          The Committee notes with satisfaction that IRDA have taken a decision to implement the
Government orders on reservations for the reserved category persons and allow to them suitable relaxation
in age, educational qualification, experience, etc. The Committee recommends that the policy decision of
IRDA should find a clear mention in their Regulation, so that the policy gets a statutory recognition. As
regard to the autonomy conferred upon IRDA in the matter of recruitment and promotion, the Committee
feel that the justification given for the autonomy may no doubt sound appealing, but vesting of wide 
discretion  in any authority is always liable to be misused.
 
While the Committee appreciates the need for autonomy as projected by the IRDA, but in the
Committee’s view, subordinate legislation in the form of Rules/ Regulations should be codified to the
optimum, particularly when they to regulate the recruitment/promotion policy of an organization which has
a bearing on its manpower. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that IRDA may review their
regulations to see to what extent they can do away with the element of subjectivity, of course without
compromising with their efficiency standards.
 
IV

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
         
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways,
(Department of Shipping) have taken necessary action on almost all of its recommendations as follows:
          ·   Reg 1.0: By inserting the commencement clause in the title of the Regulation.
          ·  Reg 10.2(5):  By replacing the term “reasonable person” with “responsible person”, which has
already been defined in the regulations.
          ·  Reg 12.0:  By substituting the words “to be taken” with “to take”, thereby rectifying the
typographical error.
          ·  Reg 15.2:      By replacing the word “competent person” with “competent authority”, which has
already been defined in the regulations.
          ·  Reg 15.4:         By substituting the word “will” by the word “shall”, thereby making it mandatory to
handle only one class of cargo at a time.
          ·  Reg 16.1:      By amending the provisions as follows
“The person aggrieved by any order of the Inspector of Dangerous Goods of the Port or Competent
Authority may appeal to the Chairman within 15 days of the said order. Such appeal shall be heard and
decided within 30 days therafter”.
The Committee had desired that the rule should provide for a specific time frame for appeal  and a
time period for hearing and deciding the appeal. Also in Committee’s opinion the word “any person” was
not specific.
·  Reg 16.2:   By rewording the regulation as - “such as in case of defence  cargo relax all or any of
the provisions of the Regulations provided that the agency handling the cargo shall fully comply with safety
measure and undertake full responsibility for handling of such activity”, thereby making the concerned
agencies responsible for all the security measures and the handling activity of dangerous cargos.
·  Reg 17.1:    By increasing the penalty amount to Rupees Twenty Thousand and to Rupees Two
Thousand, if the breach continues further, which in Committee’s opinion was desirable.
·  Reg 19.0, 30.0, 49.0, 59.0:    By substituting the word “will” with the word “shall” in these
regulations, thereby making it mandatory for the concerned parties to abide by these regulations.
·  Reg 34.0:    By substituting the word “are” with the word “shall be”, so as to  mandatorily  prohibit
the personnel working in the area from bringing matches, lighters or flints or any other material likely to
cause ignition or spark or fire hazard. 
·  Reg 79.0:    By adding the words “Inspector of Dangerous Goods”, thereby
clarifying as to who has to take action in case of accidents involving poisonous  substance.
          ·  Reg 89.0:           By substituting the word “should” with the word “shall” so as to strictly ensure
proper handling of receptacles/carboys.
 
 
V
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance had accepted its suggestions as
under:-

COM-I
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/173th%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:41:51]
 
(iv)            In Regulation 9, by indicating the different groups including representatives of Class III and Class
IV employees, and an Officer of the rank of Under Secretary from the Ministry of Finance   apart
from other members that can be or should be included in the Board of Trustees of the Bank. The
Committee had impressed upon the Government to indicate the category of persons that can or
should be included in the Board of Trustees.
 
(v)              In Regulation 39, by proposing to initiate necessary steps to increase the commutation percentage
in case of pensioners to 40% of admissible pension. The Committee had pointed out that under the
provisions of the present Regulations, a pensioner may commute one third of the admissible
pension while under the CCS (Pension) Rules, a pensioner may commute up to 40% of admissible
pension. It had suggested to the Government to maintain parity in this regard.
 
(vi)
            On the issue raised vide point no 10, by proposing to make necessary changes in the numbering of
the regulations. The Committee had pointed out the discrepancy in the numbering of the
regulations and had suggested correction therein for the sake of uniformity.
 
          The Committee is, however, unhappy to note the shift in the Ministry’s stand from time to time while
corresponding with its on various points in the questionnaire like point nos. 1, 2, 3, and 6, to mention a few.
While the Committee agrees to some extent to the Government’s logic to keep in line with the Pension
Regulations of other financial institutions, but in that case they should not act as an obstacle and retard the
evolution in similar legislation that is taking place in other institutions/organizations of Government.  For
example, inclusion of part time workers within the definition of the term ‘employee’, Regulation 2(7) does
not go well with the present time.   In Committee’s view, SIDBI is a statutory body and it should have an
effective and efficient set of subordinate legislations to enable it to discharge its obligations responsibly,
and it should not feel constrained on any account, including the keeping of parity with other financial
institutions, in this endeavour  of theirs.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry to review
the regulations in the light of the Committee suggestions that have been put forth during the course of its
deliberations, keeping aside all constraints that have been pointed out so that Regulations are efficient and
relevant to the current times.    
 
 
 
 