     
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
 
HUNDRED AND THIRTY SIXTH REPORT
 
(Presented on 29th August,  2001)
(Adoption on 7th August,  2001)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
(August 29, 2001 / Bhadrapada 7,  1923 )
               
C O N  T  E  N  T  S                                                                                                                                                            
 
1.     COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                   
             
2.     INTRODUCTION                                        
 
3.        REPORT
 
I.      The Jute Manufacture Development Council (Procedure)               
        Rules, 1984.                                                                          
 
II.       The Indian Bank/Indian Overseas Bank Officer Employees’ (Acceptance of Jobs in Private Sector Concerns after
        Retirement) Regulations, 1979 
 
III.     The Lakshadweep Khadi and Village Industries Board
        Rules, 1991.
 
       IV.    The Lakshadweep Panchayats (Grant-in-aid) Rules, 1997
 
        V.    The Lakshadweep Panchayat Business  Rules, 1997.
 
      VI.    The Coir Industry (Registration and Licensing) Rules, 1958.
 
VII.        The Determination of rate of interest payable to subscribers
            of EPF-   implementation of 134th Report of the Committee
 
VIII.       Summary of Recommendations
 
        IX.     Minutes      
                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                            
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on the 16th May, 2000)
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

        1.   Shri Dipankar Mukherjee   ¾   Chairman
2.     Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt
3.     Shri Kapil Sibal
4.     Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
5.     Dr. A. R. Kidwai
6.     Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
7.     Shri Suryabhan Patil Vahadane
8.     Shri  Lajpat Rai
9.     Shri  Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
     10.    Shri  S. Sivasubramanian
     11.    Shri  Dara Singh Chauhan       
     12.    Shri  H. K. Javare Gowda 
     13.    Shri  Drupad Borgohain
   *14.    Vacant
     15.    Shri Suresh A. Keswani
 
SECRETARIAT
 
1.     Shri S. Vijay Kumar,  Joint Secretary
2. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary
4. Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
 
 
 
* Vacant on account of retirement of Shri R. Margabandu from the membership    of the House.
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
        I,      the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been authorized by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Hundred and  Thirty Sixth  Report of the Committee
.
1.1   The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on  August 7, 2001.
 
1.2     The matter examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various Rules/Regulations and the issues related
therewith alongwith the comments of the Government received thereon. The observations and recommendations which, in the
opinion of the Committee should be brought to the notice of the House are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                                                                                      DIPANKAR   MUKHERJEE
August 7,  2001                                                                                                                                                          Chairman
                                                                         Committee on Subordinate Legislation,
                                                                                                                                                                      Rajya Sabha
                                       REPORT
 
Jute Manufacture Development Council (Procedural) Rules, 1984.
 
1.     The Jute Manufacture Development Council (Procedural) Rules, 1984 framed under section 25 of the Jute Manufactures
Development Council Act, 1983 were examined and certain points were forwarded to the Ministry of Textiles for their
comments/clarifications on the 31st December, 1991.
 
2.     The requisite comments were furnished by the Ministry on the 13th January, 1992.  The points referred to and the Ministry’s
comments thereon are reproduced below:-
 
1.             Point referred
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

Rule 4:  Powers and  Function of the Chairman
 
“Subject to the provisions of the Act and the rules framed there under, the Chairman shall be responsible for the day to day
functioning of the Council”.
 
Whether any rules have been framed as referred to in the above Rules; if so, the details thereof; and if not, the reasons
therefore?
 
                Comments
 
This Rule itself, alongwith the other provisions of the Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 1983 and Jute
Manufactures Development Council (Procedural)  Rules, 1984 determine the powers and functions of the Chairman which have
been further amplified by Rule 6(2) wherein it has been stated that the Secretary shall perform his duties as referred to in Rule 6(3)
under the supervision of the Chairman.
 
2.        Point referred
Rules 7 : Tenure of appointment of member
 
“It shall be competent for the Central Government to appoint another person in the place of a member appointed under
sub-section (4) of section 3 of the Act before the completion of two years if it is of
opinion that such member has ceased to represent the interests he was appointed to represent.”
 
        The Ministry may explain the criteria for deciding as to whether a member has ceased to represent the interests he was
appointed to represent.
 
        Comments
 
Government may replace any member who may have become dissociated with the sector whose interests he was appointed to
represent, e.g. any member appointed to represent exporters of Jute goods by virtue of his position as a leading exporter of Jute
goods may be replaced if he ceases to export such jute goods etc.
 
3.        Point referred
        Rule 11:  Filling of Casual Vacancy of members
 
“Any casual vacancy in the membership of the Council by any reason shall be filled by appointment by the Central
Government.”
 
        Under the Rule, no time limit has been fixed for filling the casual vacancy, whether the Ministry have any objection in fixing a
time-limit of 3 months for the purpose.
 
                Comments
 
No time limit is necessary to be fixed for filling of the casual vacancy of members.  Government tries its best to fill up any
vacancy at the earliest but such appointments can, at time, be delayed due to completion of procedural formalities etc. However,
Government tries to ensure that there are no vacancies in the Council by initiating advance action to reconstitute this body every
two years.
 
4.       Point referred
        Rules 12: Appointment of substitutes
 
“Should a person appointed as member of the Council, be prevented from  attending a meeting of the council, a substitute
to take his place
 
 
may be appointed by the Central Government.  Such substitute shall have rights and privileges as a member for that
meeting only”.               
 
        The above rule is vague in as much as it does not specify any ground for preventing a member of the Council from attending
its meeting. What is justification for appointing a substitute for such member?
 
        Comments
               
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

This rule is meant to take care of any unforeseen eventuality viz lawful  or unlawful confinement etc. that may prevent any
member from attending the meeting of the Council.
 
5.     Point referred
        Rule 14: Procedure for meetings of the Council
 
“(2) The Chairman may, at any time, convene a meeting of the Council.
 
       
XXX                                       XXX                                       XXX
 
Provided further that in cases of emergency a special meeting may be summoned at any time by the Chairman who shall
inform in advance the Government of India and members of the subject matter for discussion and the reasons for which he
considered it urgent.  No other business shall be transacted at such special meeting.”
 
The term ‘in advance’ appearing in the  Rule is not clear.  It is felt that the emergency meeting be convened giving notice of
some specific time period and the same be incorporated  in the  Rules.
                    Comments
 
This rule has been framed so that urgent matters can be discussed by the Council at the earliest possible occasion. 
Specification of a time period for the notice for such emergent meetings would bind the Chairman to a time limit which may  delay
discussion on emergent matters.
 
 
6.          Point referred
Rule 14: Procedure for meetings of the Council
 
“(4)The emergency shall, with the approval of the chairman, or in the absence of  Chairman the Vice –Chairman, prepare and
circulate  amongst the
 
 
members at least seven days before a meeting of the Council, a list of the business to be transacted at such meeting.  No business ,
not included in the Agenda shall be considered at a meeting of the  Council, without permission  of the Chairman of the meeting. 
If any member desires to suggest any subject for discussion by the Council, he shall give at least ten clear days ‘notice”.
 
The Rule requires at least ten clear days notice if any member desires to suggest any subject for discussion by the council.  But
the rules are silent over the circumstances where majority of members present at the meeting of the Council suggest any subject for
discussion.
 
Comments
 
This Rule provides for consideration of any business which has not been included in the agenda after taking due permission of
the Chairman of the meeting.  Thus, the  Chairman of the meeting may allow any subject to be discussed whether it is suggested by
only one or the majority of the members.  However, the discretion in their regard is made by the Chairman.  If any  Member desires
inclusion of a subject for discussion in the meeting he is required to give 10 clear days notice which would unable the Secretary to
prepare requisite background material to facilities discussions.
 
7.        Point referred
        Rule 14: Procedure for meeting of the  Council
 
“(7)In case of difference of opinion amongst the members of the Council present at a meeting, the opinion of the majority shall
prevail.  Each member of the Council shall have one vote.  In case of any equality of votes, the Chairman, or the Vice-
chairman or in the absence of both, the member presiding over such meeting shall have a second or a casting vote.”
 
Under the rule, the member presiding over the meeting shall have a second or a casting vote in case of equality of votes.  The
Ministry may explain the rationale behind this provision.  It is felt that the provision is against the democratic norms and the
member presiding should have only the casting vote.
 
        Comments
 
The casting vote by the member presiding over the meeting is required to arrive at a decision in the eventuality or equality of
votes.  The  Chairman normally has only one vote but has been given the casting vote to determine the outcome of a matter in
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

which equal votes have been cast on both sides.  A casting vote can only be cast if there is equality of votes.  The suggestion to
allow the presiding member only a casting vote would prevent him from voting on other issues which would also not be desirable. 
Thus, in effect,  the weightage given to the vote of the presiding officer is  more than the weightage given to votes of other
members in the eventuality of a tie.
 
3.     The  Committee held discussion on the subject at Calcutta on the 16th January, 1992 with the representatives of Jute
Manufactures Development Council and the Ministry of Textiles.
 
4.     On the 26th February, 1993 the relevant extracts from the study note on the above discussion (Annexure-I) were forwarded to
the Ministry of Textiles with the request to intimate the action taken  by them in the light of the observations made by the 
Committee.
 
5.     Thereafter, the Ministry vide their Office Memorandum dated the 8th  October, 1993 forwarded a note (Annexure-II)
containing the action taken by them in the light of the observation made by the  Committee.
 
6.     The Committee again considered the subject matter on the 15th  December, 1994 in the light of the action taken by the
Ministry. 
The Committee was not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry of Textiles.  The Committee was of the view that Rule 12
was vague and hence may be deleted.
 
7.     The decision of the Committee as above was communicated to the Ministry of Textiles for their comments/clarifications on
12th January,1995 but comments from the Ministry were not received despite several reminders.
 
8.        The Committee further considered the subject matter in its meeting held on May 20,1999.  The Committee noted with regret
that the Ministry of Textiles had not intimated the action taken on Committee’s suggestion on Rule  12.   The  Committee  also 
noted  that  the  comments of the Ministry of
Textiles were not satisfactory on certain other points also.  The Committee desired that the Jute Manufacturer Development
Council (Procedural ) Rules 1984 may be reviewed again for a complete and comprehensive examination thereof. Accordingly an
additional questionnaire was sent to the Ministry of Textiles for their comments/clarifications on 13.1.2000.
 
9.        The Committee considered the replies furnished by the Ministry on January 20, 2000 at Calcutta.  The point referred,  the
comments of the Ministry thereon as well as Committees observation on each are reproduced below:-
 
I.      Point referred
 
        Whether the Jute Manufactures Development Council (Procedural) Rules, 1984 have been laid on the Table of both the
Houses and if so, the date of laying thereof?
 
        Comments
 
        The Jute Manufactures Development Council (Procedural) Rules have been laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 25.3.1985
and Lok Sabha on 22.03.1985.
 
        Committee’s Observation
 
        The Committee noted the reply.
 
II.        Point referred
 Rule 4:  Powers and  Function of the Chairman
 
“Subject to the provisions of the Act and the rules framed there under the Chairman shall be responsible for the day to day
functioning of the Council”.
 
Powers, duties, responsibilities etc. of the Chairman have not been specifically provided in the rules.  The procedure for
removal of the Chairman from his office, investigation/inquiry against him etc. have not been specified in the rules.  Provision in
rule 6(2) is not adequate in this regard.  Whether Ministry have any objection is specifying the above provisions in the rules itself?
 
Comments
 
        Since the Chairman of the Council is an official (Secretary, Ministry of Textiles), all the provisions regulating a public servant
are applicable in his capacity as the Chairman.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

        Committee’s Observation
 
The Committee noted the reply.
 
III.        Point referred
 Rule 6(3)(iv) and Rule 14(9) Proceeding of the Meeting
               
“Maintain the minute books containing a record of the business transacted by the Council”
 
“A record shall be maintained of all business transacted by the council and copies of such record shall be submitted to the
Central Government.  The record of business transacted at a meeting of the Council shall be signed by the Chairman presiding
over such meeting”.
 
        It is not clear whether proceedings of the Meetings of the Council are circulated to its members for their information or not. 
Whether Govt. have any objection in making it mandatory to circulate record/proceedings of the meetings to its members for their
information.  Whether minutes of a meeting are also got approved in the subsequent meeting.
 
This Rule itself, alongwith the other provisions of the Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 1983 and Jute
Manufactures Development Council (Procedural).  Rules 1984 determine the powers and functions of the Chairman which have
been further amplified by Rule 6(2) wherein it has been stated that the Secretary shall perform his duties as referred to in Rule 6(3)
under the supervision of the Chairman.
 
                Comments
 
        The minutes of the meeting of the Council are drafted and forwarded to the  Chairman  for  his approval.  The approved
minutes are then circulated to the members.  In the next meeting of the Council, the said minutes are placed before the members for
confirmation.
 
        Committee’s Observation
 
The Committee noted the reply
 
IV.     Point referred
         Rule 6(3)(vii); Delegation of Financial Powers
 
“Sanction re-appropriation of grants under such powers as may be delegated by the Council and within such limits as may be
specified by it”.
 
        Meaning of the words” such powers as may be delegated” and “such limits as may be specified” are not clear.  The extent and
limit for delegation of Power, particularly in case of financial matters, should be specified in the rules itself.
        Comments
 
A specific provision as regards delegation of financial powers may not be desirable since it may create a need for frequent
amendment to the Rules.
 
        Committee’s Observation
 
The Committee agreed to their contention.
 
 
V.      Point referred
       Rule 6(3)(ix): Delegation of Duties and Powers
 
“Undertake such other duties and exercise such other powers, as may, from time to time, be entrusted or delegated to him by
the Council or the Chairman”.
 
        Should the extent to which the council or Chairman can entrust/delegate duties/powers to the be secretary be specified in the
rules itself?
        Comments
 
Sub-rules (1) to (viii) specify the duties and powers which may be delegated to Secretary.  Rule 6(3)(ix) is a residual clause
and the provision has been made for administrative convenience for the working of the Council 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
Committee’s Observation.
 
The Committee noted the reply.
 
VI.    Point referred
       Rule 6(3)(ix): Delegation of Duties and Powers
 
“Any casual vacancy in the membership of the Council by any reason shall be filled by appointment by the Central
Government”.
 
        Filling up of a casual vacancy may be delayed upto any extent in the name of procedural formalities.  What are these
procedural formalities committee’s earlier stand is reiterated that such vacancies should be filled up within three months from the
date of such vacancy.
        Comments
 
The proposal for filling up a casual vacancy in the membership of the Council is received from JMDC and approved at the
level of Minister of Textiles.  All efforts are made by the Ministry to fill up such casual vacancy within a period of three months. 
The suggestions of the Committee on filling up of a casual vacancy within a period of three months from the date of arising
of such vacancy is, therefore, accepted.  Action will accordingly be initiated to amend the above Rule.
               
        Committee’s Observation
 
        The Committee noted the reply
               
VII.  Point referred
        Rule12: Appointment of Substitutes
 
“Should a person, appointed as member of the Council, be prevented from attending a meeting of the Council a substitute to
take his place may be appointed by the Central Government. Such substitute shall have rights and privileges as a member for that
meeting only”.
 
The provision of the above rule is vague.  The total membership of the council including its Chairman is 32.  For the purpose
of quorum. One third of total members  but not less than 7 members presence is required.  Then what is necessity and urgency for
keeping this provision for appointment of substitutes. As suggested by the Committee earlier, either rule 12 may be deleted or
suitably modified.
 
Comments
 
        The clause has been inserted in the Rules with a view to maintain due representation of each interested group in a Council
meeting, even in the event of a member being prevented from attending the meeting, by appointment of a substitute in his place. 
The JMDC Act provides for 7 interest groups in the membership of the Council from different segments and hence the retention of
Rule 12 is necessary for providing representation to all these groups.
 
        Committee’s Observation
 
        The Committee noted the reply
 
VIII.      Point referred
            Rule 14(1): Meeting of the Council
 
 “Not less than one meeting of the Council shall be held each financial year”.
 
        The rule provides that meeting of the Council shall be held at least once in a financial year.  Maximum gap between two
meetings is not specified therein.  By holding one meeting in the 1st week of a financial year and 2nd  meeting in the last week of
the next financial year, the condition of the rule may be satisfied but there will be a gap of about two years between two meetings. 
 
Whether Govt. have any objection in specifying maximum gap between two consecutive meetings.
 
        Comments
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

        Due to budget formalities, at least one meeting in each year is the minimum requirement.  In fact the Council has been holding
on an average two meetings in a year.  Any amendment, therefore, is not required.
 
     Committee’s Observation
 
The Committee noted the reply.
 
IX.     Point referred
         Rule14(6): Quorum for the Meeting
 
“One-third of the total number of members of the Council but not less than seven members present shall form a quorum at a
meeting of the Council”.
 
Total membership of the Council including its Chairman may go upto thirty two.  Rule 14(6) states that one third of total
number of members but not less than seven members present shall form a Quorum. Whether under any circumstances the total
membership can be less than twenty one and if not, what is the justification for keeping both provisions of one third of total
members of the Council and not less than seven members.  Whether govt. have ;any objection in suitably modifying the rule?
        Comments
 
        Both the provisions, as regards number of members to form a quorum and the minimum numbers for convening a meeting of
the Council are necessary in the light of representation of the various segment groups in the meeting of the Council.  This may be
seen with reference to the reply of the Ministry to the Question No. 7 above.
 
        Committee’s Observation
 
        The Committee noted the reply.
 
X.      Point referred
        Rule 16(1) Powers of the Council
 
“Power of appointment subject to the provisions of section 6 of he Act, the Council may create new posts and make
appointments thereto as may be necessary for the efficient performance of its functions, provided that no posts carrying the
maximum salary beyond rupees 1,300 per mensum  shall be created or filled without the previous approval of the Central
Government”.
 
        The Council can create and filled up posts carrying salary upto Rs.1,300/-. Whether the limit of salary for this purpose has
been modified as per the fifth Pay Commission’s Report if not, what is the present stage of the matter?
 
        Comments
 
A suggestion in this regard to revise the salary limit to a maximum of Rs. 13,500/- has been received from the Council and is
under consideration of the Ministry. 
               
Committee’s Observation
 
The Committee directed the representative of the Ministry to furnish a proposal in this regard for its consideration.
 
 
XI.    Point referred
         Rule 16(2): (iii)
 
“The Council may incur expenditure outside India upto an amount not exceeding ten thousand rupees on each individual item
subject to the provisions of rule 18”.
 
What are the maximum expenditure limit of Rs. 10,000/- to be incurred outside India has since been enhanced and if so, to
what extent and if not, the justification therefor?
 
        Comments
 
The matter needs to be considered in the light of appropriate exchange control regulations.
 
        Committee’s Observation
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
The Committee desired that a proposal to this effect may be sent to the Committee for its consideration.
               
XII.  Point referred
        Rule 19(6) Payments by the Council
 
“All payments by or on behalf of the Council shall b made by cheques except for amounts not exceeding “ordinarily”
Rs.1000/- and extraordinarily Rs.2500/- under special sanction of the Secretary, which may be paid in cash”.
 
        What are the extraordinary circumstances under which the Secretary of the council can make cash payment beyond Rs. one
thousand?
        Comments
 
When this Act was formulated, the ceiling for payments, other than cheque were Rs. 1000/- in ordinary circumstances and Rs.
2500/- in extraordinary circumstances.  However, the Council has imposed self discipline and maintained payments on this account
normally to within Rs. 1000/-.  Now the said ceiling has since been revised to Rs. 20,000/- in Income Tax Act and the same may be
followed by the Council.
        Committee’s Observation
 
The Committee desired the Ministry to furnish a note in this regard.
 
XIII.      Point referred
            Rule 19(6) Bank Account and fixed deposit by the Council
 
“All funds not required for current expenditure may be placed in fixed deposit with such Banks as the Central Government
may approve. The placing
 
 
of money in fixed deposit and the disposal of money so placed shall require the sanction of the Chairman or in his absence, the
Vice-Chairman”.
 
        Vice-Chairman is elected from amongst the members of the Council. Whether the sanction required for placing the money in
fixed deposits and disposal thereof shall be left with the Vice-Chairman who is otherwise an ordinary member of the Council?
               
Comments
 
        JMDC does not have a Vice Chairman at present.  The approval of Secretary (Textiles) as Chairman of the Council will be
taken towards provisions of this Rule.  Hence the question of taking the approval of Vice-Chairman for such purposes does not
arise.
 
Committee’s Observation
 
The Committee noted the reply.
 
10      The Ministry of Textiles vide their O.M. dated 31.10.2000 and 23.2.2001 have furnished the proposed amendment  in the
Rules (Annexures-III & IV).
 
11.  The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Textiles have agreed to carry out amendment in the rules as follows
on the basis of Committee’s suggestions/recommendations:
 
(i)          Rule 4(1) by providing that the Chairman shall preside over the Meeting of the Council.
 
(ii)           Rule 6(3) by providing that minutes containing a record of the business would be circulated to the members for
confirmation in the next meeting.
 
(iii)          Rule 14(9) by providing for maintenance of a record of the business transacted by the Council.
 
 
(iv)         Rule 11(1) by providing a period of three months for filling up of  a casual vacancy.
 
 
(v)        Rule 12 by deleting the provisions with regard to appointment of the substitute member of the Council.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
(vi)      Rule 14(6) by providing that one third of the total number of members of the Council but not less than eleven
members present shall form a quorum at a meeting of the Council.
 
(vii)     Rule 16(1)by revising salary limit from Rs.1300 (pre-revised) to Rs.13500/- for purpose of creation and filling up of
a posts.
 
(viii)   Rule 16(2)(iii) by raising the limit of expenditure to be incurred outside India to the extent as permissible under the
Exchange Control Regulations or other relevant regulations and guidelines in place of the existing limit of
Rs.10000/-.
 
(ix)       Rule 19(2) by raising the ceiling on payments by the Council upto Rs.5000/-ordinarily and Rs.20000/- in
extraordinarily in place of existing ceilings of Rs.1000/- and Rs.2500/-, respectively.
 
(x)         Rule 19(6)  by doing away with the provisions requiring approval of Chairman/Vice Chairman for disposal of
money placed in fixed deposit.
 
12.     The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Textiles should carry out the above amendments
expeditiously under intimation to it.
 
Annexure-I
[Vide para 4 Page…]
 
JANUARY 16, 1992
(1.00 P.M.)
 
 
THE JUTE MANUFACTURES DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL (PROCEDURAL) RULES, 1984.
 
 
5.     The Committee assembled in the Crystal Room of Hotel Taj Bengal at 1.00 P.M. on the 16th January, 1992, and held
discussions with the representatives of the Jute Manufactures Development Council and Ministry of Textiles.
      
MEMBER PRESENT
 
1.        Shri Jagesh Desai    —   Chairman
2.        Shri Md. Salim
3.        Shri M. Palaniyandi
4.        Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray
5.        Shrimati Pratibha Singh
6.        Shri Ashok Nath Verma
SECRETARIAT
 
1.        Shri S.K. Sen Gupta, Deputy Secretary
2.     Shri A.K. Singh, Committee Officer
 
OFFICIALS OF THE JUTE MANUFACTURES DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
1.     Shri N. Saggi, Secretary
2.     Shri N. Sen Gupta, Senior Accounts Officer
3.     Shri S.K. Chakraborty, Assistant Secretary
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES
 
Shri G.P. Tandon, Under Secretary
 
5.1     Smt. N. Saggi, Secretary Jute Manufactures Development Council welcomed the Committee and introduced the Officers
present.  Thereafter, Chairman also introduced the  Members and officers of the Committee.
 
5.2     Before initiating discussion on the subject the chairman sought to  know the sphere of activities of the Jute Manufactures
Development Council and problems faced by the Council in its smooth functioning.  The Committee was told about inadequate
funds being directed for current year from the case fund to Jute Manufactures Development Council.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

        The Chairman directed the Secretary of the Council to submit  a note in this regard to the Ministry for perusal and directed the
representative of the Ministry to report to the Committee about their views.
 
5.3     Thereafter, the Committee took up discussion of the Rules.
 
Rules 4, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE CHARIMAN
       
        The Committee felt that it was not possible for the Chairman to be responsible for the day to day functioning of the Council
and directed the representative of the Ministry to examine whether this needs to be changed.
 
5.4     In regard to appointment of new member to the Council, under Rules 7, 11 and 12 the Committee felt that new member
should represent the same interest which were being represented by the outgoing member and, if necessary, the rules be amended
accordingly.
 
5.5     The Committee was told that Council meets once a year.  The Committee felt that it was too long a period and directed that
the Ministry may consider specifying that these meetings should be held more frequently preferably  quarterly.
 
5.6     The Committee took strong exception for equipping the member presiding over the meeting of the Council with a power of
casting a second vote in the case of equality of votes and directed that this provision be deleted from Rule  4.
 
5.7     The discussion concluded at 1.45 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks. 
 
Annexure–II
[Vide para 5 page…]
 
Subject:- Jute Manufactures Development Council (Procedural) Rules, 1984— Examination by the Committee on
Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha.
 
        Action taken by the Ministry of Textiles on various action points is as follows:-
 
Para 5.2  Ministry is releasing funds to JMDC according to the budget provision in the budget of Ministry of Textiles duly voted by
the Parliament.  However, the fund requirement of JMDC has  been much higher than the funds provided in the budget.  Action is
being taken to provide more funds by way of augmenting the budget provision or to create a Public Deposit Fund to which all the
collection on jute manufactures could be credited and the funds be released to JMDC for their activities.
 
Para 5.3  JMDC has already proposed an amendment to the Procedural Rules so that the Secretary of the Council could be
designated as the Chief Executive.  The matter is under consideration.
 
Para 5.4 The Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 1984 specifies the composition of the Council in Section 3 (4).  The
various sectors from which the members are to be appointed to the Council are clearly mentioned.
 
Para 5.5.The Procedural Rules of JMDC in Article 1.4 specify that not less than one meeting of the Council shall be held in each
financial year.  However, there is no limit over the maximum number of meetings.  Thus, the meetings of the JMDC can be held as
and when required.  Thus, there is no need for any amendment o the Rules.
 
Para 5.6 The  casting vote by the member presiding over the meeting is required only to arrive at a decision in the eventuality of
equality of votes.  In normal circumstances the Chairman will have only one vote as also the other members have.  The purpose for
which the provision for casting vote has been provided  will  be defeated if the second vote or the casting vote is not allowed
to the Chairman.   Thus, no amendment to the existing provision is necessary.
 
 
Annexure —III
[Vide para 10 page …]
 
AMENDMENTS IN THE JMDC (PROCEDURAL) RULES, 1984
 
1 2 3
Rule
No.
Existing  Provision Amended Provision
   
1. Short title :- These rules may be
called the Jute Manufactures
Short title:- These rules may be
called the Jute Manufactures
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

Development Council (Procedural)
Rules. 1984.
Development Council (Procedural) 
(Amendment) Rules….
3(d) “Secretary” means the principal
officer of the Council appointed
under rule 6 of these rules to carry
on the functions of Secretary of the
Council;
 
“Secretary” means the Secretary
Cum Chief Executive Officer of
the Council appointed under rule 6
of these rules to carry on the
functions of Secretary of the
Council.
4(1) Powers and Functions of the
Chairman–(‘) Subject to the
provisions of the Act and the rules
framed thereunder, the Chairman
shall be repressible for the day to
day functioning of the Council.
Powers and Functions of the
Chairman–(1) Subject to the
provisions of the Act and the rule
framed thereunder, the Chairman
shall preside over the meeting of
the Council.
6(1)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6(2)
Power and duties of the Secretary-
 
(1)        The Secretary shall be
appointed by the Council with the
approval of the Central Government.
 
The Secretary shall be the principal
officer of the Council and shall work
under the supervision of  the
Chairman.
 
 
 
 
The Secretary shall be appointed by
the Central Government.
 
 
 
The Secretary shall be the Chief
Executive Officer of the Council
and shall work under the
supervision of the Chairman.
 
6(3) It shall be duty of Secretary to:
 
(iv)  maintain the minute books
containing a record of the business
transacted by the Council.
 
 
Maintain the minute books
containing a record of the business
transacted by the Council and get it
circulated to the members for
confirmation in the next meeting.
 
14(9) A record shall be maintained of all
business transacted by the Council
and copies of such record shall be
submitted to the Central
Government.  The record of
business transacted at a meeting of
the Council shall be signed by the
Chairman presiding over such
meeting.
A record shall be maintained of all
business transacted by the Council. 
Copies of such record shall be
submitted to the Central
Government and circulated to the
members for confirmation in the
next meeting.  The record of
business transacted and a meeting
of the Council shall be signed by
the Chairman presiding over such
meeting.
 
11. Filling of casual vacancy of
members
 (1) Any casual vacancy in the
membership of the Council by any
reason shall be filled by
appointment by the Central
Government.
 
 
Any casual vacancy in the
membership of the Council by any
reason shall be filled by
appointment by the Central
Government within a period of
three months from the date of
arising such vacancy.
 
12. Appointment of substitutes should
a person appointed as member of
the Council, be prevented from
attending a meeting of the Council,
a substitute to take his place may
 Deleted
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

be appointed  be the Central
Government.  Such substitute shall
have rights and privileges as a
member for that meeting only
14. Procedure for meetings of the
Council—
(6) One-third of the total number of
members of the Council but not
less that seven members present
shall form a quorum at a meeting of
the Council.
 
 
One-third of the total number of
members of the Council but not
less that eleven members present
shall form a quorum at a meeting of
the Council.
16. Powers of the Council:
(i) Power of appointment – Subject
to the provisions of section to the
provision of section 6 of the Act the
Council may create new posts and
make appointments thereto as may
be necessary for the efficient
performance of its functions
provided that no posts carrying the
maximum salary beyond Rupees
1,300 per mensem shall be created
or filled without the previous
approval of the Central
Government.
Powers of the Council:
Powers of appointment – Subject to
the provisions of section 6 of the
Act, the Council may, keeping in
mind the resources of the Council,
create new posts and make
appointments thereto as may be
necessary for the efficient
performance of its functions,
provided that no posts carrying the
maximum salary beyond Rupees
9,000 per mensem shall be created
or filled without the previous
approval of the Central
Government.
 
 (2)     Other Powers
 
(i) Subject to the provisions of
rules 18, the Council may, by
resolution, sanction any
expenditure or enter into any
contract involving expenditure
from the Fund in the discharge of
its functions under the Act.
 
         Provided that the Council
shall not sanction any expenditure
or enter into any contract involving
expenditure in excess of the budget
allotments.
 
   Provided further that the
Council shall not enter into any
contract involving any expenditures
in excess of two lakhs of rupees, or
extending over a period of five
years, without the previous
approval of the Central
Government.
 
(ii) The Council shall have power
to write off, in any individual case,
losses upto five thousand rupees.
 
(2)  Other Powers:
 
 (i) Subject to the provisions of
rules 18 the Council may, by
resolution, sanction any expenditure
or enter into any contract involving
expenditure from the Fund in the
discharge of its functions under the
Act:
 
     Provided that the Council shall
not sanction any expenditure or
enter into any contract involving
expenditure in excess of the budget
allotments.
 
     Provided further that the Council
shall not enter into any contract
involving any expenditures in
excess of twenty five lakhs of
rupees, or extending over a period
of fine years without the previous
approval of the Central
Government.
 
(ii) The Council shall have power to
write off all the losses arising out of
normal wear and tear of assets (in
lieu of depreciation) and in other
individual cases, losses upto
twenty five thousand rupees.
 
 
   
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

(iii) The Council may incur
expenditure outside India upto an
amount not exceeding ten thousand
rupees on each individual item
subject to the provisions of rule 18.
(iii) The Council may incur
expenditure outside India upto an
amount, as may be permissible
under the exchange control
regulations or other relevant
regulations, and guidelines of
Government of India on each
individual item.
 
19 Maintenance and operation of
Bank Accounts and Investment of
Funds of the Council:-
 
   (2) All payments by or on behalf
of the Council shall be made by
cheques except for amounts not
exceeding  ordinarily Rs. 1000/-
and extraordinarily Rs. 2500/-
under special sanction of the
Secretary, which may b paid in
cash.
 
(6)   All funds not required for
current expenditure may be placed
in fixed deposit with such Banks as
the Central Government may
approve.  The placing of money in
fixed deposit and the disposal of
money so placed shall require the
sanction of the Chairman or in his
absence, the Vice-Chairman.
 
 
 
 
 
(2) All payments by or on behalf of
the Council shall be made by
cheques except for amounts not
exceeding ordinarily Rs.5000/- and
extraordinarily Rs. 20.000/- under
special sanction of the Secretary,
which may be paid in cash. 
 
(6) All funds not required for
current expenditure may be placed
in suitable term deposit with State
Bank of India or other
Nationalized Bank.
Annexure–II
[Vide para 10 pages 19]
 
 
Communication No. 6/6/2000-Jute dated 23.02.2001 received from the Ministry of Textiles.
 
Subject:-  Jute Manufactures Development Council (Procedural) Rules, 1984— Examination by the Committee on
Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha.
 
        The undersigned is directed to refer to Rajya Sabha Secretariat O.M. No.R 5/5(22)/91-Com.1 dated 15th January, 2001 on the
above subject raising therein objection on the proposed amendment in Rule 16(1) which relates to the power of JMDC to create
new posts.  The matter has been reconsidered and the provision proposed to be amended as follows:-
 
                                Existing Provision                Amended Provision
 
16
 
 
 
Powers of the Council
 
(1)   Power of appointment –
Subject to the provisions of section
6 of the Act, the Council may
create new posts and make
appointments thereto as may be
necessary for the efficient
performance of its functions,
provided that no posts carrying the
maximum salary beyond Rupees
1,300 per mensem shall be created
or filled without the previous
approval of the Central
Government.
Power of the Council
 
Powers of appointment  -  Subject to
the provisions of section 6 of the Act,
the Council may create new posts and
make appointments thereto as may be
necessary for the efficient performance
of its functions, provided that no posts
carrying  the maximum salary beyond
Rupees 13,500 per mensem shall be
created or filled without the previous
approval of the Central Government.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
 
 
II
 
The Indian Bank/Indian Overseas Bank Officer Employees’ (Acceptance of Jobs in Private Sector Concerns after
Retirement) Regulations, 1979 -Examination by the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha.
 
               
The Indian Bank/Indian Overseas Bank Officer Employees’ (Acceptance of Jobs in Private Sector Concerns after Retirement)
Regulations, 1979 framed under the Section 19 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970
were examined and certain points were referred to the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Banking Division) on
the 6th June, 1995 for their comments/clarifications. 
 
2.        The subject matter was taken up by the Committee for discussions with the  representatives of the Indian Overseas
Bank/Indian Bank and the Ministry of Finance on 13th and 19th June, 1995 respectively at Chennai.
 
3.        Relevant extracts from the study notes (Annexures I& II) on the above visit were forwarded to the Ministry of Finance on the
2nd and 3rd November, 1995, respectively, for necessary action.
 
4.        The action taken notes on the suggestions of the Committee, as contained in the study notes, could not be received from the
Ministry for quite some time despite exchange of reminders and interim  replies.
 
5.         Thereafter, the Committee considered the subject in its meeting  held on May 15, 1998 and expressed its anguish over the
inordinate delay and casual attitude on the part of the Ministry in dealing with the Committee.  Accordingly, a communication was
sent to the Ministry of Finance on 19.6.1998 requesting them to issue necessary directions to the various divisions in the Ministry
to implement the pending recommendations within a period of three months and also to take action on future recommendations of
the Committee in a time-bound manner.
 
6.        After a couple of reminders and interim replies the Ministry of Finance (Banking  Division  vide  their O.M. dated 9.5.2000
(Annexure-III)  furnished 
 
as   action   taken  note  a   copy  of  the  approved  Regulations  viz.    Officer
 (Employees Acceptance of Jobs in Private Sector Concerns after Retirement) Regulations, 1999 send to public sector banks for
notification in the Official Gazette superseding the earlier notification on the regulation.
 
7.     The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have incorporated amendments in regulation 4 (3) making provision
for granting or refusing permission to a person for taking up any commercial employment more specific and regulation 4(5)
regarding appeal on rejection of request for permission to a person for taking up any commercial employment based upon
Committee’s recommendation, though it took an undue long time in doing so.
 
Annexure-I
[Vide para 3, page…]
 
Indian Overseas Bank Officer (Employees Acceptance of Jobs in Private Sector concerns after retirement
Regulation.
 
June 13, 1995
(2.45 P.M.)
 
        The Committee assembled at 2.45 P.M. in the Board Room of Indian Overseas Bank, at Madras and held discussions with the
representatives of Indian Overseas Bank and the Ministry of Finance.
 
MEMBER  PRESENT
 
1.     Shri Hanumanthappa  -  Chairman
2.     Shri Misa R. Ganesan
3.     Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao
4.     Shri K.N. Singh
5.     Shri Gopalsinh G. Solanki
6.     Shri Som Pal
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

SECRETARIAT
 
        Shri H.K. Chanana   -  Deputy Secretary
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF INDIAN OVERSEAS BANK
 
1.     Shri K. Subramaniam,      Executive Director
2.     Shri K.M. Narayanan,       General Manager
3.     Shri N.R. Natarajan,          General Manager
4.     Shri T.S. Raghavan,          General Manager
5.     Shri S. Krishnamurthy,    General Manager
6.     Shri K. Vasudeva Bhatt,  Deputy General Manager              
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF  THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE
 
        Shri Y.P. Sethi,              Director
 
        Members wanted to know about the nature of activities in various fields and the performance highlights of the Bank, the
performance of the Regional Rural Bank sponsored by Indian Overseas Bank and how many of them were viable.  Members
wanted information about the system of providing consultancy services, especially in preparing project reports and financial
analysis for the agricultural sector.  As the Bank was the pioneer in consumer credit schemes, Members enquired about the
consumer credit plans in vogue, village adoption scheme, and whether the cluster approach was being attempted to take care of the
total requirements of  a particular village.  Besides, whether the Bank was able to reduce the extent of the Non-performing Assets
and improve the recovery position.
 
        Shri K. Subramanian, Executive Director, Indian Overseas Bank gave a compendium of the plans of Indian Overseas Bank
and how the Bank was striving to achieve the targets fixed for profitability by improving the internal productivity.   The Regional
Rural Banks sponsored by the Bank has signed Memorandum of Understanding with Indian Overseas Bank to improve their
productivity and profitability.  He also furnished the available  details as regards the consumer credit and about the achievement
under Service Area Approach of the Bank.
 
        The Chairman of the Committee was of the view that with regard to financing the hi-tech agriculture, the same need not be
clubbed with the conventional agriculture.
 
        The Chairman of the Committee mentioned that as the tractors were not only being used by the formers for agricultural
purposes, but also by unemployed youth for  transport purposes, the Bank should extend credit liberally in both kinds of cases so as
to generate more employment opportunities, thereby helping in elimination of poverty.  Besides, Members wanted that hi-tech
agriculture should not come in the way of lending to small farmers.  While determining the realization of the target for agricultural
lending, financial assistance to hi-tech agriculture should not come in the way of lending, financial assistance to hi-tech agriculture
should be excluded and the national norms for agricultural lending should apply only to lending  to rural or conventional
agricultural sector.
               
 
        Members expressed their concern that hi-tech agriculture should not come in the way of lending  to small farmers.  While
achieving the target of agricultural lending, financial assistant to hi-tech should be excluded and the national norms for agricultural
lending should apply only to lending to rural or conventional agricultural sector.
 
        Executive Director informed the Committee that as the conveyor of State level Bankers Committee meetings, the norms and
level of finance were taken up in the meeting which was also attended by NABARD.  Financing the agricultural sector was a thrust
area in the Bank’s lending.   Agricultural card scheme had been introduced in a total of 21 districts in TamilNadu and Andhra
Pradesh.  So far, an amount of Rs.11.2 crores had been disbursed, covering about 13,000 beneficiaries.  It was clarified that the
Card  Scheme dispenses with the elaborate procedure of documentation and farmers can get finance expeditiously from the Bank.
 
        In the matter of functioning of Regional Rural Banks, the Committee was informed that their working has been streamlined by
providing equity support and that various parameters for performance have been spelt out.
 
        Chairman of the Committee stated that the very concept of floating RRBs has changed and RRBs had failed in achieving their
objective.  As   their personnel were being placed at par with any other commercial Bank, RRBs have  turned to aim at profits.  It
was time to rethink about the concept of RRBs and to fix  norms for them.  Members expressed their view that the Bank should
take initiative in helping artisans in rural areas, by financing them through rural branches, by preparation of schemes  and provision
of consultancy services. 
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

        Chairman   pointed out that the Banks take different stand while preparing the projects in the District level meetings for the
beneficiaries and while   actually lending to them.
 
        The Chairman suggested the need for absolute coordination between the Bank, NABARD and Government agencies.  In
response to a query, it was stated that   NABARD refinance scheme had a different rate of interest.  The Executive Director of the
Bank promised to supply a copy of the NABARD Scheme.
 
        To a specific query  about the position of reconciliation of accounts,  Intra Bank and Inter Branches, the Executive Director
explained the steps taken by the Bank.
 
        The Executive Director gave details of the computerization and the in-house software development system of the Bank.  As
regards recruitment, it was stated that the same was limited as the Bank had signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the
Government.  However , he assured that not a single staff had been rendered unemployed with the introduction of computers.
 
AGENDA
 
        Point Referred
 
        Regulations provide that a retired officer has to take the approval of the Board for taking appointment in a privateconcern.   It
means that an officer can join a corporate body wholly or substantially held or controlled by the Government of India without
taking the approval of the Bank’s  Board, whether there is any objection in making the regulations applicable to all cases of
appointments, whether in private or public sector ?
 
                Ministry’s Reply
 
        The regulations provide for taking approval of competent authority for joining  the private concerns only.  If the Government
considers that taking approval of the competent authority is necessary to join corporate body wholly or substantially held or
controlled by the Government of India, the regulation may be made applicable to all cases of appointment, whether in private or
public sector.
 
                Point Raised
 
        Whether  there is any such Regulation for taking up employment while in service.
 
                Ministry’s Reply
 
        Executive Director replied in the affirmative stating that under the Indian Overseas Bank Officer Employees’ (Conduct) 
Regulations, (Clause 6), taking up employment while in service without the previous sanction of the competent authority is
prohibited.
 
                Committee’s observations
 
        The Committee felt that the scope of the Regulation was very limited.  If a member who has retired, had no dealings with the
proposed  employer, with an eye on employment in the concern after retirement, the competent authority may consider giving
sanction, unless there is any malafide intention on the part of the employee.
 
2.     Point Reply
 
The Committee wanted the number of request received for such permission by the Bank during the last three years and how
many of them have been accepted?
 
Ministry’s Raised
 
        During 1993, 2 request and in 1994, 5 requests were received from scale IV to VII employees and during 1995 one request
was received from scale I to III employees.   All these requests were accepted.
 
 
Committee’s observations
 
The Committee was satisfied with the reply.
 
3.     Point Raised
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

        What is the broad criteria maintained for acceptance or rejection of such requests? Whether there are any guidelines for
rejection of such requests or such rejections are made only on the basis of the views of the competent authority?
 
Ministry’s Reply
 
        Whenever applications are received for grant of permission under these regulations for seeking employment in commercial
establishment  from the officers retired from our services, the competent authority has to satisfy whether the following broad
criteria has been fulfilled:-
 
(1)     Has the officer, while in service had any such dealings with the proposed employer as might create the suspicion that he
had shown favour to the letter?
 
(2)     Will his commercial duties be such that his official  knowledge and experience could be used to give the employer an
unfair advantage?
 
(3)     Will his duties be such as might bring him into conflict with Government?
 
(4)     Is the proposed employment of a thoroughly reputable kind?
 
(5)     Are there any exceptional circumstances which would make the refusal of consent a real hardship?
 
        The above guidelines were given by Government of India vide their letter dated 19.6.1981 and the same were approved by the
Bank’s Board in its meeting on 16.8.1981.  The applications are processed based on the above criteria, by the competent authority.
 
        Committee’s  observations
 
        The Committee observed that there is no appeal provision in the Regulations against the rejection of request.  Therefore, a
suitable provision for appeal should be made in the Regulation itself.
 
        While going through the broad parameters to be fulfilled while giving permission, the Chairman observed that the Regulation
could be interpreted either way and therefore, it needed to be made more specific by redrafting the provisions/regulations in this
regard.
 
        The Committee also felt that the guidelines approved by the Banks Board while considering requests for jobs after retirement
needed to be incorporated in the Regulation itself, to ensure transparency.
 
4.     Point Raised
 
Acceptance of employment after retirement
 
“No officer employee shall, without the previous sanction of the Board, take up employment in a private concern within two
years from the date of his retirement from the service of he bank”.
 
Provided that in the case of officer below the rank of Assistant General Manager, such previous sanction could be granted by
the competent authority to whom the powers have been delegated by the Board.”
 
        Whether such competent authority has been defined by the Bank, if so, the details of the same for various categories of
officers may be provided?
 
        Ministry’s Reply
 
        As per the provision to Regulation 4, in the case of officers below the rank of Grade IV, such previous sanction could be
granted by the competent authority  to whom the powers have been delegated by the Board.  Our Bank’s 
Board, vide its meeting dated 26.12.1979 delegated the powers to the Managing Director or in his absence, the General Manager. 
The competent authority for various Grades are given below:-
 
        Scale IV to VII :  Board
 
Scale I to II       : Managing Director or in his absence General    Manager.
                Committee’s  Stand
 
        The Committee accepted the comments furnished by  the Bank.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
5.             Regulation 5
 
Savings
 
“These Regulations are without prejudice to the continuance of the Regulations, if any, already in force by virtue of Sub-
section(3) of section 19 of the Banking companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 except in so far
as it expressly provided under these regulations”.
 
 
        What are those regulations and whether the regulations are still in force, if so, the details of those regulations may be given.
 
                Ministry’s Reply
 
        The following Regulations have been framed by them and these Regulations are still in force:-
 
(a)           Indian Overseas Bank (officers’) Service Regulations, 1979.
 
(b)           Indian Overseas Bank Officer Employees’ (conduct) Regulations, 1976.
 
(c)           Indian Overseas Bank officer Employees’ (Discipline & Appeal) Regulations, 1976.
 
Committee’s Stand
 
The Committee was satisfied with the reply of the Bank.
Annexure–II
[Vide para 10 pages 19]
 
INDIAN BANK OFFICER (EMPLOYEES’) ACCEPTANCE OF JOBS IN PRIVATE SECTOR CONCERN AFTER
RETIREMENT REGULATIONS.
 
JUNE 19, 1995
(11.30 A.M.)
 
The Committee assembled at 11.30 a.m. on the 19th June, 1995, in the Board Room of Indian Bank, at Madras, and held
discussions will the Representatives of Indian Bank and the Ministry of Finance.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.     Shri H. Hanumanthappa, — Chairman
2.     Shri Misa R. Ganesan
3.     Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao
4.     Shri K.N. Singh
5.     Shri Gopalsinh G. Solanki
6.     Shri Som Pal
SECRETARIAT
 
        Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF INDIAN BANK.
 
1.     Shri M. Gopalkrishanan, Chairman & Managing Director 
2.     Shri H.Dinesh Nayak, Executive Director
3.     Shri S. Arunachalam, General Manager
4.     Shri T. Jothipandian, General Manager
5.     Shri V. Ramanan, General Manager
6.     Shri G.R. Sundaravadivel, General Manager
7.     Shri M. Rajavadivelu, General Manager
8.     Dr. Jayanti Lal Jain, General Manager
9.     Shri N.P. Mohan Ram, General Manager
10.     Shri M.B. Nageswara Rao, General Manager
11.   Shri S.C. Vohra, General Manager
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE
 
Shri C.B. Prasad, Under Secretary (Banking Division)
 
At the outset, the Chairman gave brief details about the functioning of the Bank.  Indian Bank was founded as Swadesh Bank
due to the efforts of Shri V. Krishanaswani Iyer and others in the wake of widespread misery caused to depositors by the failure of
the House of M/s Abbuthnot & Co. in 1905.  The Ban was incorporated on March 5, 1907.
 
Since then, the Bank has emerged as one of the major commercial Banks in the country with 1407 branches out of which 914
are in rural and semi urban areas.  Besides, it has two branches outside the country.
 
Members were informed that the global deposits of the Bank stood at Rs 11818 crores out of which domestic deposits were Rs.
10447 crores at the end of March 1994.  The Gross Credit extended by the bank amounted to Rs. 6781 crores and domestic credit
Rs. 5463 crores at the end of March 1994.  Credit to priority sectors amounted to Rs. 2084 crores for the same period and
accounted for 42.9% of the net bank credit extended by the bank.  Advances to agriculture amounted to Rs. 833 crores.
 
Under  the Service Area Approach, the bank has disbursed Rs. 386 crores during 1993-94 against the target of Rs. 388 crores. 
 
The bank has, on its rolls, 26000 employees.  There is no backlog in respect of reserved category (except S.T.) for which
necessary action was being taken.
 
The bank has fulfilled the recommendations of the Talwar Committee on customer services.
 
The bank has adopted 230 model villages involving an outlay of Rs. 29.04 crores.  Their requirement in respect of agricultural
credit were being met in full.
 
The Chairman of the Committee observed that figures given by the bank in respect of Regional Rural Banks were not
encouraging. Nor did they indicate the flow of credit in respect of rural areas.
 
The Members were informed that the bank made use of the services of agricultural graduates, each of them was assigned with
a village.  They would collect primary data necessary for assessing the needs of a village.  Evaluation was done after a lot of
discussion and assessment with regard to the needs of each of the 229 villages.  The Bank’s philosophy was based on being useful
to the society.  the bank has never gone by default on this.  The bank provides credit to rural areas hi-tech agriculture, large as well
as small holders of land.
 
        The Members were informed that the bank advances credit, inter-alia with a view to enable the farmers to hold on to the stock
in hope of better prices later.
        The Chairman of the Committee opined that with regard to financing the hi-tech agriculture, it need not be clubbed with the
conventional agriculture.  The Chairman also wanted to know the extent of assistance to hi-tech agriculture.
 
        The chairman of the Committee mentioned that these days tractors are not only used by the farmers for agricultural purposes
but also by unemployed youth for transport purposes.  Hence banks should extend credit liberally to these two types of persons and
generate employment and eliminate poverty.
 
        In response to a query, Members were informed that NABARD re-finance scheme has a different rate of interest.  The
Chairman of the bank promised to supply a copy of NABARD Scheme.
 
AGENDA
 
 
1.     Point Raised
 
        Regulations provide that a retired officer has to take the approval of the Board, for taking appointment in a private concern.  It
means that an officer can join a corporate body wholly or substantially held or controlled by the Government of India without
taking the approval of the bank’s board.  The Committee sought to know whether there is any objection in making the regulations
applicable to all cases of appointments, whether in private or public sector?
 
        Reply of the Bank
 
        During the course of their employment, their officer may deal with individuals/concerns in capacities that could possibly place
them in a position advantageous to facilitate securing employment after retirement with the very same companies.  In order to
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

avoid this, the above regulation was framed by the Bank in consultation with the Government and RBI, which permits employment
in private concerns with Bank’s prior permission, within a period of 2 years from the date of retirement.
 
        Since Officers retire at the age of 58/60, under normal circumstances there is no possibility of getting reemployment in a
corporate body wholly or substantially held or controlled by the Government after the age of 58 i.e., after retirement and such
recruitment’s are made purely on merit and not on personal considerations.  In these circumstances, we are of the view that we
need not insist for obtaining permission from the banks for getting employment in such organisations after retirement from the
banks.
 
        Point Raised
 
        The   Committee sought to know whether chere is any such Regulation for taking up employment while in service.   The
Chairman of the Bank replied in the affirmative.
 
       
Committee’s Recommendations
 
        The Committee felt that the scope of the Regulations was very limited.  If a member, who has retired, had no dealings with the
proposed employer, with an eye on employment in the concern after retirement, the competent authority may consider giving
sanction, unless there is any malafide intention on the part of the employee.
 
2.     Point Referred
 
        How many requests have been received for such permission by the bank during the last three years and how many of them
have been accepted?
 
Reply of the Bank
 
        During 1993, 1994 & 1995 two requests were received in each year and the same were accepted.
 
        The Committee was satisfied with the reply.
 
3.     Point referred
 
        What is the broad criteria maintained for acceptance for rejection of such requests?  Whether there are any guidelines for
rejection of such requests or such rejections are made only on the basis of view of the competent authority?
               
        Reply of the Bank
 
        While examining requests for taking up employment after retirement, a decision is taken on the basis of following criteria:-
 
a)       Had the officer, while in service any association/dealings with the proposed employer.
 
b)       Will his duties be such that his official knowledge and experience could be used to give the employer an unfair
advantage?
 
c)       Will his duties be such as might bring him into conflict within the Bank?
 
        Committee’s Observation
 
        The Committee observed that there is difference between the gudielines issued by the Indian Bank and Indian Overseas Bank
in this regard.  Therefore, a uniformity should be maintained.  The Committee further observed that there is no provision for appeal
in Regulations, against the rejection of request.  Therefore, a suitable provision for appeal should be made in the Regulations itself.
 
        The Committee also felt that the criteria adopted by the Bank while considering requests for jobs after retirement needed to be
incorporated in the Regulation itself, to ensure transparency.
 
4.     Point referred
 
Acceptance of employment after retirement
 
“No officer employee shall, without the previous sanction of the Board, take up employment in a private concern within two
years from the date of his retirement from the service of the bank:
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
Provided that in the case of officer below the rank of assistant Manager, such previous sanction could be granted by the
competent authority to whom the powers have been delegated by the Board”.
 
        Whether the “competent authority” refereed to above has been defined by the Bank?  If so, the details of the same, for various
categories of offices may be provided.
 
Reply of the Ministry
 
        The competent authority appointed by the Board at their meeting dated the 21st April, 1980 are as follows:-
 
For posts                               Competent Authority
 
Scale III and IV                     Managing Director
 
Scale I and II                         General Manager
 
Committee’s Observations
 
The Committee was satisfied with the reply.
 
5.     Point referred
               
        Regulations 5
 
“These Regulations are without prejudice to the continuance of the Regulations, if any, already in force by virtue of sub
section (3) of section 19 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 except in so far as it
expressly provided under these regulations.”
 
        What are those regulations and whether the regulations are still in force, if so, the details thereof may be given?
 
        Reply of the Bank
 
        The Bank informed that they have framed the following regulations relating  to service matters:
 
i)         Indian Bank Officer’s Service Regulations, 1979
 
ii)       Indian Bank Officers Employees (Conduct) Regulations,  1976.
 
iii)      Indian Bank Officer Employees’ (Discipline & Appeal) Regulations, 1976.
 
Apart from the above, they have framed Regulations relating to use and custody of common seal.
Indian Bank (Pension) Regulations is expected to be finalized in the near future.
 
Apart from the Regulations, the provisions of the articles and Memorandum of Association of Indian Bank Limited in so far as
the same is not inconsistent with the provisions of the Bank Nationalization Act and the Regulations are also in force.
 
        Committee’s  observations
 
        The Committee was satisfied with the reply.
 
Annexure–II
[Vide para 6 pages 28]
 
Communication No. 3/3/95/vig.  dated 9.5.2001
received from Ministry of Finance
(Banking Division)
 
Indian Overseas Bank Officer (Employees Acceptance of Jobs in Private Sector Concerns,  After Retirement)
Regulations  -  Examination by the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

        The undersigned is directed to refer to Rajya Sabha Secretariat’s OM No.R 55(11)/95.Com dated 27th March, 2000 regarding
the subject mentioned above.   After detailed inter-ministerial consultation with Law Ministry and Reserve Bank of India (RBI), it
has been decided to make regulations viz. Officer (Employees Acceptance of Jobs in Private Sector Concerns after Retirement) 
Regulations 1999 in exercise of powers conferred by Section 19 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertaking ) Act, 1970/ 1980.
 
        A copy of the approved regulations has been sent to the public sector banks with the request to issue necessary notifications in
the official gazette and publish these regulations.  A copy of the regulations approved and communicated to  the banks for
notification is enclosed for perusal.
 
 
 
 
OFFICER EMPLOYEES (ACCEPTANCE OF JOBS IN PRIVATE SECTOR CONCERNS AFTER RETIREMENT)
REGULATION, 2000
 
In exercise of powers conferred by Section 19 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,
1970/80 and in supper session of notification published in the Gazette on India vide----------------- dated ---------------the
Board of Directors of the (Name of the Bank) in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India and with the previous
approval of the Central Government hereby make the following Regulations, namely:-
 
SHORT TITLE AND COMMIECEMENT:-
 
(1)     These Regulations may be called (Name of the Bank) Officer Employees (Acceptance of Jobs in Private Sector Concerns
after Retirement) Regulations, 2000.
 
(2)     These Regulations shall come into force from the date of their publication in the official Gazette.
 
2.     APPLICATION
 
        These Regulations shall apply to all Officer Employees of the bank except.
 
(i)       Chairman of the bank;
 
(ii)     Managing Director of the bank;
 
(iii)    Whole time director, if any;
 
(iv)   Officer Employees covered under the Bank’s (Employees) Pension Regulations, 1995;
 
(v)     Those who are in casual employment or paid from contingency;
 
(vi)   The Award Staff;
 
(vii)   Officers on contract.
 
3.     DEFINITION
        In this Regulations unless the context otherwise requires:-
 
(a)     ‘Bank means (Name of the Bank):
 
(b)     ‘Board’ means the Board of Directors of the (Name of the Bank):
 
(c)     ‘Competent Authority’ means the authority empowered by the Board for the purpose of these regulations;
 
(d)     ‘Employment in private concerns’ means:-
 
(i)       an employment in any capacity including that of an agent, under a company (including a banking company), co-operative
society, firm or individual engaged in trading, commercial, industrial, financial or professional business and includes also a
directorship of such company (including a banking company) and partnership of such company (including a banking
company) and partnership of such firm, but does not include employment under a body corporate, wholly or substantially
owned or controlled by the Central Government or a State Government;
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
(ii)     setting up practice, either independently or as a partner of a firm, as adviser or consultant in matters in respect which the
person-
 
(a)     has no professional qualifications and the matters in respect of which the practice is to be set up or is carried on are relatable
to his official knowledge or experience, or
 
(b)     has professional qualifications but the matters in respect of which such practice is to be set up are such as are likely to give his
clients and unfair advantage by reason of his  previous official  position, or
 
(c)     has to undertake work involving liaison or contact with the offices or officers of the bank.
 
EXPLANATION – For the purpose of this clause, the expression “employment  under a co-operative society”  includes the holding
of any office, whether elective or otherwise, such as that of President, Chairman,  Manager, Secretary, Treasurer and the like, by
whatever name called in such society.
 
(c)   ‘Officer employee’ means a person who has held a supervisory, administrative or managerial post in the bank or any other
person who was appointed and/or has functioned  as an officer of the bank at the time of his retirement by whatever designation
called.
 
 
4.     ACCEPTANCE OF EMPLOYMENT AFTER RETIREMENT:-
 
(1)     If a person who immediately before is retirement was holding the post of an officer employee and wishes to accept any job in
private concern before the expiry of two years from the date of his retirement he shall obtain the previous sanction of the bank
to such acceptance.
 
(2)     Subject to the provision of sub regulation (3), the bank may by order in writing, on the application by  a person, grant, subject
to such conditions, if any, as it may deem necessary, permission, or refuse, for reasons to be recorded in the order, permission
to such person to take up the job in private concern specified in the application.
 
(3)     In granting or refusing permission under sub regulation (2) to a person for taking up any commercial employment the bank
shall have regard the following factors, namely:-
 
(a)     the nature of the employment proposed to be taken up and the antecedents of the employer;
 
(b)     whether his duties in the employment which he proposes to take up might be such as to bring him into conflict with the bank;
 
(c)      whether  the officer employee while in service had any such dealing with the   employer  under whom he proposes to take
employment  as it might
afford a reasonable  basis for the suspicion that such person had shown favours to such  employer;
 
(d)     whether the duties of the commercial employment proposed involve liaison or contact work with bank;
 
(e)     whether his commercial duties will be such that his previous official position or knowledge or experience under bank could be
used to give the proposed employer an unfair advantage;
 
(f)      the emoluments offered by the proposed employer; and
 
(g)     any other relevant factor.
 
(4)     Where within a period of sixty days of the date of receipt of an application under sub-regulation (2), the bank does not refuse
to grant the permission applied for or does not communicate the refusal to the applicant, the bank shall be deemed to have
granted the permission applied for;
 
Provided that in any case where defective or insufficient information is furnished by the applicant and it becomes necessary
for the bank to seek further clarifications or information from him,  the period of sixty days shall be counted from the date on
which the defects have been removed or complete information has been furnished by the applicant.
 
(5)  Where the bank grants the permission applied for subject to any conditions or refuses such permission, the applicant may,
witting thirty days of the receipt of the order of the bank to that effect, make a representation against any such condition or
refusal and the bank may make such orders thereon as it deems fit;
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

Provided that no order other than an order cancelling such condition or granting such permission without any conditions shall
be made under this sub-regulation without giving the person making the representation an opportunity to show cause against
the order proposed to be made;
 
(6)     Every order passed by the bank under this Regulation shall be communicated to the person concerned.
III
 
The Lakshadweep Khadi and VillageIndustries Board Rules, 1995
 
        The Lakshadweep Khadi and Village Industries Board Rules, 1995 framed under sub Section (1) of section 38 of the
Lakshadweep Khadi and Village Industries Board Regulation 1990 were examined and a questionnaire was sent to the Ministry of
Home Affairs for their comments/clarifications.  The points referred and the Ministry’s comments thereon are placed at (Annexure-
I).
 
        The Committee discussed the subject matter with the representatives of the Lakshadweep Administration and the Ministry of
Home Affairs at Kavarti on July 12,1997.
 
2.0   Relevant extracts from the study note on the discussion of the Committee were forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs on
November 19,1997 (Annexure-II)wherein the Committee had suggested amendments in the following rules:-
 
(i)       Rule 3(1) regarding reappointment of Chairman and other Member of the Board.
 
(ii)     Rule 3(2) regarding function of Financial Advisor and Executive Officer.
 
(iii)    Rule 4(1) regarding removal of a Member from the Board
 
(iv)   Rule 6(1) regarding rate of honorarium to Chairman and Member of the Board.
 
(v)     Rule 7(2) (a) regarding presentation of papers to the Board.
 
(vi)   Rule 16(1) regarding preparation of Budget by the Financial Advisor.
 
(vii)  Rule 23(1) regarding contract being extended by the Board
 
(viii)Rule 25(1) regarding framing of rules for grant of loans for Khadi and Village  Industries.
 
3.        The Ministry of Home Affairs vide their O.M. dated March 1, 2001(Annexure-III) have furnished a copy of Notification of
Lakshadweep Administration carrying out amendments in the above mentioned rules as per the suggestion of the Committee.
 
4.     The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Home Affairs have accepted its suggestions and, accordingly,
amended various rules as follows:
 
(i)       Rule 3(1) by providing that an out going Member of the Board shall not be eligible for reappointment for more than two
years consecutively.
 
(ii)Rule 3(2) by deleting the words “Executive Officers” thereby making the provision specific with regard to function of the
financial Advisor and by inserting a new sub clause (3) by prescribing term of the office of the Executive officer.
 
(iii)  Rule 4(1) by inserting rule 4A containing provisions for disqualification and removal of members.
 
(iv)  Rule 6(1) by substituting with a new proviso containing rate of salary admissible to the Chairman and Vice Chairman and
adding new sub-rule (4) pertaining to grades and scales of pay of the Financial Advisor and the Executive Officer.
 
(v)   Rule 7(2)(a) by substituting the words “within three months” in place of the words “as early as practicable” thereby
making the provision specific.
 
 
(vi)   Rule 16(1) by substituting the words “in September” for the words “sufficient in advance of the date fixed in sub rule (4)
thereby making the provision specific.
 
(vii)  Rule 23(1) by substituting with a new proviso indicating the manner in which the contract is to be entered into by the
Board and the nature of the contract.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

(viii)            Rule 25(1) by substituting with a new proviso, revising the terms and conditions for grant of loans to Khadi and
Village Industries.
 
Annexure–II
[Vide para 1 pages 53]
 
QUESTIONNNAIRE AND REPLY TO QUESTIONNAIRE ON  LAKSHADWEEP KHADI AND VILAGE  INDUSTRIES,
BOARD RULES, 1991
 
1.     Whether these Rules and other Rules in vogue in Union Territory have been laid on the Table of both the Houses of
Parliament if so, the details thereof?
 
Ans:-  The copies of Rules (English) version and Hindi version were forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs in this
Administration letter F.NO.1/10/91 Genl.(1) dated 30.9.91 and dated 8/6/92 respectively for placing in both Houses of Parliament.
 
2.     Regulation 4
 
        Lakshadweep Khadi and Village Industries Board
 
 (i)   Whether the Lakshadweep Khadi and Village Industries Board have been duly constituted by the Administrator under the
above regulation?  If so, what is the present composition of the Board?
 
Ans:-  The lakshadweep Khadi and Village Industries Board have been constituted by the Administrator.  The present composition
of the Board follows:-
 
Non Officials
 
1.  Shri U.C.K. Thangal                                        Chairman
2.  Dr. K.K. Mohammedkoya                              Vice Chairman
     (Resigned during March 96)                         (Vacant)
3.  Shri M.P. Cheriyakoya                                   Member
4.  Dr. K.K. Sayedkoya                                        Member
5.  Shri E. Seethikoya                                           Member
6.  Shri C. Usman                                                  Member
 
 
 
        Official Members
 
1.  State Director, KVIC, Kerala State                :Member
2.  Registrar of Co-op. Societies                        :Member
3.  Director of Industries                                     :Member
 
 (ii): Whether due representation has been given to various category of persons as mentioned in clauses (a),(b)&(c) Sub regulation
(2) of Regulation 4?
 
Ans:  Representation has been given as provided in the Regulation.
 
3.     Rule 3(1)
 
Save as provided in the Regulation, the Chairman and other members of the Board shall hold office for a period of 3 years
from the date of notification of their appointment in the official Gazette and shall be eligible for re-appointment.
 
        The rule is silent on the eligibility of member for re-appointment, their term of office, period of re-appointment and number of
terms upto which re-appointment can be made.  Whether the rule is accordingly proposed to be reviewed?
 
Ans:-  The rule provision for re-appointment can be reviewed.
 
4.     Rule 3(2)
 
The Financial Advisor who shall also be the Chief Accounts Officer and Executive Officer shall hold office for a period of 3
years from the date of appointment.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

        Section 9(1) of the Lakshadweep Khadi and Village Industries Board Regulation, 1990 empowers the Administrator to appoint
Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer Section 9(2) ibid empower him to appoint an Executive Officer of the Board. 
However Rule 3(2) appears to be inconsistent with the above provision wherein the office of the Executive Officer has been
merged with that of the Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer.  The position may be clarified.
Ans:  The function of the Financial Advisor and Executive officer has not been merged.  The function of Executive Officer is being
looked after by the Secretary of the Board.
 
5.     Rule 4(1)
 
When a member dies or resigns or is removed from office, the Administrator may by notification in the official Gazette,
appoint a person to fill the vacancy.
 
(i)     The grounds for removal of a Member from office are not mentioned in the rules.  Whether any guidelines have been issued
in this regard?  Whether there is any objection in specifying the same in the rule?  Whether any Member has been removed
from his office so far; if so, what are the details thereof?
Ans:  No guidelines have been issued for removal of a member from his office.  There is no objection to incorporate such a
provision in the rules.  No member has been removed from the office so far.
 
(ii)  Whether a Member of a Board or a Committee can attend and vote in a meeting convened after submission of his resignation
but before the acceptance by the Chairman or Administrator as the case may be?
 
Ans:  We have not faced with such a situation.  However rules can be amended.
 
6.    Rule 5
 
The Board may appoint Officers and Other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions.
 
Provided that no officer and other employees whose honorarium or maximum salary exceeds Rs. 300/- per month shall be
appointed by the Board except with the prior approval of the Administrator.
 
        The rule does not indicate the broad composition of officers and other employees for the efficient performance of the function
of the Board, manner of  employment,  term  of  office,  qualification,  if  any, for such appointment,
service condition, benefits if any enjoyed by them.  Will the Administration make the rule exhaustive?  The honorarium or salary of
Rs. 300/- per month to be paid to the officers and employees is very meager and totally unrealistic.  What is the basis for fixing this
ceiling?
 
Ans:  For appointment of officers and employees, the Board is recently following the rules applicable to the Central Government
employees.  The ceiling is fixed based on the provisions under sections II(I) of the Regulation.  However, Administrator is
empowered to give a higher rate of Honorarium/salary with in the provision.
 
 (ii):section 11(2) of the Regulation empowers the Administrator to make bye-laws for the terms and conditions of service of the
officer and other employees of the Board.  Whether any bye-laws have been made by the Administrator?  If so, what are the details
thereof:  If not, how matters related to the service conditions of the officers and employees are dealt with?
 
Ans:  No Bye-laws for the terms and conditions of services of officers and employees have been framed by the Administrator till
date.  Presently dealt with as per Government rules.
 
7.     Rule 6(1)
 
The Chairman Vice Chairman, Secretary Executive Officer and Financial Advisor shall be entitled to receive a salary at the
rate of Rs. 700/- per mensum during the whole time of the office and shall also be entitled to receive a daily allowance for
each day of the sitting of the Board at the same rate as are admissible to the first grade officers under the Lakshadweep
Administration.
 
        What is the basis for fixation of salary of Rs. 700/- per memsum for Chairman, Vice Chairman, Secretary and Executive
officer and Financial Adviser?  Whether the Administration have any objection in incorporating the rates of honorarium payable to
Chairman, Vice Chairman, Secretary and Executive Officer, Financial Adviser, in the rules itself?
 
Ans:  There is no objection in prescribing the rates of Honorarium to Chairman, etc in the rule itself.  The rule can be amended.
 
8.     Rule 7(2)(a)
 
Subject to such delegation as may be made under the Regulation or Rules made thereunder the Chairman shall;
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
(a)     Cause important papers and matters to be presented to be Board as early as practicable.
(b)     xxx                                           xxx                                           xxx
(c)     xxx                                           xxx                                           xxx
 
 
The term “as early as practicable” is vague.  Whether the Administration will provide a definite time limit for presentation of
papers to the board, in the rules itself?
 
Ans:  Every matter immediately on receipt is presented in the next meeting itself.
 
9.     Rule 14
The Board shall constitute by a resolution, one or more committees as in the manner as prescribed under rule 13 for the
purpose of securing efficient performance of its functions and in particular for the purpose of securing that the functions
are performed with due regard to the circumstances and requirements of Khadi or any particular village industry.
 
(i)    The rule does not indicate the procedure for the constitution of committee by resolution, convening of meeting of such
Committees, quorum, composition, qualification of members, term of appointment and other benefits.    Whether the
Administration have any objection in specifying the same in the rules?
 
Ans:  The Board is competent to constitute the required committees under the sections 14 and 15 of the Regulations.
 
 (ii):  Whether such committees have been constituted so far, if so the details thereof.
 
Ans:  The following Committees were constituted by the Board for activities of the Board.
 
(a)   Requirement Committee
(b)     State Finance Committee
 
 
10.   Rule 15(2)
 
A supplementary programme, if any, under section 20 may be prepared and approved by the Board in Form II and
forwarded to the Administrator before 30th June of each year for which it applies.
 
        What are the contingencies which necessitate the Board for preparation of the supplementary programme?
 
Ans:       Supplementary Programmes are prepared as and when specific directions to that effect are received from the
Administrator or from the Commission. 
 
11.   Rule 16(1)
 
The budget estimates of the Commission for every financial year beginning on the 1st Day of April and ending on 31st day
of March following shall be prepared or caused to be prepared by the Financial Adviser sufficiently in advance of the date
fixed in sub-rule (4) in accordance with sub rule (6) in form III.
 
        The term ‘sufficiently in advance’ is vague.  Whether there is any objection to provide a period / date for preparation of budget
estimate of the Commission every year by the Financial Adviser?
 
Ans:  There is no objection in prescribing the period for preparation of budget by the Financial Advisor.
 
12.   Rule 16(5)
 
Subject to such orders as may be issued by the Administrator from time  to  time  no  expenditure  shall  be  incurred  until
the budget is
sanctioned by the Administrator and expenditure authorised by a competent authority in the board.
 
(i)    Who is the ‘Competent Authority’  for authorisation of expenditure of budget of the Board?  Whether there is any objection if
the rank of the Competent Authority is defined in the rule itself?
 
Ans:  The Board is the competent authority to incure the expenditure against the budget sanctioned by the Administrator.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

12(ii) :  What is the total budget estimate of the Board during the last three years and the current financial year and the actual
expenditure in each year?
 
Ans:       Allocations.
 
Year                        Scheme                  Establishment                       Total
                                Rs.                          Rs.                                          Rs.
 
 
1992-93                   3981500/-               300000/-                 4281500/-1993-94                  4219000/-               425000/-                
4644000/-
1994-95                   2463100/-               910000/-                 3373000/-1995-96                  26100000/-            
1500000/-                               27600000/-1996-97                   26100000/-             2000000/-                               28100000/-
 
               
Expenditure
 
Year                        Scheme                                  Establishment
 
1992-93                   3981000/-                               300000/-
1993-94                   4219000/-                               425000/-
1994-95                   2463100/-                               910000/-
1195-96                   -----                                         1500000/-
1996-97                   -----                                         900000/-
 
 
 
13.   Rule 16(6)(3)
 
The budget shall, among/other matters, include;-
 
(1)           x              x              x              x
(2)           x              x              x              x
(3)           The proposed expenditure separately under “Khadi” “Village Industries” and “General and Miscellaneous”
classified under such heads or sub-heads as under or as the Administrator may direct:
 
        What is the percentage of budget earmarked under “Khadi, “Village Industries” and “General and Miscellaneous” heads? 
Please give details, separately.
 
Ans:       Total percentage of budget ear-marked
 
Year                        Budget                   Khadi     Village                    General and
                                                                                Industries              Miscellaneous
 
1992-93                   4281500/-               nil            93                            7
1993-94                   4644000/-               nil            91                            8
1994-95                   3373000/-               nil            73                            27
1995-96                   27600000/-             nil            96                            4
1996-97                   28100000/-             nil            93                            -
 
 
14.   Rule 18(1)
 
The annual report to be submitted by the Board to the Administrator and Commission under section 31 regarding its activities
during the previous financial year shall be prepared by the Secretary in Form V shall be submitted within three months from
the end of the previous financial year.
 
 
        Whether the Annual Report and Accounts of the Lakshadweep Khadi and Village Industries Board are being laid on the Table
of each House of Parliament regularly and on time?  Please mention the date of laying in respect of the reports and Accounts of the
last three financial years?
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

Ans:  The Annual Report and Accounts of the Board have not been placed in each House of parliament till date.  This will be
immediately done.
 
15.   Rule 20
 
The Board shall set apart 5% of the total grants and loans given by the Lakshadweep Administration and the Khadi and
Village Industries Commission and 25% of net profit as Reserve Fund for the purpose of setting off irrecoverable loans,
and losses and direct trading activities.
 
        What are the criteria for setting apart the prescribed percentage of the grants and loan by the Administrator and Commission?
Whether any guidelines are being followed?
 
Ans:  Being in the initial stage of its constitution, the Board has not taken steps to create the Reserve Funds as stipulated in the
Rules.  The amount received as loan and grant for implementations of schemes has fully been disbursed to the beneficiaries also.  
Appropriate steps will be taken to create the Reserve Fund.
 
16.   Rule 21
 
All money belonging to all the funds referred to under sub section (1) of section 25 and the Reserve Fund
referred in section 27 of the Regulation shall be invested/deposited in the State Bank of India or any branch of
Syndicate Bank in Lakshadweep.
 
 
        What is the present size of accumulation of funds of the Board?  How the funds are being regulated?  What are the liabilities?
 
Ans:  Present accumulations of funds against different Heads are as follows.
 
(a)           Schemes:                                                               Rs. 2800000/-
 
(b)           Establishment (General and miscellaneous)    Rs. 1200000/-
 
        The scheme funds are regulated as per the guidelines of the Commission and the Establishment as per the Government norms.
 
        Since the Board is constituted in 1991, we don’t have any liability as on date.
 
17.           Rule 23(1)
 
The Board may in connection with its trading and other activities enter into contract provided provision therefor exist in
the sanctioned budget.
 
        The manner in which the contracts are being entered into by the Board is not indicated.  Whether the Administration purpose
to incorporate the manner and nature of the contract in the rules for its trading and other activities?  The term ‘other activities’ need
further explanation/clarification?  Please clarify.
 
Ans:  Till date the Government norms were followed for various contracts.  The Administration have no objection for
incorporating the required provisions in the rules.
 
        Organising of Seminars, Workshops, Exhibitions, etc. to create awareness among the natives are covered under the term
“other activities”.
 
18.   Rule 24(1)
 
The Board shall disburse grants and subsidies in accordance with and at rates and on terms sanctioned by the
Administrator, Central Government and Commission in respect of each Industry, from time to time.  The Administrator
may on his own motion or on the recommendation of the Board or Commission modify or supersede the financial rates
and terms previously sanctioned.
 
(i)    What are the circumstances where the Administrator may suomoto review on its own motion or the recommendation of the
Board or Commission, the rates and terms for the disbursement of grants and subsidies?
 
Ans:  The reviews are made depending upon the revised policy decisions of Government of India and the Commission from time to
time.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 (ii):  Whether any guidelines have been framed for disbursement of such grants and subsidies?
 
Ans:  The grants and subsidies are released to the beneficiaries as per the guidelines of the Commission.
 
 (iii):  Who are the beneficiaries of such grants and subsidies?  What are the criteria for selecting the beneficiaries?
 
Ans:  The benefits are generally extended to the local inhabitants of this Union Territory.
 
        The viability of the project proposed by the beneficiary and the seniority of the applications are the criteria adopted for
selecting the beneficiaries.
 
19.   Rule 25(1)
 
The board shall grant loans in accordance with the provisions of the loan rules for Khadi and Village Industries made by the
Union Territory  Administration from time to time, and in accordance with and at rates on terms sanctioned by the
administration in respect of each industry from time to time.
 
        Whether the rulers pertaining to grant of loans for Khadi and Village Industries have been made;  If so, what are the details
thereof?
 
Ans:       The Administration has not framed separate rules for grant of loans.  The existing rules of the Commission are being
followed.
 
20.   Rule 25(3)
 
The Administration may, on its own initiative or on the recommendation of the Board, modify or amend the loan rules.  The
modification or amendment will have effect from the date it is made by the Administrator.
 
                The power to amend, modify loan rules pertaining to Khadi and Village Industries it is felt, should not vest in the
Administrator alone, because that  could lead to arbitrariness.  Such powers should lie with the Board only.  Whether the Ministry
have any objection in amending the rule accordingly?
 
Ans:       Any amendment for the existing rules are either based on the recommendation of the Board or done after consultation
with the Board.  Therefore the existing rule provision may continue.
 
General
 
21.   Whether any rules/bye-laws other than the Khadi and Village Industries Board Rule 1991 have been made under section 38
and 39 of the Regulation.  If so, what are the details thereof alongwith dates of laying?  If certain rules/bye-laws have not been
made, the reasons for not framing them.
 
Ans:       No rules or bye-laws other than the LKVI Board Rules, 1991 have been framed under section 38 and 39 of the
Regulations. However the requirements under Section 38 and 39 have been accommodated in the Lakshadweep Khadi and Village
Industries Board Rules except 38(2)(c),(f),(i),(j),39(2)(a) and (b).
 
Annexure – II
[Vide para 2 page...]
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
STUDY NOTE ON THE
VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE TO KOCHI-LAKSHADWEEP FROM
FEBRURARY 10 TO 17, 1997
LAKSHADWEEP KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES BOARD RULES, 1997.
 
        The Committee met at 10.30 a.m. on Wednesday, the 12th February, 1997 in the Library Room, Kavaratti and discussed the
Lakshadweep Khadi and Village Industries Board Rules, 1991 with the representatives of the Administration of Union Territory of
Lakshadweep and Ministry of Home Affairs.
 
Members Present
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

1.        Shri Balbir Singh – in the Chair
2.        Shri Narain Prasad Gupta
3.        Shri Shiv Charan Singh
4.        Shri Narendra Pradhan
5.        Smt. Ila Panda
6.        Shri S. Muthu Mani
 
Secretariat
 
Shri N.S. Walia, Committee Officer
 
Representatives of Lakshadweep Administration
 
1.     Shri Rajive Thalwar – Administrator
2.        Shri B. Vijayan – Collector Cum Division Commissioner
3.        Shri U.C.K. Thangal, Chairman, Khadi Board,
4.        Shri T.M. Balakrishan – Secretary (Finance and Agriculture)
5.        Shri Hamsa, Director of industries
6.        Shri V. M. Shamsuddeen – Director of Agriculture
7.        Shri Hassan Mamikfan – Director of Fishries
8.        Shri K.I. Syedmohamed - Director of Social Welfare.
9.        Shri A.M. Kasmikosa, Supdt. Engg. – P.W.D.
10.     Shri Aboobaoker, Assistant Director A.H.
11.     Shri Abdulkhader, Deputy Registror
12.     Shri K. Ashokan, Settlement Officer,
 
        Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
 
        Shri Sudesh Kumar, Under Secretary
 
2.        In the absence of Chairman, Shri Balbir Singh was voted to the Chair.
 
3.        At the very outset the Chair introduced the Members of the Committee and officials of the Secretariat.  The Administrator of
the Union Territory of Lakshadweep also introduced his tea of officials.
 
4.     Thereafter, the Committee took up for discussion the Lakshadweep Khadi and Village Industries Board Rules, 1991 in the
light of the answers furnished to the Questionnaire sent by the Secretariat.
 
(1)     Re: Laying of Rules:
 
        The Committee was not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Union Territory Administration and expressed its serious
concern on the fact that they were not clear whether these rules had been laid on the table of both Houses of Parliament.  The
Committee directed the Administration/Ministry of Home Affairs to look into the matter and send the requisite information to the
secretariat at the earliest.
 
(2)   Re:  Rule 3(1)
 
                The Committee noted the reply of the Union Territory Administration to review the provision for re-appointment of 
members to the Board and directed that it may be kept informed about it.
 
(3)   Re:   Rule 3(2)
 
 The Committee was not satisfied with the reply and was of the view that this provision prim-facie appeared to be inconsistent
with the provision of Section 9(1) of the Lakshadweep Khadhi and Village Industries Board Regulation, 1990 and, therefore,
needed modification.  The Adminstration agreed to review the same and also modify it accordingly.
 
(4)  Re:  Rule 4
               
        The Committee noted the reply.
 
(5)  Re:  Rule 4(1)
 
        The Committee noted with satisfaction the reply furnished by the UT Administration for amending the rule suitably.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
(6)  Re:  Rule 5
               
        The  Committee noted the comments of the Union Territory Administration.
 
(7)  Re:   Section 11(2) of the Regulation:
 
        The Committee noted the reply but directed that it should be informed of the Government Rules which were being followed.
 
(8)  Re:  Rule 6(1)
 
        The Committee noted the reply.
 
(9)  Re:  Rule 7(2)(a)
 
        The Committee while noting the reply of the Administration was of the view that some time limit must be prescribed in the
Rules itself  to make it comprehensive.
 
(10)  Re:  Rule 14
 
        The Committee noted the reply and directed the Administration to furnish the details of the composition and functions of the
Committees.
 
(11)   Re:  Rule 15(2)
 
        The Committee noted the reply.
 
(12)  Regulation  Rule 16 (1)
               
        The Committee noted the reply that the Administration had agreed to prescribe the period of one month for preparation of the
budget by the Financial Advisor.
 
(13)  Re:  Rule 16(5)
 
        The Committee noted the reply.
 
(14)  Re:  Rule  16(6)  (3)
 
        The Committee while noting down the reply of the Administration  expressed its concern over the fact that no budget had been
earmarked for the development/promotion of Khadi under the Lakshadweep Khadi and Village Industries Board Rules from 1992
onwards.  The Committee was assured by the Administrator that he would look into the matter.
 
(15)  Re: Rule 18(1)
 
        The Committee was not satisfied with the reply that the Annual Reports and Accounts of the Board had not been laid on the
Table of both the Houses of Parliament.  The Committee specifically directed that those should be laed immediately and it should
be informed of it.
 
(16)  Re: Rule 20
 
        The Committee noted the reply.
 
(17)  Re: Rule 21
 
        The Committee noted the reply.
 
(18) Re:  Rule 23(1)
 
        The Committee noted with satisfaction that the Administration had agreed to incorporate the required provisions in the Rules.
 
(19)  Re:  Rule 24(1)
 
        The Committee noted the reply.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
(20)  Re:  Rule  25(1)
                               
        The Committee noted the reply but directed that the Rules should be immediately framed.
 
(21)   Re:  Rule 25(3)
 
        The Committee noted the reply.
 
(22)   General
 
        The Committee noted the reply and directed that all the rules under Section 38 (2) (c), (f), (i), (J) and 39(2) (9) and (b) of the
Lakshadweep Khadi and village Industries Board Regulation, 1990 may also be framed, notified and laid on the Table of the
House.  The Committee directed the Union Territory Administration to furnish the “Action Taken Notes” to the Committee within
One Month.
 
5.     The meeting then concluded at 1.15 p.m. with mutual vote of thanks.
               
Annexure III
[Vide para 3 page]
ADMINSTRATION OF THE
UNION TERRITORY OF LAKSHADWEEP
KAVARATTI ISLAND
DATED: 29.11.2000
 
N O T I F I C A T I O N
 
F.No.1/2/97-Genl:- In exercise of the powers conferred by section 38 of the Lakshadweep Khadi and Village Industries Board
Regulation, 1990 (No.4 of 1990),  the Administrator, Union Territory of Lakshadweep, hereby makes the following Rules, namely:-
 
1.     Short title:
 
(i)       These rules may be called the Lakshadweep Khadi and Village Industries Board (Amendment) Rules, 1999.
 
 (ii)  They shall come into force on the date of publication in the official gazette.
 
2.     In Rule 3 of the Lakshadweep Khadi and Village Industries Board Rules, 1991 (hereinafter referred to as the principal rules);
 
(a)  after the sub-rule(1) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
 
“Provided that an outgoing member of the Board shall not be eligible for reappointment for more that two terms
consecutively”.
(b)     in sub-rule (2), the words “and Executive Officer”  shall be deleted.
 
(c) after sub-rule(2), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:-
 
“(3)  The Executive officer shall hold office for a period of three years from the date of appointment.”
 
3.     After rule 4 of the principal rules, the following rules shall be inserted, namely:-
 
“4A  Disqualification  and removal of members:- (1) No person shall be a member who -
 
(a)     is, or at any time has been, adjudged an insolvent; or
 
(b)     is of unsound mind and has been so declared by a competent court; or
 
(c)     has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Administrator, involves  moral  turpitude; or
 
(d)     has, directly or indirectly by himself or by any partner, any share or interest in any company or firm carring on the
business with the Board; or
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
(e)     is a  Director, Secretary, Manager or other salaried officer or employee of any company or firm having any contract
with the Board; or
 
(f)      has so abused, in the opinion of the Administrator, his position as a member as to render his continuance as such
member detrimental to the interest of the Board.
 
 
(2) The Administrator shall, by order in writing remove any number who is, or has become, subject to any disqualification
mentioned in sub-rule (1):
               
Provided that no order of removal shall be made by the Administrator unless the member concerned has been given a
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the same.
 
“4B.  A  member who has given notice of resignation in accordance with the provisions under section 7 shall not have the
right of voting in any meeting thereafter.”
 
4.     In Rule 6 of the Principal rules;-
               
        (a) for the sub-rule (1) and proviso thereunder the following sub-rule and proviso shall be substituted, namely:-
               
        “(1)The Chairman and Vice Chairman shall be entitled to receive salary at the rate of Rs.3000/-and Rs.2,500/- respectively per
menseum during the whole time of the office and shall also be entitled to receive daily allowance for each day of the sitting of
the Board at the same rate as applicable to the first grade officers under the Lakshadweep Administration:
 
        Provided that the Chairman and Vice Chairman shall be non official on full time basis.”
 
        (b)  After sub rule (3), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:-
 
        “(4)Where the Financial Advisor and Executive Officer are or full time basis their grades and scale of pay shall be decided by
the Administrator and they shall receive salary of the same grade as applicable to the employees under Lakshadweep
Administration:
 
        Provided that where the person appointed is on part time or ex-officio capacity, he shall be entitled to remuneration or
honorarium as may be fixed by the Administrator.
 
5.     In clause (a) or sub-rule (1) of rule 7 of the Principal rules, for the words “as early as practicable”,  the words within three
months” shall be substituted.
 
6.     In sub-rule (1) of rule 16 of the Principal rules, for the words “sufficiently in advance of the date fixed in sub-rule (4)”, the
words “in September” shall be substituted. 
 
7.    In Rule 23 of the Principal Rules, for the sub-rule (1) the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:-
 
“(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 3, every contract or agreement entered into by the Board shall be in
accordance with the general Financial Rules and in writing and shall be signed by the
Chairman or such other member or officer of the Board as may be generally or specially empowered in this behalf by the
Board and shall contain the common seal of the Board”.
 
8.     In Rule 25 of the Principal Rules, for the sub-rule (1), the following sub-rule shall be substituted. Namely:-
 
“(1)   The Board shall grant loans in accordance with the provisions of the Rules for Khadi and village Industries made by the
Union Territory Administration from time to time and also rules of the Khadi and Village Industries Commission and in
accordance with and at the rates or terms sanctioned by the Administration or Commission, as the case may be, from time to
time”.
               
 
IV
 
The Lakshadweep Panchayats (Grant-in-Aid) Rules, 1997
 
        The Lakshadweep Panchayats (Grant-in-Aid) Rules, 1997 framed under the Lakshadweep Panchayats Regulations, 1994 were
examined and certain points were referred to the Ministry of Home Affairs on March 12, 1999 for their comments/clarifications.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

The subject matter was then taken up for discussion with the representatives of the Union territory of Lakshadweep and the
Ministry of Home Affairs at Kavarati on November 16, 1999.
 
2.        The points referred to the Ministry, their comments/clarifications thereon and the observation / recommendations of the
Committee on each are as follow:
 
I.         Point referred
 
        Whether the Lakshadweep Panchayats (Grant-in-Aid) Rules, 1997 have been laid on the Table of both the House of
Parliament.  If so, the details in this regard?
 
        Ministry’s Reply
 
        The rules have not so far been laid on the Table of both the Houses of the Parliament.  The Administrative Ministry, i.e., the
Ministry of Rural Development have, however, initiated action to lay these rules on the Table of the both the Houses of the
Parliament.
 
        Committee’s Observation/recommendation
 
The Committee was not convinced with the reply furnished by the Ministry to question regarding laying of rules on the Table
of the Rajya Sabha.  The representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs assured that the rules would be laid as early as possible.
 
 
I.         Point referred   Rule 1(3) (Commencement)
 
        They shall come into force with immediate effect.
 
        What is the date from which these rules have come into force? The commencement clause in the rule appears to be unusual as
it does not convey the date on which these rules came into force nor it gives power to the Administrator to notify them.
       
        Ministry’s reply
 
        Rule 1(3) of the Lakshadweep Panchayats (Grant-in-Aid) Rules, 1997, clearly states that these rules would come into force
with immediate effect.  In other words the rules would come into force from the date they are notified in the Official Gazette.  The
Lakshadweep Panchayats (Grant-in- Aid) Rules, 1997 were notified in the Lakshadweep (Extraordinary) Gazette on 24th April,
1997.  Therefore, these rules have come into force on 24th  April,  1997.
 
Committee’s Observation
 
        The Committee noted the reply.
 
III.   Point referred  
        Rule 21(d) (Definition of original work)
 
          ‘Original work’ means new construction whether of entirely new or of additions and alterations to existing work and
purchases and also all work whether of additions and alterations or repairs to bring into use newly purchased or previously
abandoned building required for bringing them into use.
 
        In the above rule repair of previously abandoned building cannot be termed as original work and should go under the
definition of ‘other works’ as provided for in sub rule(e) of rule 2. What is the view of the Ministry in this regard?
 
                Ministry’s reply
 
        The suggestion made seems to be proper and, hence, accepted.  Necessary amendment to the rules will be made accordingly.
 
        Committee’s Observation
 
        The Committee was satisfied that its suggestion had been accepted with the assurance given by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
 
IV    Point referred 
        Rule 6(a) and (c) (Procedure for sanctioning)
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

Whether Government have any objection in amending the sub-rule (a) and prescribing a maximum time limit for
processing of the applications as Panchayat submits the application under rule 7(2) (1) after almost all preparations.
 
6 (c)   If it appears to the Administrator that the financial assistance is urgently needed for any one of the purposes
indicated in rule 3 above, it shall be competent after further enquiry, if any, as he thinks fit to make to accord sanction for
grants-in-aid with due regard to the principles enunciated in General Financial Rules, 1963 as amended from time to time
in respect of grants-in-aid subject to the conditions as may be imposed subsequently.
 
The words ‘subject to the conditions as may be imposed subsequently’ is not clear.  What may be the conditions and the
circumstances under which such conditions are contemplated to be imposed subsequently.
 
Ministry’s reply
 
        The UT Administration/Ministry of Home Affairs have no objection in amending the sub rule (a) and to prescribe a maximum
time limit for processing of applications under rule 6.
 
        In case the Administrator comes across any gap or omission in the normal processing   of   the  applications  for  grant  in 
aid,  the  rules  authorises  the
 
Administrator to specify conditions for sanction after taking into consideration the omission or gap found in the processing of the
grant in aid applications.
 
Committee’s Observation
 
        The Committee was satisfied that its suggestion had been accepted with the assurance given by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
 
V.    Point referred  
        Rule 8 (7) (Execution of work)
 
The Panchayat shall execute the work for which grants-in-aid has been obtained through Public Works Department or
other approved agency.
 
What is the ‘other approved agency’. What is the criteria taken into consideration for calling an agency approved.  Whether
there exists any list mentioning the approved agencies.
 
Ministry’s reply
 
The other approved agency includes Government Departments other than PWD like LHW, Post & Telegraph, etc. There is no
list under the UT Administration indicating the approved agencies under rule 8(7).
 
Committee’s Observation
 
The Committee noted the reply.
 
VI.     Point referred 
        Rule 8 (12)(Penal interest)
 
The Administrator reserves the rights to order refund the entire amount or a portion of the amount of grant-in-aid
sanctioned to a Panchayat if any serious breach of terms of grants is noticed on the part of the Panchayat and in that case
if considered necessary penal interest at the rate of 6% will be charged on such sums as may be ordered to be refunded.
 
        As per the above rule the Administrator has the right to charge penal interest at the rate of 6% on such sums as may be ordered
to be refunded by the Administrator.
 
        The rate of 6% penal interest appears to be on the lower side.  Whether any rate has been fixed in this regard by the Ministry
of Finance at present.  Whether it is possible to raise the rate of interest to 8 or 10 percent.
 
        Ministry’s reply
 
        The rate of 6% interest to be levied on the amount of grant-in-aid to be refunded is as per the instructions issued by the
Ministry of Finance (Note No. 2 below GFR 149).
 
Committee’s Observation
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
        The Committee, after some discussion, agreed with the view points of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
 
VII.   Point referred  Rule 8 (13)
 
Every Panchayat shall maintain a register of grant-in-aid Form ‘D’ appended to these rules of permanent and semi-
permanent assets acquired wholly or mainly out of grants.
 
        The word ‘mainly’ is not specific.  Whether the word ‘mainly’ may be substituted by the word ‘partially’.
       
        Ministry’s reply
 
        The UT Administration/Ministry of Home Affairs have no objection to replace the word ‘mainly’ by the word ‘partially’ under
rule 8 (13).
 
Committee’s Observation
 
        The Committee was satisfied to note that the Ministry of Home Affairs had agreed to amend the rules as suggested by  the
Committee.
 
3.        The observations of the Committee as above were forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs on March 6, 2000 for necessary
action. The Ministry vide their O.M. dated January 25, 2001 have furnished a copy of the notification F.No. 4/4/95-DOP dated
September 14, 2000 publishing the  Lakshadweep  Panchayat  (Grant-in-Aid)  (Amendment)  Rules, 2000
(Annexure). The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry has   notified amendments to rules 2(1)(d), 6(a) and 8(13) of
the Lakshadweep Panchayats (Grant-in-Aid) Rules, 1997 as per the Committee’s suggestions.
 
 Annexure-I
(vide para 3 Page..para)
The Lakshadweep Gazette
Published by Authority
 
Extraordinary
Vol. XXXVI,  No. 27, THURSDAY, 14TH SEPTEMBER, 2000/23RD BHADRA 1922 (SAKA)
 
Administration of the Union Territory of Lakshadweep the Lakshadweep Panchayats (Grant in Aid) (Amendment) Rules, 2000.
 
Dated : 12th September, 2000
NOTIFICATION
 
        F.No.4/4/95-DOP:- In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 81 of the Lakshadweep Panchayats Regulation, 1994 (4 of
1994), the Administration, Union Territory of Lakshadweep, hereby makes the following rules, namely:
 
1.        Sort title and commencement: (1) These rules may be called the Lakshadweep Panchayats (Grant in Aid) (Amendment)
Rules, 2000.
 
2.        These shall come into force with effect from the date of their publication in the Lakshadweep Gazatte.
 
2.     In the Lakshadweep Panchayats (Grant in Aid) Rules, 1997.
 
(a)     in Rule 2 Sub-Rule (1) clasue (d) the words” or previously abandoned” and “required for bringing them into use” shall be
deleted.
 
(b)     in Rule 6 clause (a), after the words “to the Administrator” the words “within 45 days of the receipt of the application”
shall be inserted.
 
(c)     in Rule 8 Sub Rule (13), for the word “mainly” appearing after the words” assets acquired wholly or”, the word
“partially” shall be substituted.
 
 
V
 
The Lakshadweep Panchayats Business Rules, 1997
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
        The Lakshadweep Panchayats Business Rules, 1997 framed under the Lakshadweep Panchayat Regulations, 1994 were
examined and certain points were referred to the Ministry of Home Affairs on March 12, 1999 for their comments/clarifications. 
The Subject matter was then taken up for discussion with the representatives of the Union Territory of Lakshadweep and the
Ministry of Home Affairs at Kavarati on November 16, 1999.
 
2.     The points referred to the Ministry and their comments/clarifications alongwith  the observations / recommendations of the
Committee thereon are as follows:
 
I       Point referred
 
Whether the rules have been laid on the table of both the Houses of Parliament, if so, the details thereof?
 
                Ministry’s Reply
 
        The rules have not so far been laid on the Table of both the Houses of the Parliament.  The Administrative Ministry (i.e., the
Ministry of Rural Development) have, however, initiated action to lay these rules on the Table of  both the Houses of the
Parliament.
 
Committee’s Observation/recommendation
 
        The Committee was not convinced with the reply furnished by the Ministry regarding laying of rules on the Table of the Rajya
Sabha.  The representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs assured that the rules would be laid as early as possible.
 
II     Point referred  
 
        What is the date from which these rules have come into force?
 
Ministry’s reply
 
        The Lakshadweep Panchayat Business Rules, 1997 came into force on 19th February, 1997 (i.e. the date on which these were
published in Lakshadweep (Extraordinary) Gazette).
 
Committee’s Observation/recommendation
 
        The Committee noted the reply
 
III    Point referred
 
The Lakshadweep Pachayats Business Rules were framed after almost three years of the Lakshadweep Panchayat Regulation
1994.  How the business of the Panchayat was regulated during the period when these regulations had not been enacted and
enforced?
       
        Ministry’s reply
 
        Though the Lakshadweep Panchayat Regulation was promulgated in the year 1994,  the elections to village (Dweep)
Panchayats and the District Panchayat could be held only in December, 1997.  By the time the elections to Village (Dweep)
Panchayats and District Panchayat were held, the Lakshadweep Panchayats Business Rules, 1997 had already been notified. 
During the period between the date of promulgation of the Lakshadweep Panchayats Regulation and constitution of the Village
(Dweep) Panchayats and the District Panchayat, the functions of these bodies were carried out by the Special Officer appointed by
the Administrator in exercise of the powers vested in him under the Lakshadweep Panchayats Regulation.
 
Committee’s Observation
 
        The Committee noted the reply.
 
IV    Point referred  Rule 5
 
        The intervening period of two consecutive meetings of a Gramsabha shall not be more than six months.
        The intervening period of six months between the two consecutive meetings of a Gramsabha appear to be too long keeping in
view the development required at village level.  Whether it is possible to reduce this period to 3 or 4 months.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

        Ministry’s reply
 
        The matter is being examined in consultation with the Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs and the Ministry of Rural
Development.
 
Committee’s Observation
 
        The Committee noted the reply.
 
V     Point referred Rule 8
 
A Gramsabha shall keep in Malayalam or Mah1 a brief record of  its meetings and proceedings in Form 1. 
 
        Whether a copy of this brief record of the  proceedings in Form 1 is also send to the Administrator or Director of Panchayats
for information?  Whether there is any objection in incorporating such a provision in the rule itself.
 
Ministry’s reply
 
        A copyof brief record of the proceedings of the Gramsabha is normally forwarded to the Administrator or Director of
Panchayats.  The UT Administration/Ministry of Home Affairs have no objection in incorporating specific provisions in the rules
for forwarding a copy of the proceedings to the Director of Panchayats/ Administrator.
 
        Committee’s Observation
 
        The Committee expressed satisfaction that the Ministry had agreed to the suggestion of the Committee.
VI    Point referred  Rule 9(1)
 
Questions, Resolutions and propositions pertaining to the Gramsabha alone will be discussed in the meeting of the
Gramsabha.  The Pradhan or the Up-Pradhan, as the case may be, may disallow the moving or discussion of any resolution or
proposition before the Gramsabha which he considers to be beyond the scope or function of the Gramsabha.
 
 
The rule gives the Pradhan or the Up-Pradhan the right to disallow moving or discussion of any resolution or proposition
before the Gramsabha which he considers to be beyond the scope or function of the Gramsabha.  Whether the provision may
include the recording of the reasons in writing for disallowing the same as has been provided under rule 20(1).
 
Ministry’s reply
 
The UT Administration/Ministry of Home Affairs have no objection for including the same provision as under rule 20(1) for
disallowing any resolution/proposition before the Gramsabha.
 
Committee’s Observation
 
The Committee expressed satisfaction that the Ministry had agreed to the suggestion of the Committee.
 
VII  Point referred  Rule 18
 
        A Village (Dweep) Panchayat shall keep in Malayalam or Mah1 a brief record of its meetings and proceedings in Form 2.
 
The above provision provides for keeping a record of its meetings and proceedings.  Whether the provision should also include
the recording of minutes and circulation of the same to the members for the benefit of the members who are not present in the
meeting.  Whether there is any objection if the record is kept open for inspection.
 
       
        Ministry’s reply
 
        It may not be necessary to circulate minutes amongst the members of the Village (Dweep) Panchyat as the meetings of the
Village (Dweep) Panchayats are held at least once in a month and very often more than one meeting is conducted in a month by all
Village (Dweep) Panchayats.  Proceedings of every meeting is read and confirmed in the next meeting of the Village (Dweep)
Panchayat and, therefore, it may not be necessary to circulate the minutes.  A copy of the proceedings is always forwarded to the
Director of Panchayat.
 
Committee’s Observation
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
        The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry.
 
VIIIPoint referred  Rule 46
 
(i)(3) Agenda for the meeting shall include the following:-
 
(a) The draft proceeding of the previous session shall be read and confirmed at the beginning of each meeting and then
signed by the President-cum-Chief Counsellor or the Vice President-cum-Counsellor, as the case may be.
 
        The formation of para (a) is wrong, whether the Ministry have any objection in correcting the formation by inserting the word
‘which’ after the words ‘previous session’.
 
(ii) (4) Any member who wishes to have any subject included in the   agenda shall intimate his intention by notice in writing to
the Chief Executive Officer at least fifteen clear days before the day of the meeting and such notice shall contain a gist
of the subject which he wishes to be included.  The President-cum-Chief Counsellor shall decide on the admissibility
of the subject and shall disallow any subject stating the reason therefore in writing if in his opinion it contravenes any
of the provision of the Regulation or the Rules made thereunder.
 
 
 
 
Whether the Ministry have any objection in giving powers to the President-cum-Chief Counsellor to relax the period of fifteen
days as required under the sub-rule.
 
        Ministry’s reply
 
        There does not appear to be any drafting error in Rule 46(3)(a).  However, the Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law
will be consulted in the matter.
 
The UT Administration/Ministry of Home Affairs have no objection in giving powers to the President-cum-Chief Counsellor
to relax the period of fifteen days as required under the sub-rule.
 
        Committee’s Observation 
 
        The Committee expressed satisfaction that the Ministry had agreed to the suggestion of the Committee.
 
IX    Point referred Rule 52(1)
 
Written answers to questions :  The Chief Executive Officer shall obtain as far as possible all the information sought in
such question, in writing and make it available to the members.
 
        While collecting the information for question the words ‘as far as possible’ are likely to be misused.  Whether they can be
substituted by any specific and suitable words?
 
Ministry’s Reply
 
The UT Administration/Ministry of Home Affairs have no objection to delete the words ‘as far as possible’ and include the
words ‘which are within in the subjects allotted to the Panchayat after the words in such questions under rule 52(1).
 
Committee’s Observation
 
The Committee expressed satisfaction that the Ministry had agreed to the suggestion of the Committee.
 
X     Point referred  Rule 53 Condition of admissibility of question
 
        The conditions of admissibility of questions do not restrict ;the maximum number of words in a particular question nor
prescribe any condition that there shall be one question on one subject.  Whether the Ministry have any objection in prescribing
these conditions under the rules?
 
        Ministry’s Reply
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

        The UT Administration/Ministry of Home Affairs have no objection in restricting the number of words in a question nor have
any objection in prescribing the condition that only one question on one subject would be allowed.
 
        Committee’s Observation 
 
The Committee expressed satisfaction that the Ministry had agreed to the suggestion of the Committee.
 
XI    Point referred  Rule 56(1)(2)(3)
 
(1)   The President-cum-Chief Counsellor may, from time to time when considered necessary, appoint a Committee to consider
any matter related to the Panchayat for making report to the President-cum-Chief Counsellor.
 
(2)   The Committee shall consist of not more than five members to be elected from amongst the members of the District
Panchayat.
 
(3)   The Committee appointed under sub rule (1) shall hold office for a period specified by the President-cum-Chief
counsellor or until a new Committee is formed.
 
Sub-rule 1 of rule 56 provides for appointment of a Committee which will make a report to the President-cum-Chief
Counsellor.  The provision does not lay down any time period for making the report.  Whether a maximum time period may be laid
within which Committee has to make its report to the President.
 
        Sub-rule 2 does not mention the procedure for election of the members of the Committee.  Whether the same may be included
in the provision itself.
 
        Whether the time period for which a Committee shall hold office may be specified in the provision itself in relation to sub rule
(3) of rule 56.
 
Ministry’s Reply
 
(1)   The UT Administration/Ministry of Home Affairs have no objection to specify the maximum period of time for a Committee
to submit its report to the President under rule 56(1).
 
(2)   The UT Administration/Ministry of Home Affairs have no objection in prescribing procedure for election of members for the
Committee under rule 56(2).
 
(3)   The UT Administration/Ministry of Home Affairs have no objection to specify maximum period for which the Committee
shall hold office under rule 56(3).
 
Committee’s Observation 
 
The Committee expressed satisfaction that the Ministry has agreed to all the suggestions made by the Committee.
 
3.     The above observations of the Committee were forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs on March 6, 2000 for necessary
action. The Ministry vide their O.M. dated January 25, 2001 have furnished a copy of the notification F.No. 5/7/95-DOP dated
August 26, 2000 publishing the Lakshadweep Panchayat Business (Amendment) Rules, 2000 (Annexure-I). The Committee notes
with satisfaction that the Ministry has   notified amendments to rules 8, 9(1),46,52(1) and 53 and 56 of the Lakshadweep
Panchayats Business Rules, 1997 as per the Committee’s suggestions.
Annexure-I
[vide para 3 Page..]
 
The Lakshadweep Gazette
Published by Authority
 
Administration of the Union Territory of Lakshadweep the Lakshadweep Panchayats (Business) (Amendment) Rules, 2000.
 
Dated : 26th Augusat, 2000
 
NOTIFICATION
 
        F.No.5/7/95-DOP:- In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 81 of the Lakshadweep Panchayats Regulation, 1994 (4 of
1994), the Administration, Union Territory of Lakshadweep, hereby makes the following rules, namely:
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
1.     Short title and commencement: (1) These rules may be called the Lakshadweep Panchayats (Business) (Amendment) Rules,
2000.
 
(2)   These shall come into force with effect  from the date of their publication in the Lakshadweep Gazatte.
 
        In the Lakshadweep Panchayats Business Rules, 1997:
 
        (a) in rule 8 after the existing entry the following shall be inserted, namely:-
 
        “A copy of brief record of the meetings and proceedings so recorded shall be forwarded to the  Director of Panchayats and
Administrator.”
 
(b) in rule 9 sub-rule (1), after the words “beyond the scope or function of the Grama Sabha”, the words, “as the case may be,
and in so doing he shall record his reasons in writing” shall be inserted.
 
(c) in rule 46 after sub-rule (4), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
 
“Provided that the President-cum-Chief Counsellor may, if he is satisfied that there is sufficient reasons for so doing, relax the
period of 15 clear days, in individual case or in general.”
 
(d) in rule 52 sub-rule (1), for the word “as far as possible, all the in formations sought in such question” the words “all the
information sought in such questions”  which are within the subjects allotted to the  Panchayat”  shall be inserted.
 
(e) in rule 53 after clause (xvi) the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:-
 
“(xvii) each question shall not exceed more than fifty words.
(xviii) A member shall not ask more than one question on one subject.”
 
            (f) in rule 56-
            In sub-rule (2), after the existing entry, the following shall be inserted, namely:-
 
        “The election of members to the committee shall be made by suggesting name of one person by a member and seconded by
another member.  If the names of persons so suggested and seconded exceed the number of members required to constitute the
committee, the required number of members shall be elected from among the persons so suggested and seconded in accordance
with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.”
 
        (ii) In sub-rule (3), for the existing entry, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
 
        “(3) the terms of office of the Committee shall not be exceeding three months, within which it shall submit its report:
 
        Provided that the President-cum-Chief Counsellor , may on request of the Committee and with the approval of the Panchayat
extend the terms of office for valid reasons beyond three months or a maximum period not exceeding three months.”
 
VI
 
The Coir (Registration & Licensing) Rules, 1958
 
        The Coir Industry (Registration & Licensing) Rules, 1958 framed under Section 26 of the Coir Industry Act, 1953 were
examined and certain points were referred to the Ministry of Small scale Industries and Agro and Rural industries for their
comments and clarifications of January 9, 2001.
 
2.     The Committee discussed  the subject with the representatives of the Coir Board and the Ministry on 19.01.2001 at Cochin. 
The points referred the  Ministry’s comments/clarification thereon alongwith Committee’s observations on each in the meeting
dated the 19th January, 2001 are reproduced below:
 
Point referred
 
        Whether the Coir Industry (Registration & Licensing) Rules, 1958 have been laid on the Table of the Houses of Parliament.  If
so, the details in this regard?
Ministry’s comments
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
        The Department of SSI & ARI came into being only in 1990 and prior to that the subject was being dealt in the Ministry of
Industry/Commerce as such details of laying of the Coir Industry (Registration & Licensing) Rules, 1958 are not available with this
Ministry.  This fact has already been communicated to the Committee on Subordinate Legislation through the Rajya Sabha
Secretariat on 19th August, 1999 vide O.M. No.4(27/98-Coir.
 
        Committee observation
 
        The Commute noted the reply.
 
2.     Point referred
 
The Coir Industry (Registration & Licensing) Rules, 1958 lack  in format inasmuch as they indicate neither the name nor the
provisions of the Act under which these rules have been framed.
 
Whether the Ministry have any objection in rectifying this discrepancy?
 
Ministry’s comments
 
There is no objection to adopt the standard format and will be incorporated at the time of revision of the Coir Industry
(Registration & Licensing) Rules, 1958.
 
Committee’ observation
 
The Committee noted the reply.
 
3.     Point refereed
Rule2 (f) regarding definition of Industrial Establishment
 
Rule 2(f) defines “Industrial Establishment”.  It says that any premises or part thereof where re-hanking of coir yarn is done
with hired labour or any process for manufacture or finishing of coir products etc. is being carried on or is ordinarily carried on
constitutes an industrial establishment.
 
As per the above provisions, even a single hired labour would be sufficient to be covered within the definition of “industrials
establishment”.  What is the real intention of Government in this regard; should a minimum number of hired labour not be
prescribed here?  Secondly, the words “ ordinarily carried on “appearing in rule 2 (f) do not appear to be specific and is capable of
varied interpretations.  Where Ministry have any objection in amending the provision for the purpose of making it specific?
 
     Ministry’s Comments
 
        Around the year 1958, when the rules in question were framed the coir product manufacturing industry was generally in an
organized set up wherein the activities were carried out in centralized manner.    The rehanking of yarn was done centrally by
engaging labour.  Therefore, it was felt necessary to consider rehanking units as industrial establishments.  But, of late, with the
ruse of a number of small scale handloom units manufacturing coir products, rehanking activities have got shifted to such units or
attached to bigger product manufacturing factories.  There are also a few exclusive rehanking units distributed    sporadically,  
where   labour   is   being   engaged.    Since  such
rehanking units are engaging hired labour of varying numbers and are not household units where family members are the only
workers, it was the intention of the Government of know the umber of such units.  hence, it is not felt necessary to fix up a
minimum number of hired labour in respect of rehanking units for being considered as an industrial establishment in the coir
sector. 
 
        The activities in the product manufacturing sector in coir industry  is of an intermittent nature, depending on various factors
like demand of product, availability of raw material, circumstances of work etc. Therefore, manufacturing of coir and coir products
may not be carried out continuously in all units all through the year.  It is necessary to register all such units also.  To bring all
industrial establishments in the coir sector within the ambit of registration, the work “ordinarily carried on”  appearing in Rule 2(f)
is required to be retained.  This enabling provision helps to include al units which are ordinarily in production, but for some reason
or other the production activity gets discontinued for some time.
        Committee’s observation
 
        The Committee noted the reply
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

4.     Point referred
Rule 3
 
As per Rule 3 a restriction has been put on a person not to work in a spindle or Industrial Establishment  unless the same has
been registered.   Would it not be appropriate to impose restriction on Coir Spindle or Industrial Establishment also not to
carry on such work unless registered while prohibiting persons from working in them?
 
Ministry’s comments-
 
The intention behind this Rule is to ensure that all coir spindles and industrial establishments are registered in accordance with
these rule.  The Rule 3 categorically puts a restraint on coir spindle and industrial stablishment not  to  carry   on  activity  without 
due  registration.   It  may  be  seen  that  the  rule
applies to the coir spindle and industrial establishment as defined in the Rule.
It is amply made clear in Rule 3 that the definition of the word “persons” includes a corporation, a firm, an association of
individuals and a cooperative society registered under any law.
 
        Committee observation
 
The  Committee noted the reply.
 
5.     Point referred
 
Rule 4 regarding application for registration
 
The Secretary of the Board has been authorized to entertain late applications for registration, if he is satisfied that there is
sufficient cause for not making application in time.  What checks, if any, have been prescribed to avoid  non-registration/late
registration of a Coir Spindle/ Industrial Establishment; what are the consequences in case there is a delay’ default in the
registration of a coir Spindle or an Industrial Establishment? 
 
Ministry’s comments-
 
        The Coir Industry (Registration & Licensing) Rules, 1958 do not prescribe any penal provision to deal with the cases of non
registration, delay and default in the registration of coir spindle/industrial establishments.  However, in the case of registered units,
if there is any violation of the provision, the registration can be cancelled.  The coir industrial units are encouraged to register
themselves under the Registration & Licensing Rules.  It has been stipulated that assistance extended by Coir board shall be
available only to those coir industrial units who have been registered with the Coir board.  The Board has also taken concerted
efforts to register all small scale mats and matting units of Alleppey and Shertallai areas where there is concentration of such units. 
Statistical data collection, which is one of the major objectives of registration, has been made possible by conducting periodical
industrial surveys./  The experience shows that lack of any incentive or disincentive has been the reason for not registering or
default in renewing the registration.  This has been rectified to some extent by insisting that no assistance  under  the  Coir  Board 
will be made available unless the units are
registered with the Coir board.  The industrial units are also encouraged to register under the Registration & Licensing Rules and
sport registration is given whenever Entrepen Development programmes and Quality Improvement Programmers are conducted by
the Board.  In order to facilitate registration and to simplify the procedure, survey teams have been sent to the concerned locations
and applications are filled on the spot for registration.
               
Committee’s observation
 
      The Committee  noted  the reply
 
6.     Point referred
Rule 6 regarding grant of certificate
 
Whether Government have any objection in prescribing a time period for grant of certificate of registration for coir
spindle/industrial establishment?
 
        Ministry’s comments-
 
        Before given registration, it is obligatory on the part of the registering authority to satisfy that the unit applied for registration
is in existence.  This is now  being done through on-the-spot inspection of the unit.   The registration, all over the country is now
being made through 4 field offices of  the Board which are handicapped, by limitation of staff.   These field offices are  responsible
for implementation of various developmental  activities such as grant of financial assistance, conduct of training, organizing
Entrepreneur Development Programmes/Quality Improvement Programme camps, Mahila Coir Yojana, demonstration of  various
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

innovative technologies and the end uses of coir, extension service activities, implementation of Purchase Price  (Enforcement)
scheme, quality inspection, registration of coir machinery manufacturers, various welfare schemes etc.  besides registering of coir
units.  Apart from this, going a cottage and rural industry most of the units in this industry are located in far and remote places and
to make on-the-spot inspection of such units the officers deputed for inspection will have to travel long distances even to places
where public transport system is not available.
        A registration can be given only after the units start production and a due inspection is carried out to ascertain the status and
the veracity of statements made in the application.  Since the field offices of the Coir Board are very few and distributed far and
wide, prescribing a short time frame for issuing registration certificate will be difficult.  However, the Board will be guided by the
advice of the Committee in this regard.
 
            Committee’s observation
 
        The Committee noted the reply.
 
7.     Point referred
Rule 8 regarding application for renewal
 
Whether Government have any objection in fixing a time period for allowing renewal of registration of a coir
Spindle/industrial establishment? 
 
        Ministry’s comments
 
        Under the existing provisions of Rule 8, the Secretary or other officer may entertain an applicable for renewal which  is not
made in time if he is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not making the application in time.  The objective of the provision
is to ensure that the industrial units come forward and comply with the provisions of the rule.  It will be difficult to enforce renewal
of registration within the prescribed time limit especially in the absence of  a penal provision or any particular incentive.  However,
a time lit of 30 days may be prescribed, with the provisions to relax it, if there was sufficient reason for not filing the application in
time.
 
Committee’s observation
 
        The Committee accepted the proposed amendment.
 
8.     Point referred
Rules 9, 10 and 23
 
The quantum of fee prescribed for registration of renewal of registration for an Industrial Establishment or for issue of a
duplicate certificate is Rs.1/- only.  No fee is charged on an application for registration or renewal of registration of a coir-spindle. 
Further, as per rule 23, the fee for license is @ 5 paise per 50 kg subject to a maximum of Rs.100/-.
 
Whether the amount of fee to be charged as prescribed  in the above rules has since been revised, if not, whether Ministry have
any objection to revise the same so as to make it realistic?
 
Ministry’s comments
 
The fee for registration/renewal of industrial units for export license have not bee revised so far.  The Board is in favour of
revision of the fee referred to in Rule 9 & 10.
 
The Board has proposed revision of the fee for registration/reveal of an Industrial Establishment as Rs.10/- and for issue of 
duplicate certificate as Rs.25/-.  However, the coir spindles are proposed to be exempted from any registration/renewal fee on the
ground that such units are run by small household entrepreneurs.
 
No fee is proposed to  be levied for license as the requirement of a license for export has been relaxed by the Central
Government by Notification No.S.O. 1898 dated 2nd July, 1963.
 
Committee’s observation
 
The Committee accepted the proposed amendments.
 
 
9.     Point referred
Rules 18 & 19 regarding registration of established exports.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

 
As per rule 18 any person fulfilling the prescribed conditions, may be registered as an exporter.  Similarly, rule 19 also states
that  a person may be registered as an exporter if he fulfils the specified conditions.
 
Whether the registration of the exporters is optional; should it not be compulsory for all exporters to get themselves registered
with the Board under the rules, in  case they fulfill the conditions, as laid down in the rules?
 
It is further seen that the conditions  prescribed in rules 18 and 19 subject to which registration is done, seem to have been
determined longtime back.  Whether their revision is not called for?
 
        Ministry’s comments
 
Under Rule 17, it is mandatory on the part of every exporter of coir and coir products to register with Coir Board to effect export
of coir fibre, coir yarn or coir products.  Accordingly, the registration of exporters is not optional but compulsory under this rule.
           
Rule  18 was defined with an intention for registering exporters who were already in the business of  export at the time when the 
rule came into force.  Whereas Rule 19 was meant for new exporters who came to the scene after these rules were enacted.  The
conditions under the said  rules are still in force as it is.
 
An amendment by way of addition was effected as 19 (A) in 1963.  The provision under this amendment provides flexibility to
meet with exigencies of registering an exporter.  The Rule was further amended in 1965 where the quantities mentioned under Rule
19 have been enhanced.  Subsequent to that there was no amendment to these Rules.  With the inclusion of Rule 19 (A) there does
not appear to be any need for revision of these provisions.  However, if any need arise in future it can be duly incorporated.
 
Committee’s observation
 
The Committee noted the reply
 
10.  Point referred
Rule 24
 
As per rule 24, an export licence can be granted by the Chairman, subject to such conditions not inconsistent with these rules
as may be imposed by him.
 
These powers to impose conditions while granting a license seem to be unqualified.  Whether Government have any objection
in either specifying the conditions or at least their nature or type and also the objective, so that the powers are exercised
judiciously?
 
11.   Point referred
Rule 25
 
A licence issued under these rule has been prescribed to be valid for a period of 30 days only from the date of its grant and it
has further been provided that this period may be extended under certain conditions.
 
Is the period   of 30 days not too less;  what is the justification for prescribing the validity period of licence as 30 days;
whether Government have any objection in specifying the maximum period upto  which a licence could be extended?
               
Ministry’s  comments on points nos. 10 & 11
 
Section 12 of the Coir Industry Act, 1953 is an enabling provision that controls export of coir fibre, coir yarn and coir products
through issue of a license by or on behalf of the Board.  This provision in section 12 of the Coir Industry Act has been relaxed
through a Gazette Notification in 1963 to the extend that no license under the said Section shall be necessary for the export of coir
fibre, coir yarn or coir products, by any  person who has been duly registered as an exporter in accordance with procedure
prescribed under the Registration & Licensing Rules, 1958.  In view of  the relaxation in the operation of Section  12 of the Coir
Industry Act, 1953 the issue of license for export  of  coir products is not invoked at present.
 
Committee’s observation
 
The Committee noted the reply.
 
12.   Point referred
Rule 29 regarding appeal
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

Order canceling a registration or a licesnce can be appealed against on the Central Government.  But, the term Central
Government  has not been defined in the rules.  Whether Government have any objection in naming of the authority in the Central 
Government  to whom appeal lied?
 
Ministry’s comments
 
        Although the term Central Government has not been specifically defined in the rules, by convention and precedents, it refers
to the Nodal Administrative Ministry of the Government of India under which the Coir Board is enlisted.  At present it is under the 
Ministry of Small scale Industries and Agro and Rural Industries.  It is not considered necessary to specify in the Registration &
Licensing Rules to name any particular authority in the Central Government to whom lies an appeal under Rule, 29, as experience
shows that the Coiir Board has been functioning under different nodal Ministries/Department from time in the past.
 
        Committee’s observations
 
        The Committee noted the reply.
 
13.   Point referred
Rule 31 regarding powers to call for return, etc.
 
The rule seems to vest wide powers in the Board in the matter of prescribing the manner in which the records may be kept or
information/returns may be called for from the holder of a certificate or a licensee.  To what extent rule 31 is being complied with
at present, whether there is any objection to enumerate the information/returning required in the rules itself?
 
Ministry’s comments
 
Rule 31 is only an enabling  provision to be used depending on the need, for obtaining relevant information pertain to
transactions in relation to registration and licensing, of which the licensing element is not more in operation.  Therefore, as of now,
it’s operation is limited only to the registration aspect.  In view of the above, it is felt that the provision may continue unaltered, as
it is only an enabling provision.
 
Committee’s observation
The Committee noted the reply.
 
14.   Point referred
 
A general perusal of the provisions of the rules gives an impression that its provisions have not been updated.  For example,
the fee etc.  prescribed for registration or issue of licences  is really too less in the present day’s context.  For example, rule 20 (a)
refers to a scheduled bank or a registered bank often years standing for the purpose of obtaining a certificate  regarding financial
status for applying for  registration as an exporter.  The condition of Registered Bank of ten years’  standing is not relevant in
present day’s context.  Whether Government  have any objection in reviewing the provisions of these rules for the purpose of have
any objection in reviewing the provisions of these rules for the purpose of amending those provisions that are either irrelevant or
insignificant in the present  scenario?
 
Ministry’s comments
 
Coir Industry (Registration & Licensing) Rules were enacted on 22.02.1058.  On account of various development, especially 
liberalization and economic reforms some of these provisions have become outdated and irrelevant as  rightly commented upon by
the Committee.  The Government and the Board have no objection in reviewing the provisions of these Rules to keep in line with
the changed scenario especially in the context of economic liberalization polices.   
However, based on the directions received from the Prime Minister’s Office, the Ministry of Law & Justice had requested all
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India to review all laws, regulations and procedures  so that outdated
laws/regulations etc. maybe deleted and suitable reorienting modifications can be done in those which have substantial changes. 
Accordingly, an Expert Group under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary in this Ministry was constituted for the purpose.  The
Expert Group in its various meeting held with the representative of the concerned Organisation, Coir Board in this case had,
proposed various amendments to the Coir Industry Rules, 1954 and the Coir Industry (Registration & Licensing) Rules, 1958
which are being finalized in consultation with the Ministry of Law ,Justice & Company Affairs.
 
Committee’s observation
 
        The Committee noted the reply.
 
15.   Point referred
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

The objective of the rules seem to be regulate the activities of persons working on  Coir Spindle or in Industrial Establishment
or in the business of export of coir fibre/yarn or products through the process of registration and licensing.  The rules do not
provide for any penalty in case anybody violates the provisions of these rules.
 
Whether any penalties in this behalf have been prescribed by Government anywhere, if so details thereof?
 
 Ministry’s comments
 
  Under Rule 14, if any person has obtained a certificate by furnishing incorrect information or he has contravened any of the
provisions of these rules or conditions mentioned in the certificate  the Board can exercise its powers to cancel the certificate  of
registration.   Similarly under Rules 21, if a registered exporter fails to comply any of the provisions of these rules or if such person
has become disqualified to continue as an exporter, his registration as an exporter can be cancelled.  Being a promotional agency it
is the  endeavor  of  the  Board to encourage the coir industrial enterprise to ,suo-
moto, take to the provisions of the Registration & Licensing Rules especially if they intend to take advantage of various assistance
provided through Coir Board’s scheme.
 
Committee’s observation
 
The Committee noted the reply.
 
16.   Point referred
 
The number of coir spindles/industrial establishments and exporters registered with the Coir Board at present and what is the
mechanism in place that nobody  who is supposed to get registered avoids it or function without a licence?
 
Ministry’s comments
 
As on 31.3.2000, the number of coir spindle and industrial establishments and  exporters registered with the Coir Board under
the provisions of the Registration & Licensing Rules is given below:             
 
Coir Spindles                        -                               1125000
           
               Industrial Establishments    -                               7541
 
Registered Exporters           -                               309
 
 
In the traditional areas, almost all the coir industrial enterprises have been registered.  Surveys and on-the-sport registration
system have been resorted to, especially in the small scale product manufacturing sector so as to enlist all such units.  In the non-
traditional areas like Tamil Ndu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa etc.  where coir industrial units are newly coming up, there
exists a regular system of registration  through the field offices of the Coir Board.  Registration of the exporter, in total, since a
mechanism exists where Costume authorities in sit on proof of registration with the Coir Board, prior to shipping of goods.
 
Committee’s  observation
 
The Committee noted the reply.
 
17.   Point referred
 
        To what extend the these rules have relevance in the present day scenario of liberalization, free trade and reduction of
Government control in trade and industry.  What is the justification for continuing with these rules in today’s new economic
scenario?
 
        Ministry’s comments
 
        To organize planning and implementation of developmental schemes and for undertaking promotional activities, it is
necessary to get reliable date on various aspects of the industry particularly, the                production capacity and export
performance.  Registration & Licensing Rules have been instrumental in collecting such date.  The registration of exporters has
been enabling the Board to get factual data on exports, market preferences, product mix and other factors affecting the export of
coir and coir products.  In this context, the Registration & Licensing Rules continue to be relevant even today.  The licensing
provision has been dispensed with, which is in line with the liberalization and reduction of Government control in trade and
industry.  Insistence of registration does not amount to any Government control whereas it provides valuable input in planning and
implementation of developmental schemes and promotional activities.  Therefore, it maybe seen that the Coir Industry
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

(Registration & Licensing) Rules, 1958 are not against the liberalization or inconsistent with the policies of the Government of
India.
 
Committee’s observation
 
        The Committee noted the reply.
 
4.       The Committee considered the subject at its sitting held on 7th February 2001 and observed that many of the provisions of the
Coir Board (Registration and Licensing) Rules, 1958 have become outdated in the liberalized economic scenario calling for a
major review.  The Committee  noted  that  with t he on set of  liberalization  the  Coir  Board  as  already  dispensed  with the
process of licensing.  The Committee is of the view that there is enough export potential in the Coir Industry and the Ministry of
Small Scale Industries and Agro and Rural Industries should put in all efforts to review the existing rules  in line with the resent
requirements.  The Committee hopes that the Ministry would expedite the process of review.
 
VII
 
 
Determination of rate of interest payable to subscribers of EPF-Implementation of 134th report of the Committee.
 
 
The subject pertaining to determination of rate of interest payable to  the subscribers of EPF –Implementation of 130th Report
of the Committee was reported to the House on April 25, 2001 vide 134th Report of the Committee.  The Committee’s
recommendations/observations as contained in paras 3,0,3,1,3,2, and 3,3, are under:
 
“The Committee at the outset did not find  the ATR acceptable and it also expressed its dissatisfaction over the manner in
which the Ministry of Labour had taken action on the recommendations.   While the Committee refrained from making any
comments on the reply of the Ministry of Labour in   response to the contents of para 6 of the Report, it expressed its
disagreement over the reply of Ministry of Labour, in response to the Committee’s recommendations, as contained in para 6.1
of the Report on compliance of the consultation process in the matter of determination of rate of interest payable to subscribers
of EPF.  The Committee is of the firm view that merely obtaining of recommendation of the Board on the rate of interest to be
paid on provident fund for  a financial year by the Central Government does not constitute adequate “consultation”.  In this
context, the Committee reiterates its observation appearing in the 130th report which are as follows:
 
“In Committee’s view, consolation is not a one way traffic; it is a process which facilitates dialogue between two parties.  The
dialogue is essential.  In this case, the Ministry of Labour, after consultation with the Ministry of Finance over the question of
rate of interest did not go back to the CBT finally for  “consultation”.  The consultation was between the two departments of
Government  of India and the Ministry of Labour had only intimated the decision of Ministry of Finance to the CBT.  In
Committee’s view the consolation process has not been carried out as envisaged under the scheme”
While the Committee does recognize the role of the Ministry of Finance in the matter of declaration of rate of interest on EPF as
well as the relevance of related issues at the macro level, but, in the opinion of the Committee, the provisions of Clause 60 (1) of
the EPF Scheme, viz, that the Commissioner shall credit to the account of each member,  interest at such rate as may be determined
by the Central Government in consultation with the Central Board, does not seem to have been employed with in the true sense. 
The Committee, in this context had recommended that the consultation process should be “undergone during the meeting of the
CBT itself where the Central Government is represented by both the Ministry of Labour and Finance”.  The Committee had further
recommended that the Government’s  views on the rate of interest should be placed unambiguously at the meeting of the CBT. 
While the Committee does appreciate that it may not always be feasible for the Government representatives to effectively influence
the decision of the Board in the meeting where the decisions are taken on the basis of majority of votes of the trustees and where
the strength of the representativ4es of the Central Government  is comparatively small but, in Committee’s onion, be nothing
prevents Government from placing their view on the rate of interest in the meeting of the CBT specially if Government’s views is
founded on sound financial and economic principles.
 
The Committee feels that placing of Government’s view in the matter in the meeting of the CBT, would enable compliance in
sprit of the procedure of consultation as contemplated in the scheme.  It was in consonant with this view that the Committee in
its 130th Report had recommended that the Ministry of Labour should call for another meeting of the CBT where all parties
should be apprised of the exact position of the fund and the existing decision 11 per cent interest for the year 2000-01 is
reviewed and the consultation process is also carried out.
 
In this context, the Committee is unhappy over the reply furnished by the Ministry of Labour wherein they have stated that as
required by the Committee as special meeting of the CBT was convened on 25th July, 2000.  The Commiittee is unhappy to
note that the Ministry of Labour have not taken action on its recommendation in a proper manner.  The Committee  was 
already  aware  of the meeting of the CBT dated July 25,
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

2000 as is obvious from the fact that the report was presented much later on the 1st December, 2000.  In fact, what had been
recommended by the Committee was to convene another meeting of the CBT in view of the variation in the rate of interest as
recommended by the CBT  and what was payable in the opinion of the Central Government.  The Committee accordingly,
recommends that whenever there is a difference of opinion on the question of rate of interest between the CBT and the Central
Government, the final view of the Central Government must come before the CBT so that at the very least the CBT is aware of
the factors which have influenced Government to taken decision in the matter.
 
The Committee would like the Ministry of Labour to review the matter in the light of the above recommendations.”
 
2.     The Report of the Committee was forwarded to the Ministry of Labour for furnishing the action taken note thereon.  In the
mean time a representation was received from the Secretary, the Hind Mazdoor  Sabha (Annexure) stating that Government had
once again taken a unilateral decision to further reduce the rate of interest payable  to the EPF subscribers to 9.5% during the year
2001-02 from the already reduced rate of 11% for the year 2000-01 without proper consultation with the Central Board of Trustees
of the Fund despite the fact that there were specific recommendations of the Committee in this regard.  The representation was
forwarded to the Ministry of Labour on July 23, 2001 for their comments.
 
3.     The Ministry of Labour vide their O.M. dated August 6, 2001 have furnished the action taken note on the Committee’s
observations/recommendations as contained in its 134th Report.  The Committee considered the subject matter in its meeting held
on 7th August, 2001 in the light of the above  action taken note.  The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have
agreed that whenever there is a difference of opinion on the question of rate of interest between the CBT and the Central
Government,  the final view of the Central Government must come before the CBT  so that at the very lest the CBT is aware of the
factors which have influenced Government  to take a decision in the matter.
 Annexure
[vide para 2 page...]
 
Representation Received From Hind Mazdoor Sabha on 17th  2001
 
Sub:    Employees’ Provident Fund – Determination of Interest Payable to Subscribers.
 
        In response to  the joint representation dated June 4, 2001 from HMS, AITUC, AMS, CITU and INTUC on the issue of the
rate of interest payable to the subscribers  to the Employees’ Provident Fund.  We have been favoured with  a copy of the 134th
Report of the Committee, including the Committee’s observations, after taking note of the Labor Ministry’s reply, at its meeting
held on April 9, 2001, by the  Under Secretary  at the Rajya Sabha Secretariat vide his letter No.R/12(4)/2001-Com.I dated June
29, 2001.  We are happy that in its observations, the Committee did not find the Ministry’ action report acceptable and had
reiterated its observations contained in its 130th Report. 
 
            However we are constrained to point  out that the Committee’s 134th Report and the reiteration of its earlier observations
relate to the interest payable for the preceding year 2000-01.  Our complaint, on the other hand, is against the Government’s non-
compliance of the Committee’ recommendation on the issue of the unilateral decision to further reduce the interest payable to the
EPF   subscribers to 9.5 per cent during the year 2001-02 from the already reduced 11 per cent for the year 2000-01 without proper
consultation with the Central Board of Trustees of the Fund.
 
        At its meeting on March 23, 2001, the Board was only informed that the Report of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation
was under examination of the Government.   Despite the Board’s recommendation of an interest rate of 10.25 per cent on the
monthly balance of subscribers for the financial year 2001-02.  The Labor Ministry unilaterally notified the approval of the reduced
rate of 9.5 per cent as decided by the Ministry of Finance.
 
        It is to this gross violation of the essentiality of the consultation process to be at the meetings of the CTBT itself that  we had
drawn the Committee’s attention for appropriate intervention.
 
        We, therefore, once again approach the Committee to  take up the issue and deal with it as it deems fit.
VIII
108
Summary of Recommendations
 
I
 
The Jute Manufacture Development Council (Procedure) Rules, 1984.
 
        The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Textiles have agreed to carry out amendment in the Rules 4(1),
6(3), 14(9), 11(1), 12,14(6), 16(2) of the Jute Manufacture Development Council (Procedure) Rules, 1984 as per the Committee’s
suggestions.
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

II
 
The Indian Bank/Indian Overseas Bank Officer Employees’ (Acceptance of Jobs in  Private Sector Concerns after
Retirement) Regulations, 1979
 
        The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have incorporated the recommendations of the Committee in sub-
regulation (3) (regarding provision of granting or refusing permission to a person for taking up any commercial employment more
specific) and sub-regulation (5) (regarding appeal on rejection of request  for permission to a person for taking up any commercial
employment) of Regulation 4, though it took an unduly long time in doing so.
 
III
 
The Lakshadweep Khadi and Village Industries Board Rules, 1991.
 
        The Committee notes satisfaction that Ministry of Home Affairs has notified amendments to Rules 3(1), 3(2), 4(1), 6(1), 23(1)
and 25(1) The Lakshadwep Khadi and Village Industries Board Rules, 1991 as per the Committee’s suggestion.
 
IV
 
The Lakshadweep Panchayate (Grant-in-aid) Rules, 1997.
 
        The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Home Affairs has notified amendment to rules 2(1)(d), 6(a), and
8(13) of the Lakshadweep Panchayats (Grant-in-aid) Rules, 1997 as per the Committee’s suggestions.
 
 
V
 
The Lakshadweep Panchayat Business  Rules, 1997.
 
The Committee notes with  satisfaction that the Ministry of Home Affairs has notified amendments to rules 8, 9(1),46,52(1),
53 and 56 of the Lakshadweep panchayats Business Rules, 1997 as per the Committee’s suggestions.
 
VI
 
The Coir Industry (Registration and Licensing) Rules, 1958.
 
        The Committee observed that many of the provisions of the Coir Board (Registration and Licensing) Rules, 1958 have
become outdated in the liberalized economic scenario calling for a major review of these provisions.  The Committee noted that
with the onset of liberalization, the Coir Board has already dispensed with the process of licensing.  The Committee is of the view
that there is enough export potential in the Coir Industry and the Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro and Rural Industries
should put all efforts in reviewing the existing rules in line with the present requirements.  The Committee hopes that the Ministry
would expedite the process of review.
 
 
VII
 
Determination of Rate of Interest payable to the Subscribers of EPF- Implementation of 134th Report of the Committee
 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have agreed that whenever there is a difference of opinion on the
question of rate of interest payable to subscribers of EPF between the CBT and the Central Government, the final view of the
Central Government must come before the CBT so that at the very least the CBT is aware of the factors which have influenced
Government to take a decision in the matter.
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA.
 
XIX
 
 
Nineteenth  Meeting
 
 
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF

        The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday  the 7th  August, 2001 in Room No. 126-C (Chairman’s Room) Third Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
                MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1. Shri Dipankar Mukherjee, Chairman
2. Shri Kapil Sibal
3. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi  
4. Shri  Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy
5. Shri S. Sivasubramanian
6. Shri H.K. Javare Gowda
7. Shri Suresh A. Keswani
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary
Shri Surendra Kumar Tripathi, Committee Officer
 
 
    
xxx                                                   xxx                                           xxx
 
2.        The Committee after some discussion adopted its draft 136th Report and decided to present the same during the ongoing
Session.
 
xxx                                           xxx                                           xxx
 
xxx                                           xxx                                           xxx
 
3.             xxx                                           xxx                                           xxx
 
4.             xxx                                           xxx                                           xxx
 
5.     The Committee then adjourned at 3.50 p.m.
Explore our developer-friendly HTML to PDF API Printed using PDFCrowdHTML to PDF