    COMMITTEE ON 
 
Rajya Sabha 
                             TWO HUNDRED AND 
Notifications issued by Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Affairs 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on     
                                                                                                                             
REPORT 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
Rajya Sabha  Secretariat, New Delhi                                
March, 2017/Chaitra, 1939 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
Notifications issued by Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic 
Affairs ) on Demonetization   
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on     10 th  April,   2017)
 
                                                                                                                             
REPORT 
NO.  
233 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                   
REPORT  
Economic 
) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : 
http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 
E-Mail: rsc1sub@sansad.nic.in  
 
  

COMMITTEE ON SUBORDI 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND 
Notifications issued by Ministry of Finance (Department of 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDI NATE LEGISLATION 
TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
Notifications issued by Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10 th  April, 2017) 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
March, 2017/ Chaitra, 1939 (Saka) 
Hindi  version of this publication is also available 
NATE LEGISLATION  
REPORT  
Economic Affairs ) on Demonetization   
 
version of this publication is also available  

 
C O N T E N T S 
      
                                                            PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION  OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
2 
3.. 
INTRODUCTION 
ACRONYMS 
4. 
 
 
 
 
 
5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT ON 
Notifications issued by Ministry of Finance  
(Department of Economic Affairs) on Demonetization  
*MINUTES  
 
 
*To be appended later 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   15 th  SEPTEMBER, 2016) 
 
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy   Chairman 
2.  Shri Ali Anwar Ansari      
3. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
*4.  Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh 
5. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
6. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
7. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
8.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
9. Shri S. Muthukaruppan 
10. Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
11. Shri K. Parasaran 
12. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
13. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
14. Shri Sanjay Seth 
15. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
_____________________________________________________________ 
*     Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 8 th  November, 2016 in place of Prof. Jogen 
Chowdhury  
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri J.G.Negi , Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
3. Shri  R.S. Rawat, Joint Director 
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director 
5. Smt. Monica Baa, Deputy Director  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
1. I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordina te Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on i ts behalf, this Two Hundred and Thirty 
Third Report of the Committee.  
 
2.  The Committee examined the matters that came up  while scrutinizing the 
Notifications issued by the Ministry of Finance, De partment of Economic Affairs on 
Demonetization.. 
 
3.   The observations and recommendations of the Co mmittee are contained in the 
Report.  
 
4.  The Committee considered and adopted the draft Re port in i 
ts meeting held on the       
28 th  March, 2017. 
 
 
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY  
Chairman  
Committee on Subordinate Legislation,  
 Rajya Sabha  
 
NEW DELHI  
April 10, 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ACRONYMS 
RBI : Reserve Bank of India 
SBN : Specified Bank Notes 
AIR : All India Records 
FICN : Fake Indian Currency Notes 
APMC : Agricultural Produce Market Committee 
MSME : Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
  

Report  
on   
Notifications issued by Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on Demonetization   
 
 
 The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Af fairs) issued Notification No S.O. 3407(E) dated 
the 8 
th  November, 2016 declaring the denominations of the existing series of the value of five hundred rupees  
and one thousand rupees shall cease to be legal ten der, on the recommendations of the Central Board of  
Directors of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). On th e same date, the Department also issued two other 
notifications, namely, S.O. 3408(E) and S.O. 3409(E ) dated the 8 th  November, 2016 specifying certain 
exemptions for the convenience of the members of th e public in carrying out certain emergent and urgen t 
transactions using the Specified Bank Notes (SBN); and specifying the denomination of bank notes of th e value 
of two thousand rupees respectively. The first two notifications have been issued under Section 26(2) of the RBI 
Act, 1934 and the last notification has been issued  under Section 24(2) of the RBI Act, 1934. These 
Notifications however were not laid on the Table of the House although they are statutory in nature.  
  
2. Therefore, the Committee decided to take up Noti fication No. S.O. 3407(E) dated 8 
th  November, 2016 
(Annexure I)  for detailed examination and a questionnaire on th e same was forwarded to the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) for their comments/clarifications (Annexure II) . The Committee 
also took up for discussion the said Regulations wi th Reserve Bank of India along with Ministry of Fin ance 
(Department of Economic Affair) and also with diffe rent Banks and Financial Institutions during its st udy visit 
to Ahmedabad, Mumbai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad from 5 th  to 11 th  January, 2017. Relevant extracts of the 
study notes are enclosed at Annexure III, IV, V and VI .   
3. While deliberating on the issue the Committee wa s of the view that the primary function of the 
Parliament is the passage of legislation concerned with addressing the needs of the government. Howeve r, an 
Act of the Parliament creates the framework of a pa rticular law and tends only to contain an outline o f the 
purpose of the Act. The Parliament by giving author ity for legislation to be delegated, enables other persons or 
bodies to provide more detail to an Act of Parliame nt. Parliament thereby, through primary legislation  (i.e. an 
Act of Parliament), permit others to make law and r ules through delegated legislation. Such delegated 
legislation which is known as subordinate legislati on goes by names like rules, regulations, schemes, bye-laws, 
orders, circulars, ordinances, statutes and notific ations etc. All such instruments created under the Act in fact, 
have same force of law. It is equally important to note that the subordinate legislation so framed mus t be within 
the framework of law which makes the delegation, and such subordinate legislation has to be consistent with the 
law under which it is made and cannot go beyond the  limits of policy and standards laid down in the la w. 

Towards this end it is essential to ensure that the  subordinate legislation so framed must conform exa ctly to the 
powers granted under the law. So it is imperative to have Parliamentary control over such legislations.  
 
4. Effective Parliamentary control is the defining feature of a subordinate legislation. It is the las t frontier 
of legislative scrutiny and is integral to the legi slature’s role as supreme law making body. The Supr eme Court 
of India has pronounced this in unequivocal terms i n Avinder Singh V. Punjab, AIR 1979 SC 321, “ Legislature 
cannot efface itself. It cannot delegate the plenar y or the essential legislative functions’ even if t here be 
delegation, parliamentary control over  delegated l egislation should be a living continuity as a const itutional 
necessity ”. Further, the Court added: “ The legislature is the master of policy and if the delegate is free to switch 
policy it may be usurpation of legislative power it self’ . In this respect to ensure Parliamentary scrutiny of the 
subordinate legislation laying of such instruments before the House is the first step. 
 
5. The U.K. Parliament has also evolved its own sys tem of Parliamentary scrutiny of delegated legislat ion. 
There is no formal procedure in the House of Common s for scrutiny of Bills to see that any delegated p ower is 
necessary and appropriately defined and controlled,  but the House of Lords has set up a committee to d eal with 
these matters in 1994. In U.K. the requirement of l aying of statutory instruments on the Table is used  
extensively. There are four broad categories of sta tutory instruments considered as delegated legislations: in the 
first category, statutory instruments are made but not laid on the Table of the House and thus not sub jected to 
debate or voting. Second categories of statutory instruments are laid but not subject to debate or voting hence no 
scrutiny. In the third category, statutory instrume nts are laid in draft form but can be revoked if ei ther House of 
Parliament votes against it within 40 days of sitti ng days. This is called negative procedure. In the fourth 
category, statutory instruments are laid on the Tab le of the House and cannot come into force unless a greed to 
by both Houses of Parliament.   
6.  The Committee on Subordinate Legislation since its inception has been grappling with the issue of 
ensuring that subordinate legislation framed by the  Executive comes before the Parliament for its info rmation 
and scrutiny. In this respect the following efforts steps taken by the Committee may be enumerated: 
(i) The Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya  Sabha has in its various reports recommended the 
need for laying of “Orders” on the Table of the Hou se. In its 10 
th  Report  presented to the House on 24 th  May, 
1971, the Committee, after extensive discussions wi th the Ministry of Law & Justice, recommended a sta ndard 
laying formula, as given below, which was to be inc orporated in all new Acts as well as existing Acts as and 
when the Bills to amend them are brought before the Parliament.  
  "Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which  
may be comprised in one session or in two or more s uccessive sessions, and if, before the expiry of th e 
session immediately following the session or the su ccessive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 

making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be  made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however that any such modification or annulment sha ll be without prejudice to the validity of anything  
previously done under that rule."  
(Paras 57 of the 10 th  Report) 
(presented on 24.5.1971)   
 
(ii) Thereafter, the Parliament adopted the Delegat ed Legislation Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1983 vide 
which certain Acts were amended to implement the re commendations of the Committees on Subordinate 
Legislation regarding publication and laying of rules and other delegated legislation.  
(iii)  The Committee in its 75 
th  Report presented to the House on the 29 th  March, 1988, recommended that, 
“the Committee agrees with the view of the Committe e on Subordinate Legislation, Lok Sabha (Seventh Lo k 
Sabha) expressed in its 20 th  Report, that laying on the Table of all ‘Orders’ i n pursuance of powers delegated 
by Parliament is very significant, as it affords an  opportunity to Members of Parliament if they so de sire to 
move any amendment or modification to such ‘Order’;  including a Motion for their annulment.”  The term 
“Orders” refers to rule, regulations, bye-law, sche me or other statutory instrument as per Rule 209 of  the Rules 
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of States. 
(iv) The Committee in its 82 nd  Report  presented to the House on the 1 st  June, 1990 recommended that all 
rules/regulations framed under Article 309 of the C onstitution should be laid on the Table of the Hous e even 
though the said Article does not contain laying pro vision. The Committee also recommended that in orde r to 
maintain a uniform practice all the Rules made unde r delegated authority whether under various Acts of  
Parliament or Article 309 of the Constitution shoul d be laid before Parliament. In case, however, Gove rnment 
feels that the non-existence of the laying provisio n in Article 309 is the reason for not laying the R ules made 
thereunder, the Committee recommends that Article 3 09 of the Constitution be suitably amended, so as t o 
ensure that all the Rules made thereunder are laid before Parliament. 
(v) The need and importance of laying of notificati on was also highlighted by the Legislative Departme nt, 
Ministry of Law & Justice while giving its opinion on the right of a Member to move a Motion for Annul ment 
of the Delimitation of the Council Constituencies ( Tamil Nadu) Order, 2010 laid under the Tamil Nadu 
Legislative Council Act, 2010 wherein they stated that: 
“the Legislative Department is of the considered view that the aforesaid Order was not laid before 
the Parliament under statutory provision. The docum ent was placed before the Parliament purely 
for its information and the same should not be subj ected to a motion of the House for its 
annulment or modification. The intention was to mak e available to the public and Parliament the 
important document as a public document as otherwis e such important document may not become 
a public document within the realm of the public do main and with the knowledge of the House for 
further use of the House.” 

(vi) The Committee in its 131 st  Report  presented to the House on the 15 th  December, 2000 made some 
observations on the time-frame within which any not ification/Order should be laid on the Table of the House 
and recommended that Orders required to be laid bef ore the House should be laid (i) if the House is no t in 
Session, during the Session immediately following t he date of publication of the Order in the Official  Gazette, 
and (ii) if the House is in Session, on the date of  publication of the Order, during its continuance and in case the 
time lag between the date of publication is less th an 15 clear days, before the expiry of the Session immediately 
following the said Session.  
 (vii) In its 228 
th  Report  presented to the House on the 11 th  August, 2016, the Committee recommended that 
Circulars, Master Circulars, Master Directions and other instruments issued by the Reserve Bank of Ind ia 
coming under the definition of ‘subordinate legislation’ should be laid before both the Houses of the Parliament. 
The Committee had recommended as follows: 
“125. The Committee based upon its observations and  taking into consideration the various judgments 
of the Courts recommends that the Ministry of Finan ce should ensure that the Circulars, Master 
Circulars, Master Directions and other instruments issued by the Reserve Bank of India under the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and other Acts passed by Parliament should be published in the Gazette 
and laid before both the Houses of the Parliament as these instruments come under the comprehensive 
definition of “Subordinate Legislation” and are statutory in nature.  
126. The Committee also observes that Section 52(5)  of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 provides for 
laying of all rules issued under the Act before eac h House of Parliament and accordingly the 
Committee impresses upon the Ministry of Finance to  ensure that the Circulars, Master Circulars, 
Master Directions and other instruments issued by t he Reserve Bank of India coming under the 
definition of ‘subordinate legislation’ should be laid before both the Houses of the Parliament.  
127. RBI should ensure that these Circulars, Master  Circulars, Master Directions and other 
instruments issued by it under the Banking Regulati on Act, 1949 and other Acts passed by Parliament 
should have simplicity, precision and clarity so as  to be legible to the concerned stakeholders and th e 
common man. RBI should also ensure that the nomencl ature of the instruments issued by it should be 
specified so as to differentiate between the legal and statutory instruments and other administrative 
orders and instruments”. 
7. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation  on laying of all the orders, notifications etc. 
issued under the statutes passed by Parliament. Lay ing of statutory orders is the first step towards 
exercising Parliamentary control over delegated legislation. Laying of statutory instruments on the Ta ble 
of the House gives member an opportunity to move a Motion of Modification or Annulment. The 
Committee on earlier occasion in its 10 th  Report has suggested to incorporate laying formula  in all 
existing statutes wherever there is scope of framin g of delegated legislation so that it becomes manda tory 
on the part of all Ministries to lay all the notifications under the statute. The Committee also recommends 

the Ministry of Finance should bring suitable amend ments in RBI Act, 1934 to make laying of statutory 
instruments under it mandatory.      
8. During the discussion the Committee sought to kn ow from the Ministry whether the said Notification,  
i.e. S.O. 3407 (E) dated the 8 th  November, 2016 was laid before the Parliament and if not, the reasons therefore. 
The Ministry, in response, stated that the said Not ification has not been laid before the Parliament a s there was 
no provision in the RBI Act, 1934 for statutory not ifications being laid in the Parliament. They are i ssued in the 
Gazette. 
9. The Committee discussed this issue in detail and  took into consideration the fact that this notific ation 
was framed under a Statute and was statutory in nat ure. Hence it should have been brought before the 
Parliament for its knowledge and scrutiny. The Committee, took into consideration its earlier  
recommendations as contained in its various Reports  mentioned earlier and was of the considered view 
that the notification issued by the Ministry of Fin ance (Department of Economic Affairs) should have 
been laid before the Parliament in the Winter Sessi on of 2016 itself.  The Committee, accordingly, 
impresses upon the Ministry to take note of the  re commendations of the Committee enumerated earlier 
and, in future, to ensure that the Committee’s recommendations are adhered to both in letter and spirit. 
10. The Committee observed that the Notification S. O. 3407(E) dated 8 
th  November, 2016 states that the 
fake currency of the specified bank notes have larg ely been in circulation and is causing adverse effe ct to the 
economy of the country at large.  In this reference  the Committee sought to know the estimated total v alue of 
the fake currency in the economy of the country and  the steps proposed to be taken to check the fake c urrency 
notes from coming into the system.  The Ministry in formed that as per the study conducted by the India n 
Statistical Institute, the stated value of Fake Ind ian Currency Notes (FICN) in circulation was Rs 400  crore.  In 
the year 2014 the seized/recovered value of FICN wa s Rs 40.58 crore, in the year 2015 it was Rs 43.83 crore 
and in the year 2016 upto 30.09.2016 the fake Indian currency notes seized/recovered was Rs 27.79 crore.  
11. The Committee took note of the facts stated by the Ministry .  The Committee, accepts that FICN is a 
major issue of concern for the economy and needs to  be addressed with all seriousness.  The Committee 
hopes that the Ministry would now take all measures  possible in coordination with all the concerned 
agencies to ensure that counterfeit currency of the new series of 500 and 2000 Rupee Notes issued by R BI 
do not enter into the Indian economy and cause a th reat to our economy again.  At the same time, 
Committee also takes note of reports that counterfe it notes of the New series of notes have already 
entered the economy and expects  that the Ministry would assess the veracity of these reports 
immediately on a priority and take corrective measu res at the earliest so that this menace is curbed 
effectively and financial integrity of our system is well maintained. 

12. The Committee observed that the earlier demonet ization in the year 1978 was done by way of an Act i.e. 
the High Denominations Bank Notes (Demonetization) Act, 1978 whereas the present demonetization was 
effected by way of a Gazette Notification. In this respect, the Committees sought clarification on the  major 
differences between the two and the reason why the present demonetization was done by way of a notific ation.   
The Ministry stated that in 1978 the 1000, 5000 and  10,000 denominations were demonetized, i.e. after 
demonetization, these denominations did not exist a t all.  Whereas, in 2016, bank notes of denominatio ns 500 
and 1000 of particular series and existing till a p articular date, have been declared not to have lega l character. 
The denominations as such had not been cancelled.  
13.   The Committee further observed that the proce ss of demonetization has virtually affected every s ector 
of the economy.  However, sectors like the Micro, S mall and Medium Enterprises (MSME), agriculture, textiles 
etc which are labour intensive have been worst affected due loss of livelihood as most of the wages were paid in 
cash.  Accordingly, the Committee sought to know fr om the Ministry whether it had taken into considera tion 
the impact demonetization would have on these secto rs and what relief measures it had proposed to help  revive 
the sectors which had been negatively affected by it.  
14. In response, the Ministry informed about the st eps taken in different sectors of the economy.  In the 
Agriculture sector , to resolve the issues faced by the farmers, they were allowed to purchase seeds from 
various Government agencies on tendering Specified Bank Notes (SBN). To facilitate their selling in ma rkets, 
withdrawal of Rs. 50,000/- per week was allowed to the traders registered with the Agricultural Produce Market 
Committee (APMC).  Also, to facilitate small busine sses and wage-earners, withdrawal of Rs. 50,000/- p er 
week was allowed from a current account. To address  the concerns of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSME) sector action have been taken by RBI/ DFS for the benefit of MSME.  Additional 90 days have been 
allowed for repayment of loan to those establishmen ts where running working capital accounts (OD/CC) /  crop 
loans with any bank the sanctioned limit whereof Rs.1 crore or less and to the term loan of Rs.1 crore or less for 
business purposes, including agriculture loan. The dispensation applies to dues payable between 1st No vember 
to 31st December, 2016. 
15. The Committee was also informed that  RBI  has advised the banks for additional working capital limit to 
MSMEs for meeting temporary increase in working cap ital (WC) requirement arising mainly due to unfores een 
/ seasonal increase in demand for products produced  by them.   On its part, Department of Financial Services  
has advised all Public Sector Banks (PSBs) (i) not to cap working capital limit for MSMEs at 20% of es timated 
annual turnover and to treat 20% limit as the minim um and (ii) WC limits of MSMEs to be increased 
appropriately to facilitate their transit to cashle ss / digital mode.  Further, action has been taken for factoring in 
cash deposits made by MSMEs in the recent period for determining working capital limits. 

16. The Committee took note of the steps taken by t he Ministry to mitigate the effects of demonetizati on on 
the rural population with specific reference small farmers, traders, artisans etc. the Committee impre sses upon 
the Ministry to ensure that the steps taken by them  reach the intended recipients and the rural econom y of the 
country recovers at the earliest.   
17. The Committee also highlighted a number of inst ances where it was found that the Bank employees 
were involved in the act of depositing the money in  the bank accounts especially the non-operational J an-Dhan 
accounts in rural areas. It sought to know from the  Ministry whether they had taken any assessment of the 
situation, steps taken to check the veracity of the se reports and  action proposed to be taken in such  cases, if 
found to be true. 
18.  In response the Ministry stated that the Incom e-Tax Department has adopted a multi-pronged approa ch 
to detect and seize undisclosed assets and take oth er enforcement measures. Since 9 
th  November, 2016 more 
than 980 intrusive actions (searches/surveys/seizur es) have taken place. These actions have led to sei zure of 
valuables of about Rs 550 crore which include cash of Rs 458 crore. New currency of more than 105 cror e is 
part of the cash seizure. Besides, based upon speci fic intelligence, more than 5000 verification notic es have 
been issued under relevant provisions of the Income -Tax Act. The total undisclosed income detected in these 
actions till 28 th  December, 2016 is more than Rs 4172 crore.  
19. The Committee observed that even in developed c ountries like in Europe a majority of the transacti ons 
are in cash. In this respect they sought details of the efforts made by the Ministry/Banks/Financial Institutions to 
promote e-transactions.   The Ministry informed tha t Government had advised all Ministries/ Department s to 
remove convenience charges.  Also, the Controller g eneral of accounts (CGA) had issued instructions ad vising 
all Government agencies to make necessary budget pr ovision to absorb MDR on payments made to 
Government.  
20. The Ministry further informed that 19 short-ter m and 4 medium term measures, to be implemented 
within 1 year and 2 years respectively, have been a pproved by the Cabinet in February, 2015.  The Depa rtment 
of Economic Affairs had constituted a Committee und er the Chairmanship of Shri Rattan P. Wattal, Princ ipal 
Advisor, NITI Ayog and former Finance Secretary to implement the medium term measures.  The Committee 
submitted a report which has since been placed on t he website of the Ministry of Finance to obtain the  
comments of the stakeholders. 
21. Expressing the concerns of the public at large on the restrictions on withdrawal of amount from ba nks 
across the country, the Committee wanted to know ti ll when this restriction on withdrawal would contin ue and 
whether any timeframe had been set for such restric tions.   The Ministry stated that steady supply of new notes 

was continuing and will be carried out till suffici ent money is in circulation.  Restrictions on withd rawal will be 
removed based on the assessment made from time to time. 
22. The Committee was not satisfied with the commen t of the Ministry and was anguished to note that su ch 
a major exercise had been carried out without any a dequate survey or research on the needs of the diff erent 
sectors of the economy. The restrictions on withdrawal of cash had been made uniform for all the custo mers not 
taking into consideration the needs and requirement s of different sections of society as well as busin ess 
establishments.  For example there were number of e stablishments which need more than 10 to 15 lakhs c ash to 
conduct their transactions, such establishments alo ng with many other sectors like the Tea Gardens and  
construction sectors had literally collapsed and it  would take many years for them to recover. The Com mittee 
was of the view that the Ministry/RBI should have c arried out a study based on last three years cash w ithdrawal 
to fix the cash withdrawal limit in a more pragmati c and realistic manner.  Keeping in view the fact that the 
economy is now slowly recovering from the effects o f demonetization the Committee is of the view that 
the Ministry and the Reserve Bank of India should h old discussions with the affected parties and provi de 
the support as and where required so that these sec tors which virtually collapsed during the 
demonetization process are recovered fully in due course.  
23. The Committee observes that India is the second lar gest producer and consumer of currency 
notes.  Circulation of bank notes has increased fro m 64,58 billion pieces to 90.27 billion pieces over  the 
last five years.   The main object behind cancellin g the legal tender character of the specified bank notes 
on the 8 th  November, 2016 was to eliminate black money and to  curb the infusion and circulation of fake 
Indian currency notes.   It was an effort to combat  corruption, tax evasion and counterfeiting and 
eradicate black money.  However, the Committee real izes that inevitably, it is the low-income and rura l 
households who have been hardest hit by the currenc y reform.  Demonetization has weighed heavily on 
the country’s manufacturing sector.   Though the Ministry took steps to mitigate the effe cts, it cannot be 
ignored that it created significant disruption throughout the economy and threatened economic output.  
24. The Committee appreciates the Government’s effo rts to move towards cashless economy and steps 
taken to encourage public to adopt digital transact ion in every sphere of life. However, Committee fee ls 
that though Electronic payments systems are fast, c onvenient and easy, but India’s economy relies 
predominantly on cash, therefore the effects of dem onetization were greater than anticipated.  Our 
economy is heavily dependent on cash as only less t han half of the population uses banking system for 
monetary transactions.  As a result, demonetization has hit trade and level of consumption very hard.   
25. The Committee acknowledges that corruption is a  problem but in the process honest, 
hardworking and tax paying citizens of India were made to suffer. The Committee agrees that corruption 
is a major cause for the persistence of poverty and  the growth of corruption in India due to the maze of 

regulations and the thickets of red tapism. In Comm ittee’s view solution lies in simplification, 
rationalization and reduction in taxes; cutting reg ulations and curtailing officials’ discretionary po wers; 
eliminating loopholes and widening the tax net alon g with efficient implementation.  And for efficient  
implementation of all this, discussion on the issue s at hand with people with the requisite expertise is a 
must rather than attack any criticism as somehow anti-national or pro-corruption.   
26. The Committee also feels that tackling black mo ney would require immense political will and 
legal/administrative/diplomatic heavy-lifting. Ther efore, the Committee hopes that the Government 
would meticulously  to follow up strongly on its demonetization move. 
27.  The Committee is hopeful that the Ministry will tak e of note of the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee and work on them e xpeditiously under intimation to it. The 
Committee is also hopeful that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in coordination 
with other concerned agencies will take proactive m easures to revive the sectors that are still not ab le to 
recover from the adverse effects of demonetization and stresses upon the Ministry to ensure that the 
menace of fake currency does not enter the Indian economy.  

 


Annexure II  
 
 
REPLIES TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE  ON THE NOTIFICATIONS ISSUED ON DEMONETIZATION AND 
PROBLEMS/ GRIEVANCES OF THE CUSTOMERS REGARDING COLLECTION AND DISBURSEMENTR 
OF CASH BY BANKS  
 
Q. No.  Question  Reply  
1 The Notification S.O. 3407(E) dated 8 th  
November, 2016 was issued by the 
Department of Economic Affairs, 
Ministry of finance. In this respect 
inform whether this notification was laid 
before the Parliament. If no, the 
reasons thereof. 
The Notification S. O.  3407 (E) have  not been pla ced 
before the Parliament. The processing of the Specif ied 
Bank Notes (SBN) i.e. Rs.500 and Rs. 1000 bank note s 
which started on 8 
th  November, 2016 continued till 
30.12.2016. There is no provision in the RBI Act, 1 934 
for statutory notifications being laid in the Parli ament. 
They are issued in the Gazette. 
2 The Notification S.O. 3407(E) dated 8 th  
November, 2016 states that the fake 
currency notes have largely been in 
circulation and is causing adverse effect 
to the economy of the country. In this 
reference, what is the estimated total 
value of the fake currency in the 
economy of the country and what other 
steps are proposed to be taken to check 
the fake currency notes from coming 
into the system again. 
As per a study conducted by the Indian Statistical 
Institute, the stated value of Fake Indian Currency Notes 
(FICN) in circulation is of Rs. 400 Crore. The deta ils of 
seizures and recovery are as follow: 
 
Year  seized/recovered 
(pcs) 
seized/recovered (value)  
                    in Rupees  Cr. 
2014 801528 40.58  
2015 886058 43.83  
2016*  574176 27.79  
 
* upto 30.9.2016 
3 The said Notification states that the 
Central Govt after due consideration 
has decided to implement the 
recommendations of the Central Board 
of Directors of the Reserve Bank of 
India. In this respect inform as to when 
did the Central Board of Directors of the 
Reserve Bank of India recommended to 
the Central Govt for demonetization. 
What other recommendations were 
made by the Board and what were the 
recommendations that were not 
accepted and the reasons for the same. 
The Reserve Bank of India conveyed on 8 
th  November of 
their recommendations for withdrawing the legal ten der 
character of the then existing Rs.500 ad Rs. 1000 b ank 
notes, i.e., Specified Bank Notes (SBN). 
 
No other recommendation was conveyed along with the  
above.  
4 The earlier demonetization in the year 
1978 was done vide a Act i.e. the High 
Denomination Bank Notes 
(Demonetization) Act, 1978 whereas 
the present demonetization has been 
effected by way of Gazette Notification. 
In this respect what are the major 
differences between the two and why 
the present demonetization was done 
by way of a notification. 
The major difference between the demonetization 
carried out in 1978 and cancelling legal tender cha racter 
of R. 500/- and Rs. 2000/- denomination banknotes 
existing on 8 
th  November, 2016 are as below: 
In 1978 - 1000, 5000 and 10,000 denominations were 
demonetized, i.e., after demonetization, these 
denominations did not exist at all. Whereas, in 201 6, 
bank notes of denominations 500 and 1000 of 
particular series and existing till a particular da te 
have been declared not to have legal tender charact er. 
The denominations as such had not been cancelled 
5 The process of demonetization has 
effected virtually every sector of the 
economy however sector like the 
MSME, agriculture, textiles etc which 
Agriculture  
To resolve the issues faced by the farmers they wer e 
allowed to purchase seeds from various Government 
agencies on tendering SBN. To facilitate their sell ing in 

are labour intensive have been the 
worst affected due to the fact that it has 
resulted in loss of livelihood of the 
labour as most of the wages were paid 
in cash. In this respect, did the Ministry 
take into consideration the impact the 
process of demonetization would have 
of these sectors and what relief 
measures are proposed to help revive 
the sectors which has been negatively 
affected by it. 
markets, withdrawal of Rs. 50,000/- per week was 
allowed to the traders registered with the Agricult ural 
Produce Market Committee (APMC). 
 
To facilitate small businesses and wage-earners, 
withdrawal of Rs. 50,000/- per week was allowed fro m a 
current account.  
 
MSME 
 
Following actions have been taken by RBI/ DFS for t he 
benefit of MSME 
 
Additional 90 days have been allowed for repayment of 
loan to those establishments where running working 
capital accounts (OD/CC) / crop loans with any bank  the 
sanctioned limit whereof Rs.1 crore or less and to the 
term loan of Rs.1 crore or less for business purpos es, 
including agriculture loanThe dispensation applies to 
dues payable between 1st November to 31st December,  
2016 
 
RBI has advised the banks for additional working ca pital 
limit to MSMEs for meeting temporary increase in 
working capital requirement arising mainly due to 
unforeseen / seasonal increase in demand for produc ts 
produced by them.  
 
DFS has advised all PSBs the following: 
i. Not to cap working capital limit for MSMEs at 20 % 
of estimated annual turnover and to treat 20% limit  
as the minimum 
ii. WC limits of MSMEs to be increased appropriatel y 
to facilitate their transit to cashless / digital mode 
iii. Factoring in cash deposits made by MSMEs in th e 
recent period for determining working capital limits. 
6 RBI has issued a number of circulars 
since 8 
lh  November, 2016 after 
assessing the effect of demonetization. 
It has however at times resulted in 
confusion among the people as to what 
was the exact rule position at any given 
time. In this respect what efforts were 
made by the Ministry and RBI to ensure 
that the customers in rural areas did not 
face problems at the Banks. 
RBI has issued Press Release from time to time to 
clarify any confusion created in the minds of the 
members of public. Banks have been advised for 
immediate implementation of any advisory issued by 
RBI. 
7 Reports have appeared that number of 
instances have come where it has been 
found that the Bank employees were 
involved in depositing the money in the 
bank accounts especially the non-
operational Jan-Dhan accounts in rural 
areas. Has the Ministry taken any 
assessment of the situation and steps 
to check the veracity of these reports 
and what action is proposed to be taken 
in such cases, if found to be true. 
The Income-tax Department (ITD) has adopted a multi -
pronged approach to detect and seize undisclosed 
assets and take other enforcement measures. Since 9  
November, 2016 more than 980 intrusive actions 
(searches/surveys/seizures) have been taken. These 
actions have led to seizure of valuables of about Rs. 550 
crore which includes cash of Rs.  458 crore. New 
currency of more than Rs. 105 crore is part of the cash 
seizure. Besides, based upon specific intelligence,  more 
than 5000 verification notices have been issued und er 
relevant provisions of the Income-tax Act. The tota l 

undisclosed income detected in these actions till 2 8 th  
December 2016 is more than Rs. 4172 crore. Further 
enquiries in the matters are in progress.  
8 What are the security features that have 
been incorporated in the new series of 
500/- and 2000/- rupee notes that have 
released by the RBI. Is it a fact that the 
paper used for printing these notes is 
imported and if so. what efforts are 
been made for its indigenous 
production. 
Security Features of Rs.500 and Rs.2000 banknotes a re 
at Annexure-II 
 
The actions taken to print Indian bank notes on 
indigenous paper has been detailed in Annexure-I 
9 Efforts are being made to promote 
cashless transactions. However, it is 
seen that convenience charges 
imposed by different portals tend to be 
substantial. In this respect what efforts 
been made to reduce transaction 
charges to promote more cashless 
transactions? 
Government has advised all the Ministries/ Departme nts 
to remove convenience charges. Also Controller gene ral 
of Accounts (CGA) has issued instruction, vide OM N o. 
1(1)/2006/ECS/TA/669 dated 14.12.2016, advising all  
the Government agencies to make necessary budget 
provision to absorb MDR on payments made to Govt. 
10  It is observed that even in developed 
countries like in Europe a majority of the 
transactions arc in cash. In this respect 
what efforts have been made by the 
Ministry/ Banks/ Financial Institutions to 
promote e-tranactions. 
19 short term (to be implemented within 1 year) and  4 
medium term (to be implemented within 2 years) 
measures have been approved by the Cabinet in 
February, 2015.  
 
Actions taken on short term measures is at Annexure-3 
 
To implement the medium term measures, the 
Department of Economic Affairs had constituted a 
Committee under the Chairmanship of ShriRattan P. 
Watal, Principal Advisor, NITI Ayog and Former Fina nce 
Secretary. They have submitted the Report, which ha s 
been placed on the Ministry of Finance website to o btain 
comments from stakeholders. 
11  Apprehensions have been raised that 
as the government promotes cashless 
transactions companies providing e-
payment platform with majority holding 
by foreign investors would benefit. In 
this respect what are the efforts made 
by the Ministry to ensure that promotion 
of cashless transactions don't benefit 
such companies. 
Government has taken action to launch e-payment 
platforms and has created BHIM App, based on UPI, 
and has also developed USSD-based payment option. 
The details may be seen at Annexure-4. 
 
 
12  There are Reports that certain banks 
have been involved in money 
laundering. If so. what are the steps 
taken by the Ministry/RBI against such 
Banks and steps taken to prevent such 
activities. 
As in Question-7. DFS will report separately on the  
actions taken by them and the RBI.  
13  Till now Banks had been insisting on 
KYC (Know your customer) 
requirements, however keeping in view' 
the fact that reports have surfaced 
showing the involvement of bank 
officials in depositing old notes in 
different accounts and exchanging 
notes. What measures have been 

proposed by the RBI/Banks against 
such officials. 
14  Demonetization has raised the liquidity 
of the Banks. In this respect what are 
the steps contemplated by RBI and the 
Bank to ensure that the liquidity of the 
Banks is utilized in considerate manner. 
Banks have already reduced the interest rates of lending 
due to the increased liquidity. 
15  What has been the approximate cost of 
this exercise of replacing the currency 
with a new series of notes? By when 
Govt/RBI proposes to come out with 
new' series of Rs 1000/-. 
The replacement of the notes is still in progress a nd the 
costs will be available after the same is completed . The 
decision on introducing the Rs. 1000 note will be t aken 
in due course 
16  It has been provided that after 30 Ih 
December, 2016 the old currency notes 
of 500/- and 1000/- value can be 
exchanged only at RBI offices subject to 
certain conditions. In this respect what 
are the conditions that will be valid for 
exchange at RBI offices. 
As per the Ordinance and RBI Notifications the 
conditions for depositing SBN at RBI offices are pl aced 
at Annexure-5 
17  There is apprehension in the public that 
in near future Rs 2000/- currency will 
also be demonetized. In this regard 
what are the comments of RBI/ 
Ministry? 
No such recommendation has been made by RBI 
18  There is restrictions is withdrawn of 
amount from the Banks across the 
country. How long this restriction on 
withdrawal will continue? Whether there 
is any time- frame for such restriction? 
Please comment. 
Steady supply of new notes is continuing and will b e 
carried out till sufficient money in to circulation . 
Restriction on withdrawal will be removed based on the 
assessment made from time to time. 
 
 
  

Annexure-1 
 
Measures to Control Circulation of FICN and Steps for Indigenous Production 
 
i. RBI issued instructions on August 26, 2015 to al l banks that banknotes tendered over the 
counter / received directly at the back office / cu rrency chest through bulk tenders should 
be examined for authenticity through machines. 
ii. To enhance the capabilities of BhartiyaReserve Bank Note Mudran Private Limited 
(BRBNMPL), a state of the art laboratory and a desi gn studio for the purpose of R & D has 
been created by BRBNMPL.  RBI has proposed to set u p digital depository of forensic 
reports which would be helpful in facilitating sharing of data on FICN seized in Bangladesh. 
iii. Security Printing and Minting Corporation of I ndia Limited (SPMCIL) and BRBNMPL will 
conduct training programme for Bangladeshi and Indi an Police officers to build/ develop 
capacity in India and in Bangladesh for tackling FI CN menace free of cost. RBI will provide 
necessary faculty support for the training.  
iv. SPMCIL and BRBNMPL have installed stand-alone P Cs, with the stipulated specifications 
with broad band connection within a week in all the  laboratories under them to have 
secured net-working of Currency Forensic Labs.   
v. RBI advised Ministry of Home Affairs to install note sorting machines at airport and 
international borders cross over points. DFS has been requested to install the machines. 
vi. Indigenous production of note-printing material s has been taken up on priority basis. One 
new paper-producing line of capacity of 6000 MT has  been installed at Security Paper Mill 
(SPM), Hoshangabad, while a Joint Venture of SPMCIL  and BRBNMPL, viz., Bank Note 
Paper Mill India Private Limited (BNPMIPL) has been  set up, where two new lines of total 
capacity of 12000 MT have been installed. All these lines are producing paper.  
vii. SPMCIL has augmented its ink-producing capacit y to 800 MT per year, which suffices their 
requirement of ink of those specifications. The cap acity is being further enhanced to 1500 
MT.  
viii. BRBNMPL is setting up an ink-manufacturing fa cility for their captive use of capacity of 
1500 MT per year. 
ix. RBI takes up public awareness programmes about FICN 
x. The Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Home Affair s, RBI, Security and Intelligence Agencies 
of the Centre and States etc., are working in tandem to thwart the illegal activities related to 
FICNs. An FICN Coordination (FCORD) Group has been formed in the MHA to share the 
intelligence/ information amongst different security agencies of States/Centre to counter the 
menace of circulation of fake currency notes in the country. It also coordinates with different 
security agencies to affect more seizures. The issu e has also been raised in international 
multilateral fora constantly. RBI has also initiate d several measures for generating public 
awareness, conducting training programmes for emplo yees/ officers of banks and   
streamlining the process of reporting and detection of counterfeit notes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Annexure-2 
 
 
Security Features of 500-Rupee Notes  
 
1) M- feature 
2) Bicolour UV fibre 
3) See through register in denomination numerals 
4) Latent image of the denomination numeral 
5) Colour-changing windowed security thread with RB I/ Bharat 
6) Portrait ad electrotype watermark 
7) Number panel with exploding font 
8) Denomination in numeral with Rupee symbol in col our changing ink 
9) Intaglio printing of Mahatma Gandhi Portrait 
10) 5 Bleed lines for visually impaired persons; 
 
 
Security Features of 2000-Rupee Notes  
 
1) M- feature 
2) Bicolour UV fibre 
3) See through register in denomination numerals 
4) Latent image of the denomination numeral 
5) Micro letters RBI and 2000 
6) Colour-changing windowed security thread with RB I/ Bharat/ 2000 
7) Mahatma Gandhi portrait and electrotype (2000) w atermark 
8) Number panel with exploding font 
9) Denomination in numeral with Rupee symbol in col our changing ink 
10) Horizontal  rectangle with rupee symbol and 200 0 in raised print 
11) 7 Bleed lines for visually impaired persons 
 

 
Annexure-3 
 
i. Government Ministries/ Departments have been adv ised top remove 
Convenience charges and also to create budget head to absorb merchant 
Discount Rate. 
 
ii. To create adequate Acceptance Infrastructure, i t has been suggested to mandate 
banks to create separate fund backed by MDR receipt s that is utilized by 
acquiring banks to set up necessary infrastructure.  RBI has been suggested to 
deploy the Financial Inclusion Fund for the purpose  of widening the acceptance 
infrastructure. And to make the existing infrastructure Aadhaar-enabled . 
 
iii. Ministry of Road Transport& Highways has enabl ed RFID-based Toll payment 
cards, in collaboration with NPCI.  
 
iv. Ministry of Urban Development is developing in collaboration with NPCI, a open-
loop for multi-purpose transportation card.  
 
v. Department of Revenue has enhanced the limit for  requirement for banks to 
report card/ digital transactions of more than Rs 2  lakhs a year made by a credit 
cardholder to the tax authorities. 
 
vi. Department of Financial Services / RBI has allo wed enhanced Cashout, of a 
specified amount, at Point of Sale (PoS) Terminals through Cards/ Digital means. 
 
vii. Department of Telecommunications has rationali zed USSD Charges.  
 
viii. RBI has increased the limitsfor e-wallets. 
 
ix. All ministries have been directed to encourage employees to use debit/credit 
card for payments. 
 
x. The Government on 19 December 2016 has announced  benefit of lower rate of 
Income Tax on digital turnover for small businesses  up to a turnover of Rs. 2 
crore.   
 
xi. DigiDhanAbhiyaanhas been undertaken to get peop le and merchant onboard 
digital platform through CSC SPV of the Ministry. C SC SPV has around 1.75 lkh 
Common Service Centres run by Village level entrepr eneurs throughout the 
country. 1 crore people and 25 lakh merchants acros s 476 district and 2120 
blocks have been targeted under this campaign.  
xii. DigiShaala – a education channel has been init iated from December 9 to educate 
people regarding various facets of digital payments . Channel is available on DD 
Free Dish which caters to nearly 2-2.5 crore rural households. 
 

xiii. DigiDhanMela was organized in National Stadiu m Delhi on Dec 17  
 
xiv. CashlessIndia.gov.in has been launched on Dec 9 to provide official authentic 
information regarding various digital payment systems. 
 
xv. National Institute of Electronics and IT (NIELI T) has been conducting workshops 
and reaching out to its student community – approx.  3 lakh students/merchants 
have been promoting digital payments. 
 
  

Annexure-4 
 
Indigenous products for adopting cashless mode of transactions are as follow: 
 
RuPay- Domestic Card  
RuPay is the domestic card scheme of India. Started  in 2012, the RuPay scheme have 
card base of over 300 million debit cards. The card is accepted on all the ATMs, Point of 
Sale (PoS) and online ecommerce websites in an inte roperable manner. RuPay comes 
with a social benefit feature, insurance coverage o f Rs. 1, 00,000 ($ 1500) accidental 
death/ permanent disability, at no cost to the cardholder. 
 
Aadhaar Enabled Payment System (AEPS) 
AEPS Platform encourages financial inclusion using the Aadhaar (National ID of India) 
number as the central key. It is used for the elect ronic transfer of benefits and subsidies 
given by the government using Aadhaar No. The servi ces leverage advanced 
technology and telecommunication infrastructure to reach out to the common man. 
AEPS is a platform that facilitates financial inclu sion by allowing transaction at Point of 
Sale (POS), using an Aadhaar. 
 
Immediate Payment System (IMPS) 
IMPS is real-time, anywhere-anytime remittance serv ice. It is a channel agnostic 
platform that caters to processing of Person to Per son (P2P) and Person to Merchant 
(P2M) payments that are initiated from a bank branc h, mobile device, internet, or from 
ATM channels. Currently more than 185 Banks & Finan cial Institutions are offering 
IMPS facility to their customers. 
 
National Unified USSD Platform (NUUP) 
NUPP is a USSD based mobile banking platform that m akes banking services 
accessible to all the bank account holders even usi ng feature (non-smart) mobile 
phones. The service brings the banks &telcos togeth er, making it an interoperable 
platform. . Key services are currently  being offer ed by 51 Banks, Services includes 
Balance Enquiry, Mini Statement, Fund Transfer, MPIN Management etc. 
 
Unified Payments Interface (UPI) 
UPI is a new generation product leveraging on the p roliferation of smart phones in the 
country. It is estimated that there are appx. 250 M illion smart phone holders in India. A 
Bank in its capacity of a Payment Service Provider (PSP) can provide for a Mobile App 
to the customers for their transaction needs. The c ustomers opting to use the Mobile 
App interface of a Bank could either be banking wit h the same bank or may be holding 
accounts with another bank.  
 
A customer could send money (Push) or initiate a Co llect request from another 
customer (Pull). Thus, the payments can be both Sen der & Payee initiated. The UPI 
framework provides for a single click 2-factor auth entication where the device becomes 
the first factor of authentication for all subseque nt financial transactions & the PIN or 
Bio-metrics is used as the second factor of authentication. 

BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) 
 
Bharat Interface for Money is an app that lets you make easy and quick payment 
transactions using UPI. It is easier than Wallets. One can easily make direct bank to 
bank payments and instantly collect money using jus t Mobile number or Payment 
address. Bharat Interface for Money app is currentl y available on Android. The same 
will be made operable on other platforms too.  
 
 
 
 
  

Annexure-5 
The following persons holding specified bank notes on or before the 8 th  day of 
November, 2016 can tender within the grace period w ith declarations or statements, as 
specified by the Reserve Bank.  
2. Among Indian citizens, two categories of individ uals, holding SBNs, can avail of 
the facility, viz., 
i. Resident Indians who were abroad during the peri od from November 9 to 
December 30, 2016, and 
ii. Non Resident Indians(NRIs) who were not in Indi a during the period from 
November 9 to December 30, 2016 
This facility will not be available for Indian citi zens resident in Nepal, Bhutan, Pakistan 
and Bangladesh. 
 
3. The facility can be availed only by Indian citiz ens in their individual capacity and 
only on one occasion during the period. No third pa rty tender is permissible under the 
facility. There will be no monetary limit for submission of SBNs in the tender. This facility 
will be made available through five of the offices of the Reserve Bank viz. the Reserve 
Bank offices at Mumbai, New Delhi, Chennai, Kolkata, and Nagpur. 
 
4. Only those NRIs who were not present in India du ring the period from November 
9, 2016 to December 30, 2016 will be eligible to av ail this facility   once during the 
tenure of the facility. Tenders will be restricted to a maximum of ₹ 25,000 per individual 
depending on when the notes were taken out of India as per relevant FEMA rules.   
 
5. The facility will remain open for residents from  January 2, 2017 to March 31, 
2017 and for NRIs from January 2, 2017 to June 30, 2017. 
 
6. Any person, aggrieved by the refusal of the Rese rve Bank to credit the value of 
the notes may make a representation to the Central Board of the Reserve Bank within 
fourteen days of the communication of such refusal to him. 
  

Annexure III  
 
STUDY NOTE OF THE COMMITTEE’S DISCUSSION AT AHMEDAB AD ON 05.01.2017 
 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on the 5 th  January, 2017 at Ahmedabad to discuss 
various rules/regulations, viz. (i) Environment (Pr otection) Rules, 1986; (ii) Hazardous and 
Other Wastes (Management and Transboundary Movement ) Rules, 2016 and Plastic Waste 
Management Rules, 2016; (iii) Reserve Bank of India  Scheme for Sustainable Restructuring of 
Stressed Assets; problems faced by Banks sue to ris ing NPA of different categories; RBI Master 
Circular on Cash Reserve Ratio and Statutory Liquid ity Ratio; and  Notifications issued on 
Demonetization and problems/grievances of customers  regarding collection and disbursement of 
cash by Banks due to demonetization in Gujarat; and  (iv) Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (Power Market) Regulations, 2010. The fo llowing Members, officers of the 
Committee and representatives of Central Government , State Government and different 
organizations were present during the meeting:- 
 
Present 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy, Chairman 
Members 
2.  Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
3.  Shri Biswajit Daimary 
4. Shri S. Muthukaruppan 
5. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
6. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
 
1.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
2.  Shri R.S. Rawat, Joint Director 
3.  Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
 
Representatives of Central Government, State Government and different organizations 
 
(i)  Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986; Hazardous and  Other Wastes 
(Management and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016  and Plastic Waste 
Management Rules, 2016 
 
1.  Dr. J.N. Singh, Chief Secretary, Government of Gujarat 
2.  Shri Sujit Gulati, Additional Chief Secretary, Ener gy & Petrochemicals 
Department, Government of Gujarat 
3.  Shri Puranchand Parmar, Additional Chief Secretary,  Urban Development 
Department, Government of Gujarat 
4.  Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Secretary (Exports), Government of Gujarat 

5.  Shri Biswanath Sinha, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change 
6.  Shri Hardik Shah, Member Secretary, Gujarat Pollution Control Board 
7.  Shri B. Vinod Babu, Additional Director, CPCB 
8.  Shri S. Ramesh, Director, Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited 
9.  Shri Vinay K. Misra, Executive Director, Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
10.  Shri B.S. Canth, Director, Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
11.  Shri Vinod S Shenoy, Director, Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited 
12.  Shri A.K. Dwivedi, Director, ONGC 
13.  Dr. Ashutosh Karnatak, Director, GAIL India Limited 
14.  Shri P.K. Sharma, Director, OIL India Limited 
15.  Shri Ajit Kumar, Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
16.  Shri Amith Garg, Executive Director, Ministry of Railways 
17.  Shri S.M.A. Razi, Director, Ministry of Railways 
18.  Shri V. Kalyana Rama, CMD, Container Corporation of India 
19.  Dr. T. Natarajan, Joint MD, Gujarat State Petronet Limited  
20.  Shri Nagaraj, CMD, PEC Limited 
21.  Shri K.P. Jangod, General Manager, GUVNL 
22.  Shri B.R. Naidu, Zonal Officer, CPCB, Vadodara 
23.  Shri Ajay Bhadoo, Vice-Chairman & CEO, Alang Shipbu ilding, Gujarat 
Maritime Board 
24.  Shri Atul Sharma, Deputy General Manager, GMB 
25.  Shri Ravi M Parmar, Chairman, Kandla Port Trust 
26.  Shri R.K. Jha, Secretary, Kandla Port Trust 
27.  Shri Sanjay Swarup, Director, CONCOR 
28.  Shri Ved Prakash, Group General Manager, CONCOR 
29.  Shri A.N. Talati, Additional General Manager, Gujar at Narmada Valley 
Fertilizers Company 
30.  Shri H.R. Bosamia, Senior Engineer, Gujarat Alkalie s & Chemicals 
Limited 
31.  Shri D.U. Vyas, General Manager, Gujarat Mineral De velopment 
Corporation 
32.  Shri A.K. Makadia, General Manager, Gujarat Mineral  Development 
Corporation 
33.  Shri H.D. Dalsania, Senior V.P., Gujarat State Fert ilizers & Chemicals 
Limited 
  
 
(ii)  Reserve Bank of India Scheme for Sustainable Restru cturing of Stressed Assets; 
problems faced by Banks due to rising NPA of differ ent categories; RBI Master 
Circular on Cash Reserve Ratio and Statutory Liquidity Ratio; and  Notifications 
issued on Demonetization and problems/grievances of  customers regarding 
collection and disbursement of cash by Banks due to demonetization in Gujarat 
 
1.  Dr. Anil Ranga, Director, Department of Economic Af fairs, Ministry of 
Finance 

2.  Shri R.N. Dubey, Economic Advisor, Department of Fi nancial Services, 
Ministry of Finance 
3.  Shri Ashwini Kumar, CMD, Dena Bank 
4.  Shri Sanjeev Nautiyal, Chief General Manager, State Bank of India 
5.  Shri G. Malleswara Rao, Zonal Manager, Andhra Bank 
6.  Shri Shalil M. Awate, Chief General Manager & Zonal Head, IDBI Bank 
7.  Smt Vibha Aren, Deputy General Manager & Circle Hea d, Punjab 
National Bank 
8.  Shri R.N. Sharma, General Manager & Zonal Head, Bank of Baroda  
9.  Shri A.N. Shiva Swamy, Regional Manager, Syndicate Bank 
10.  Shri G. Malleswara Rao, General Manager, Syndicate bank 
11.  Shri Alok Chaudhry, General Manager, Canara Bank  
12.  Shri V.S. Renganathan, General Manager, Canara Bank, 
 
(iii)  Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Power Market) Regulations, 2010 
 
1.  Shri Vikram Singh, Central Electricity Authority, Ministry of Power 
2.  Smt Sonal Mishra, Managing Director, Gujarat Indust ries Power 
Corporation Limited 
3.  Shri Kiran Mishra, Deputy General Manager, Gujarat Industries Power 
Corporation Limited 
4.  Shri S.K. Negi, Managing Director, Gujarat Energy T ransmission 
Corporation Limited 
5.  Shri Bijal A Shah, Managing Director, Uttar Gujarat Vij Company Limited 
6.  Shri R.B. Kothari, GMF & CFO, Uttar Gujarat Vij Company Limited 
7.  Shri P.R. Dahake, Managing Director, Gujarat State Electricity 
Corporation Limited 
8.  Shri M.B. Kaka, Senior CGM & CFO, Gujarat State Ele ctricity 
Corporation Limited 
 
 
1.  On behalf of the Committee, the Chairman welcomed a ll the representatives of various 
organization to the meeting. At the outset, he brie fed the Committee about the mandate of the 
Committee, stating that the main function of the Co mmittee is to scrutinize and report to the 
Rajya Sabha whether the powers to make rules, regul ations, bye-laws, etc conferred on it by 
the Constitution or delegated by Parliament are bei ng properly exercised by the executive 
authorities or not.  
   
2.  *** 
 
3.  ***. 

 
4.  ***.  
 
5.  ***  
 
6.   ***  
 
7.  *** 
 
8.  *** 
 
9.  *** 
 
10.  *** 
 
11.  *** 
 
12.  *** 
 
13.  *** 
 
14.  *** 
 
15.  *** 
 
16.  *** 
 
17.  *** 
 
18.  *** 
 

19.  *** 
 
20.  ***    
 
21.  The Committee then took up for discussion the Notif ications issued on Demonetization 
and problems/grievances of the customers regarding collection and disbursement of cash by 
Banks. Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance informed the Committee that 
the present scheme of Demonetization under Section 26 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 
1934 is a bold move of the government to eradicate black money/slush money operating for 
decades. In the last two attempts of demonetization  made in 1946 & 1978, the scale of 
operation was not as expansive due to the sheer siz e of the cash component in the economy. 
India remains a cash based economy and hence the ci rculation of Fake Indian Currency Notes 
continues to be a menace. The incidence of fake Ind ian currency notes in the higher 
denomination has increased. The fake notes are used  for illegal, antinational and terrorist 
activities. A parallel shadow economy corrodes and eats into the vitals of the country’s 
economy. It generates inflation which adversely aff ects the poor and the middle class more 
than the others. It deprives Government of its legi timate revenues which could have been 
otherwise used for welfare and development activiti es. Therefore, they stated that the 
cancellation of existing high denomination bank not es will curb funding of terrorist activities 
with the proceeds of FICN and the use of existing F ICN network for subversive activities. It 
will also help reduce tax avoidance and bring more transactions into the formal economy. 
 
22.  Dena Bank informed the Committee that given the fac t that demonetization has affected 
the labour intensive industries the most they had o rganized over 9700 camps for opening of 
accounts of unorganized sectors/other persons not h aving accounts and have mobilized over 
1.77 lakh accounts since 26.11.2016. It was further  informed that Dena Banks liquidity 
improved by Rs 12300/- crore on account of demoneti zation and at this liquidity was utilized 
to reduce market borrowings to the tune of Rs 6990 crore, reduction in bulk deposits to the 
tune of 1440 crore and investments on Government se curities and LAF operations to the tune 
of Rs 3100 crore & Rs 225 crore, respectively. IDBI  Bank informed the Committee that a 
substantial amount of the liquidity generated durin g the period from November 26 to 

December 9, 2016 was kept as additional (incrementa l) CRR with the RBI. A large portion of 
incremental deposits was still lying with the Bank as cash, which cannot be deployed, unless 
deposited in currency chests and credited into IDBI Bank’s account with RBI.  
 
23.  SBI informed that the Committee that during the per iod from 9 
th  November, 2016 the 
Bank did receive number of clarifications/direction s from RBI and they made all efforts to 
disseminate these to all its offices/branches and a ppropriate functionaries were also put in 
place by the Bank to facilitate implementation of these instructions at all the Branches. Canara 
Bank informed the Committee that they had received 10 cases of deviations wherein their 
bank officials were found to be involved in depositing old currency notes in different accounts 
and suitable action had been initiated/taken as per  the staff accountability policy of the Bank. 
Syndicate Bank informed that they had appointed Dig i Banker, a trained staff member, in all 
its branches to assist customers in understanding v arious digital channels for reducing 
dependency on cash based transactions, apart from h elping them in downloading/using these 
applications. 
 
24.  Concluding the meeting the Chairman was of the view  that the efforts made by the State 
in giving effect to the different  environment prot ection rules framed by the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change was very com mendable and it could act as an 
example to other States. The Chairman stated that t he Hazardous and Other Wastes 
(Management and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016  was a very important rule and 
urged the agencies present to implement it effectiv ely to ensure its success. He further 
observed that banks had worked very dedicatedly in the last few weeks to ensure that the 
common man and small traders are not harassed unduly due to the demonetization exercise.  
 
25.  The meeting thereafter concluded with a mutual vote of thanks.         
  

Annexure IV  
 
STUDY NOTE OF THE COMMITTEE’S DISCUSSION AT MUMBAI ON 06.01.2017
 
 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on the 6 th  January, 2017 at Mumbai to discuss various 
rules/regulations, viz. (i) Reserve Bank of India S cheme for Sustainable Restructuring of 
Stressed Assets; problems faced by Banks due to ris ing NPA of different categories; RBI Master 
Circular on Cash Reserve Ratio and Statutory Liquid ity Ratio; and  Notifications issued on 
Demonetization and problems/grievances of customers  regarding collection and disbursement of 
cash by Banks due to demonetization; and (ii) Insur ance Regulatory Development Authority 
(Investment) Regulations, 2016. The following Membe rs, officers of the Committee and 
representatives of Central Government, State Govern ment and different organizations were 
present during the meeting:- 
 
Present 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy, Chairman 
Members 
2.  Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
3.  Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
4.  Shri S. Muthukaruppan 
5.  Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
6.  Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
7. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
8. Shri Sanjay Seth 
9. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
Special Invitee 
 
1.  Shri Rajkumar Dhoot  
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
 
4.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
5.  Shri R.S. Rawat, Joint Director 
6.  Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
 
Representatives of Central Government, State Government and different organizations 
 
(iv)  Reserve Bank of India Scheme for Sustainable Restru cturing of Stressed Assets; 
problems faced by Banks sue to rising NPA of differ ent categories; RBI Master 
Circular on Cash Reserve Ratio and Statutory Liquidity Ratio; and  Notifications 
issued on Demonetization and problems/grievances of  customers regarding 
collection and disbursement of cash by Banks due to demonetization in Gujarat 

 
13.  Dr Urjit R. Patel, Governor, Reserve Bank of India 
14.  Shri R. Gandhi, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India  
15.  Shri N.S. Vishwanathan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India 
16.  Dr. A.K. Verma, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Power 
17.  Dr. Anil Ranga, Director, Department of Economic Af fairs, Ministry of 
Finance 
18.  Shri R.N. Dubey, Economic Advisor, Department of Fi nancial Services, 
Ministry of Finance 
19.  Smt Arundhati Bhattacharya Chairman, State Bank of India 
20.  Shri P.S. Jayakumar, MD & CEO, Bank of Baroda 
21.  Shri Melwyn Rego, MD & CEO, Bank of India 
22.  Shri R.A. Sankara Narayanan, Executive Director, Bank of India 
23.  Shri Arun Tiwari, CMD, Union Bank of India 
24.  Shri Ravindra Marathe, MD & CEO, Bank of Maharashtra 
25.  Shri Rajeev Rishi, CMD, Central Bank of India 
26.  Shri R. Amalorpavanathan, DMD, NABARD 
27.  Shri K. Venkateshwara Rao, Chief General Manager, NABARD 
28.  Shri A.K. Kapur, DMD, SIDBI 
29.  Shri Sriram Kalyanaraman, MD & CEO, NHB 
30.  Shri Yaduvendra Mathur, CMD, EXIM Bank 
31.  Shri Debasish Mallick, DMD, EXIM Bank 
32.  Smt Chanda Kochhar, MD & CEO, ICICI Bank 
33.  Shri N.S. Kannan, Executive Director, ICICI Bank 
34.  Shri Kaizad Bharucha, Executive Director, HDFC Bank 
35.  Shri Manish Kumar, MD & Chief Risk Officer, Kotak Mahindra Bank 
36.  Shri Dipak Gupta, Joint MD, Kotak Mahindra Bank 
37.  Shri G.M. Yadwadkar, DMD, IDBI bank 
38.  Shri Sanjeev Kaushik, DMD, IIFCL 
39.  Shri Rajat Monga, Chief Financial Officer & Senior Group President, YES 
Bank 
40.  Ms Shikha Sharma, MD & CEO, AXIS Bank 
41.  Shri Cyril Anand, President-Risk, AXIS Bank 
42.  Shri Pushpendra Sharma, Head-Compliance, Ratnakar Bank Limited 
43.  Shri Naresh Karia, CFO, Ratnakar Bank Limited 
44.  Shri Animesh Chauhan, MD & CEO, Oriental Bank of Commerce 
45.  Shri Dibakar Mohanty, MD, State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur 
46.  Smt Usha Ananthasubramanian, MD & CEO, Punjab National Bank 
47.  Shri S. Jatinderber Singh, CMD, Punjab & Sind Bank 
48.  Shri Pawan Bajaj, MD & CEO, United Bank of India 
49.  Shri T.K. Thakkar, MD & CEO, UCO Bank 
50.  Shri Rakesh Sethi, CMD, Allahabad Bank 
51.  Shri Zarin Daruwala, Chief Executive Officer, Standard Chartered Bank 
52.  Shri Vinod Paptist, Head- Customer Experience 
53.  Shri Rajesh Verma, Head- Treasury, DCB Bank Limited 
54.  Shri Ramaswamy Meyyappan, Chief Risk Officer, Indusind Bank 

55.  Shri Anil K. Rao, Head- Operations, Indusind Bank 
56.  Shri Ajeet Agarwal, Director, Rural Electrification Corporation Limited 
57.  Shei Rajeeva Sharma, CMD, Power Finance Corporation Limited 
 
(v)  Insurance Development Regulatory Authority (Investment) Regulations, 2016 
 
9.  Shri Nilesh Sathe, Member (Life), IRDAI  
10.  Smt Usha Sangwan, Managing Director, Life Insurance  Corporation of 
India  
11.  Shri V. Chandrasekaran, Executive Director, Life Insurance Corporation of 
India  
12.  Shri Satish Chandra Singh, Executive Director, Life Insurance Corporation 
of India  
 
26.  On behalf of the Committee, the Chairman welcomed a ll the representatives to the 
meeting. At the outset, he briefed the Committee ab out the mandate of the Committee, stating 
that the main function of the Committee is to scrutinize and report to the Rajya Sabha whether 
the powers to make rules, regulations, bye-laws, et c conferred on it by the Constitution or 
delegated by Parliament are being properly exercised by the executive authorities or not.  
   
27.  ***        
 
28.  ***   
 
29.  The Committee took up for discussion the Notificati ons issued on Demonetization and 
problems/grievances of the customers regarding coll ection and disbursement of cash by 
Banks. The Chairman stated that the Committee suppo rts the initiative taken by the RBI and 
Government to curb the problem of fake currency not es, financing of terror activities and 
black money by way of Demonetization. However keepi ng in view the way it had been 
implemented it raised serious questions regarding t he preparedness of the system to handle 
such a major exercise. The problems faced by the pe ople in general and also the stress faced 
by the Banking system had also been observed by the  Committee. In this respect the 
Committee sought to have the views of the Banks and  other Financial organizations present 
on the steps needed to be taken to handle this proc ess in a more organized and systematic 
manner in the coming months and ensure that the com mon man does not suffer in the process. 
The Committee sought to be apprised about the steps  taken to use the liquidity generated in 
the process in a more productive and growth oriente d manner. The Committee also sought to 

be briefed about the steps taken by the Ministry to  ensure that the hoarding of the new 
currency notes does not take place and measures that have been taken up in collaboration with 
the Banks to prevent it.  
 
30.  *** 
 
31.  The Governor informed the Committee that the demone tization has led to increase in the 
bank’s balance-sheets due to the increase in the de posits and this has lead to decrease in the 
yield on the government securities which effects th eir treasury operations and profits and 
thus effecting their bottom-line.  
 
32.  *** 
 
33.  *** 
 
34.  The Committee then sought clarifications on the fol lowing issues i.e. (i) reasons for not 
getting these notifications vetted from the Ministr y of Law & Justice and laying them before 
the Parliament; (ii) why RBI want ahead with this e xercise of demonetization if it was not 
prepared for it and thereby putting the whole natio n into lot of troubles; (iii) what were the 
reasons that for controlling approximately 6% black  money in the economy, 86% of the 
currency in the economy was demonetized; (iv) till when RBI proposed to lift the weekly 
limits on withdrawal as it was severely affecting t he business/units in which daily working 
capitals required are  particularly in the construc tion sector, tea plantations etc; (v) in the 
rural sector number of villages are still not conne cted to the banks and the nearest banks are 
very far off for such people it has caused excessiv e hardship; (vi) apprehensions have been 
raised that a part of the black money has come back into the banks, in this respect, what steps 
are proposed to account for this black money; and ( vii) steps to be taken against bank 
employees who have indulged in shady activities in this phase of demonetization. 
 
35.         Governor, RBI informed that as on date the s ame number of currency notes had been 
released in the economy as there were on 8 
th  November, 2016, and, for sectors where the 
amount of loans was less than one crore they have b een given a forbearance of 90 days from 
re-payment of loan. The Committee was informed that  RBI was continuously studying the 

situation and the limits on withdrawals would be ra ised in the near future. The four note 
currency presses were working to their full capacit y. He also briefed the Committee on the 
status of NPAs in the economy and the steps taken to handle it in a more coordinated manner. 
 
36.        CMD, State Bank of India informed that during  the 50 day period of demonetization 
they received deposits to the level of Rs 3,19,806 crores and Rs 2,24,554 crorers were 
withdrawn in this phase. She informed that on a dai ly basis more than a thousand Suspect 
Transaction Reporting are reported to the Financial  Investigation Unit. In fact the banks only 
have been reporting about such cases and so the iss ue is about the individuals involved in 
such activities rather than the concerned banks. Sh e informed that it was not so easy to use 
the Jan-Dhan accounts and this was possible only wi th the collusion of bank officials. She 
assured the Committee that the banking sector was t aking all precautions to ensure that such 
activities did not happen and stringent action woul d be taken against the officials found 
indulging in such activities. She briefed the Commi ttee about the steps taken for the farmers 
to ensure that cash shortages didn’t affect the pur chasing of seeds, fertilizers and pesticides 
and they were going out of the way to help them out. 
  
37.  Bank of Baroda informed the Committee that they had  received about 65,000 crores of 
deposits and their balance-sheet had gone up by38,0 00 crores. He further informed that the 
interest rate had been reduced to 8.35% and when th e loans come up for re-financing the 
benefits of lower interest-rates will be passed on to them. Power Finance Corporation 
informed that they were the largest Non-banking fin ance company in the country and their 
87% business was with the State Power utilities. He  informed that they had disbursed 36,000 
crores in the current financial year. He informed t hat renewable power projects were coming 
up for financing from the private sector. He inform ed that they were the nodal agency for 
Integrated Power Development Scheme which covers ab out 4200 towns in the country for 
upgradation and strengthening of transmission and distribution system.    
 
38.  In regard to hardship of rural areas in the event o f demonetization Deputy Governor, RBI 
informed that utmost secrecy had to be maintained a bout the demonetization process and 
once the demonetization was announced they have bee n continuously observing the situation 
and cash was being sent to all places as required. Rural areas have also been given priority so 

as to ensure that agriculture does not suffer. He i nformed that RBI was working in 
collaboration with NABARD to ensure that the agricu lture sector receives adequate cash as 
the next season agriculture activities had started.  He stated that they would issue currency as 
and when needed by the system.  
 
39.  ICICI Bank informed that they received cash deposit s of 85,000 crores in the 50 day 
period from 8 
th  November to 31 st  December, 2016 and they disbursed 28,000 crores in  this 
period. It was informed that they had reduced their  MCLR by 70 basic points and now their 
MCLR was 8.2% and their home loan interest rates ha d also been reduced. She informed that 
their NPAs were going up but still they were making  all efforts to handle it. She informed 
that all the banks were meeting once in every two w eeks to discuss issues about restructuring 
of loans under S4A, Strategic debt restructuring an d so on to ensure that better management 
of sick units. Bank of India informed that they rec eived 55,000 crores in the said period and 
after taking into account the withdrawals their dep osits had gone up by 35,000 crores. He 
informed that they had reduced the one year MCLR by  75% basic points. He informed that 
they had approved two cases for the Overseeing Committee under the S4A Scheme.  
 
40.  Punjab National Bank informed that they collected 9 5,200 crores in the said period and 
they reduced the MCLR across all categories which w ould in turn lead to reduction of the 
interest rates also. Axis Bank informed that they h ad got deposits of about 80,000 crores and 
withdrawals had been to the tune of 20,000 crores. In reply to a query from the Committee, 
NABARD informed that the interest rate in the coope rative credit structure for crop loans the 
ultimate lending rate to farmers was 7% in which 3%  is given as incentive by the Central 
government for timely payment of loans and only 4% is collected from the farmers and even 
this is reduced in by the State governments. In many States the State Governments decide the 
rates at which the Farmers cooperative societies wo uld lend to the farmers and in this respect 
the NABARD or RBI instructions don’t apply to the l ending rates fixed by these societies for 
the farmers.  
 
41.  *** 
 
42.  ***   

 
43.  *** 
 
44.  Concluding the discussions the Chairman urged the R eserve Bank of India to coordinate 
closely with the Banks to ensure that the economy r ecovers at the earliest from the impact of 
demonetization. He impressed upon the organizations  present to take note of the grievances 
faced by the common man and ensure that schemes are  devised to provide relief to worst 
affected sections of the society.  
 
45.  The meeting thereafter concluded with a mutual vote of thanks.  
 
  

Annexure V  
 
STUDY NOTE OF THE COMMITTEE’S DISCUSSION AT BENGALU RU ON 08.01.2017
 
 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on the 8 th  January, 2017 at Bengaluru to discuss 
various rules/regulations, viz. (i) Environment (Pr otection) Rules, 1986; (ii) Hazardous and 
Other Wastes (Management and Transboundary Movement ) Rules, 2016 and Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016; (iii) Reserve Bank of India  Scheme for Sustainable Restructuring of 
Stressed Assets; problems faced by Banks due to ris ing NPA of different categories; RBI Master 
Circular on Cash Reserve Ratio and Statutory Liquid ity Ratio; and  Notifications issued on 
Demonetization and problems/grievances of customers  regarding collection and disbursement of 
cash by Banks due to demonetization in Karnataka, T amil Nadu & Kerala; and (iv) Central 
Electricity Regulatory Commission (Power Market) Re gulations, 2010. The following Members, 
officers of the Committee and representatives of Ce ntral Government, State Government and 
different organizations were present during the meeting:- 
 
Present 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy, Chairman 
Members 
7.  Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
8.  Shri Biswajit Daimary 
9.  Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
5. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
6. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
 
7.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
8.  Shri R. S. Rawat, Joint Director 
9.  Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
 
Representatives of Central Government, State Government and different organizations 
 
(vi)  Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986; Hazardous and  Other Wastes 
(Management and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016  and Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016 
 
34.  Shri T.M. Vijay Bhaskar, Additional Chief Secretary  (Forest & 
Environment), Government of Karnataka 
35.  Shri Ramachandra, Secretary (Environment), State Go vernment of 
Karnataka 
36.  Shri Manoj Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary, Ministry o f Environment, 
Forest & Climate Change 

37.  Shri Manjunath Prasad, Commissioner, BBMP 
38.  Shri S. Sarfaraz Khan, Special Commissioner, BBMP 
39.  Shri Lakshman, Chairman, Karnataka State Pollution Control Board 
40.  Shri Sandeep Chatterji, Director, Ministry of Elect ronics & Information 
Technology 
41.  Shri S. Suresh, Additional Director, CPCB 
42.  Shri T.S. Raju, CMD, HAL 
43.  Shri M.V. Gowatama, CMD, Bharat Electronics Limited 
44.  Shri D.K. Hota, CMD, Bharat Earth Movers Limited 
45.  Shri D. Bandyopadhyay, Director, BHEL 
46.  Shri S.K. Tyagi, Director, Software Technology Park of India 
 
 
(vii)  Reserve Bank of India Scheme for Sustainable Restru cturing of Stressed Assets; 
problems faced by Banks due to rising NPA of differ ent categories; RBI Master 
Circular on Cash Reserve Ratio and Statutory Liquidity Ratio; and  Notifications 
issued on Demonetization and problems/grievances of  customers regarding 
collection and disbursement of cash by Banks due to  demonetization in 
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu & Kerala 
 
58.  Dr. N. Srinivas Rao, Economic Advisor, Department o f Financial 
Services, Ministry of Finance 
59.  Smt Ipsita Mitra, Under Secretary, Department of Ec onomic Affairs, 
Ministry of Finance 
60.  Shri P.J. Thomas, General Manager, Reserve Bank of India 
61.  Shri P. Vasudevan, General Manager, Reserve Bank of India 
62.  Shri N.Krishnamachari, MD & CEO, State Bank of Mysore 
63.  Shri C.R. Sasikumar, MD& CEO, State Bank of Travancore 
64.  Shri Jatinderbir Singh, CMD, Punjab & Sind Bank 
65.  Shri Mahesh Kumar Jain, MD & CEO, Indian Bank 
66.  Shri R. Subramaniakumar, MD & CEO, Indian Overseas Bank 
67.  Shri J.K. Garg, MD & CEO, Corporation Bank 
68.  Dr. Kishore Sansi, MD, Vijaya Bank 
69.  Shri Rakesh Sharma, MD & CEO, Canara Bank 
70.  Shri D. Mohapatra, Executive Director, Canara Bank 
71.  Shri Arun Srivastava, MD & CEO, Syndicate Bank 
72.  Shri P. Jayarama Bhat, MD & CEO, Karnataka Bank Limited 
73.  Shri G. Sreeram, MD & CEO, Dhanlaxmi Bank 
74.  Shri Vinod Joshi, General Manager, Punjab National Bank 
75.  Shri Shishupal Yadav, Circle Head, Punjab National Bank 
76.  Shri K.S.N. Murty, Nodal Regional Head, Union Bank of India 
77.  Smt Rajni Mishra, Chief General Manager, State Bank of India 
78.  Shri K. K. Venkatsessan, DGM & Deputy Zonal Head, Bank of Baroda 
79.  Shri G. Rajendra Kumar, General Manager, State Bank of Hyderabad 
80.  Shri Narayana Murthy B, CGM & Zonal Head, IDBI Bank Limited 
81.  Shri Johnson E.K., DGM, State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur 

82.  Shri Nanda Kumar V., DGM, Federal Bank 
83.  Shri K.M. Swamy, DRM & RO, Central Bank of India 
84.  Shri V. Venkatesh, DGM, Central Bank of India  
 
(viii)  Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Power Market) Regulations, 2010 
 
13.  Shri P. Ravi Kumar, Secretary (Power). State Government of Karnataka 
14.  Shri Vikram Singh, Director, Central Electricity Authority, Ministry of 
Power 
 
 
46.  On behalf of the Committee, the Chairman welcomed a ll the representatives to the 
meeting. At the outset, he briefed the Committee ab out the mandate of the Committee, stating 
that the main function of the Committee is to scrut inize and report to the Rajya Sabha whether 
the powers to make rules, regulations, bye-laws, et c conferred on it by the Constitution or 
delegated by Parliament are being properly exercised by the executive authorities or not.  
   
47.  *** 
 
48.  *** 
49.  *** 
 
50.  *** 
 
51.  *** 
 
52.  *** 
 
53.  *** 
 
54.  *** 
 
55.  *** 
     
56.  *** 

 
57.  *** 
 
58.  The Committee then took up for discussion the Notif ications issued on Demonetization 
and problems/grievances of the customers regarding collection and disbursement of cash by 
Banks particularly in Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil N adu. The Chairman stated that the 
Committee supports the initiative taken by the RBI and Government to curb the problem of fake 
currency notes, financing of terror activities and black money by way of Demonetization. 
However, keeping in view the way it had been implem ented it raised serious questions regarding 
the preparedness of the system to handle such a maj or exercise. Given the problems faced by the 
people in general and the stress faced by the Banki ng system, the Committee sought to have the 
views of the Banks and other Financial organization s present on the steps needed to be taken to 
handle this process in a more organized and systema tic manner in the coming months and ensure 
that the common man does not suffer in the process.  The Committee sought to be apprised about 
the steps taken to use the liquidity generated in t he process in a more productive and growth 
oriented manner.  
 
59.  Canara Bank informed that in the period from 9 
th  November to 31 st  December, 2016 they 
received a total of 55,076.63 crore of Specified Ba nk Notes and their overall deposits have gone 
up by 23,729 crore in the said period. Their Bank a lso issued instructions to distribute cash to far 
flung areas on priority basis viz. for plantation w orkers at North-East and Coorg District of 
Karnataka. Vijaya Bank informed the Committee that as per the Financial Action Task Force 
Report of 2013,  the Indian rupee was the ninth mos t counterfeited currency in terms of its value 
and stood third in terms of the number of fake curr ency notes detected around the world. State 
Bank of Mysore informed that they had identified 4 cases of suspected malpractices in their bank 
in this phase of demonetization and all the bank st aff involved have been placed under 
suspension with immediate effect. It was also infor med that in this phase they received 
remittances of Specified Bank Notes for a total val ue to Rs 11,605.31 crore upto 30 th  December, 
2016. Karnataka Bank stated that the excess liquidi ty in the form of cash on hand was a cause of 
worry to the banking system as the same was not ear ning any returns. However, the funds 

deposited by the customers to the savings bank acco unts need to be paid interest at the rate of 
4%.  
60.    *** 
61.    *** 
 
62.   The meeting thereafter concluded with a mutual vote of thanks. 
  

Annexure VI  
 
STUDY NOTE OF THE COMMITTEE’S DISCUSSION AT HYDERAB AD ON 10.01.2017 
 
 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on the 10 th  January, 2017 at Hyderabad to discuss 
various rules/regulations, viz. (i) Environment (Pr otection) Rules, 1986; (ii) Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016 and progress made with respe ct to Green Vishakha Project; (iii) 
Reserve Bank of India Scheme for Sustainable Restru cturing of Stressed Assets; problems faced 
by Banks due to rising NPA of different categories;  RBI Master Circular on Cash Reserve Ratio 
and Statutory Liquidity Ratio; and  Notifications i ssued on Demonetization and 
problems/grievances of customers regarding collecti on and disbursement of cash by Banks due 
to demonetization and recovery of fake and new curr ency in Andhra Pradesh & Telangana; and 
(iv) Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Pow er Market) Regulations, 2010. The 
following Members, officers of the Committee and re presentatives of Central Government, State 
Government and different organizations were present during the meeting:- 
 
Present 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy, Chairman 
Members 
10.  Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
11.  Shri Biswajit Daimary 
12.  Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
13.  Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
14.  Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
7. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
8. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
 
1.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
2.  Shri R.S. Rawat, Joint Director 
3.  Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
 
Representatives of Central Government, State Government and different organizations 
 
(i)  Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986; Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 and 
progress made with respect to Green Vishakha Project 
 
1.  Shri Lingaraj Panigrahi, Special Chief Secretary, G overnment of Andhra 
Pradesh 
2.  Shri Surendra Pandey, Special Secretary (Environmen t, Forest, Science & 
Technology), Government of Andhra Pradesh 

3.  Shri Manoj Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary, Ministry o f Environment, 
Forest & Climate Change 
4.  Shri P. Srinivas, Additional Transport Commissioner , Government of 
Andhra Pradesh 
5.  Shri V. Vinay Chand, Commissioner, Tirupati Municip al Corporation, 
State Government of Andhra Pradesh, Government of Andhra Pradesh 
6.  Shri R. Karikal Valaven, Principal Secretary (Munic ipal Administration & 
Urban Development) 
7.  Shri K Kanna Babu, Commissioner & Director of Munic ipal 
Administration, Government of Andhra Pradesh 
8.  Shri R.G. Kalaghsti, Principal Chief Conservator of  Forests, Government 
of Andhra Pradesh 
9.  Dr. T. Baburao Naidu, Vice-Chairman, Visakhapatnam Urban 
Development Authority, State Government of Andhra Pradesh 
10.  Shri Hari Narayanan M, Commissioner, Greater Visakh apatnam 
Municipal Corporation, State Government of Andhra Pradesh 
11.  Shri Phani Kumar, Chairman, Andhra Pradesh State Po llution Control 
Board 
12.  Shri Amith Garg, Executive Director, Ministry of Railways 
13.  Shri A.K. Gupta, Additional General Manager, South Central Railways 
14.  Shri A.K. Gupta, Additional General Manager, East Coast Railways 
15.  Ms Chandralekha Mukherjee, DRM, East Coast Railways 
16.  Shri Anand Kumar, Additional Director, Central Pollution Control Board  
17.  Shri P.L. Haranadh, Deputy Chairman, Visakhapatnam Port Trust 
18.  Shri Venu Gopal, Secretary, Visakhapatnam Port Trust 
19.  Lt. Cdr. Neeraja Varadharajan, Eastern Naval Command, Indian Navy  
20.  Shri N. Sridhar, CMD, Singareni Colleries Company Limited 
21.  Shri D.P. Bahuguna, Chief General Manager, MSTC 
22.  Shri D.N. Prasad, Advisor, Ministry of Coal 
23.  Shri M.P. Chaudhari, CMD, MOIL Limited 
24.  Shri T.K. Pattnaik, Director, MOIL Limited 
25.  Shri C.D. Goswami, General Manager, MECON Limited 
26.  Shri P. Madhusudan, CMD, RINL 
27.  Shri D.N. Rao, Director, RINL 
28.  Shri B.R. Reddy, CMD, South Eastern Coalfields Limited 
29.  Shri G. Singh, CMD, Central Coalfields Limited 
30.  Shri M.V. Subba Rao, Director, KIOCL Limited 
31.  Shri J. Chandana, Manager, M/s Brandix India Appord City (P) Limited 
 
(ii)  Reserve Bank of India Scheme for Sustainable Restru cturing of Stressed Assets; 
problems faced by Banks sue to rising NPA of differ ent categories; RBI Master 
Circular on Cash Reserve Ratio and Statutory Liquidity Ratio; and  Notifications 
issued on Demonetization and problems/grievances of  customers regarding 
collection and disbursement of cash by Banks due to  demonetization and 
recovery of fake and new currency in Andhra Pradesh & Telangana 
 

1.  Shri Harish Kumar Gupta, IGP (Law & Order), State G overnment of 
Andhra Pradesh 
2.  Shri T. Krishna Prasad, Additional DGP, State Gover nment of Andhra 
Pradesh 
3.  Shri V.V. Srinivasa Rao, Additional C.P., State Government of Telangana 
4.  Shri T. Prabhakar Rao, DIG (Intelligence), State Go vernment of 
Telangana 
5.  Shri P. Narasimha Rao, Additional DCP (Vijayawada),  State Government 
of Andhra Pradesh 
6.  Shri A.S. Khan, Joint CP (Vizag City), State Govern ment of Andhra 
Pradesh 
7.  Dr. N. Srinivas Rao, Economic Advisor, Department o f Financial 
Services, Ministry of Finance 
8.  Smt Ipsita Mitra, Under Secretary, Department of Ec onomic Affairs, 
Ministry of Finance 
9.  Shri R. Subramanium, Regional Director, Reserve Bank of India 
10.  Shri G. Ramesh, General Manager, Reserve Bank of India 
11.  Shri J. Meghanan, General Manager, Reserve Bank of India 
12.  Shri Suresh N. Patel, MD & CEO, Andhra Bank 
13.  Shri S.K. Kalra, ED, Andhra Bank 
14.  Shri Hardayal Prasad, Chief General Manager, State Bank of India 
15.  Shri Mani Palvesan, Chief General Manager, State Bank of Hyderabad 
16.  Shri D.R. Sharma, DGM & Zonal Manager, UCO Bank 
17.  Shri D. Chirajeevi, DGM, Union Bank of India 
18.  Shri G. Viswanath, General Manager, Bank of India 
19.  Shri Ashwin H. Dalal, Zonal Manager, Dena Bank 
20.  Shri Vinod Joshi, General Manager, Punjab National Bank 
21.  Shri D.M. Majumdar, General Manager, Corporation Bank 
22.  Shri Joseph Lawrence Tobias, United Bank of India 
23.  Shri N. Srinivasa Rao, AGM, United Bank of India 
24.  Shri Siddhart Mishra, Zonal Head, ICICI Bank Limited 
25.  Shri N. Ram Babu, DGM, Bank of Maharashtra 
26.  Smt P.L. Khuntia, DGM, Allahabad bank 
27.  Shri B. Dasgupta, CGM & Zonal Head, IDBI Bank Limited 
28.  Shri E. Ratan Kumar, Field General Manager, Central Bank of India 
29.  Shri S.P. Sharma, Field General Manager, Syndicate Bank  
 
 
(iii)  Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Power Market) Regulations, 2010 
 
1.  Shri P. Ravi Kumar, Secretary (Power). State Government of Karnataka 
2.  Shri Vikram Singh, Director, Central Electricity Authority, Ministry of 
Power 
3.  Dr. P.V. Ramesh, CMD, Rural Electrification Corporation Limited 
4.  Shri I.S. Jha, CMD, Power Grid Corporation of India Limited 

5.  Shri V. Shekhar, Executive Director, Power Grid Corporation of India 
Limited 
6.  Shri K.V.S. Baba, CEO, POSOCO 
7.  Smt Shubha Sarma, Secretary, CERC 
8.  Shri G. Adinarayana. Director (Finance), Andhra Pradesh Power 
Generation Corporation Limited 
9.  Shri P. Sivaramanjayulu, Chief Engineer, Andhra Pradesh Power 
Generation Corporation Limited 
10.  Shri P. Dinesh, Joint Managing Director, Andhra Pradesh Power 
Transmission Company Limited 
11.  Shri Ghanshyam Prasad, Chief Engineer, Central Electricity Authority, 
Ministry of Power 
12.  Shri V.B. Fadnavis, Regional E.D., NTPC limited 
 
1.  On behalf of the Committee, the Chairman welcomed a ll the representatives to the 
meeting. At the outset, he briefed the Committee ab out the mandate of the Committee, stating 
that the main function of the Committee is to scrut inize and report to the Rajya Sabha whether 
the powers to make rules, regulations, bye-laws, et c conferred on it by the Constitution or 
delegated by Parliament are being properly exercised by the executive authorities or not.  
 
2.  *** 
 
3.  *** 
 
4.  *** 
 
5.  *** 
 
6.  *** 
 
7.  *** 
 
8.  ***  
 
9.  *** 
 

10.  *** 
 
11.  *** 
 
12.  *** 
  
1.  *** 
 
2.  *** 
 
3.  The Committee then took up for discussion the Notif ications issued on Demonetization 
and problems/grievances of the customers regarding collection and disbursement of cash by 
Banks. The Chairman stated that the Committee suppo rts the initiative taken by the RBI and 
Government to curb the problem of fake currency not es, financing of terror activities and black 
money by way of Demonetization. However, keeping in view the way it had been implemented it 
raised serious questions regarding the preparedness  of the system to handle such a major 
exercise. The problems faced by the people in gener al and the stress faced by the Banking 
system had also been observed by the Committee. In this respect the Committee sought to have 
the views of the Banks and other Financial organiza tions present on the steps needed to be taken 
to handle this process in a more organized and syst ematic manner in the coming months and 
ensure that the common man does not suffer in the process.  
4.  Regional Manager, Reserve Bank of India gave a brie f overview of the status of currency 
management since 8 
th  November, 2016 in the two States of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh. He 
informed that 1,35,000 crore of old notes were with drawn in the two States and they were still in 
the process of lifting them from the banks as these  notes are stored in the currency chest of 
different banks. They had also started the processi ng of these old notes. About 62,000 crores of 
new notes have been released for circulation in the economy of these States. He accepted that the 
state of demonetization was not fully normal and th ey were making efforts to manage the 
situation better. He informed that the problem toda y was that circulation was not taking place of 
the new currency notes.  
 

5.  The Committee sought clarification on the basis of which the cash withdrawal limit had 
been set by RBI . The Committee felt that if the RB I had undertaken a study of the cash 
withdrawals in the last one year then it would have  been better placed to decide the permissible 
limits of cash withdrawal as it would be closer to the ground realities. The Committee also 
pointed frequent modifications made in the rules by  way of which the weekly and daily cash 
withdrawal limits were affected by RBI.   
 
6.  Additional DGP, State Government of Telangana infor med that they were investigating 
the case of fake currency recovered in the State af ter demonetization and they were also 
following up cases were they caught people trying to exchange large amounts of old notes. DGP, 
State Government of Andhra Pradesh informed that th ey have registered five cases of fake 
currency notes after demonetization and they have 1 8 cases where new currency notes were 
seized during search operations. The Committee then  raised the issue of impact of 
demonetization on naxalism in the States. The Commi ttee was informed that in the short term 
there has been a fall in their activities as they a re also facing cash shortages. However, the 
movement of the naxals is still there. The long ter m effect of demonetization on the naxal 
activities would have to be studied and it was assured that they would do so.     
 
7.  UCO Bank informed that in the post 8 
th  November, 2016 scenario they had proactively 
taken all possible measures to further enhance the penetration of its Alternate Delivery Channel 
and to connect the remotest villagers to the bankin g system through e-transactions. Syndicate 
Bank informed that one officer and five workmen emp loyees of the bank were found to 
indulging in suspect activities subsequent to demon etization. Punjab National Bank informed 
that since demonetization they had confiscated 497 fake currency notes of Rs 500 and 387 fake 
notes of Rs 1000 denomination. Andhra Bank informed  that keeping in mind the difficulties 
faced by the unorganized sector they had organized 6154 camps for the unorganized sector for 
opening PMJDY accounts and a total of 1.24 lakh accounts were opened. As regards adequacy of 
cash they stated that the situation was manageable only because of the current withdrawal limit 
of Rs 24,000 per week and the actual position would  emerge once this limit is withdrawn. State 
Bank of India informed that 27,300 crore of Specifi ed Bank Notes had been received by them in 
Telangana and Andhra Pradesh and their deposits had  gone up by Rs 15,000 crores in these 

States.  They received Rs 18,000 crore from RBI for  dispersal as against the Rs 27,300 of 
Specified Bank Notes deposited.   
 
8.     Concluding the discussions the Chairman impresse d upon the officials the need to 
prevent the entry and distribution of counterfeit currency in the economy. This was imperative as 
the major exercise of demonetization was carried ou t to weed out the counterfeit currency 
prevalent in the Indian economy. He expressed his a pprehension on the reports coming in the 
news about recovery of huge volumes of new series o f notes as well as counterfeit notes and 
expressed the hope that the law enforcement agencie s would take proper care and precaution to 
prevent the entry of counterfeit currency in the co untry from abroad. He expressed the 
Committees satisfaction over the progress status of  Green Vishakha project and hoped that the 
target would be achieved in the near future. 
 
9.  The meeting thereafter concluded with a mutual vote of thanks.                
     
           
  

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDIN ATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
 
III 
 Third Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 3.00 pm on Tuesday, the 28 th  March, 2017 in Room No.126-C 
(Committee Chairman’s Room), Parliament House, New Delhi.   
Present 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy    Chairman 
Members 
2. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
3. 
 Shri K. Parasaran 
4.  Dr.K. Keshava Rao 
5.  Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
6.  Shri Sanjay Seth 
 
Secretariat 
1. 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
3.  Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director 
4.  Smt. Monica Baa, Deputy Director 
 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members o f the Committee to the meeting.  The 
following draft reports were taken up for consideration and adoption by the Committee: 
(i) 
      Draft 230 th  Report on Statutory Orders Laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha during its 
240 th  Session; 
(ii)        Draft 231 st  Report on the Khadi and Village Industries Commission Regulations, 2007 and 
The Framing of Rules and Regulations under the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with 
Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multi ple Disabilities Act, 1999- 

Implementation of the 220 th  Report of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya 
Sabha;  
(iii)    Draft 232 nd  Report on Statutory Orders Laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha during its 
241 st  Session; and 
(iv)        Draft 233 rd  Report on Notification issued by Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs) on Demonetization. 
 
3. The Committee considered the reports and unanimo usly adopted the draft 230 th , 231 st , 232 nd  
and 233 rd  Reports and decided to present these Reports to the Ho use on the 3 rd  April, 2017.  
Accordingly, it authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri Sanjay Seth and Shri Ali Anwar Ansari , 
Members of the Committee, to present the Reports to the House. 
4. *   *   *  
5     The meeting adjourned at 3.30 p.m. 
 
 
____________________ 
*** Matter not related to the subject. 