PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTH REPORT
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
On
Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of
Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010
(Presented on 3rd May, )2013
REPORT NO.
205


Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTH REPORT
On
Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and promotion of
Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010
(Presented on 3rd May, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ (i)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT  ON THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS (APPOINTMENT AND
PROMOTION OF O FFICERS AND E MPLOYEES) R ULES, 2010............. 1-16
4. S UMMARY OF R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS........................ 17-21
5. A NNEXURE .......................................................................... 22-129
6. M INUTES ............................................................................ 130-132

LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLA TION, RAJYA SABHA
(CONSTITUTED ON THE 29th SEPTEMBER, 2010)
1. Shrimati Maya Singh        ------       Chairperson
2. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
3. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
4. Shri P. Kannan
5. Shri Prakash Javadekar
6. Shri Narendra Kashyap
7. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam
8. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
9. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut
10. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi
11. Shri Shantaram Naik
12. Shri Bhupender Yadav
*13. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
*14. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay
*15. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri N .K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
3. Shri R.S. Rawat, Deputy Director
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Deputy Director
5. Shri  R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director
6. Shrimati Monica Baa, Assistant Director
(i)
*Nominated w.e.f. 9th May, 2012.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having
been authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf, this Two
Hundred and Fifth Report of the Committee.
2. The Committee examined the matters that came up while scrutinizing
the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and
Employees) Rules, 2010 and issues relating to them along with the comments
received from the Government.
3. The observations and recommendations of the Committee are contained
in the Report.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report in its meeting
held on the 2nd May, 2013.
MAY A SINGH
Chairperson,
Committee on Subordinate Legislation,
Rajya Sabha.
NEW DELHI;
May 3rd, 2013
(iii)

1
REPORT
The Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of
Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010
The Regional Rural Banks were initially established under the provisions
of the Ordinance promulgated way back on 26th September, 1975 and
thereafter under the provisions of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 with a
view to develop the rural economy and to create an alternative channel to the
‘cooperative credit structure’. The RRBs are jointly owned by the Government
of India, the concerned State Government and Sponsor Banks with issued
capital which is shared by them in proportion of 50%, 15% and 35%
respectively. The area of operations of RRBs is as specified in the notification
issued by the Central Government in a State or a Union Territory.
2. In 2007, a Committee was set up under the Chairmanship of Dr. Y .S.P.
Thorat, the then Chairman of NABARD to examine the manpower norms in
RRBs and to have a standard method of manpower assessment and planning.
The said Committee examined the related issues which had a bearing on
development of appropriate human resources in RRBs vis-à-vis the Model
RRB Officers and Employees Service Regulations, 2000 and RRBs
(Appointment and Promotion of Officers and other Employees) Rules, 1998.
The Committee inter-alia recommended that there was need to revisit the
Model RRB Officers and Employees Service Regulations, 2000 in the changed
scenario especially, after the restructuring of RRBs by way of amalgamation.
In view of that, a Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Amresh Kumar,
Executive Director, NABARD was constituted for a comprehensive review of
the RRB (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and other Employees) Rules,
1998. This Committee submitted its report in February, 2009 and after
consultations with NABARD and Ministry of Law and Justice the revised
Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and Employees)
Rules, 2010 were notified on 13th July, 2010 ( Annexure I).

2
3. The Committee on Subordinate Legislation had earlier taken up for detailed
examination the model Regional Rural Banks (Officers and Employees) Service
Regulations, 2000. This model Regulations was adopted and notified by all
RRBs. Thereafter, the Committee also had discussions on the Regulations
with various RRBs and their sponsor banks. The Ministry in their latest status
note furnished on the subject stated that the Ministry had also framed the
revised model Regional Rural Banks (Officers and Employees) Service
Regulations, 2010 after consultation with NABARD, Ministry of Law and
Justice and approval of the Finance Minister. This revised model Regulations
was circulated to all RRBs through NABARD and the same are required to be
notified and adopted by RRBs in consultation with their respective sponsor
banks after approval of their Board. In view of the fact that the model Regional
Rural Banks (Officers and Employees) Service Regulations, 2000 was no
longer in force and that RRBs had notified the new RRB (Officers and
Employees) Service Regulations, 2010, the Committee decided not to pursue
the model Regional Rural Banks (Officers and Employees) Service Regulations,
2000 further.
4. Keeping in view the importance of Regional Rural Banks (Appointment
and Promotion of Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010 the Committee decided
to take them up for detailed examination. The Committee held wide ranging
discussions with the Banks like Andhra Bank, State Bank of Hyderabad, Indian
Bank, Indian Overseas Bank, Canara Bank, Syndicate Bank, Vijaya Bank,
Corporation Bank, State Bank of Mysore, Dena Bank, Bank of India, Central
Bank of India, Bank of Baroda, Union Bank of India, State Bank of India, Bank
of Maharashtra, Allahabad Bank, United Cooperative Bank, United Bank of
India, Punjab National Bank and ICICI Bank along with the representatives of
the Regional Rural Banks sponsored by them. The Committee also held
discussions with concerned Associations of Employees of Regional Rural Banks
at different places to know the problems being faced by them. Overall the
Committee held 15 meetings on the said rules during its study visits to different
places.

3
5. The said rules were examined and a detailed questionnaire was forwarded
to the Department of Financial Services (Ministry of Finance). The Department
of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance furnished their comments/
clarifications on the points raised in the questionnaire (Annexure II) . The
points raised by the Committee and the comments of the Ministry are contained
in the succeeding paragraphs.
6. The Committee wanted to know the reasons that necessitated the framing
of RRBs (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and Employees) Rules,
2010 in super session of RRB appointment and Promotion of officers’ and
Employee’ Rules, 1998 and what were the main points of difference between
the old rules 1998 and new rules, 2010.
In response it was informed that on the amalgamation of Regional Rural
Bank (RRBs) business level and area of operation of amalgamated RRBs had
increased substantially. A Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Y .S.P.
Thorat was constituted by Government of India to formulate “Comprehensive
Human Resource Policy for RRBs” which inter-alia include categorization of
RRBs/ branches, staff pattern, at Head Office/Controlling Offices/Branch level,
recruitment, promotion, etc. The Committee inter-alia recommended (i)
creation of posts at Scale IV and V level for RRB officer to provide promotional
avenues with a view to shoulder the higher responsibilities (ii) Direct
recruitment upto scale III (iii) Fast Track Promotion (iv) outsourcing of non-
core activities. All these factors necessitiate framing the Regional Rural Banks
(Appointment and Promotion) Rules, 2010.
7. Information was sought on the fact that the RRB Act was passed in
1976 and the RRB (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and Employees)
Rules were framed in 1998. Was any other rules in place before the rules were
framed in the year 1998 and if, no, why was there a delay of 22 years in the
framing of the rules?
The Ministry stated that prior to 1988 the recruitments in RRBs were
carried out as per the guidelines of the Government. The Appointment and

4
Promotion Rules were framed in 1998. These were revised in 1998 as the
posts in RRBs were designated on the basis of the recommendations of the
Equation Committee. The RRBs (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and
Employees) Rules, 2010 have been framed to provide for recruitment in scale
IV and V posts and also re-designation of the Group ‘B’ and ‘C’ posts.
8. The Committee sought information on the differences in the appointment
procedure of officers and employees in nationalize banks and RRBs in terms
of qualification, experience and tests, etc. In response to which it was informed
that whereas the appointment of officers and employees in RRBs was governed
by rules and regulations framed by Government of India in consultation with
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development and Sponsor Banks
from time to time under section 29 (1) and (2) (ba) of RRB Act, 1976,
appointments and promotion of staff of nationalized banks are governed by
the rules and regulations of the respective banks. However, overall the broad
features were more or less similar in both cases.
9. The Committee raised the issue that in the Third Schedule to the Rules,
it is provided that if none of the members of the Committee belongs to SC/ST,
the Board may nominate an officer of the suitable position belonging to SC/ST
as an additional member. In this reference the word ‘suitable position’ seems
to be vague and whether it would not be better to specify some rank, seniority
or qualifications for the same. In clarification the Ministry stated that the
RRBs are of different size and availability of SC/ST member in a particular
grade may cause problem. Hence a broad provision has been made.
10. It was noted that Rule 9 provides that the written examination for direct
recruitment of officers and employees other than those of Group ‘C’ employees
shall be entrusted to the Institute of Banking Personnel Selection (IBPS) or
any agency approved by the Sponsor Bank. In this reference information was
sought on the reasons for allowing the Sponsor Bank to get direct recruitment
done by an agency other than IBPS and whether it would not have been better
to entrust the work of conducting the examination to IBPS only so that there
is uniformity in the recruitment.

5
The Ministry informed that the recruitments in RRBs is at a much lower
scale as compared to the Public Sector Banks. In order to provide the desired
flexibility for recruitment in RRBs the provision of recruitment though Institute
of Banking Personnel Selection (IBPS) or any other agency approved by the
Sponsor Bank has been made.
11. The Committee wanted to know the number of districts in the country
covered by the RRBs so far and steps being taken by the Ministry and NABARD
to extend the RRB network to all the rural districts in the country along with
the difficulties faced by them in this regard.
The Ministry informed that 619 districts have been covered by the RRBs
as on 31 March, 2010. Recently Reserve Bank of India has also deregulated/
liberalized the licensing policy for RRBs to open their branches in category III
to VI centers without prior permission of RBI subject to fulfilling the following
conditions - (i) CRAR of at least 9%, (ii) Net NPA less than 5%, (iii) No
default in CRR/SLR for the last year; (iv) Net profit in the last financial year.
It was also informed that Government of lndia had given target for
opening 2000 new RRB branches in uncovered blocks/ districts by March,
2011. Resultantly, RRBs have opened 955 branches during the period from
March, 2007 to March, 2010. However the opening of the branches’ also
depends upon the financial viability of it.
12. It was observed that the Second Schedule to the Rules provides a list of
the regional rural banks in the country and their sponsor banks. All the RRBs
are sponsored by nationalized banks and no private bank is involved in the
sponsoring of rural bank. The Committee, accordingly desired to know the
reasons behind this and whether it was not desirable to involve the private
banks also in the RRB network. In response it was clarified that there were
already two RRBs sponsored by private sector banks, viz., Jammu Rural
Bank (Jammu & Kashmir Bank Ltd.), Mewar Aaanchalik Gramin Bank (taken
over by the ICICI Bank Ltd., from Bank of Rajasthan Ltd.) and one RRB, viz.
Kshetriya Kisaan Gramin Bank sponsored by UP Cooperative Bank Ltd.

6
13. It was felt that the scope of promotion in RRBs was very limited as
compared to the sponsor banks. Information was sought on the reasons for
lesser scope of promotion in RRBs as compared to the sponsor banks. In
clarification, the Ministry informed that as per the RRBs (Appointment and
Promotion of Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010, officers of RRBs can
now be promoted upto scale V and this in turn has increased the promotional
avenues for other categories of staff of RRBs.
14. Details were sought on the main recommendations of the Committee
constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri Amaresh Kumar, Executive
Director, NABARD for comprehensive review of the model RRB Officers
and Employees Service Regulations, 2000 and the RRB (Appointment and
Promotion of Officers and Employees) Rules, 1998. Information was also
sought on how far the Ministry of Finance/NABARD had accepted the
recommendations of the Committee and what were the amendments carried
out in the new rules of 2010 as a result of that acceptance?
The Ministry informed that the recommendations made by Shri Amaresh
Kumar were broadly accepted by the Government. A few of the important
recommendations made regarding the RRBs Officers and Employees Service
Regulation 2000 were as follows i.e. (i) Change in definition of competent
Authority and decentralisation in respect of delegation of powers; (ii) Change
in designation of group B&C staff (Office Assistant/Office Attendant);
(iii) Creation of additional scale/grades-IV&V; (iv) Increase in duration of
Extraordinary Leave and Sick Leave; (v) Increase in percentage of promotion
from Group “C” to “B” posts from existing 10% to 25%; (vi) Recruitment
(Scale II & III- direct recruitment of specialist 25% and 10% respectively);
and (vii) Introduction of fast track promotion upto the level of scale III.
15. The Committee sought to know the status of amalgamation and
reorganization of RRBs and the reasons behind the need for amalgamation of
RRBs.

7
It was informed that as on date, there were 46 amalgamated RRBs and
36 stand alone RRBs in the country. In order to reap the benefits of a large
area of operation, enhance credit exposure limits and to undertake diverse
banking activities, the Government initiated a process of structural consolidation
of RRBs by the amalgamation of RRBs sponsored by the same Bank within a
State.
16. Details were also sought as to what extent the power to make rules/
regulations under section 29 and 30 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976
had been carried out as also the details of all such rules/regulations framed
under the Act along with their date of laying on the Table of both the Houses
of Parliament.
In response the Ministry informed that under section 29 and 30 of RRB
Act, 1976, the Government can frame rules and regulations in consultation
with NABARD and Sponsor Banks and accordingly, RRBs (Appointment and
Promotion of Officers and Employees) Rules were issued first in 1988. The
same were revised in 1998 and thereafter in 2010. Similarly, RRB Officers
and Employees Service Regulations were first issued in 1980 and modified in
2000 and further amended in 2010. RRBs (Appointment and Promotion of
Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010 were laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
6.8.2010 and Rajya Sabha on 10.8.2010.
17. The Ministry also brought before the Committee the important features
of the Committee set up under the Chairmanship of Dr. K.C. Chakrabarty,
Deputy Governor, RBI to analyze the financial position of RRBs which were
as follows;
z 40 RRBs to be recapitulated out of 82 RRB
z Total amount of recap assessed is Rs. 2,200.00 crore to be released
in two instalments, i.e. , Rs. 1,337.50 crore in 2010-11 and
Rs.862.50 crore in 2011-12
z An additional amount of Rs.700 crore may be kept as contingencies
for RRBs of NE and NER region

8
z Increase in authorized capital of RRB from Rs 5.00 crore to
Rs. 500.00 crore
z RRBs with a networth of Rs.100 crore or more as on March,
2009 may be permitted to pay dividend from 1 April, 2013
onwards
z RBI may prescribe ‘fit and proper’ criteria for the Chairmen of
RRBs in respect of appointment and salary structure
The Committee was further informed that the Report of the Committee
was being processed.
18. The Committee also taken up the said Rules for discussion with the
representatives of Andhra Bank and State Bank of Hyderabad at Hyderabad
and with Indian Bank and Indian Overseas Bank at Chennai along with the
representatives of the Regional Rural Banks sponsored by them during its
study visit to Hyderabad and Chennai in December, 2010. The relevant study
notes are enclosed ( Annexure III & IV ). During the course of the said
discussions the Committee was made aware of the fact that that after coming
in force of the said rules, the promotion avenues of the RRB officers had
increased. The efforts were also being made to ensure time bound promotions.
As for the manpower shortages it was informed that recruitments are an
ongoing process and efforts are being made to ensure adequate staffing. The
guidelines issued by NABARD regarding recruitment are being adhered to and
corrective measures taken where ever need be. The Committee, however,
expressed its concerns about the promotion avenues available to the
officers and employees of the Regional Rural Banks as campared to the
Employees working in the Sponsor Banks. The Committee therefore
recommends that adequate provisions for time bound promotions should
be provided in the Rules itself . This would help ensure that attrition of the
employees joining these RRBs is reduced and also help to improve their
motivation.

9
19. The Committee also discussed the said Rules with the representatives
of Regional Rural Banks and their sponsor banks i.e. Canara Bank, Syndicate
Bank, Vijaya Bank, Corporation Bank and State Bank of Mysore during its
study visit to Bengaluru, Cochin and Munnar in June, 2012. During the course
of the said discussions the Committee was informed that the employees
working in RRBs had no proper promotion opportunities and that some people
retire in the same post in which they join. There was also the problem of lack
of manpower in RRBs and that many branches have one manager and one
clerk. Payment of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme wages and issue of Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) tend to strain the
resources of RRBs further. Regarding the pay and allowances, employees of
RRBs have Dearness Allowance and basic pay at par with sponsor banks but
there is no pension scheme for RRB employees. There was high attrition rate
and the youths were not attracted to RRBs. Relevant study notes are enclosed
at Annexure V , VI & VII. The Committee took note of the issues raised
and recommends that the Ministry should look into the feasibility of
extending pensionary benefits as provided to the staff of the sponsor
banks to the officers and employees of the RRBs also. This would help to
attract and retain qualified staff in the long run.
20. The Committee also took note of the fact that the RRBs were created to
attract local youth to join and serve the RRB branches located near their place
of residence. However, the Committee noted that recently changes had been
made in the minimum educational qualifications needed for joining the RRBs.
The Committee therefore was of the opinion that the Ministry should
look into the possibility of relaxing the required educational qualifications
for candidates aspiring to join the RRBs. This would help the local youth
to join and serve the RRBs. This is particularly relevant keeping in
view the fact that RRBs tend to operate in rural and backward areas of
the States and the local youth of such areas tend to suffer from lack of
good educational institutes in these areas. As the local youths tend to
be well conversant with the local people and their surrounding they can

10
be instrumental to develop a good network for RRBs in rural and
backward areas of the States.
21. Thereafter, the Committee took up for discussion the said Rules during
its study visit to Mumbai & Goa in September and October, 2011 respectively.
The Committee held discussions with the representatives of different Regional
Rural Banks and also their sponsor banks i.e. Dena Bank, Bank of India,
Central Bank of India, Bank of Baroda, Union Bank of India, State Bank of
India and Bank of Maharashtra. The relevant study notes are placed at Annexure
VIII, IX & X. During the course of the discussions the Committee was made
aware of the fact that as a result of the amalgamation the immediate challenge
faced by the concerned Banks was of cultural and emotional integration of the
erstwhile units into the new units. However, the benefits of amalgamation far
out-weigh the problems and it in the longer run has resulted in better utilization
of resources and more profits for these entities. Today these RRBs had become
an important platform for the sponsor banks for meeting these priority sector
targets as they have a better reach and network in the rural and backward
areas and are also better placed to dispense the loans and policies in these
areas. The local people tend to have a sense of attachment with these entities
which translated into healthy repayments and low NPAs for the RRBs. The
Committee also took note of the fact that recapitalization of the RRBs which
was critical to their revival was still not complete as the contributions from
the parties involved was not being received. The Committee therefore
recommends that the Ministry of Finance should take up the matter
with the concerned State Governments so as to ensure that share to be
contributed by them is released by the States. This is essential for the
revival of the RRBs and for their effective functioning.
22. The Committee also noted that RRBs were a crucial support for the
success of the Self Help Groups (SHG) working in the rural areas and more
particularly for such groups owned and operated by women. These SHGs
owned and operated by women not only depend on the RRBs for financial

11
support but also for business development and marketing of their products.
Keeping in view the fact that SHGs have being playing a key role in the
economic empowerment of women in rural areas the Committee was of
the opinion that Ministry and the sponsor banks should look into the
feasibility of setting up all women RRBs in some districts and more
specifically in those regions were number of women managed SHGs are
quite active. This would help these SHGs integrate more effectively
with the RRBs and also be source of motivation for women to set up
SHGs.
23. These Rules were also taken up for consideration by the Committee
during its study visit to Kolkata, Port Blair and Chennai during February, 2012.
The Committee held discussions with the representatives of Regional Rural
Banks, the concerned sponsor banks i.e. Allahabad Bank, United Cooperative
Bank and United Bank of India. The relevant study notes are enclosed at
Annexure XI & XII. During the course of these discussions it was noted that
the tenure of Chairman of the RRBs was not fixed and this leads to their
untimely removal. This affected the overall morale of the organization. However
in view of the sponsor banks Chairman of the RRBs not usually removed
before their tenure is over. The Committee however was of the opinion
that it would be more appropriate if the tenure of the Chairman of the
RRBs was duly ensured by the rules. Also the conditions in which the
Chairman could be removed should be specified in the rules itself. This
would help bring sufficient flexibility in the removal of the Chairman
while ensuring a certain amount of stability of tenure. It therefore
recommends that the Ministry accordingly study the rules to incorporate
the views of the Committee. The Committee was also of the view that
the Sponsor Banks should appoint at least General Manager rank Officer
as Chairman of the Rural Bank.
24. The Committee discussed the said Rules with the representatives of
Punjab National Bank and the RRBs sponsored by them at Dharmshala during

12
its visit to Dharmshala and Srinagar in June, 2012 (study note enclosed at
Annexure XIII). Based upon these discussions the Committee was of the
view that the Rules needed to be made more employee friendly to ensure
proper motivation and morale of the employees working in these RRBs. Based
on its interactions with employees of different RRBs the Committee
decided to recommend the following:
(i) The minimum period of service in a particular Scale of
promotion may be introduced to 4 years from 5-6 years upto
Scale-III to bring younger and energetic work force at higher
levels;
(ii) At least 25% of the candidates may be kept in the waiting
list on promotion;
(iii) Minimum period of preceding 4 years may be taken into
account for looking into adverse remarks before promotion;
(iv) the sealed cover process should be co-terminus with the
commencement of the next promotion process; and
(v) The minimum qualifying marks in interview should be 50%.
However, for candidates belonging to SC or ST categories, it
should be 45%.
25. The Rules were also discussed with Bank of Baroda and ICICI Bank
along with their RRBs at Udaipur and with State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur at
Jaisalmer by the Committee during its study tour to Udaipur, Jodhpur & Bikaner
in February, 2013. The relevant study notes are enclosed at Annexure XIV.
The Committee took note of the experiences of ICICI Bank in managing a
RRB. The Committee appreciated the efforts made by ICICI Bank in
strengthening the Regional Rural Banks it got when it took over the Bank of
Rajasthan. The Committee noted that today even private sector banks were
setting up RRBs as it was an important vehicle for penetrating the rural areas
of the country. The RRBs are also an important tool for meeting priority

13
sector targets. The Committee therefore urged the Ministry of Finance to
make efforts to strengthen the network of Regional Rural Banks in the country
because they were an important component for achieving financial inclusion
in the country.
26. The Committee was also apprised at various places about the shortage
of staff in the branches of rural banks. At most of the places in the remote
areas, the branches are working with one manager and one clerk. If cash is to
be deposited or withdrawn, the branch has to be shut thus causing
inconvenience to consumers. These banks are servicing large number of rural
people who otherwise need assistance from the staff to open bank accounts
and also to know about the various schemes. So the work of rural banks is
different from branches servicing in urban areas where they deal with accounts
having large amount of money. However, in rural areas the bank staff has to
deal with lots of people. Keeping in mind the consumers interest the
Committee recommends that there should be realistic assessment of
the work load on the officers of rural banks and minimum staff
requirements should be determined on the basis of number of operative
accounts.
27. The Committee based upon its wide ranging discussions considered the
Rules and recommends as follows:
i. Rule 3: Category of Posts
The Rule mentions five category of posts upto scale V , i.e., Assistant
General Manager. During the course of the discussions with various Bank
Unions, it was felt that Scale VI should also be brought in category of
posts so that officers recruited in rural banks are able to earn promotions
upto the level of Deputy General Manager . The Board may create post of
this level and accordingly the Third Schedule may be amended. This schedule
may provide for minimum qualifications for the post of Deputy General
Manager. The post may be exclusively filled from amongst the eligible officers
of rural bank.

14
The Third Schedule specifies that for scale II, 25% vacancies have to
be filled up by direct promotion of which 10% from specialist cadre. The
Committee feels that immediately after scale I for which there is already
open recruitment it is not appropriate to go for direct recruitment. This
will deny lots of eligible officers from their promotions. It is
recommended that 10% of the vacancies may be filled up by the
specialized cadre while rest of the posts should be filled by promotions
only. In the same way for scale III also 10% vacancies have been sought
to be filled up by direct recruitment. The Committee feels that this
means should be resorted only if the eligible officers of the homegrown
cadre are not available .
The schedule also prescribes that for scale IV the posts are to be filled
up either by promotion or on deputation basis. The Committee feels that
this scale is not senior enough where officers have to be brought on
deputation basis. The posts should be filled up from the eligible officers
of the homegrown cadre itself. The Committee is of the view that officers
at this stage coming from either sponsor bank or some other bank will
lack working culture of the concerned rural bank and will not be able to
understand the working of rural bank at the grass root level. Chief
Manager or Regional Manager will be commanding large rural area
where understanding of rural area and its people will be of immense
importantance. This lack of experience will hinder working of entire
banking system in rural areas. Hence it’s important that homegrown
officer is always appointed to this post who will have wealth of experience
at this level .
ii. Rule 4: Creation of Post
The Board is empowered to create posts in accordance with the
guidelines approved by the Central Government from time to time. The
Committee feels that Government should publish the guidelines in the
rule itself for the sake of transparency which may be amended from
time to time if so required .

15
iii. Rule 5: Vacancies
The Board may determine the number of vacancies in each category of
posts to be filled by direct recruitment or promotion. The Committee while
discussing the rules with major banks and unions found that large number of
vacancies exist in most of the branches of rural banks and there is huge gap
between demand and supply of human resources. Lots of branches are working
with either one manager or with one manager and a clerk. The sponsor banks
have given the reasons that since these banks are dealing with small amounts
and micro- credit in the rural areas so it is economically not viable.
The Committee recommends that Board should assess the vacancies
and requirements of human resources at various levels on the basis of
actual requirement in the rural areas considering number of accounts
and schemes as one of the parameters. The Bank should assess the
vacancy position in advance so that immediately after retirement the
vacancies are filled up. The banks should conduct cadre review
periodically.
iv. Rule 7: Appointing Authority
Rule says that Chairman shall be appointing authority in respect of officers
and the General Manager be appointing authority in respect of employees.
However, the terms ‘Chairman’ and ‘General Manager’ have not been defined
in the definition clause of the Rules. It is not clear whether ‘Chairman’ and
‘General Manager’ mean Chairman of the sponsoring bank or rural bank.
Though explanation to Rule 3 says that Chairman may designate officers as
Branch Manager, Regional Manager or General Manger. The Committee feels
that when the Chairman and General Manager have been assigned such
important task, their position and rank should be defined in the rule
itself .
v. Rule 8: Direct Recruitment
These rules prescribe direct recruitment of officers at entry level as

16
well as through lateral entry at various positions in the middle management.
The rules also provide scope for deputation. The Committee feels it will
not be desirable to recruit the officers through direct recruitment at
middle level as the officers coming fresh from outside will lack experience
and may also destabilize the structure. This will also give less opportunity
to the officers coming at entry level for further promotions. The
Committee feels if eligible officers are available they should be given
opportunity to grow further . This will give them incentive to work.

SUMMARY OF OBSERV ATIONS/
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
28. The Committee, however, expressed its concerns about the
promotion avenues available to the officers and employees of the
Regional Rural Banks as campared to the Employees working in the
Sponsor Banks. The Committee therefore recommends that adequate
provisions for time bound promotions should be provided in the Rules
itself.
29. The Committee took note of the issues raised and recommends
that the Ministry should look into the feasibility of extending pensionary
benefits as provided to the staff of the sponsor banks to the officers and
employees of the RRBs also.
30. The Committee therefore was of the opinion that the Ministry
should look into the possibility of relaxing the required educational
qualifications for candidates aspiring to join the RRBs. This would help
the local youth to join and serve the RRBs. This is particularly relevant
keeping in view the fact that RRBs tend to operate in rural and backward
areas of the States and the local youth of such areas tend to suffer from
lack of good educational institutes in these areas. As the local youths
tend to be well conversant with the local people and their surrounding
they can be instrumental to develop a good network for RRBs in rural
and backward areas of the States.
31. The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Finance
should take up the matter with the concerned State Governments so as
to ensure that share to be contributed by them is released by the States.
This is essential for the revival of the RRBs and for their effective
functioning.
32. Keeping in view the fact that SHGs have being playing a key role
17

18
in the economic empowerment of women in rural areas the Committee
was of the opinion that Ministry and the sponsor banks should look into
the feasibility of setting up all women RRBs in some districts and more
specifically in those regions were number of women managed SHGs are
quite active. This would help these SHGs integrate more effectively
with the RRBs and also be source of motivation for women to set up
SHGs.
33. The Committee however was of the opinion that it would be more
appropriate if the tenure of the Chairman of the RRBs was duly ensured
by the rules. Also the conditions in which the Chairman could be removed
should be specified in the rules itself. This would help bring sufficient
flexibility in the removal of the Chairman while ensuring a certain
amount of stability of tenure. It therefore recommends that the Ministry
accordingly study the rules to incorporate the views of the Committee.
The Committee was also of the view that the Sponsor Banks should
appoint at least General Manager rank Officer as Chairman of the Rural
Bank.
34. Based on its interactions with employees of different RRBs the
Committee decided to recommend the following:
(i) The minimum period of service in a particular Scale of
promotion may be introduced to 4 years from 5-6 years upto
Scale-III to bring younger and energetic work force at higher
levels;
(ii) At least 25% of the candidates may be kept in the waiting
list on promotion;
(iii) Minimum period of preceding 4 years may be taken into
account for looking into adverse remarks before promotion;
(iv) The sealed cover process should be co-terminus with the
commencement of the next promotion process; and

19
(v) The minimum qualifying marks in interview should be 50%.
However, for candidates belonging to SC or ST categories, it
should be 45%.
35. Keeping in mind the consumers interest the Committee
recommends that there should be realistic assessment of the work load
on the officers of rural banks and minimum staff requirements should
be determined on the basis of number of operative accounts.
36. i. Rule 3:
It was felt Scale VI should also be brought in category of posts so
that officers recruited in rural banks are able to earn promotions upto
the level of Deputy General Manager.
36. ii. Third Schedule
The Committee feels that immediately after scale I for which there
is already open recruitment it is not appropriate to go for direct
recruitment. This will deny lots of eligible officers from their promotions.
It is recommended that 10% of the vacancies may be filled up by the
specialized cadre while rest of the posts should be filled by promotions
only. In the same way for scale III also 10% vacancies have been sought
to be filled up by direct recruitment. The Committee feels that this
means should be resorted only if the eligible officers of the homegrown
cadre are not available.
The schedule also prescribes that for scale IV the posts are to be filled
up either by promotion or on deputation basis. The Committee feels that
this scale is not senior enough where officers have to be brought on
deputation basis. The posts should be filled up from the eligible officers
of the homegrown cadre itself. The Committee is of the view that officers
at this stage coming from either sponsor bank or some other bank will
lack working culture of the concerned rural bank and will not be able to
understand the working of rural bank at the grass root level. Chief

20
Manager or Regional Manager will be commanding large rural area
where understanding of rural area and its people will be of immense
importantance. This lack of experience will hinder working of entire
banking system in rural areas. Hence it’s important that homegrown
officer is always appointed to this post who will have wealth of experience
at this level .
36. iii. Rule 4: Creation of Post
The Committee feels that Government should publish the
guidelines in the rule itself for the sake of transparency which may be
amended from time to time if so required .
36. iv. Rule 5: Vacancies
The Committee recommends that Board should assess the vacancies
and requirements of human resources at various levels on the basis of
actual requirement in the rural areas considering number of accounts
and schemes as one of the parameters. The Bank should assess the
vacancy position in advance so that immediately after retirement the
vacancies are filled up. The banks should conduct cadre review
periodically.
36. v.  Rule 7: Appointing Authority
The Committee feels that when the Chairman and General
Manager have been assigned such important task, their position and
rank should be defined in the rule itself .
36. vi. Rule 8: Direct Recruitment
The Committee feels it will not be desirable to recruit the officers
through direct recruitment at middle level as the officers coming fresh
from outside will lack experience and may also destabilize the structure.
This will also give less opportunity to the officers coming at entry level

21
from further promotions. The Committee feels if eligible officers are
available they should be given opportunity to grow further.
37. The Committee is hopeful that the Ministry would carry out the
recommendations of the Committee expeditiously under intimation to
it. The Committee is also of the opinion that proper monitoring and
inspections are essential for the proper implementation of the Rules
and stresses upon the Ministry to work in close coordination with the
Regional Rural Banks and their Sponsor Banks.

ANNEXURE-I
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(Department of Financial Services)
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, The 13th July, 2010
S.O. 1663(E).- In exercise of the powers conferred by section 29 of the
Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 (21 of 1976) read with section 17 thereof and
in supersession of the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of
Office and other Employees) Rules, 1998 except as respects things done or
omitted to be done before such supersession, the Central Government after
consultaion with the National Bank and the Sponsor Banks specified in the
Second Schedule to these rules, hereby makes the following rules, namely :-
1. Short title and commencement.-
(1) These Rules may be called the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment
and Promotion of Offiecrs and Employees) Rules, 2010
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the
Official Gazette.
2. Definitions.-
In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Act" means the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 (21 of 1976);
(b) "Committee" means the Committee constituted by the Board under
rule 11 of these rules;
(c) "Regional Rural Bank (Officers and Employees) Service
Regulations" means the Service Regulations framed under section
30 of the Act;
(d) "Schedule" means any one of the Schedules to these rules;
22

23
(e) "Sponsor Bank" in relation to Regional Rural Bank specified in
column (2) of the Second Schedule means;-
(i) the Sponsor Bank specified in column (3) of Second
Schedule; and
(ii) which sponsores the Regional Rural Banks specified in
column (2) of the Second Schedule.
(f) all other words and expressions used in these rules and not defined
but defined in the Act shall have the meanings respectively assigned
to them in the Act.
3. Category of Posts.-
(1) (a) The officers and employees of the Bank shall be classified
as follows:-
(1) Group "A" - Officer
(i) Scale I- (Assistant Manager) - Junior Management
(ii) Scale II- (Manager) - Middle Management
(iii) Scale III- (Senior Manager)- Middle Management
(iv) Scale IV- (Chief Manager)- Senior Management
(v) Scale V- (Assistant General Manager)- Senior
Management
Explanation: For the purposes of these rules, the Officers may be
functionally designated by the Chairman, as Branch Manager, Regional Manager
or General Manager, depending on the work or functions assigned and the
Scale of the Officer.
(b) Group "B" - shall consist of Office Assistants (Multipurpose).
(c) Group "C" - shall consist of Office Attendants (Multipurpose).

24
(2) Group "A", Group "B" and Group "C" shall consist of officers and
employees of each Regional Rural Bank specified in the First
Schedule to these rules.
4. Creation of Posts.-
The Board may, create requisite number of vacancies in each category
of posts as are specified in the First Schedule to these rules in accordance with
the guidelines approved by the Central Government from time to time.
5. Vacancies.-
The Board may determine the number of vacancies in each category of
posts to be filled by direct recruitment or promotion, keeping in view the
Guidelines approved by Central Government from time to time.
6. Filling up of vacancies.-
(i) All vacancies determined under rules 5 by the Board shall be filled
by promotion or direct recruitment in accordance with the
provisions contained in these rules and Third Schedule to these
rules;
(ii) Officers in Senior Management of Scale IV and Scale V are liable
to be posted to any other Regional Rural Bank sponsored by the
same Sponsor Bank as General Manager as per the decision of the
Sponsor Bank.
7. Appointing Authority.-
The Chairman shall be the Appointing Authority in respect of officers
and the General Manager shall be the appointing authority in respect of
employees. If so authorised by the Board.
Provided that if there is no incumbent to the post of General Manager,
the Chairman shall be the Appointing Authority in respect of employees also.

25
8. Direct recruitment.-
The vacancies of officers and employees shall be filled by each Regional
Rural Bank in accordance with the provisions of Third Schedule of these rules
and subject to such guidelines as may be issued by the Central Government
from time to time.
9. Agency for Direct Recruitment.-
(i) Written examination for the selection of the candidates by direct
recruitment to the posts of officers and employees other than those
of Group 'C' employees shall be entrusted to the Institute of Banking
Personnel Selection or any other agency approved by the Sponsor
Bank.
(ii) The Institute of Banking Personnel Selection or approved Agency
shall follow the procedure as laid down under rule 8 and forward
the list of candidates qualified in the written examination to the
Regional Rural Bank concerned.
10. Recruitment to the posts of Group 'C'.-
The posts of Group 'C' employee shall be filled by the Regional Rural
Bank after making a reference to the Employment Exchange, Sainik Board or
other agencies catering to the welfare of Scheduled Castes., Scheduled Tribes,
Physically Challenged Persons or other special category of persons as are
recognised by the Central Government or the State Government having
jurisdiction over the Regional Rural Bank filling the posts:
Provided that preference shall be given to candidates belonging to
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in accordance with the instructions
or guidelines issued by the Central Government in this regard from time to
time.

26
11. Constitution and function of Committee.-
(i) The Board may, from time to time, constitute Committees
consisting of the persons specified under each post in the Third
Schedule for the purpose of recommending candidates for
recruitment or promotion to the posts referred to in the Third
Schedule.
(ii) The Committees shall function for such period as may be determined
by the Board.
(iii) The Committees shall recommend to the Appointing Authority the
candidates for recruitment or promotion to the posts mentioned in
the Third Schedule to these rules, in accordance with the provisions
contained in that Schedule.
12. Reservation.-
Provisions of Reservation Policy for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
and other Special category of persons as per the Guidelines of Department
of Personnel and Training, issued from time to time, to the extent relevant in
the context of the Regional Rural Banks, shall a pply while following these
Rules.
13. Power to Interpret.-
The power to interpret these Rules shall vest in the Central Government
and the Central Government may issue such administrative instructions or
guidelines in consultation with the National Bank as may be necessary to give
effect to and carry out the provisions of these rules or to remove any difficulty
in their implementation.

27
FIRST SCHEDULE
(See rule 3)
Category of posts in each Regional Rural Bank
Serial Classification  Description of post Designation
Number of Officers
and
Employees
1 Group "A" Officer Junior Assistant Manager
Management (Scale-I)
2 Group "A" Officer Middle Manager
Management (Scale-II)
3 Group "A" Officer Middle Senior Manager
Management (Scale-III)
4 Group "A" Officer Senior Chief Manager
Management (Scale-IV)
5 Group "A" Officer Senior Assistant General
Management (Scale-V) Manager
6 Group "B" Office Assistant Office Assistant
(Multipurpose) (Multipurpose)
7 Group "C" Office Assistant Office Attendant
(Multipurpose) (Multipurpose)

28
SECOND SCHEDULE
(See rule 2e)
List of Regional Rural Banks and their Sponsor Banks
Serial Name of the Regional Sponsor Bank State
Number Rural Bank
   (1)             (2)       (3)         (4)
1 Chaitanya Godavari Andhra Bank Andhra Pradesh
Grameena Bank
2 Saptagiri Grameena Indian  Bank Andhra Pradesh
Bank
3 Deecan Grameena State Bank of Andhra Pradesh
Bank Hyderabad
4 Andhra Pradesh State Bank of Andhra Pradesh
Grameena Vikas Bank India
5 Andhra Pragathi Syndicate Bank Andhra Pradesh
Grameena Bank
6 Arunachal Pradesh State Bank of Arunachal Pradesh
Rural Bank India
7 Langpi Dehangi State Bank of Assam
Rural Bank India
8 Assam Gramin United Bank of Assam
Vikash Bank India
9 Uttar Bihar Gramin Central Bank of Bihar
Bank India

29
10 Madhya Bihar Gramin Punjab National Bihar
Bank Bank
11 Samastipur Kshetriya State Bank of Bihar
Gramin Bank India
12 Bihar Kshetiya UCO Bank Bihar
Gramin Bank
13 Surguja Kshetriya Central Bank of Chhattisgarh
Gramin Bank India
14 Durg Rajnandgaon Dena Bank Chhattisgarh
Gramin Bank
15 Chhattisgarh State Bank of Chhattisgarh
Gramin Bank India
16 Baroda Gujarat Bank of Baroda Gujarat
Gramin Bank
17 Dena Gujarat Dena Bank Gujarat
Gramin Bank
18 Saurashtra State Bank of Gujarat
Gramin Bank Saurashtra
19 Haryana Gramin Bank Punjab National Haryana
Bank
20 Gurgaon Gramin Bank Syndicate Bank Haryana
21 Himachal Gramin Bank Punjab National Himachal Pradesh
Bank
22 Parvatiya Gramin Bank State Bank of Himachal Pradesh
India
   (1)             (2)       (3)         (4)

30
23 EIIaquai Dehati Bank State Bank of Jammu & Kashmir
India
24 J&K Gramin Bank J&K Bank Ltd. Jammu & Kashmir
25 Jharkhand Gramin Bank Bank of India Jhrakhand
26 Vananchal Gramin Bank State Bank of Jhrakhand
India
27 Pragathi Gramin Bank Canara Bank Karnataka
28 Chikmagalur Kodagu Corporation Bank Karnataka
Gramin Bank
29 Krishna Gramin State Bank of Karnataka
Bank India
30 Cauvery Kalpatharu State Bank of Karnataka
Gramin Bank Mysore
31 Karnataka V ikas Syndicate Bank Karnataka
Gramin Bank
32 Visveshvaraya V ijaya Bank Karnataka
Gramin Bank
33 South Malabar Canara Bank Kerala
Gramin Bank
34 North Malabar Syndicate Bank Kerala
Gramin Bank
35 Sharda Gramin Bank Allahabad Bank Madhya Pradesh
36 Jhabua Dhar Kshetriya Bank of Baroda Madhya Pradesh
Gramin Bank
   (1)             (2)       (3)         (4)

31
37 Narmada Malwa Bank of India Madhya Pradesh
Gramin Bank
38 Satpura Narmada Central Bank of Madhya Pradesh
Kshetriya Gramin India
Bank
39 Vidisha Bhopal State Bank of Madhya Pradesh
Kshetriya Gramin Indore
Bank
40 Madhya Bharath State Bank of Madhya Pradesh
Gramin Bank India
41 Mahakaushal Kshetriya UCO Bank Madhya Pradesh
Gramin Bank
42 Rewa Sidhi Gramin Union Bank of Madhya Pradesh
Bank India
43 Maharashtra Gramin Bank of Maharashtra
Bank Maharashtra
44 Wainganga Krishan Bank of India Maharashtra
Gramin Bank
45 Vidharbha Kshetriya Central Bank of Maharashtra
Gramin Bank India
46 Manipur Rural Bank Union Bank of Manipur
India
47 Meghalaya Rural Ban k State Bank of Meghalaya
India
48 Mizorm Rural Bank State Bank of Mizoram
India
   (1)             (2)       (3)         (4)

32
49 Nagaland Rural Bank State Bank of Nagaland
India
50 Rushikulya Gramin Andhra Bank Orissa
Bank
51 Baitarni Gramin Bank Bank of India Orissa
52 Neelachal Gramin Indian Overseas Orissa
Bank Bank
53 Utkal Gramin Bank State Bank of Orissa
India
54 Kalinga Gramin Bank UCO Bank Orissa
55 Puduvai Bharthiar Indian Bank Puducherry
Gramin Bank
56 Sutlej Gramin Bank Punjab and Sind Punjab
Bank
57 Malwa Gramin Bank State Bank of Punjab
Patiala
58 Punjab Gramin Bank Punjab National Punjab
Bank
59 Baroda Rajasthan Bank of Baroda Rajasthan
Gramin Bank
60 Mewar Anchalik Bank of Rajasthan Rajasthan
Gramin Bank
61 Hadoti Kshetriya Central Bank of Rajasthan
Gramin Bank India
   (1)             (2)       (3)         (4)

33
62 MGB Gramin Bank St ate Bank of Rajasthan
Bikaner and Jaipur
63 Jaipur Thar Gramin UCO Bank Rajasthan
Bank
64 Rajasthan Gramin Punjab National Rajasthan
Bank Bank
65 Pallavan Gramin Indian  Bank Tamil Nadu
Bank
66 Pandyan Gramin Indian Overseas Tamil Nadu
Bank Bank
67 Tripura Gramin United Bank of Tripura
Bank India
68 Allahabad UP Allahabad Bank Uttar Pradesh
Gramin Bank
69 Baroda UP Gramin Bank of Baroda Uttar Pradesh
Bank
70 Aryavart Gramin Bank Bank of India Uttar Pradesh
71 Shreyas Gramin Bank Canara Bank Uttar Pradesh
72 Ballia Etawah Gramin Central Bank of Uttar Pradesh
Bank India
73 Sarva UP Gramin Punjab National Uttar Pradesh
Bank Bank
74 Purvanchal Gramin State Bank of Uttar Pradesh
Bank India
   (1)             (2)       (3)         (4)

34
75 Prathma Bank Syndicate Bank Uttar Pradesh
76 Kashi Gomti Samyut Union Bank of Uttar Pradesh
Gramin Bank India
77 Kshetriya Kisan UP State Uttar Pradesh
Gramin Bank Cooperative Bank
78 Nainital Almora Bank of Baroda Uttarakhand
Kshetriya Bank
79 Uttaranchal Gramin State Bank of Uttarakhand
Bank India
80 Uttar Banga Kshetriya Central Bank of West Bengal
Gramin Bank India
81 Bangiya Gramin United Bank of West Bengal
Vikash Bank India
82 Paschim Banga UCO Bank W est Bengal
Gramin Bank
THIRD SCHEDULE
(See rule 8 and 11)
Appointment to different categories of officers and employees to Group "A",
"B" and "C" posts whether by direct recruitment or by promotion shall be
effected as follows :
   (1)             (2)       (3)         (4)

35
Part I- Group "A"
Recruitment and Promotion
I Officer Junior Management (Scale-I)
(a) Name of Post Officer Junior Management (Scale-I)
(b) Classification Group "A"
(c) Mode of appointment 50% by Direct Recruitment and 50%
by Promotion from Group "B"
(A) For Direct Recruitment
(i) Age Above 18 years but below 28 years
(relaxation of age in case of Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes candidates or
candidates belonging to other Reserved
categories in accordance with the
instructions/orders issued by the
Central Government from time to time
in this regard).
(ii) Minimum Qualification (i) Bachelor degree of a recognised
University in any discipline or its
equivalent.
Preference will be given to the
candidates having degree in Agriculture
Horticulture, Forestry, Animal
Husbandry. Veterinary Science,
Agricultural Engineering, Pisciculture,
Agricultural Marketing and
Cooperation, Information Technology,
Management, Law, Economics and
Accountancy;

36
(ii) Proficiency in local language, as
may be specified by the Board.
(iii) Computer Knowledge or
awareness will be an added
qualification.
(iii) Selection process The Selection shall be made on the
basis of written test and interview as
under.
written Test 70 marks
Interview 30 marks
Total 100 marks
The written test will be conducted by
the Institute of Banking Personnel
Selection or any other agency
approved by the Sponsor Bank.
The written test shall cover (a) Test
of Reasoning, (b) Numerical Ability,
(c) General Knowledge and (d) General
English or Hindi. The candidates
securing a minimum 40% marks in the
written test shall qualify for interview
In the case of candidates belonging to
the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes categories the minimum marks
in the written test shall be 35% to
qualify for interview.
All those candidates who have secured
minimum qualifying marks stipulated

37
fo written examination, in the order of
merit, shall be called for interview upto
the ratio of 1.3
The merit lists of successful candidates
in each category shall be made
separately on the basis of combined
performance in the written test and
interview.
(iv) Preparation of Lists of successful candidates for
Merit list appointment to Officer Junior
Management (Scale I) shall be
prepared on the basis of ranking
accorded to them in the combined
performance of written test and
interview for General, Scheduled
Castes Scheduled Tribes and Other
Special categories, separately.
The number of selected candidates to
be empanelled for recruitment shall be
equal to the number of notified
vacancies In addition thereto, an
additional panel of selected candidates,
not exceeding 50% of the notified
vacanies as may be decided by the
Board with a minimum of two
candidates in each category, shall be
drawn up to meet exigencies.
(B) For Promotion
(i) Mode of Promotion 50% of the vacancies for promotion

38
shall be filled under Normal Channel
and 50% under Fast Track Channel as
per eligibility and selection process
given as follows:-
(ii) Eligibility Promotion shall be made from amongst
the employees holding, on full time and
regular basis the post of Office
Assistant (Multipurpose)
Normal Channel
Must have ten years experience as
Office Assistant (Multipurpose) on full
time and regular basis. The minimum
eligibility in terms of the number of
years of service for promotion shall
be reckoned as on the 1st day of April
of the year in which the vacany is
expected to arise or has actually arisen.
Relaxation in eligibilty criteria of one
year service will be given to such of
the candidates who have passed Junior
Associate of the Indian Institute of
Bankers (JAIIB) of Indian Institute of
Banking and Finacne and one more
year in case of such candidates who
have passed Certified Associate of the
Indian Institute of Bankers (CAIIB) of
Indian Institute of Banking & Finance.
However. such relaxation will be
available only once during the entire
service period.

39
Provied that no employee shall be
considered for promotion unless he has
been confirmed in the feeder grade
post.
Zone of consideration
Three times the number of vacancies
including repeaters:
Explanation:
1 Vacancies under Normal Channel
shall be filled after filling the
vacancies under Fast Track
Channel.
2 The Employees who are eligible
under Normal Channel shall also be
considered under Fast Track
Channel.
3 There shall be common written
examination and interview for both
the channels.
Fast-Track Channel
Must have six years service as Office
Assistant (Multipurpose) on full time
and regular basis and should have
passed Graduation from a recognised
University. The minimum eligibility in
terms of the number of years of service
for promotion shall be reckoned as on

40
the 1st day of April of the year in which
the vacancy is expected to arise or has
actually arisen Relaxation in eligibility
criteria of one year service will be given
to such of the candidates who have
passed Junior Associate of the Indian
Institute of Bankers (JAIIB) of Indian
Institute of Banking and Finance and
one more year in case of such
candidates who have passed Certified
Associate of the Indian Institute of
Bankers (CAIIB) of Indian Institute of
Banking & Finance. However, such
relaxation will be available only once
during the entire service period.
Provided that no employee shall be
considered for promotion unless he has
been confirmed in the feeder grade
post.
Zone of consideration
All eligible employees
(iii) Selection Process The selection shall be on the basis of
performance in the written test,
interview and last five years
performance appraisal reports as per
the division of marks given below.
written Test 50 marks
Interview 20 marks

41
Performance Appraisal 30 marks
Reports
Total 100 marks
The candidates shall be required to
appear in a written test comprising test
in General English or Hindi and General
Banking knowledge. 50 marks allotted
to written test shall be further divided
as under.
(i) General English or 20 marks
Hindi
(ii) General Banking 30 marks
knowledge
Total marks 50 marks
(iv) Preparation of merit List Normal Channel
There shall be minimum qualifying
marks of 50% in aggregate of written
test, interview and performance
appraisal reports.
Selection of successful candidates for
promotion shall be made by going
down in Seniority Order starting from
the top and selecting those found to
score the said minimum qualifying
marks of 50% in the aggregate up to a
number equal to the number of
vacancies notified for this channel.

42
Fast Track Channel
There shall be minimum qualifying
marks of 60% in aggregate of written
test, interview and performance
appraisal reports.
Selection will be based on the aggregate
marks secured in the written test,
interview and performance appraisal
reports by placing the candidates in
descending order of merit to the extent
of number of vacancies.
The vacancies under this channel,
which remain unfilled for  want of
non-selection of adequate number of
candidates shall lapse and shall be filled
up by way of normal channel.
(d) Inter-se-Seniority The Inter-se-seniority of all the
empanelled officers selected through
normal channel or fast track channel
in their feeder posts shall remain
unchanged.
(e) Composition of the The Committee shall consist of the
Committee for following namely :-
Interview
(1) The Chairman of the Regional Rural
Bank concerned - Chairman
(2) Director nominated by the Sponsor
Bank -  Member

43
(3) Director nominated by the National
Bank    - Member
Note If none of the members of the
Committee belongs to the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, the
Board may nominate an officer of
suitable position belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes as an additional member of the
Committee.
(f) V alidity of the panel The panel shall be valid for a peiod of
for direct recruitment one year
and for promotion.
II Officer Middle Management (Scale II)
(a) Name of post Officer Middle Management (Scale II)
(b) Classification Group "A"
(c) Mode of appointment 25% by direct recruitment (of which
10% from Specialist cadre like
Information Technology, Agriculture,
Treasury, Law, Marketing, Chartered
Accountants etc. and 15% from
experienced officers) and 75% by
promotion.
(A) For Direct Recruitment
(i) Age Above 21 years but below 32 years
(relaxation of age in case of the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled

44
Tribes candidates or candidates
belonging to other special categories
in accordance with the instructions/
orders issued by the Central
Government from time to time in this
regard.
(ii) Minimum Qualification (I) Information Technology
and Eligibility
Degree from a recognised University
in Electronics/Communication/
Computer Science/Information
Technology or its equivalent with a
minimum of 50% marks in aggregate.
Desirable Experience :
Certificate in ASP , PHP , C++, Java, VB,
VC, OCP etc.
Experience: One year
(II) Chartered Accountants
Experience : One year
(III) Law Officer
Degree from a recognised University
in Law or its equivalent with a
minimum of 50% marks in aggregate.
Experience :-
Two years as an advocate or should
have worked as law Officer in Banks

45
or Financial Institutions for a period
not less than two years.
(IV) Treasury Manager
Candidate should be a Chartered
Accountant or MBA in Finance from a
reputed Institute Experience- one year
(V) Marketing Officer
MBA in Marketing from any Institute
of repute Experience :- one year
(VI) Agricultural Officer
Degree from a recognised University
in any discipline in Agriculture,
Horticulture, Dairy, Animal Husbandry,
Forestry, V eterinary Science,
Agricultural Engineering, Pisciculture
or its equivalent, with a minimum of
50% marks in aggregate.
Experience - Two years
(VII) General Banking Officer
Degree from a recognised University
in any discipline or its equivalent with
a minimum of 50% marks in
aggregate. Preference will be given to
the candidates having degree/diploma
in Banking, Finance, Marketing,
Agriculture, Horticulture, Forestry,

46
Animal Husbandry, Veterinary Science,
Agricultural Engineering, Pisciculture,
Agricultural Marketing and Co-
operation, Information Technology,
Management, Law, Economics and
Accountancy.
Experience- Two years as an officer
in Bank or Financial Institution.
(iii) Selection process The selection of the candidates shall
be on the basis of written test and
interview. The written test shall be
conducted through Institute of
Banking Personnel Selection or any
other agency approved by the Sponsor
Bank.
The candidates securing a minimum
qualifying marks of 40% in the written
test shall qualify for interview. In the
case of candidates belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes categories, the minimum
qualifying marks in written test shall
be 35% to quality for interview.
All those candidates who have secured
minimum qualifying marks stipulated
for written examination, in the order
of merit, shall be called for interview
upto the ratio 1:3.

47
The merit lists of successful
candidates in each category shall be
made separately on the basis of
combined performance in the written
test and interview.
(iv) Preparation of Merit The list of successful candidates for
List appointment to Officer Middle
Management (Scale II) shall be
prepared on the basis of their combined
performance of written test and
interview for General, Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other
Special categories separately.
The number of selected candidates to
be empanelled for recruitment shall be
equal to the number of notified
vacancies. In addition thereto, an
additional panel of selected candidates
not exceeding 50% of the notified
vacancies to be decided by the Board
with a minimum of two candidates in
each category shall be drawn-up to
meet exigencies.
(B) For Promotion:
(i) Mode of Promotion 50% of the vacancies for promotion
shall be filled under Normal Channel
and 50% under Fast Track Channel as
per eligibility and selection process
given as follows:-

48
(ii) Eligibility Promotion shall be made from amongst
the officers holding the post of Officer
Junior Management (Scale I), full time
on a regular basis.
Normal Channel
Must have eight years experience as
Officer Junior Management (Scale I)
on full time and regular basis. The
minimum eligibility in terms of the
number of years of service for
promotion shall be reckoned as on the
1st day of April of the year in which
the vacancy is expected to arise or has
actually arisen. relaxation in eligibility
criteria of one-year service will be given
to such of the candidates who have
pssed Junior Associate of the Indian
Institute of Bankers (JAIIB) of Indian
Institute of Banking and Finance and
one more year in case of such
candidates who have passed Certified
Associate of the Indian Institute of
Bankers (CAIIB) of Indian Institute of
Banking & Finance. However, such
relaxation will be available only once
during the entire service period:
Provided that no officer shall be
considered for promotion unless he has
been confirmed in the feeder grade
post.

49
Zone of consideration:
Three times the number of vacancies
including repeaters.
Explanation.-
1. Vacancies under Normal Channel
shall be filled after filling the vacancies
under Fast Track Channel.
2. The Officers who are eligible under
Normal Channel shall also be
considered under Fast Track Channel.
3. There shall be common written
examination and interview for both the
Channels.
Fast Track Channel :
In Officer Junior Management (Scale-
I) for a period of six years. The
minimum eligibility in terms of the
number of years of service for
promotion shall be reckoned as on the
1st day of April of the year in which
the vacancy is expected to arise or has
actually arisen. Relaxation in eligibility
criteria of one-year sevice will be given
to such of the candidates who have
passed Junior Associate of the Indian
Institute of Bankers (JAIIB) of Indian
Institute of Banking and Finance and
one more year in case of such

50
candidates who have passed Certified
Associate of the Indian Institute of
Bankers (CAIIB) of Indian Institute of
Banking & Finance. However, such
relaxation will be available only once
during the entire service period.
Zone of consideration :
All eligible officers.
(iii) Selection Process The selection shall be on the basis of
performance in the written test, interview
and performance appraisal reports for
preceding five years as per the division
of marks given below:
Written Test 50 Marks
Interview 20 marks
Performance Appraisal
Reports 30 marks
Total : 100 marks
50 marks allotted to written test shall
be further divided as under :-
Part "A" : 25 marks
Part "B" : 25 marks
The candidates shall be required to
appear for a written test comprising
of two parts namely Part (A) covering
Banking Law and Practice of Banking
and Part (B) covering Credit Policy,

51
Credit Management including Priority
Sector, Economics and Management.
(iv) Preparation of Normal Channel:
Merit List
There shall be minimum qualifying
marks of 50% in aggregate of written
test, interview and performance
appraisal reports.
Selection of successful candidates for
promotion shall be made by going
down in Seniority Order starting from
the top and selecting those found to
score the said minimum qualifying
marks of 50% in the aggregate up to a
number equal to the number of
vacancies notified for this channel.
Fast Track Channel:
The selection of candidates shall be
made by the Committee in order of
merit on the basis of written test,
interview and performance appraisal
reports.
There shall be minimum cut off marks
of 60% in aggregate in the writtern
test, interview and performance
appraisal reports. Selection will be
based on the aggregate marks secured
in the written test, interview and

52
performance appraisal reports by
placing the candidates in descending
order of merit to the extent of number
of vacancies.
The vacancies under this channel,
which remain unfilled for  want of
non-selection of adequate number of
candidates shall lapse and shall be filled
up by way of normal channel.
(d) Inter-se-Seniority The inter-se-seniority of all the
empanelled officers selected through
normal channel or fast track channel
in their feeder posts shall remain
unchanged.
(e) Composition of the The Committee shall consist of the
Committee for following, namely:-
Interview
(1) The Chairman of the Regional Rural
Bank concerned -Chairman
(2) Director nominated by the Sponsor
Bank- Member
(3) Director nominated by the National
Bank-Member
Note :- If none of the members of the
Committee belongs to the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, the
Board may nominate an officer of

53
suitable position belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes as an additional member of the
Committee.
(f) V alidity of the Panel The pannel shall be valid for a period
for Direct Recruitment of one year.
and for Promotion
III Officer Middle Management (Scale III)
(a) Name of post Officer Middle Management (Scale III)
(b) Classification Group “A”
(c) Mode of Appointment 10% by direct recruitment and 90%
by promotion
(A) For Direct Recruitment
(i) Age Below the age of 40 years (relaxation
of age in the case of the scheduled
castes or the Scheduled Tribes
candidates or candidates belonging to
other Special categories in accordance
with the instructions/orders issued by
the Central Government from time to
time in this regard.
(ii) Minimum Qualification Degree from a recognised University
and Eligibility in any discipline or its equivalent with
a minimum of 50% marks in aggregate.
Preference will be given to the
candidates having Degree/Diploma in

54
Banking, Finance, Marketing,
Agriculture, Horticulture, Forestry,
Animal Husbandry, Veterinary Science,
Agricultural Engineering, Pisciculture,
Agricultural Marketing and Co-
operation, Information Technology,
Management, Law, Economics and
Accountancy.
Experience : Minimum 5 years
experience as an Officer in any Bank
or Financial Institutions.
(iii) Selection process The selection of the candidates shall
be on the basis of written test and
interview. The written test shall be
conducted through Institute of
Banking Personnel Selection or any
other agency approved by the Sponsor
Bank.
The candidates securing a minimum
qualifying marks of 40% in the written
test shall qualify for interview. In the
case of candidates belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes categories, the minimum
qualifying marks in the written test shall
be 35% to qualify for interview.
All those candidates who have secured
minimum qualifying marks stipulated
for the written examination, in the order

55
of merit, shall be called for interview
upto the ratio 1:3.
The merit lists of successful candidates
in each category shall be made
separately on the basis of combined
performance in the written test and
interview.
(iv) Preparation of The list of successful candidates for
Merit List appointment to Officer Middle
Management (Scale III) shall be made
on the basis of their combined
performance of written test and
interview for General, Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other
Special categories, separetely.
The number of selected candidates to
be empanelled for recuitment shall be
equal to the number of notified
vacancies. In addition thereto, an
additional panel of selected candidates
not exceeding 50% of the notified
vacancies as may be decided by the
Board with a minimum of two
candidates in each category shall be
drawn-up to meet exigencies.
(B) For Promotion:
(i) Mode of Promotion 50% of the vacancies for promotion
shall be filled under Normal Channel

56
while 50% under Fast Track Channel
as per eligibility and selection process
given as follows :-
(ii) Eligibility Promotion shall be made from amongst
the officers holding on full time and a
regular basis, the post of Officer
Middle Management (Scale II)
Normal Channel
Must have seven years experience as
an Officer Middle Management (Scale
II). The minimum eligibility in terms
of the number of years of service for
promotion shall be reckoned as on the
1st day of April of the year in which
the vacancy is expected to arise or has
actually arisen. Relaxation in eligibility
criteria of one-year service will be given
to such of the candidates who have
passed Junior Associate of the Indian
Institute of Bankers (JAIIB) of Indian
Institute of Banking and Finance and
one more year in case of such
candidates who have passed Certified
Associate of the Indian Institute of
Bankers (CAIIB) of Indian Institute of
Banking & Finance. However, such
relaxation will be available only once
during the entire service period:

57
Provided that no officer shall be
considered for promotion unless he has
been confirmed in the feeder grade
post.
Zone of consideration:
Three times of the number of vacancies
including repeaters.
Explanation :-
(1) Vacancies under Normal Channel
shall be filled after filling the vacancies
under Fast Track Channel.
(2) The Officers who are eligible under
Normal Channel shall also be
considered under Fast Track Channel.
(3) There shall be a written Examination
for Fast Track Channel.
Fast Track Channel :
Must have five years experience as an
Officer Middle Management (Scale
II). The minimum eligibility in terms
of the number of years of service for
promotion shall be reckoned as on the
1st day of April of the year in which
the vacancy is expected to arise or has
actually arisen. Relaxation in eligibility
criteria of one-year service will be given
to such of the candidates who have

58
passed Junior Associate of the Indian
Institute of Bankers (JAIIB) of Indian
Institute of Banking and Finance and
one more year in case of such
candidates who have passed Certified
Associate of the Indian Institute of
Bankers(CAIIB) of Indian Institute of
Banking & Finance. However, such
relaxation will be available only once
during the entire service period:
Provided that no officer shall be
considered for promotion unless he has
been confirmed in the feeder grade
post.
Zone of consideration
All eligible Officers.
(iii) Selection Process Normal Channel:
The selection shall be on the basis of
performance in the interview and
performance appraisal reports for
preceding six years as per the division
of marks given below:
Interview 40 marks
Performance Appraisal 60 marks
Reports
Total 100 marks

59
The minimum qualifiying marks in the
interview shall be 50%.
Performance Appraisal Reports for the
preceding six years shall be considered
for the purpose of awarding marks for
promotion. The minimum qualifying
marks in the performance appraisal
reports shall also be 50%.
Fast Track Channel :
The selection shall be on the basis of
performance in the written test,
interview and performance appraisal
reports for preceding six years as per
the division of marks given below:
Written Test 50 Marks
Interview 20 marks
Performance Appraisal 30 marks
Reports
Total 100 marks
50 marks allotted to written test shall
be further divided as under:-
Part "A" 25 marks
Part "B" 25 marks
The candidates shall be required to
appear for a written test comprising
two parts namely:-

60
Part (A) covering Banking Law and
Practice of Banking; and Part (B)
covering Credit Policy, Credit
Management including Priority Sector,
Economics and Management.
(iv) Preparation of Normal Channel :
Merit List There  shall  be  minimum  qualifying
marks of 50% in aggregate of written
test, interview and performance
appraisal reports.
Selection of successful candidates for
promotion shall be made by going
down in Seniority Order starting from
the top and selecting those found to
score the said minimum qualifying
marks of 50% in the aggregate up to a
number equal to the number of
vacancies notified for this channel.
Fast Track Channel :
The selection of candidates shall be
made by the Committee in order of
merit on the basis of written test,
interview and performance appraisal
reports.
There shall be a minimum cut off
marks of 60% in aggregate in the
written test, interview and

61
performance appraisal reports.
Selection will be based on the aggregate
marks secured in the written test,
interview and perfomance appraisal
reports by placing the candidates in
descending order of merit to the extent
of number of vacancies.
The vacancies under this channel,
which remain unfilled for want of
non-selection of adequate number of
candidates shall lapse and shall be filled
up by way of normal channel.
(d) Inter-se-seniority The Inter-se-seniority of all the
empanelled officers selected through
normal channel or fast track channel
in their feeder posts shall remain
unchanged.
(e) Composition of The Committee shall consist of the
the Committee for following persons namely:-
Interview (1) The Chairman of the Regional Rural
Bank concerned -Chairman
(2) Director nominated by the Sponsor
Bank -Member
(3) Director nominated by the National
Bank -Member
Note: If none of the members of the
Committee belongs to the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, the

62
Board may nominate an officer of
suitable position belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes as an additional member of the
Committee.
(f) V alidity of the Panel The panel shall be valid for a period
for Direct Recruitment of one year.
and for Promotion
IV Officer Senior Management (Scale IV)
(a) Name of post Officer Senior Management (Scale IV)
(b) Classification Group “A”
(c) Mode of appointment By promotion or deputation as per
eligibility and selection process given
hereinafter.
(A) For Promotion
(i) Eligibility Promotion shall be made from amongst
the officers holding, on a regular
basis, the post of Officer Middle
Management (Scale III) for a period
of four years. The minimum eligibility
in terms of the number of years of
service for promotion shall be
reckoned as on the  1st day of April of
the year in which  the vacancy is
expected to arise or has actually
arisen.

63
Zone of consideration :
All eligible officers.
(ii) Selection Process The selection shall be on the basis of
combined performance in the interview
and performance appraisal reports for
preceding four years as per the division
of marks given below:
Interview 40 marks
Performance Appraisal 60 marks
Reports
Total 100 marks
(iii) Preparation of List of successful candidates for
Merit list promotion shall be made by the
Committee in order of merit on the
basis of combined performance of
interview and performance appraisal
reports.
The number of selected candidates to
be empanelled for promotion shall be
equal to the number of notified
vacancies in the order of merit.
(iv) Inter-se-seniority The Inter-se-seniority of all the
empanelled officers in their feeder
posts shall remain unchanged.
(v) Composition of The Committee shall consist of the
Committee for interview following namely:-

64
(1) The Chairman of the Regional Rural
Bank concerned -Chairman
(2) Director nominated by the Sponsor
Bank - Member
(3) Director nominated by the National
Bank -Member
Note: If none of the members of the
Committee belongs to the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, the
Board may nominate an officer of
suitable position belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes from the Regional Rural Bank
or Sponsor Bank or National Bank as
an additional member of the
Committee.
(vi) V alidity of the Panel The panel shall be valid for a further
period of one year.
(B) For Deputation
Criteria Officers holding analogous post in
Regional Rural Bank sponsored by the
same Sponsor Bank.
V Officer Senior Management (Scale V)
(i) Name of the post Officer Senior Management (Scale V)
(ii) Classification Group “A”

65
(iii) Mode of appointment By pro motion as per eligibility and
selection process given hereinafter.
(iv) Eligibility Promotion shall be made from amongst
the officers holding, on a regular basis
the post of Officer Senior Management
(Scale IV) for a period of three years.
The minimum eligibility in terms of the
number of years of service for
promotion shall be reckoned as on the
1st day of April of the year in which
the vacancy is expected to arise or has
actually arisen.
Zone of consideration :
All eligible officers.
(v) Selection Process The selection shall be on the basis of
combined performance in the interview
and performance appraisal reports for
preceding six years as per the division
of marks given below:
Interview 40 marks
Performance Appraisal 60 marks
Reports
Total 100 marks
(vi) Preparation of List of successful candidates for
Merit list promotion shall be made by the
Committee in order of merit on the

66
basis of combined performance of
interview and performance appraisal
reports.
The number of selected candidates to
be empanelled for promotion shall be
equal to the number of notified
vacancies in the order of merit.
(vii) Inter-se-seniority The Inter-se-seniority of all the
empanelled officers in their feeder
posts shall remain unchanged.
(viii) Composition of The Committee shall consist of the
Committee following namely:-
(1) The General Manager of the
Regional Rural Bank Division of the
Sponsor Bank -Chairman
(2) One of the PRB Chairmen of the
same Sponsor Bank, to be nominated
by the Sponsor Bank - Member
(3) An Officer nominated by National
Bank not below the rank of General
Manager -Member
Note: If none of the members of the
Committee belongs to the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, the
Board may nominate an officer of
suitable position belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled

67
Tribes from the Regional Rural Bank
or Sponsor Bank or National Bank as
an additional member of the
Committee.
(ix) V alidity of the Panel The panel shall be valid for a period of
one year.
Note :
1. The incumbents eligible for promotion on or before the publication of
this notification shall continue to be considered for promotion.
2. The service of the incumbents, who are holding the posts eligible for
promotion before publication of this notification, shall continue to be
counted for the purpose of promotion.

68
Part II - Group “B”
Recruitment and Promotion
Office Assistant (Multipurpose)
1 (a) Name of Post Office Assistant (Multipurpose)
(b) Classification Group “B”
(c) Mode of Appointment 75% by direct recruitment and 25%
by promotion
(A) For Direct Recruitment :
(i) Age Between 18 years and 28 years
(relaxation of age in case of the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes candidates or candidates
belonging to other Special categories
in accordance with the instructions/
orders issued by the Central
Government in this regard from time
to time)
(ii) Minimum Qualification (i) Bachelor Degree or its equivalent
and Eligibility of a recognised University in any
discipline :
(ii) (a) Essential : Proficiency in local
language as may be specified by the
Board (b) Desirable: Knowledge of
Computer skills.
(iii) Selection Process The Selection shall be made on the
basis of written test and interview as
under:

69
Written Test : 70 marks
Interview : 30 marks
The written test shall be conducted by
the institute of Banking Personnel
Selection or any other agency
approved by the Sponsor Bank.
The written test shall cover (a) Test
of Reasoning, (b) Numerical Ability,
(c) General Knowledge and (d) General
English or Hindi.
The candidate securing a minimum of
40% marks in the written test shall
qualify for interview in the case of
candidates belonging to the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes
categories, the minimum marks in the
written test shall be 35% to qualify for
interview.
All those candidates who have secured
minimum qualifying marks in written
examination, in the order of merit, shall
be called for interview upto the ratio
of 1:3.
The merit lists of successful candidates
in each category shall be made
separately on the basis of combined
performance in the written test and
interview.

70
(iv) Preparation of Lists of successful candidates for
Merit list appointment to Office Assistant
(Multipurpose) shall be prepared on the
basis of ranking accorded to them
based on aggregate marks in written
test and interview for General, the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and Other Special categories,
separately.
The number of selected candidates to
be empanelled for promotion shall be
equal to the number of notified
vacancies in the order of seniority. In
addition thereto, an additional panel of
selected candidates not exceeding 50%
of the notified vacancies as may be
decided by the Board with a minimum
of two candidates for each category,
shall be drawn upto meet the
exigencies.
(B) For Promotion
(i) Mode of promotion 70% of the vacancies by promotion
under Normal Channel and 30% under
Fast Track Channel as per eligibility
and selection process given hereinafter.
(ii) Eligibility Promotion shall be made from amongst
the employees holding the post of
Office Attendant (Multipurpose) on a
regular basis.

71
Normal Channel :
Must have ten years experience as
Office Attendant (Multipurpose) and
also must have passed 10th Standard.
The minimum eligibility in terms of the
number of years of service for
promotion shall be reckoned as on the
1st day of April of the year in which
the vacancy is expected to arise or has
actually arisen.
Provided that no employee shall be
considered for promotion unless he has
been confirmed in the feeder grade
post.
Zone of consideration:
Three times of the number of vacancies
including repeaters.
Explanation.-
(1) Vacancies under Normal Channel
shall be filled after filling the vacancies
under Fast Track Channel.
(2) The Employees who are eligible
under Normal Channel shall also be
considered under Fast Track Channel.
(3) There shall be common written
examination and interview for both the
channels.

72
Fast Track Channel :
Must have five years experience as
Office Attendant (Multipurpose) with
Graduation from a recognised
University. The minimum eligibility in
terms of the number of years of service
for promotion shall be reckoned as on
the 1st day of April of the year in which
the vacancy is expected to arise or has
actually arisen:
Provided that no employee shall be
considered for promotion unless he has
been confirmed in the feeder grade post.
Zone of consideration:
All eligible employees.
(iii) Selection Process The selection shall be on the basis of
combined performance in the written
test and interview as per the division
of marks, given below :
Written Test 70 Marks
Interview 30 marks
Total 100 marks
The candidates shall be required to
appear for a written test comprising
test in English or Hindi and Arithmetic.
70 marks allotted to written test shall
be further divided as under:

73
English or Hindi 35 marks
Arithmetic 35 marks
Total 70 marks
(iv) Preparation of Merit list Normal Channel :
Selection of candidates for promotion
shall be on the basis of combined
performance in Written Test and
Interview for General, Scheduled
Caste, Scheduled Tribe and Other
Special Categories, separately.
There shall be a minimum cut off mark
of 40% in aggregate of written test and
interview.
The number of selected candidates to
be empanelled for promotion shall be
equal to the number of notified
vacancies in the order of seniority
from among the candidates who
secure the minimum cut off marks.
Fast Track Channel :
The selection of candidates shall be
made by the Committee in order of
merit on the basis of combined
performance in written test and
interview for General, Scheduled
Caste, Scheduled Tribe and Other
Special Categories, separately.

74
There shall be a minimum cut off
marks of 45% in aggregate in the
written test and interview. Selection
shall be based on the aggregate marks
obtained in the written test and
interview by placing the candidates in
descending order of merit to the extent
of number of vacancies.
The vacancies under this channel,
which remain unfilled for  want of
non-selection of adequate number of
candidates shall lapse and shall be filled
up by way of normal channel.
(d) Inter-se-seniority The Inter-se-seniority of all the
empanelled employees selected
through normal channel or fast track
channel in their feeder posts shall
remain unchanged.
(e) Composition of the The Committee shall consist of the
Committee for following persons, namely:-
Interview (1) The General Manager and where
there is no General Manager, an officer
nominated by the Board of Regional
Rural Bank - Chairman
(2) An officer of the Regional Rural
Bank concerned not below the rank of
officer scale II as nominated by the
Board - Member

75
(3) An officer nominated by the
Sponsor Bank - Member
(4) An officer nominated by the
National Bank - Member
Note : If none of the members of the
Committee belongs to the Scheduled
Caste or the Scheduled Tribe, the
Board may nominate an officer of
suitable position belonging to the
Scheduled Caste or the Scheduled
Tribe as an additional member of the
Committee.
(f) Validity of the panel for The panel shall be valid for a period of
direct recruitment and one year.
for promotion
Note:
1. The incumbents eligible for promotion on or before the publication of
this notification shall continue to be considered for promotion.
2. The service of the incumbents, who are holding the posts eligible for
promotion before publication of this notification, shall continue to be
counted for the purpose of promotion.

76
Part III-Group “C”
Recruitment
Office Attendant (Multipurpose)
1. (a) Name of Post Office Attendant (Multipurpose)
(b) Classification Group “C”
(c) Mode of Appointment 100% by direct recruitment
(d) Age Above 18 years but below 28 years
(relaxation in case of the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes
candidates or candidates belonging to
other Special categories in accordance
with the instructions or orders issued
by the Central Government in this
regard from time to time.
(e) Minimum Qualification A Minimum of Tenth Standard Pass
and Eligibility or equivalent from an Education Board
recognised by the State Government
and other skills required for specific
jobs as may be decided by the Board.
(f) Selection Process On the basis of interview.
(g) Preparation of Merit list Lists of successful candidates for
appointment to Office Attendant
(Multipurpose) shall be prepared on the
basis of ranking accored to them in
Interview for General, the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
Other Special categories, separately.

77
The number of selected candidates to
be empanelled for recruitment shall be
equal to the number of notified
vacancies. In addition thereto, an
additional panel of selected candidates
not exceeding 50% of the notified
vacancies as may be decided by the
Board, with a minimum of two
candidates for each category, shall be
drawn up to meet exigencies in all
categories.
(h) Composition of the The Committee shall consist of the
Committee following persons, namely:-
(1) The General Manager and where there
is no General Manager, an officer not
below Scale III nominated by the Board
of Regional Rural Bank - Chairman
(2) An officer of the Regional Rural
Bank concerned, not below Scale II
as nominated by the Board - Member
(3) An officer nominated by the
Sponsor Bank - Member
Note: If none of the members of the
Committee belongs to the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, the
Board may nominate an officer of
suitable position belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled

78
Tribes as an additional member of the
Committee.
(i) V alidity of the Panel The panel shall be valid for a period of
one year.
Note :
1. The incumbents eligible for promotion on or before the publication of
this notification shall continue to be considered for promotion.
2. The service of the incumbents, who are holding the posts eligible for
promotion before publication of this notification, shall continue to be
counted for the purpose of promotion.
[F. No. 7/5/2009-RRB]
K.V . EAPEN, Jt. Secy.
Note : - The principal rules were published under S.O. 895(E) dated 28.9.1988
and subsequent amended vide S.O. No. 642(E) dated 29.7.1998.

ANNEXURE-II
QUESTIONNAIRE ON THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS
(APPOINTMENT AND PROMOTION OF OFFICERS
AND EMPLOYEES) RULES, 2010
Question No. 1
What are the reasons that necessitiated the framing of RRBs
(Appointment & Promotion of Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010 in
supersession of RRB appointment and Promotion of officers’ and
Employees’ Rules, 1998 ? What are the main points of difference
between the old rules 1998 and new rules, 2010?
Answer
On the amalgamation of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), business level
and area of operation of amalgamated RRBs have increased substantially. A
Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Y .S.P. Thorat was constituted by
Government of India (Gol) to formulate “Comprehensive Human Resource
Policy for RRBs” which inter-alia includes categorization of RRBs/ branches,
staff pattern, at Head Office / Controlling Offices / Branch level, recruitment,
promotion, etc. The Committee inter-alia recommended; (i) creation of posts
at Scale IV and V level for RRB officers to provide promotional avenues with
a view to shoulder the higher responsibilities; (ii) Direct recruitment also upto
scale III; (iii) Fast Track Promotion; and (iv) outsourcing of non-core activities.
All these factors necessitiated framing the Regional Rural Banks(Appointment
and Promotion) Rules, 2010.
Question No. 2
The RRB Act was passed in 1976 and the RRB (Appointment 
&
Promotion of Officers and Employees) Rules were framed in 1998.
Was any other rules in place before the rules were framed in the year
79

80
1998 and if, no, why was there a delay of 22 years in the  framing of the
rules?
Answer
Prior to 1988, the recruitments in RRBs were carried out as per the
guidelines of the Government. The Appointment and Promotion Rules were
framed in 1988. These were revised in 1998 as the posts in RRBs were
designated on the basis of the recommendations of the Equation Committee.
The RRBs (Appointment & Promotion .of Officers and Employees) Rules,
2010 have been framed to provide for recruitment in scale IV and V posts and
also re-designation of the group ‘B’ and ‘C’ posts.
Question No. 3
What are the differences in the appointment procedure of officers
and employees in nationalized banks and RRBs in terms of qualification,
experience and tests, etc.? Please provide a comparative table.
Answer
Whereas the appointment of officers and employees in RRBs is governed
by rules and regulations framed by GoI in consultation with National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural development and Sponsor Banks from time to time
under section 29 (1) and (2) (ba) of RRB Act, 1976 while appointments and
promotion of staff of nationalized banks are governed by the rules and
regulations of the respective banks.
The broad features are more or less similar in both cases.
Question No. 4
In the Third Schedule to the Rules, it is provided that if none of
the members of the Committee belongs to SC / ST, the Board may
nominate an officer of the suitable position belonging to SC / ST as an
additional member. The word ‘suitable position’ seems to be vague and

81
whether it is not better to specify some rank, seniority or qualifications
for the same?
Answer
The RRBs are of different size and availability of SC/ST member in a
particular grade may cause problem. Hence a broad provision has been made.
Question No. 5
Rule 9 provides that the written examination for direct recruitment
of officers and employees other than those of Group’ C’ employees
shall be entrusted to the Institute of Banking Personnel Selection
(IBPS) or any agency approved by the Sponsor Bank? What are the
reason(s) for allowing the Sponsor Bank to get direct recruitment done
by any other agency than IBPS? It is not better to entrust the work of
conducting the examination to IBPS so that there is uniformity recruit
process.
Answer
The recruitment in RRBs is at a much lower scale as compared to the
Public Sector Banks. In order to provide the desired flexibility for recruitment
in RRBs the provision of recruitment through Institute of Banking Personnel
Selection (IBPS) or any other agency approved by the Sponsor Bank has been
made.
Question No. 6
How many districts in the country have been covered by the RRBs
so far? What steps are the Ministry and NABARD taking to extend the
RRB network to all the rural districts in the country and what are the
difficulties faced by them in this regard?
Answer
¾ 619 districts are covered by the RRBs as on 31 March 2010.

82
¾ RBI has recently deregulated / liberalized the licensing policy for
RRBs to open their branches in category III to VI centers without
prior permission of RBI subject to fulfilling conditions - (i) CRAR
of at least 9%; (ii) Net NPA less .than 5%; (iii) No default in
CRR/SLR for the last year; (iv) Net profit in the last financial
year.
¾ GoI has given target since for opening 2000 new RRB branches
in uncovered blocks / districts by March 2011. RRBs have opened
955 branches during the period from March, 2007 to March, 2010.
¾ The opening of the branches also depends upon the viability of it.
Question No. 7
The Second Schedule to the Rules provides a list of the regional
rural banks in the country and their Sponsor Banks. All the RRBs are
sponsored by nationalized banks and no private bank is involved in the
sponsoring of rural bank. What are the reasons behind this and is it not
desirable to involve the private banks also in the RRB network?
Answer
There are already two RRBs sponsored by private sector banks, viz.,
Jammu Rural Bank (Jammu & Kashmir Bank Ltd.), Mewar Aaanchalik Gramin
Bank (taken over by the ICICI Bank Ltd., from Bank of Rajasthan Ltd.) and
one RRB, viz. Kshetriya Kisaan Gramin Bank sponsored by UP Cooperative
Bank Ltd.
There are no restrictions for the private sector banks to sponsor RRBs.
Question No. 8
Is it true that the scope of promotion in RRBs is very limited as
compared to the sponsor banks? What are the reasons for lesser scope
of promotion in RRBs as compared to the sponsor banks?

83
Answer
As per the RRBs (Appointment & Promotion of Officers and Employees)
Rules, 2010, officers of RRBs can now be promoted upto scale V and this in
turn has increased the promotional avenues for other categories of staff of
RRBs.
Question No.9
What are the main recommendations of the Committee constituted
under the Chairmanship of Shri Amaresh Kumar, ED, NABARD for
comprehensive review of the model RRB Officers and Employees Service
Regulations, 
2000 and the RRB (Appointment and Promotion of Officers
and Employees) Rules, 1998. How far has the Ministry of Finance /
NABARD accepted the recommendations of the Committee and what
are the amendments carried out in the new rules of 
2010 as a result of
that acceptance?
Answer
The recommendations were broadly accepted by the Gol.
Major recommendations of RRBs Officers & Employees Service
regulation 2000 are:
z Change in definition of competent Authority, Decentralisation in
respect of Delegation of powers
z Change in designation of group B & C staff (Office Assistant/
Office Attendant)
z Creation of additional scale/grades - IV & V
z Increase in duration of Extraordinary Leave and Sick Leave.
z Appointment and Promotion Rule
z Increase in percentage of promotion from Group “C” to “B” posts
from existing 1 0% to 25 %,

84
z Recruitment (Scale II & III direct recruitment of specialist 25%
& 10% respectively)
z Introduction of fast track promotion upto the level of scale III.
Question No. 10
What is the status with regard to the amalgamation and
reorganization of RRBs and what are the reasons behind the need for
amalgamation of RRBs?
Answer
As on date, there are 
46 amalgamated RRBs and 36 stand alone RRBs in
the country. In order to reap benefits of a large area of operation, enhanced
credit exposure limits and to undertake diverse banking activities, the
Government initiated a process of structural consolidation of RRBs by the
amalgamation of RRBs sponsored by the same Bank within a State.
Question No. 11
What are the future plans of the Ministry / NABARD with regard
to amalgamation of RRBs? How far is amalgamation affecting the career
and promotion prospects of the RRB officers and employees?
Answer
As of now, there is no plan for further amalgamation of RRBs. As per
the approved plan, RRBs sponsored by a bank within the same State have
been amalgamated.
After amalgamation of RRBs, the scope for business development and
promotional avenues have increased. The increase in Controlling Offices will
ensure a close supervision and guidance.
Question No. 12
To what extent the power to make rules/regulations under section
29 and 30 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 have been carried out?

85
Please provide a list of such rules/regulations framed under the Act
along with their date of laying on the Table of both the Houses of
Parliament?
Answer
Under section 29 and 30 of RRB Act, 1976, GoI can frame rules and
regulations in consultation with NABARD and Sponsor Banks and accordingly,
RRBs’ (Appointment & Promotion of Officers and Employees) Rules were
issued first in 1988. The same were revised in 1998 and thereafter in 2010.
Similarly, RRB Officers and Employees Service Regulations were first issued
in 
1980 and modified in 2000 and further amended in 2010.
RRBs (Appointment & Promotion of Officers and Employees) Rules,
2010 were laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6.8.2010 and Rajya Sabha on
10.8.2010.
Question No. 13
What are the recommendations of the Committee set up under
the Chairmanship of Dr. K.C. Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor, RBI to
analyse the financial of RRBs. What is the status of implementation of
those recommendations?
Answer
The major recommendations of the Committee are as under:
z 40 RRBs to be recapitulated out of 82 RRB
z Total amount of recap. assessed is Rs. 2,200.00 crore to be released
in two installments, i.e.  Rs. l,337.50 crore in 2010-11 and
Rs. 862.50 crore in 2011-12.
z An additional amount of Rs 700 crore may be kept as contingencies
for RRBs of NE 
& NER Region

86
z Increase in authorised capital of RRB from 5.00 crore to Rs. 500.00
crore.
z Change of Sponsor Bank may be considered.
z RRBs with a n etworth of Rs 100 crore or more as on March
2009 may be permitted to p ay dividend from 01 April 2013
onwards.
z RBI may prescribe ‘fit and proper’ criteria for the Chairmen of
RRBs in respect of appointment & salary structure.
The Report of the Committee is being processed.
Question No. 14
The Committee has come to know that some of the sponsor banks
have withdrawn the Chairmen of RRBs before completion of their
tenure. Will this premature withdrawal not affect the performance of
the RRBs adversely besides building lowering the morale of RRBs.
Answer
In the recent review meeting of RRB held on 25 July 2010 under the
Chairmanship of the Finance Minister , sponsor banks have been advised not
to withdraw Chairmen before their stipulated tenure.
Question No. 15
What steps have been taken for the training and capacity building
of RRB officers and staff?
Answer
The training requirements of RRB Officers is adequately taken care of
by NABARD and Sponsor Banks while that of the staff is taken care of by the
RRBs themselves and also by their sponsor banks.

87
Question No. 16
There is acute shortage of staff in most of the branches of RRBs.
What is being done to address in the problem of shortage? Please give
comments?
Answer
The process of recruitment has now been expedited in all the RRBs
with the issuance of new Rules, 2010.

ANNEXURE-III
STUDY NOTE OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA
The Committee met at 10 A.M. on the 18th December, 2010 at Hyderabad
to the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and
Employees) Service Rules, 2010 discuss with the representatives of Andhra
Bank and State Bank of Hyderabad and the concerned Regional Rural Banks,
along with the representatives of NABARD, RBI and Ministry of Finance
(Department of Financial Services). The following Members of the Committee
were present during the meetings.
M
EMBERS  P RESENT
1. Shri Kalraj Mishra ––      Chairman
2. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam
3. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
4. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
5. Shri M.V . Mysura Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
Representatives of Ministry of Finance
(Department of Financial Studies)
1. Shri Lalit Kumar, Director
2. Shri Suresh Arya, Senior Research Officer
Representatives of State Bank of Hyderabad
1. Ms Renu Challu, Managing Director
88

89
2. Shri Sudhir Garg, Chief General Manager
3. Shri S. V enkataraman, General Manager
Representatives of Andhra Bank
1. Shri R.Ramachandran, Chairman and Managing Director
2. Shri Anil Girotra, Executive Director
Representatives of NABARD
1 Shri P. Mohanaiah, Chief General Manager
2 Shri E.V . Murray, General Manager
3 Shri V . Maruthiam, General Manager
Representatives of Reserve Bank of India
1 Shri A.S. Rao, Regional Director
2 Shri M. Sanjaya, General Manager
Representative of Chaitanya Godavari Grameen Bank
Shri V. M. Pardhasaradhi, Chairman
Representative of Rushikulya Grameen Bank
Shri P.V .S.T.R Seshagiri Rao, Chairman
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee
and the representatives of the concerned organizations. Thereafter the Chairman
underlined the importance of the Regional Rural Banks in tackling the menace
of poverty, unemployment and socio-economic backwardness among the rural
masses by implementing various credit linked development schemes. Realizing
the importance of these banks he said the Committee decided to take up for
discussion the present rules to ensure that the concerns of the Officers and
Employees of these banks are adequately addressed.
2. Managing Director, State Bank of Hyderabad informed the Committee
that the Regional Rural Banks were initially established with a view to develop
the rural economy and to create an alternate channel for cooperative credit.

90
From the beginning it was ensured that the Regional Rural Banks would focus
on serving the rural areas and would be an integral segment of the Indian
Banking system. The RRBs are jointly owned by Government of India, the
concerned State Government and Sponsor Banks.
3. Over a period of time several changes including restructuring of RRBs
had taken place and as such, there was a need for urgent review of manpower
related issues in them. With a view to examine manpower norms in RRBs and
to have standard methods of manpower assessment and planning, in 2007 the
Government constituted a Committee under the, Chairmanship of Dr.Y.S.P.
Thorat, the then Chairman of NABARD. The Committee submitted its report
in February, 2009. After consultation with NABARD and Ministry of Law and
Justice the revised Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of
Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010 were notified. These rules were circulated
to all RRBs through NABARD and the same are required to be notified and
adopted by RRBs in consultation with their respective Sponsor Bank and after
approval of their Board.
4. The Committee appreciated the efforts made by the Sponsor Banks in
strengthening rural credit infrastructure and providing micro credit to organized
groups. The vital role played them in providing banking facilities in harsh and
inaccessible areas was credit worthy. The Committee recognized the fact that
RRBs have taken deep roots and have become a 
sort of inseparable part of
the rural credit structure in India. The financial viability of the RRBs has,
however, been a matter of concern since the 1980s, just five years after their
existence. The Committee noted that the Sponsoring Bank which holds 35%
of the equity of the RRBs also have the critical function of providing managerial
and financial assistance to ensure financial viability of the RRBs.
5. CMD, Andhra Bank informed the Committee that after coming in force
of the said rules, the promotion avenues of the RRB officers had increased.
Also efforts were being made to ensure time bound promotions. As for the
manpower shortages recruitments are an ongoing process and efforts are

91
being made to ensure adequate staffing. Also the guidelines issued by NABARD
regarding recruitment are being adhered to and corrective measures taken
where ever need be.
6. The issues of micro credit also came up for discussion. The Committee
was apprised of the fact that the Joint Liability Groups were an issue of
concern. The NGOs, Banks, Civil Society needed to make efforts to promote
them. Also, the Banks were providing loans to farmers who had availed of the
loans waiver scheme to help them re-established them. The Committee raised
that issue of interest rate being charged by the RRB because they were
apparently quite high. Also information about the road map for the 11
th plan
framed by the financial institutions was also sought. The Committee noted
with concern that rural penetration of some Banks had been slow which needed
to be looked into and remedial measures taken.
7. The Chairman acknowledged the difficulties faced by the Banks in
ensuring proper utilization of the loans given and also the large number of
villages yet to be covered by the RRBs. However, he expressed hope that
efforts made by the Banks would give result, and ensure credit in rural areas
from institutional sources. The Committee also acknowledged the valuable
contribution made by them in building assets for the nation and especially in
rural areas.
8. The meeting adjourned at 11.15 
A.M.

ANNEXURE-IV
STUDY NOTE OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on the 21st December, 2010 at Chennai
to discuss the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers
and Employees) Service Rules, 2010 with the representatives of Indian Bank,
Indian Overseas Bank, representatives of the Regional Rural Banks, along
with the representatives of NABARD, RBI and Ministry of Finance (Department
of Financial Services). The following Members of the Committee were present
during the meetings.
PRESENT
1. Shri Kalraj Mishra ––      Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
3. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam
4. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
Representative of Ministry of Finance
(Department of Financial Studies)
Ms Sumita Dawra, Director
Representatives of Indian Overseas Bank
1. Shri M. Narendra, Chairman and Managing Director
2. Smt. Nupur Mitra, Executive Manager
92

93
Representatives of Indian Bank
1. Shri T.M. Bhasin, Chairman and Managing Director
2. Shri V .Rama Gopal, Executive Director
3. Shri Rajeev Rishi, Executive Director
Representatives of NABARD
1 Shri R. Narayan, Chief General Manager
2 Shri N. Krishnan, General Manager
Representatives of Reserve Bank of India
1. Shri K.R. Ananda, Regional Director
2. Shri M.M. Majhi, General Manager
Representative of Pandyan Grama Bank Employees Association
Shri G . S. Solaimanikam, General Secretary
Representative of Pandyan Grama Officers Union
Shri K. Pitchaimuthu, President
Representatives of Neelachal Grama Bank Employees Association
1. Shri Kumar Sahoo, General Secretary
2. Shri Dhandia Singh, General Secretary
Representatives of Neelachal Grama Bank Officers Union
1. Shri P . K. Mishra, General Secretary
2. Shri S. Dash, General Secretary
Representative of Saptagiri Grameena Bank Employees Association
Shri Muni Rathinam Reddy, General Secretary
Representative of Saptagiri Grameena Bank Officers Union
Shri K.Chenchi Reddy, General Secretary
Representative of Pallavan Grama Bank Employees Association
Shri A. Kacciyulla, General Secretary

94
Representative of Pallavan Grama Bank Officers Association
Shri C. Jeya Kumar, General Secretary
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee
and the representatives of the concerned organizations. Thereafter, dwelling
on the issue for discussion the Chairman informed that since the Committee
had already discussed the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion
of Officers and Employees) Service Rules, 2010 at its meeting in Hyderabad
hence the Committee would now like to go in for an in depth discussion on
the issue areas. The Chairman also expressed the anguish of the Committee
over the continued difficulties faced by the students in getting educational
loans especially those coming from remote areas like North Eastern States.
The Chairman also sought to know the steps taken to ensure hassle free
services for priority sector lending during the course of the discussion.
2. CMD, Indian Bank informed the Committee that the process of
restructuring and amalgamation of the RRBs was undertaken during 2005-
2009. As a sequel, there was a change in the working conditions of the RRBs.
This necessitated the framing of the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and
Promotion of Officers and Employees) Service Rules, 2010. Some of the
points of difference between the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and
Promotion of Officers and Employees) Service Rules, 1998 and the rules
under discussion were as follows: (i) As per 2010 rules there is no mention
about consultation with the Sponsor Bank regarding creation of posts and
determination of number of vacancies in each category of post. In the 1998
rules such consultation process was provided; (ii) In the 1998 rules the power
to interpret the rules was not provided for. However, in the current rules the
power to interpret has been given to the Central Government and (iii) The
category of number of officers have also been increased under the present
rules from three to five (Scale I to 
V).
3. CMD, Indian Overseas Bank informed the Committee that IOB was the
Sponsor Bank for two RRBs i.e. the Pandyan Grama Bank and the Neelachal

95
Gramya Bank respectively. IOB was making all efforts to improve the
functioning of these banks and was investing in proper training and capacity
building of the officers and employees of these RRBs. The value of the RRBs
is that the rural people see them as friend, philosopher and guide and are more
open to trusting them than other major banks. This in effect helps in extending
development schemes to them via these RRBs. Efforts are also being made to
computerize them and increase their efficiency.
4. The Committee thereafter sought clarifications on the following points:-
whether the said Regulations had ensured effective and time bound promotions;
(ii) whether their were manpower shortages in the RRBs if so, the steps taken
to full them; (iii) Have the Sponsor Banks being facing problems of cadre
redesignation in the RRBs if so, the steps taken to rectify them; and (iv)
whether there were any differences in the promotion avenues of RRB Officers
and Sponsor Bank officials. The Committee also sought clarification on the
percentage of villages the RRBs have been able to cover till now and the
position on non performing assets in these banks.
5. Chief General Manager, NABARD informed the Committee that Tamil
Nadu was the second largest State in the Self Help Group-Bank linkage
programme after Andhra Pradesh. Infact the Government of Tamil Nadu has
been encouraging formation of Federation of SHGs at Village Panchayat Level
called Panchayat Level Federation (PLF). The PLFs are graded and those
which obtain A or B grading are eligible for bulk loans from the banks.
Incentives are also given based on performance. However, the issue of linking
the small/marginal. farmers, tenant farmers/oral lessees and so on with the
formal banking sector was a matter of concern for NABARD and intensive
discussions were on to resolve this issue.
6. The Committee also pointed out that most of the private and foreign
banks did not cater to the actual users and gave loans to corporate bodies or
development authorities and reflected in their balance sheets as loans under
priority sector. The Committee queried whether the 
RBI directives to private

96
sector and foreign banks were applicable to them as they also had certain
social responsibilities while giving permission to open branches. The
contribution of foreign banks to the Rural Infrastructure Development Fund
of NABARD also came up for discussion.
7. The meeting was thereafter adjourned at 4.15 P.M.

ANNEXURE-V
STUDY NOTE ON THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS (APPOINTMENT
AND PROMOTION OF OFFICERS) RULES, 2010
The Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha had discussions
on the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers) Rules,
2010 with the representatives of Employee Association/Unions of RRBs along
with Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) on the 20th June,
2011 in Bangalore.
P
RESENT
1. Shri Kalraj Mishra ––      Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
4. Dr. K. P . Ramalingam
5. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
7. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut
8. Shri M. V . Mysura Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri N. K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
3. Shri R. P . Shukla, Assistant Director
Representatives of the Karnataka Vikas Grameena Bank
Officers’ Federation
1. Shri S. A. Neeralagi, President
2. Shri M. V . Karer, General Secretary
97

98
(Representative of Ministry of Finance
(Department of Financial Services)
Shri Tarsem Chand, Director
2. The Chairman, in his opening remarks, enquired about the problems
faced by the RRB employees and their suggestions for improvement or
amendment in the rules, if any.
3. The Committee was informed that the employees working in RRBs have
no proper promotion opportunities and that some people retire in the same
post in which they join. There is also the problem of lack of manpower in
RRBs and that many branches have one manager and one clerk. Payment of
MNREGS wages and issue of Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) strain the resources
of RRBs further. Regarding the pay and allowances, employees of RRBs have
Dearness Allowance and basic pay at par with sponsor banks but there is no
pension scheme for RRB employees. There is high attrition rate and the youths
are not attracted to RRBs. There is a suggestion that qualification should be
lessened so that local people can be inducted in the service and that the
Recruitment rules are further need to be strengthened.
4. Karnataka Vikas Grameena Bank Of ficers’ Federation submitted before
the Committee that there is urgent need to raise the retirement age of the
officers in the RRBs from 60 to 65 years or at least upto 62 years. As the
banking sector is undergoing a paradigm shift in its role and functions as a
result of increased competition and growing consumer awareness, application
of IT in banking has become important. With the expansion of and easy access
to the digital communication across the country at an affordable price, the
customers’ expectation for efficient services in banking has gained momentum.
It would be very difficult for RRBs to survive if value added services are not
provided to its customers. Hence immediate steps need to be taken to merge
RRBs with the sponsor bank.

ANNEXURE-VI
STUDY NOTE ON THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS (APPOINTMENT
AND PROMOTION OF OFFICERS) RULES, 2010 AND THE
CURRENT STATUS OF PRIORITY SECTOR LENDING
The Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha had discussions
on the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers) Rules,
2010 and the current status of priority sector lending with the representatives
of Canara Bank, Syndicate Bank, Vijaya Bank, Corporation Bank, State Bank
of Mysore and RRBs sponsored by them along with the NABARD and the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) on the 21
st June, 2011
in Bangalore.
PRESENT
1. Shri Kalraj Mishra ––      Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Ms.Sushila Tiriya
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
4. Dr. K. P . Ramalingam
5. Dr. Janardhan Wagwnare
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
7. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut
8. Shri M. V . Mysura Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri N. K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
3. Shri R. P . Shukla, Assistant Director
99

100
Representative of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Services)
Dr.Tarsem Chand, Director
Representative of NABARD
Dr.Venkatesh Tagat, CGM
Representatives of Canara Bank & its RRB
1. Smt. Archana S. Hargava, ED
2. Shri K. S. Prabhakar Rao, Chairman, Pragathi Gramin Bank
Representatives of Corporation Bank & its RRB
1. Shri Ramnath Pradeep, CMD
2. Shri Narendra Singh, ED
3. Shri Ashwani Kumar, ED
4. Shri A. P. Suresh, Chairman, Chiko Bank
Representatives of State Bank of Mysore & its RRB
1. Shri Dilip Mavinkurve, MD
2. Smt. Ambujakshi L T, Chairperson, CKGB
Representatives of Vijaya Bank & its RRB
1. Shri H. S. Upendra Kamath, CMD
2. Smt. Shubhalakshmi Panse, ED
3. Shri Govind N. Dongre, Chairman, RRB
2. The Chairman, in his opening remarks, enquired about issues such as
the scope of promotion in RRBs as compared to sponsor banks; status with
regard to the amalgamation and reorganization of RRBs and the reasons behind
the need for amalgamation of RRBs; steps being taken for the training and
capacity building of RRB officers and staff; the problem of acute shortage of
staff in most of the branches of RRBs and what is being done to address the
problem of shortage; and the disbursement of priority sector loans with special
reference to micro credit to farmers.

101
3. The sponsor banks expressed that unless the business of RRBs and
branches expand, there is a problem in getting people promoted. Sponsor
banks also stated that there is pension in RRBs but conceded that it is a minimal
amount. They want that the financial burden/implications of providing pension
to RRB employees need to be examined.
4. The North Malabar Gramin Bank in their reply stated that there are no
lady SC/ST officers in Scale IV cadre because none of the lady SC/ST officers
fall in the zone of consideration for promotion. They further informed that to
help the tribals, a special settlement project has been prepared under the
guidance of NABARD and is being implemented through exclusive satellite
office. The other initiatives taken by the bank are formation of Farmer's Club
and imparting extension education programme for diversified economic
activities.

ANNEXURE-VII
STUDY NOTE ON THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS (APPOINTMENT
AND PROMOTION OF OFFICERS) RULES, 2010 AND THE
CURRENT STATUS OF PRIORITY SECTOR LENDING
The Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha had discussions
on the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers) Rules,
2010 and the current status of priority sector lending with the representatives
of North Malabar Bank and South Malabar Bank along with the NABARD and
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) on the 25 1h June,
2011 in Bangalore.
PRESENT
1. Shri Kalraj Mishra ––      Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
3. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam
4. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
5. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri N. K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
3. Shri R. P . Shukla, Assistant Director
Representative of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial
Services)
Shri P. Vinayagam, Deputy Secretary
Representative of NABARD
Shri K. C. Shashidhar, CGM
102

103
Representative of Canara Bank
Shri N. Narasa Reddy, GM, Canara Bank
Representative of Syndicate Bank
Shri G . C. Mishra, GM
Representative of South Malabar Gramin Bank
Shri G. Pandurangan, Chairman
Representative of North Malabar Gramin Bank
Shri V . K. Saigal, Chairman
2. The Chairman, in his opening remarks, enquired about issues such as
the scope of promotion in RRBs as compared to sponsor banks; status with
regard to the amalgamation and reorganization of RRBs and the reasons behind
the need for amalgamation of RRBs; steps being taken for the training and
capacity building of RRB officers and staff; the problem of acute shortage of
staff in most of the branches of RRBs and what is being done to address the
problem of shortage; and the disbursement of priority sector loans with special.
reference to micro credit to farmers.
3. The sponsor banks expressed that unless the business of RRBs and
branches expand, there is a problem in getting people promoted. Sponsor
banks also stated that there is pension in RRBs but conceded that it is a minimal
amount. They want that the financial burden/implications of providing pension
to RRB employees need to be examined.
4. North Malabar Gramin Bank, on the 25
th July, 2011, furnished that there
are no lady SC/ST officers in Scale IV cadre because there is no lady SC/ST
officer in the zone of consideration for promotion. To help the tribals, a special
settlement project has been prepared under the guidance of NABARD and is
implemented through exclusive satellite office. Formation of Farmers’ Club
and imparting extension education programmes for diversified economic
activities are other initiatives.

ANNEXURE-VIII
STUDY NOTE OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on the 27th September, 2011 in Mumbai
to discuss with the representatives of Dena Bank, Bank of India, Central Bank
of India, Bank of Baroda, Union Bank of India alongwith the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Financial Services) on the Regional Rural Banks
(Appointment and Promotion of Officers and Employees) Service Rules, 2010
and priority sector lending schemes with special reference to micro credit to
farmers. The following Members of the Committee were present in the
meeting.-
P
RESENT
1. Shri Kalraj Mishra ––      Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
3. Shrimati Maya Singh
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
6. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam
7. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
8. Shri Bharatkumar Raut
9. Shri M.V . Mysura Reddy
10. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
3. Shri R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director
104

105
Representatives of Dena Bank
1. Shri D.L. Rawal, Chairman & Managing Director
2. Shri T.R. Chawla, Chief General Manager
Representatives of Bank of India
1. Shri N. Seshadri, Executive Director
2. Shri A.P. Ghugal, General Manager
Representative of Bank of Baroda
Shri N.S. Srinath, Executive Director
Representatives of Central Bank of India
l. Shri M.V . Tanksale, Chairman & Managing Director
2. Shri Malay Mukherjee, Executive Director
Representatives of Union Bank of India
1. Shri M.V . Nair, Chairman & Managing Director
2. Shri S.K. Jain, Executive Director
Representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Services)
1. Shri Tarsem Singh, Director
2. Shri Ambrik Singh, Under Secretary
Representatives of NABARD
1. Shri V. Ramakrishna Rao, Executive Director
2. Shri A. Lahiri, Chief General Manager
At the outset, the Chairman while initiating the discussion stated that
Regional Rural Banks are an important component of the banking system as
they are the face of the banking system in rural and backward areas. Therefore
proper working conditions of the employees of these RRBs was important for
the proper working if these entities. He thereafter sought clarifications on the
following issues i.e. (i) Employees working in RRBs have no proper promotion

106
opportunities. Some employees even retire in the same post in which they
joined; (ii) There is lack of manpower in RRBs. Many branches have one
manager and one clerk. Payment of MNREGS wages and issue of Kisan
Credit Cards (KCC) strain the resources of RRBs further; (iii) Dearness
Allowance and basic pay at par with sponsor banks but there is no pension
scheme for RRB employees; (iv) There is high attrition rate and the youths are
not attracted to RRBs; and (v) whether it is feasible to relax the qualification
so that local people can be inducted.
2. The CMD, Dena Bank, informed the Committee that it had two RRBs at
present with it. These were the Dena Gujarat Gramin Bank and Durg
Rajnandagaon 
Gramin Bank, moreover both these RRBs were profit making.
It was also stated that as compared to the sponsor bank which have an all
India presence the RRBs area of operation is restricted. Further since most of
the branches of RRBs are located in rural and semi-rural areas their business
volume is also relatively low. As such their upgradation of a branch to next
category takes a much longer time. There are less number of branches of
RRBs as they operate in a compact area. These are the factors which hamper
their promotion avenues. Likewise Bank of India informed that they had 5
RRBs with them. They informed that Dr. K.C. Chakrabarty report’s
recommendations are being implemented in consultation with the Government
of India and the concerned State Governments. As per the arrangement first
the concerned State Government would release 15% of the amount needed
for recapitalization of the RRB, thereafter the sponsor bank would release its
share of 35% and then Government of India would release the remaining
50%. As of today the process of recapitalization was at various stages in
different States and the process would be completed soon.
3. The Executive Director, Bank of Baroda informed that they had 5 RRBs
with them and these were functional in 5 States. Overall these 5 RRBs had
1223 branches covering 46 districts in the said five States. Out of these 5
RRBs, Baroda Gujarat Gramin Bank didn’t need any recapitalisation of its
financial position was already strong. As for the remaining 4 RRBs the process

107
of recapitalisation was underway. This process would help these RRBs
overcome their financial problems and also provide funds for loan disbursal
which coupled with sound investment policy would help in reviving these
RRBs. It was also informed that the Non-Performing Assets of these RRBs
were less than that of the sponsor bank because of the good repayment habit
of the people in the rural areas. The Committee was informed about the different
priority sector lending schemes operational in Bank of Baroda and also in its
concerned RRBs. The efforts made by them to fulfil their commitment under
the financial inclusion target were also ‘brought before the Committee.
4. The CMD, Union Bank of India in his presentation informed that earlier
it was operating 3 RRBs in the State of Uttar Pradesh. In the year 2005 these
were merged and one single entity named ‘Kashi Gomti Samyut Gramin Bank’
had been created. It was also operating one RRB in Madhya Pradesh named
Rewa Sidhi Gramin Bank. It was informed that as a result of the amalgamation
the immediate challenge faced by the Bank was of cultural and emotional
integration of the erstwhile units into the new units. However the benefits of
amalgamation far out-weigh the problems and it in the longer run has resulted
in better utilization of resources and more profits for these entities. Today
these RRBs had also become an important platform for the sponsor banks for
meeting these priority sector targets as they have a better reach and network
in the rural and backward areas and are better placed to dispense the loans and
policies in these areas. The local people tend to have a sense of attachment
with these entities which translated into healthy repayments and low NPAs
for the RRBs.
5. The CMD, Central Bank of India informed that it had 7 RRBs with it
and the most pressing problem today is not only of Staff shortage but also of
increasing the capacity of the existing staff. This was because when these
RRBs were set up they had very limited objectives and so the training of their
staff was also simple. However over a period of time the work of these RRBs
kept increasing but adequate training provisions were not made. Though in

108
the last few years a sustained effort by the Ministry of Finance, NABARD and
the concerned banks has helped to augment the staff strength of these RRBs.
This has lead to increased efficiency and greater customer satisfaction. It
was informed that out of 640 districts in the country, 525 districts had already
been covered by the RRB network.
6. Concluding the discussion, the Chairman reflected the views of the
Committee that today RRBs have a presence in almost all the districts of the
country but qualitative differences need to be brought in its functioning. Today
even the private banks are venturing onto opening RRBs in the country. This
shows that rural economy holds lots of potential and the State owned banks
must ensure that they are the ahead of the private entities in tapping the rural
areas.
7. The meeting thereafter concluded with a mutual vote of thanks.

ANNEXURE-IX
STUDY NOTE OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on the 29th September, 2011 at Goa to
discuss with the representatives of State Bank of India alongwith the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Financial Services) on the Regional Rural Banks
(Appointment and Promotion of Officers and Employees) Service Rules, 2010
and priority sector lending schemes with special reference to micro credit to
farmers and State Bank of India Officers Service Rules, 1955 - Implementation
of 128
th Report of COSL, Rajya Sabha. The following Members of the
Committee were present in the meeting:-
PRESENT
1. Shri Kalraj Mishra ––      Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Prakash Javadekar
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
4. Dr. K. P . Ramalingam
5. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
6. Shri Bharatkumar Raut
7. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri N. K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
3. Shri R. P . Shukla, Assistant Director
Representatives of State Bank of India
1. Shri Krishna Kumar, Managing Director
2. Shri J. K. Sinha, Chief General Manager
3. Shri A. K. Garg, Chief General Manager
109

110
Representative of NABARD
1. Shri S. D. Kulkarni, General Manager
2. At the outset, the Chairman highlighted the fact that the State Bank of
India was having the largest number of RRBs sponsored by it and the steps
taken by them to enhance the working of these RRBs was of crucial importance.
He thereafter sought clarifications on the following points i.e. (i) Employees
working in RRBs have no proper promotion opportunities, Some employees
even retire in the same post in which they joined. Steps by the Ministry/
sponsor banks in this regard; (ii) There is lack of manpower in RRBs. Majority
of branches have one manager and one clerk. Payment of MNREGS wages
and issue of Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) strain the resources of RRBs further.
What has been done by the Ministry & SBI to provide adequate manpower to
the RRBs; (iii) There is high attrition rate and the youths are not attracted to
RRBs. What steps have been taken to solve this problem; and (iv) what are
the problems, if any, faced by RRBs in achieving priority sector targets and
what steps are taken to overcome these problems.
3. Managing Director, State Bank of India informed that they were
sponsoring 18 RRBs in 17 States having 2817 branches with a total number
of 11848 employees. These RRBs are operational in 126 districts of the country.
In the financial year 2010-11, 154 new branches had already been opened and
another 150 branches would be made operational in the current financial year
itself. It was also informed that all the RRBs sponsored by SBI were profit
making though due to implementation of the IX Bipartite wage settlement the
profit margins of the RRBs were negatively effected. Though it was fact that
the RRBs were facing manpower shortages but efforts have been made to
ensure that the operational efficiency and smooth functioning of the banks are
not affected. This has been done by-way of introduction of Core Banking
Solutions in all the RRBs. The training of the employees has also been stressed
upon and to this end training programmes have been designed in collaboration
with Agriculture Banking College at Pune, BIRD centres at Lucknow,
Mangalore and Bolpur etc.

111
4. The Committee was also informed that the RRBs have been playing a
major role in priority sector obligations also. The RRBs gave a total of
Rs. 1534 crores of loans to the weaker sections during the Financial year
2010-11. In fact 54% of the total advances of RRBs are towards weaker
sections, which is well above the bench mark set by the Reserve Bank of
India. The RRBs have also started an intensive campaign to associate self-
help groups with them and in the last year the number of such SHGs associated
with these RRBs nearly doubled. In regard to status of recapitalization in these
RRBs the Committee was informed that recaptilization has been spread out in
two financial yea rs. The target RRBs have also been identified and the
Banks share has already been released. Now the concerned State Governments
have to contribute their share of the money for recaptilization of t hese
RRBs.
5. In regard to the status of implementation of the 128
1h Report of the
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha on the SBI Officers Service
Rules, 1992, the Committee was informed that keeping in view the divergent
view of GOI, the Bank approached the then Additional Solicitor General of
India and the excerpts of his opinion are mentioned as under:
i) It is permissible for the State Bank of India to frame SBI Officerss’
Service Rules in exercise of powers conferred by Section 43(1)
of the SBI Act. In fact, the statutory powers to frame SBI Officers’
Service Rules flows out of the provisions of Section 43(1) of SBI
Act only. This can be determined either by an order or by rules or
by regulations.
ii) Accordingly, the SBI Officers’ Service Rules are statutorily required
to be framed in exercise of powers under Section 43(1) and not
under Section 50 of SBI Act.
The above opinion of the Additional Solicitor General of India has been
sent to the GOI and their advices are awaited.

112
7. Concluding the discussion, the Chairman appreciated the working of
the RRBs sponsored by SBI and the efforts made by them to meet their priority
sector obligations. He also asked the Ministry to expedite the process of
implementing the Committees recommendations as contained in its 1281h Report
and any undue delay should be avoided at all cost.
8. The meeting thereafter concluded with a mutual vote of thanks.

ANNEXURE-X
STUDY NOTE OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJY A SABHA
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on the 01 st October, 2011 at Goa to
discuss with the representatives of Bank of Maharashtra alongwith the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Financial Services) on the Regional Rural Banks
(Appointment and Promotion of Officers and Employees) Service Rules, 2010
and priority sector lending schemes with special reference to micro credit to
farmers. The following Members of the Committee were present in the
meeting:-
P
RESENT
1. Shri M.V . Mysura Reddy       –– in the Chair
MEMBERS
2. Shri Prakash Javadekar
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
4. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam
5. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
6. Shri Bharatkumar Raut
7. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri N. K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
3. Shri R. P . Shukla, Assistant Director
Representatives of Bank, of Maharashtra
1. Shri A. S. Bhattacharya, Chairman & Managing Director
2. Shri A. S. Banerjee, Chief General Manager
113

114
Representative of NABARD
Shri S.D. Kulkarni, General Manager
Representative of Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Services)
Shri Tarsem Singh, Director
2. At the outset, the Convener highlighted the fact that Regional Rural
Banks today were playing a very important role in helping their sponsor banks
reduce their Non-Performing Assets and also in meeting their priority sector
lending obligations. He thereafter sought clarifications on the following points
i.e. (i) employees working in RRBs have no proper promotion opportunities.
Some employees even retire in the same post in which they joined. The steps
taken by the Ministry/sponsor banks in this regard; (ii) The Committee noted
that there is lack of manpower in RRBs and many branches have one manager
and only one clerk in position. Payment of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme wages and issue of Kisan Credit Cards (KCC)
strain the resources of RRBs further. What has been done by the Ministry/
sponsor bank to provide adequate manpower to the RRBs; (iii) There is high
attrition rate and the youths are not attracted to RRBs. What steps have been
taken to solve this problem; and (iv) What are the problems, if any, faced by
RRBs in achieving priority sector targets and what steps are taken to overcome
these problems.
3. The CMD, Bank of Maharashtra informed the Committee that at present
there was one RRB with them i.e. the Maharashtra Gramin Bank. In the year
2009, with the aim to consolidate their financial strength and to enhance public
confidence and undertake commercial activities & other new business activities
for continued self sustainability & viability with continued growth in the present
competitive era. Three RRBs i.e. Marathwada Gramin Bank, Aurangabad-
Jalna Gramin Banle and Thane Gramin Bank were merged to create
‘Maharashtra Gramin Bank’. This step has helped to create more promotion
avenues and larger financial base which would make it financially sustainable.

115
4. It was further informed that to handle the problem of staff shortage, the
following steps have been taken i.e. (i) Assessment of the position of branch
categorization on basis of criteria of average business for last two years laid
down by NABARD for RRBs; (ii) Analyzing the position of branch
categorization on the basis of business performance followed by assessing &
confirming the manpower requirements for all posts for direct recruitment &
promotion on the basis of Thorat Committee recommendations and (iii) process
of recruitment in MGB has been put on fast track process to fill up vacant
posts. Promotions have also been given to help fill up posts in the Officer
cadre. It is hoped that with this exercise in process the problem of staff
shortage would be suitably handled.
5. As for the social responsibilities of Bank of Maharashtra is concerned it
was informed that a number of initiatives had been taken like for example
creation of a Trust named Mahabank Agriculture Research and Rural
Development Foundation, This Trust undertakes various projects and village
improvement programs at different places. Also a NGO formed in association
with National Institute of Bank Management named Gramin Mahila Va Balak
Vikas Mandal is actively involved in formation, nurturing, training and ensuring
linkages of SHGs to bank credit. These initiatives have helped the Bank to
meet its priority sector lending obligations also. The Bank has established
Mahabank Self Employment Training Institute for providing training to rural
youth and women to enable them to acquire skills for self employment. Likewise
the bank also provides counseling to fanners on various issues like agriculture,
animal husbandry etc via its Mahabank Vidarbha Shetkari Jagruti Abhiyan.
6. Concluding the discussion, the Chairman appreciated the efforts made
by Bank of Maharashtra in the rural areas of Maharashtra. The steps taken by
the Bank were commendable keeping in view the fact that number of farmer
suicides had been reported in the areas where these initiatives were underway.
However more efforts are needed to be made to augment the rural economy
in a better ways.
7. The meeting thereafter concluded with a mutual vote of thanks.

ANNEXURE-XI
STUDY NOTE OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on the 24th February, 2012 at Kolkata
to discuss with the representatives of Allahabad Bank, United Bank of India.
and RRBs sponsored by them alongwith the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Financial Services) on the Regional Rural Bank (Appointment and Promotion
of Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010, Priority Sector Lending Scheme
and Complaint Redressal Mechanism for Employees of Banks. The following
Members of the Committee were present in the meeting:-
P
RESENT
1. Shri Kalraj Mishra ––      Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
3. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam
4. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
5. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
3. Shri R.S. Rawat, Deputy Director
Representative of Allahabad Bank
Shri J.P Dua, Chairman & Managing Director
Representatives of United Bank of India
1. Shri Bhaskar Sen, Chairman & Managing Director
2. Shri Ranjan Kumar Mohanty, General Manager
116

117
Representative of Bangiya Gramin Vikas Bank
Shri Rana Majumdar, Chairman
Representative of Allahabad UP Gramin Bank
Shri Sudhanshu Gaur, Chairman
Representatives of NABARD
1. Shri S. Padmanabhan, Chief General Manager
2. Shri R.K. Thanvi, Deputy General Manager
Representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Services)
1. Dr. A. Bhattacharya, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Amrik Singh, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman briefed the organisations about the mandate
of the Committee and about its functions. He also highlighted the importance
of the Regional Rural Banks in the rural economy and their significance in
building the rural infrastructure. He then sought clarifications on the following
issues i.e. (i) Employees working in RRBs have no proper promotion
opportunities. Some people even retire in the same post in which they join;
(ii) There is lack of manpower in RRBs. Many branches have one manager
and only one clerk. Payment of MNREGS wages and issue of Kisan Credit
Cards (KCC) strain the resources of RRBs further; (iii) Dearness Allowance
and basic pay is at par with sponsor banks but there is no pension scheme for
RRB employees; (iv) There is high attrition rate and the youths are not attracted
to RRBs; and (v) whether it is feasible to relax the qualification so that more
number of local people can be inducted in the service.
3. The CMD, United Bank of India in its presentation informed that initially
it was sponsoring 11 RRBs in four States. However, after the decision was
taken to amalgamate the RRBs today it had 4 RRBs in States of West Bengal,
Assam, Tripura and Manipur. After the amalgamation process posts of Scale

118
1 V & V have been created which have increased the promotional avenues of
the RRB employees. It has also been decided to further amalgamate the RRBs
and this would help to further increase the promotion avenues. He also informed
the Committee that as per the recommendations of Dr. K.C. Chakrabarty
report, recapitalization of the RRBs was underway. There have been some
delays in release of share money by concerned State Governments and also
the Union Government but they were hopeful that things would be sorted out
in the near future.
4. UBI further informed that for premature withdrawal of the Chairman of
the RRBs permission of NABARD is required and normally such requests are
not acceded to by them. Only in exceptional cases where the performance of
the Chairman of the RRB is not satisfactory or when the services of the
Chairman are required by the sponsor bank such requests are entertained.
NABARD is quite vigilant in this regard as such unmerited removal of the
Chairman tends to affect the morale of the whole organisation.
5. The CMD, Allahabad Bank in its presentation informed the Committee
that it was sponsoring two RRBs located in Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh.
It was noteworthy that both these RRBs were profit making and didn’t have
any accumulated losses. As for handling the manpower shortages in the RRBs
the Bank had undertaken an assessment study of the requirements of these
RRBs as per Thorat Committee recommendations and filling up of vacancies
in different scales was underway. It was hoped that the process would be
completed in a few months time. The Committee was also informed that the
Bank had also drawn up a project for further expansion of the RRBs. This had
become more feasible after the Reserve Bank relaxed the guidelines for opening
new branches in tier 3 to 7 centres. The RRBs today have become an 
important
vehicle for rural marketing. The RRB branches besides focussing on micro-
finance also provide insurance products to their customers. Further all the
RRBs have now made available various credit products to all segments of the
society whether from farm or non-farm sector which has helped to revive the
importance of the RRBs in the rural economy.

119
6. Chief General Manager, NABARD then informed the Committee about
the steps taken to handle customer grievance in the RRBs and also the grievance
of the employees of the RRBs. It highlighted the role of NABARD in the
whole set up and the steps taken to bring uniformity in the RRBs with respect
to implementation of the grievance redressal mechanism for their customers.
7. Concluding the discussion, the Chairman expressed his surprise over
the fact that Allahabad Bank which had it’s headquarter in West Bengal didn’t
have any RRB in the State. However, he expressed satisfaction over the
performance of the RRBs sponsored by them and hoped that branch expansion
undertaken by Allahabad bank would start soon. He expressed concern over
the delay in release of funds by the Central Government for recapitalization of
the RRBs sponsored by UBI and urged the Ministry of Finance to expedite the
process so that the revival of these RRBs is on a fast-track.
8. The meeting thereafter concluded with a mutual vote of thanks.

120
ANNEXURE-XII
STUDY NOTE OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA
The Committee met at 12.30 P.M. on the 25th February, 2012 at Kolkata
to discuss with the representatives of UCO Bank and RRBs sponsored by
them alongwith the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)
on the Regional Rural Bank (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and
Employees) Rules, 2010, Priority Sector Lending Scheme and Complaint
Redressal Mechanism for Employees of Banks. The following Members of
the Committee were present in the meeting:-
P
RESENT
1. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare    ––       in the Chair
MEMBERS
2. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
3. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam
4. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
3. Shri R.S. Rawat, Deputy Director
Representatives of United Cooperative Bank (UCO Bank)
1. Shri Arun Kaul, Chairman & Managing Director
2. Shri P . Mitra, Chairman, Paschim Banga Gramin Bank
Representatives of NABARD
1. Shri S. Padmanabhan, Chief General Manager
2. Shri R.K. Thanvi, Deputy General Manager

121
Representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Services)
1. Dr. A. Bhattacharya, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Amrik Singh, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Convenor while initiating the discussion informed that
the Committee had taken up for examination the RRB (Appointment and
Promotion of Officers and Employees) Service Rules, 2010 and had already
heard the views of some public sector banks. Priority Sectors lending being
an important part of bank credit delivery in India, the RBI requires all public
and private sector banks to direct a fixed percentage of their lending to “priority
sectors,”. India’s priority sector lending requirements are part of a policy
effort by the Reserve Bank of India to allocate credit toward marginal and
higher risk sectors. The Committee is aware that for the banks to achieve
their targets and for efficient customer service and satisfaction, the morale
and motivation of the employees of banks is very important and that a robust
and sound system of grievance redressal for employees is of utmost importance.
He also sought to know about the policy for complaints redressal mechanism
for customers and whether they have any time schedule within which the
complaints of employees are to be redressed.
3. The CMD, UCO Bank informed that they were sponsoring five RRBs in
Rajasthan, Odhisa, Bihar, West Bengal and Madhya Pradesh with total staff
strength close to 4000 employees and 800 plus branches. They also informed
that the RRBs sponsored by them were not able to carry out all the
recapitalization steps required to be taken as provided in the Dr.K.C.
Chakrabarty report. This was because the State Governments had still to
release their share of the money. This was in a way hampering their revival;
however, talks were underway on this issue. The Committee was also informed
that the Non-Performing Assets of the their RRBs were not quite satisfactory
and ranged from 4% to 13% for different RRBs. This was also one area
where urgent steps were needed to be taken. It was due to this high NPAs

122
that branch expansion of these RRBs were not feasible. Though the bank was
taking steps to manage the situation and in fact had even been able to
significantly reduce NPAs in the last few years yet more work needed to be
done in this area.
4. The Committee was informed about the socio-economic initiatives
launched by UCO Bank. This included schemes like ‘UCO Utthaan Scheme’
for upliftment of BPL households in selected villages. In these villages BPL
Development Committees have been formed between villages, bank officials
and government officials for providing not only loans but also assistance for
proper utilization of the loan money. The Bank had also ensured that loan
applications under priority sector were cleared without delays and for this
there was daily monitoring of daily disbursals under the agriculture and priority
sector loans. However, it was hoped that the definition of ‘priority sector’
would soon be revised to take into consideration today’s ground realities because
at present to achieve the priority sector targets tends to get difficult. The
Committee was also informed about the grievance redressal mechanism in
place in UCO Bank and also it’s concerned RRBs.
5. Concluding the discussion, the Convenor observed that the government
was in the process of redefining the priority sector definition and the banks
should try to ensure that their views are also taken into consideration. He was
of the opinion that Ministry of Finance must be taking steps to involve all the
concerned stake holders in this regard. The Committee also sought details
about the number of loans disbursed to weavers and small artisans in West
Bengal as it was crucial for revival of the craft industry in the State.
6. The meeting thereafter concluded with a mutual vote of thanks.

ANNEXURE-XIII
STUDY NOTE OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABRA
The Committee met at 09.30 A.M. on the 26th June, 2012 at Dharmashala
to discuss with the representatives of Oriental Bank of Commerce, Punjab
National Bank, NABARD alongwith the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Services) on the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion
of Officers and Employees) Service Rules, 2010 and grievance redressal
mechanism for customers as well as employees; the priority sector lending
schemes with special reference to credit to small/marginal farmers. The
following Members of the Committee were present in the meeting.-
P
RESENT
1. Shrimati Maya Singh ––      Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
3. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam
4. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
5. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut
6. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi
7. Shri Shantaram Naik
8. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
9. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
Representatives of Oriental Bank of Commerce
1. Shri S.L. Bansal, Chairman cum Managing Director
2. Shri V . Kannan, Executive Director
123

124
Representatives of Punjab National Bank
1. Smt. Usha Ananthasubramanian, Executive Director
2. Shri K.S. Phogat, General Manager
Representatives of NABARD
1. Shri Naresh Gupta, Chief General Manager
2. Shri K.S. Raghupathi, Deputy General Manager
Representatives of RBI
1. Shri Jasbir Singh, Regional Director
2. Shri R. Gurumurthy, General Manager
Representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial
Services)
1. Dr. A. Bhattacharya, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Amrik Singh, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson informed that the Committee had taken
up for examination the RRB (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and
Employees) Service Rules, 2010 and had already heard the views of some
public sector banks. Priority Sectors lending being an important part of
bank credit delivery in India, the RBI requires all public and private sector
banks to direct a fixed percentage of their lending to “priority sectors,”. India’s
priority sector lending requirements are part of a policy effort by the Reserve
Bank of India to allocate credit toward marginal and higher risk sectors. The
Committee is aware that for the banks to achieve their targets and for efficient
customer service and satisfaction, the morale and motivation of the employees
of banks is very important and that a robust and sound system of grievance
redressal for employees is of utmost importance. She also sought to know
about the policy for internal complaints redressal mechanism for employees
of Oriental Bank of Commerce and Punjab National Bank and whether they
have any time schedule within which the complaints of employees are to be
redressed.

125
3. The CMD, Oriental Bank of Commerce in his presentation informed the
Committee that they had a duly approved Grievance Redressal Policy and it
covered all the points that were there in the Model Policy for Grievance
Redressal for banks approved by the Management Committee.of Indian Banks
Association and Reserve Bank of India. The basis of this policy is that the
bank employees work in good faith and without prejudice to the interest of the
customers. The Bank has zero tolerance for complaints regarding misconduct
and misbehaviour by staff. This starts right from placing the complaint register
at a prominent place in the banks to having a call centre and on-line facility
where complaints can be registered. These complaints are monitored in a time
bound manner and accountability is fixed at each level to ensure that the
complaints are duly taken care of. Likewise the Committee was informed that
due importance is also given to grievance redressal of the employees of their
organisation. In fact the last working day of each month has been fixed as the
Staff Grievance Redressal Day. On this day the DGM (HRD) and concerned
officials make themselves available at the Head Office to resolve staff
grievances. The efficiency of this system can be noted from the fact that in
2011-12 a total of 56 complaints were received and out of this only 5 remain
pending as of date.
4. The Committee was also informed that Oriental Bank of Commerce had
no RRBs under it. Despite this it had been able to meet its priority sector
obligations due to its strong emphasis on rural areas and was focussing on
agriculture sector for giving loans. It had a number of agriculture. specific
schemes under which the processing related charges are considerably reduced
or even totally waived off to motivate the framers to avail them. The Bank had
started a project named ‘Oriental Bank Grameen Project’ under which finances
are provided to rural poor under the home grown model of micro finance. It
.is been implemented through Joint Liability Groups consisting of 5 members
per group preferably women. It was also informed that the Bank was also
considering setting up a RRB as it would help increase its presence in rural
areas.

126
5. The Executive Director, Punjab National Bank, informed that they had 6
RRBs with them spread out in 5 States. Keeping in view their experience of
handling these RRBs he felt that the following amendments may be introduced
in the rules i.e. (i) The minimum period of service in a particular Scale of
promotion may be introduced to 4 years from 5-6 years upto Scale-Ill to bring
younger and energetic work force at higher levels; (ii) At least 25% of the
candidates may be kept in the waiting list on promotion; (iii) Minimum period
of preceding 4 years may be taken into account for looking into adverse
remarks before promotion; (iv) the sealed cover process should be co-terminus
with the commencement of the next promotion process; and (v) The minimum
qualifying marks in interview should be 50%. However, for candidates belonging
to SC or ST categories, it should be 40%.
6. Concluding the discussion, the Chairperson agreed that the issues
pertaining to the service conditions of the Officials and employees of the
‘RRBs were very critical to the effective functioning of these entities. She
noted that the Committee in their interaction with different Employees Unions
of the RRBs again and again felt that their was an urgent need to address the
issues raised by them. She urged the Ministry of Finance to take up the matter
at a priority basis.
7. The meeting thereafter concluded with a mutual vote of thanks.

ANNEXURE-XIV
STUDY NOTE OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA
The Committee met at. 11.55 A.M. on the 11th February, 2013 at Jaisalmer
to discuss with the representatives of State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur and
Marwar Gramin Bank alongwith the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Services) on the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment & Promotion
of Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010 and Grievance Redressal Mechanism
for the customers of RRBs in Rajasthan. The following Members of the
Committee were present in the meeting:-
PRESENT
1. Shrimati Maya Singh ––     Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
3. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam
4. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
3. Shri R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director
Representatives of State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur
1. Shri Shiva Kumar, Managing Director
2. Shri S.S. Negi, General Manager
Representative of Marwar Gramin Bank
Shri Uttam Chand Agarwal, Chairman
Representative of Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Services)
Ms Anna Roy, Director (Banking Division)
127

128
2. The Chairperson in her opening remarks highlighted the important role
played by Regional Rural Banks in the rural economy by providing institutional
support to Self-Help Groups in the State of Rajasthan. Thereafter she sought
clarifications on the following points  i.e. (i) failure of RRBs to attract best
talents in the recruitments (ii) the absence of established Pay and Service
benefits unlike commercial banks and the steps taken by the Ministry /sponsor
banks in this regard (iii) RRBs employees getting paltry amount as merger
pension without any DA component after their retirement (iv) What steps
have been taken by the Ministry to maintain parity in respect of superannuation
benefits of the RRB employees; (v) business conflict between Sponsor Banks
and the RRBs sponsored by them; (vi) What has been done by the Ministry to
encourage the business of RRBs; (vii) Whether the Ministry has accepted the
recommendation of Dr. K.C .Chakroborty Committee Report regarding full
autonomy of RRBs and extending further capital support to maintain CRAR at
industry level and (ix) the steps taken by RRBs /Sponsor Banks to simplify the
Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) so that customers can lodge their
grievances at call centre of customer care unit without facing hassles of proving
identity, account details, etc.
3. The Managing Director, State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur informed the
Committee that initially when the Regional Rural Banks were set up it was felt
that its staff would be from the local area and would be well aware about the
problems of that area. The RRBs also had a limited role at that time. So
accordingly the pay and associated benefits were less as compared to the
staff of the sponsor banks. However as of date no such differences are there
and the pay along with all benefits of the employees of the RRBs are at par
with the employees of the sponsor banks. The Chairman of the RRBs are also
of the level of Deputy General Manager and sometimes even General Manager
level officers are also posted from the sponsor banks. This itself shows the
importance that the sponsor banks give to the RRBs. He acknowledged that
strengthening the RRBs was in the interest of the sponsor banks also because
with the increasing incomes in rural areas these RRBs could generate good

129
collections for the banks. It was also informed that in the State bank of Bikaner
& Jaipur the average staff strength was about 4 and efforts were been made
to further strengthen the RRBs by increasing the number of the staff and also
giving proper training to the existing staff.
4. The Director, Ministry of Finance informed the Committee that as
informed earlier the discussions on the issue of giving pensionary benefits to
the employees of the RRBs has been taken up in the Ministry and in principle
agreement has been reached to extend pensionary benefits on the line of
Contributory Pension Scheme to the RRB employees also. Now discussions
would be held with the concerned sponsor banks since they would have to
implement the scheme. Therefore in the coming months the details of the
pension scheme would be worked out and then implemented to the RRBs.
5. It was also informed that initially when RRBs were set up they were
visualized to work in one or two districts. However over a period of time
some RRBs become so big that that they covered entire States. This lead to a
condition where more than one RRB were functional in some districts.
Therefore it has now been decided to merge RRBs at the State level to reduce
their number. This would help increase their size and also provide more
promotion avenues to the employees. Further a more balanced approach can
be adopted to opening new branches of the RRBs in areas having no banking
network. In this light the process had already begun in Rajasthan where a
number of RRBs had already been merged and more would be merged in the
coming days.
6. The Chairperson concluding the discussion stressed the need for
strengthening the RRBs by providing institutional support. She also was of
the opinion that grievance redressal of the customers of RRBs should also be
given due attention.
7. The meeting thereafter concluded with a mutual vote of thanks.

130
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA
XXVII
Twenty Seventh Meeting
The Committee met at 02.15 P.M. on the 02nd May, 2013 in Room Number
126-C, Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. The following Members of
the Committee were present in the meeting:-
P
RESENT
1. Shrimati Maya Singh ––     Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
3. Shri P. Kannan
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam
6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
7. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut
8. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi
9. Shri Shantaram Naik
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
11. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay
12. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
3. Shri R.S. Rawat, Deputy Director
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Deputy Director
5. Shrimati Monica Baa, Assistant Director

131
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and thereafter
the Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration one-by-
one.
(i) Two Hundred and Fourth Report on the Statutory Orders laid on
the Table of the Rajya Sabha during the 227
th
 Session.
(ii) Two Hundred and Fifth Report on the Regional Rural Banks
(Appointment and Promotion of Officers and Employees) Rules,
2010;
(iii) Two Hundred and Sixth Report on the Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004;
and
(iv) Two Hundred and Seventh Report on Motor Spirit and High Speed
Diesel (Regulation of Supply and Distribution and Prevention of
Malpractices) Order, 2005 and the Electrical Wires, Cables,
Appliances and Protection Devices and Accessories (Quality
Control) Order, 2003.
3. The Committee adopted these Reports with some amendments suggested
by the Members.
4. The Committee while discussing the draft Two Hundred and Fourth
Report on the Statutory Orders laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha during the
227
th
 Session was of the opinion that its repeated recommendation for timely
laying of the subordinate legislation framed under different Acts before the
House, have not evoked the desired promptness in the Ministries/Departments.
However, the Committee has noted some improvement in this regard. While
33.5% notifications were delayed during 226
th Session, it came down to 26.25%
during 22th Session. It was, therefore, decided to continue the exercise of
summoning the Secretaries of the concerned Ministries before the Committee
to explain such delays.

132
5. While discussing the reasons of delay in laying of notifications by
Ministries/Departments the Committee noticed that in most of the cases reasons
citied/forwarded by the Ministry/Department has been the late receipt of printed
copies of notifications from Government of India Press. To understand the
problem and for its solution the Committee decided to summon the Secretary,
Ministry of Urban Development and administrative Ministry of Government of
India Press responsible for printing Government of India Notifications.
6. The Committee authorized its Chairperson and in her absence Shri Vijay
Jawaharlal Darda and in his absence Dr. K.P. Ramalingam to present the Reports
to the House on 03
rd December, 2013.
7. The Chairperson thanked the Members present and meeting was
concluded at 2.40 P.M.