       
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
 
 REPORT NO.  
21 7 
TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
Taking over of  Distance Education Council (DEC) of IGNOU by the University 
Grants Commission (UGC) through an administrative order in violation of IGNOU 
Act, 1985 and the Statutes framed thereunder  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18 December , 2014) 

 
  
C O N T E N T S 
      
        PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION 
 OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
(ii) 
3. REPORT ON THE TAKING OVER OF  
DISTANCE EDUCATION COUNCIL (DEC) OF 
IGNOU BY THE UNIVERSITY GRANTS 
COMMISSION (UGC) THROUGH AN 
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER IN VIOLATION OF 
IGNOU ACT, 1985 AND THE STATUTES 
FRAMED THEREUNDER 
 
 
 
4. SUMMARY OF 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
 
 
5. ANNEXURE 
  
6. MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   15 th  SEPTEMBER, 2014) 
 
 
 
 
1.  Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy   Chairman 
2. Shri  M.P. Achuthan     
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
5. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
6. Shri Kalpataru Das 
7. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
8. Shri S. Muthukaruppan 
9. Shri K. Parasaran 
10. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
11. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
12. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh 
13. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
14. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
15. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
    
 
 
S
ECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri N. K. Singh , Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
3. Shri  Ravindra Singh Rawat, Joint Director 
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director 
5. Shri R.P. Shukla,  Deputy Director 
6. Smt. Monica Baa , Assistant Director  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordina te Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on i ts behalf, this Two Hundred and 
Seventeenth Report of the Committee.  
 
2.  The Committee examined the matters that came up  while scrutinizing the issue of 
taking over of Distance Education Council (DEC) of IGNOU by the University Grants 
Commission (UGC) through an administrative order in  violation of IGNOU Act, 1985 
and the Statutes framed thereunder and issues relat ing to them along with the comments 
received from the Government. 
 
3.   The observations and recommendations of the Co mmittee are contained in the 
Report.  
 
4.  The Committee considered and adopted the draft Re port in its meeting held on the       
17 
th   December, 2014 
 
 
 
 
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY 
Chairman 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
 Rajya Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI  
December 18, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
REPORT 
 
 
Report on the taking over of  Distance Education Council (DEC) of IGNOU by the 
University Grants Commission (UGC) through an administrative order in violation 
of IGNOU Act, 1985 and the Statutes framed thereunder  
 
The Distance Education Council (DEC), which had bee n created and was 
functioning under Indira Gandhi National Open Unive rsity (IGNOU), Act 1985 was 
abolished and its mandate was given to the Universi ty Grants Commission (UGC) and 
All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE) through an administrative order of the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) dated  29 December 2012 
(Annexure-I). This was  done  without making the necessary amendments in the IGNO U 
Act, 1985 which mandates IGNOU inter alia  to regulate distance education in the 
country.   DEC, which regulated distance education in the country, had come into 
existence as an authority of IGNOU under Statute 28   framed in exercise of powers 
conferred by Section 16 of the IGNOU Act, 1985.  No w, transferring the mandate given 
to IGNOU (read DEC) to the UGC & AICTE raises the following questions:  
(i)  whether an administrative order can undo something that was created 
under a law passed by Parliament;  
(ii)  whether this can be done without amending the IGNOU Act;  
(iii)  whether UGC and AICTE Acts provided for regulating the Open & 
Distance Learning (ODL) mode of education;  
(iv)   whether the Ministry was legally right in taking such a decision; and  
(v)  whether Ministry of Law was consulted before taking such a recourse?     
 
2. In order to examine and understand these issues,  the Committee requested he 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) to furnish 
its written comments vide  a D.O. letter dated 5 
 June 2013. The Ministry furnished their 
comments and clarifications on 25 June 2013 (Annexure-II) . 
 

3. The Ministry’s arguments for abolishing DEC and transferring its mandate - of 
regulating ODL system, to UGC & AICTE was basically  based on objections being 
raised by other Universities in this system.  Their  argument was how can one university 
(IGNOU) control or regulate the working of other un iversities in this system?  The 
Ministry informed that upto 2007, DEC used to give recognition to institutions offering 
general courses in the distance mode but during that year, DEC started giving recognition 
for technical programs also under the distance mode .  This was against the policy of the 
AICTE, which is responsible for maintaining standards in technical education, to conduct 
technical programs through regular (conventional) m ode only.  This created confusion as 
to who will regulate the technical education in the  ODL mode.  The Committee was 
informed that Delhi University had challenged the a uthority of the DEC to regulate their 
ODL programmes in the Delhi High Court.  The main issue before the Court was whether 
an authority of one university could regulate the o ther universities.  Unscrupulous 
institutions conducting ODL programmes started expl oiting this confusion to their 
commercial advantage, it was argued. 
 
4. The Ministry further informed that in view of th is, a 'Madhava Menon Committee' 
was constituted to suggest measures to regulate the standards of education being imparted 
through distance mode.  It recommended to create a separate regulatory authority - the 
Distance Education Council of India (DECI) for regu lating distance education by a 
separate Act of Parliament. The Ministry, however, did not accept the recommendation of 
bringing a separate Act for this purpose on the ple a that the 'Higher Education and 
Research Bill' was then pending in Parliament which  sought to subsume all such existing 
regulators into one authority. Therefore, the Minis try took a decision to let the existing 
regulators, viz. the UGC and AICTE to perform the r egulatory responsibilities for Open 
and Distance Learning (ODL) mode as well. 
 
5. The Ministry further argued that DEC, created th rough Statute 28, was dissolved 
with the approval of the Visitor i.e. the President  of India after following due procedure 
laid down in Section 25 of the IGNOU Act, 1985 as enumerated below: 
 

(i)  Minutes of the meeting regarding approval of the Ma dhava Menon 
Committee and taking over of DEC by UGC was forward ed to Chairmen 
AICTE, UGC and DEC for taking necessary action vide  the Ministry's 
letter dated 30.04.2012. 
 
(ii)  DEC accordingly discussed the issue regarding repea ling Statute 28 of 
IGNOU on 08.06.2012 and recommended to the Board of  Management 
(BOM), IGNOU to repeal Statute 28 framed under 16 o f the IGNOU Act, 
1985. 
 
(iii)  Board of Management (BOM), IGNOU considered the mat ter on 
28.07.2012, accepted the recommendation of DEC and decided to request 
the Visitor, i.e. the President of India to repeal Statute 28. 
 
(iv)  On receiving the approval of the Visitor  to repeal  Statute 28 of IGNOU, 
as required under the IGNOU Act, Notification dated  01.05.2013 was 
issued regarding repeal of Statute 28 of IGNOU Act. 
 
6. After considering the above facts and the issues  involved, the Committee heard 
the representatives of the Ministry of Human Resour ce Development (Department of 
Higher Education), Vice-Chancellor, IGNOU and Chair man, UGC for further 
clarifications in the matter on 30 July 2013. The M inistry was asked to clarify whether 
the mandate of regulating ODL mode of education can  be taken away from IGNOU 
simply by abolishing the DEC without amending the r elevant provisions of the IGNOU 
Act, 1985 for this purpose.  The Committee also ask ed about the specific Sections of an 
Act/Rule/Statute, etc. under which the said mandate  was shifted to UGC and AICTE.  
The Committee also wanted to know about the urgency  with which DEC was shifted to 
UGC without waiting till proper legislation in the matter was passed by Parliament.  
 
7. The Ministry could not give a convincing and leg ally tenable replies to the queries 
raised by the Committee.  It could not deny the fac t that mandate to regulate standards of 

education through distance mode still remained with  the IGNOU Act and that it did not 
cease to exist merely on the repeal of Statute 28 a bolishing DEC.  On the question as to 
which Section of UGC Act empowers UGC to regulate d istance education, Chairman, 
UGC informed the Committee that Section 12 of the U GC Act empowers UGC to 
regulate distance education which says, “It shall be the duty of the Commission to  take, in 
consultation with the Universities or other bodies concerned, all such steps as it may 
think fit for the promotion and co-ordination of Un iversity education and for the 
determination and maintenance of standards of teach ing, examination and research in 
Universities..”  . He further stated that the Ministry had issued a  Direction to UGC to take 
over DEC under Section 20(1) of UGC Act which said that the Central Government has 
the power to give Direction to the UGC, which is binding.   
 
8. As regards the urgency the Ministry stated that the Madhava Menon Committee 
was aware that passing of the Distance Education Council of India Bill as suggested by it, 
might take some time. It also felt that the positio n of UGC vis-à-vis IGNOU as a 
Regulator is stronger and more acceptable to the wh ole university system including the 
Open Universities.   Therefore, the Madhava Menon Committee recommended  that the 
Government should issue a policy direction/notifica tion to UGC for assuming the 
responsibilities of maintaining standards in ODL system and creating a DECI like interim 
authority for the purpose. That is the reason why D EC had been shifted to UGC as an 
interim arrangement.  
 
9. The Ministry also informed the Committee that as  the Higher Education and 
Research Bill was unlikely to be cleared by Parliam ent, a decision had then been taken to 
have a separate legislative enactment as suggested by the Menon Committee for setting 
up of Distance Education Council of India.  They sa id that the DECI Bill had been 
prepared.  Thereafter, a Cabinet Note would be prep ared and the opinion of the 
Legislative Department would be taken before the Bill is introduced in Parliament.  
 
10. On the Committee’s query in regard to regulatin g technical education in distance 
mode, the Ministry clarified that even earlier when  the regulation of distance education 

was with DEC under IGNOU, it was only for general e ducation and that technical 
education was regulated by AICTE only.  An Order is sued by the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development on 29  December 2012 gave Direction to both UGC and AICTE to 
regulate distance education and that AICTE shall look at ODL for technical education. 
 
11. The Committee was further informed that DEC did  not go out of existence 
because of its disassociation with IGNOU; it will b e very much in existence, performing 
its current duties, but it will do so under the UGC  till the new arrangement could be 
made.   
 
12. The Committee again heard the Vice-Chancellor, IGNOU and Chairman, UGC 
for further clarifications in the matter on 31 Janu ary 2014. During the meeting, Vice-
Chancellor, IGNOU stated that IGNOU was for making DEC an independent body. 
Chairman, UGC argued that prior to 1991, the entire  higher education was regulated by 
UGC which had the mandate to maintain standards of teaching, examinations and 
research in higher education. Chairman, UGC replied  that under Section 20(1) of UGC 
Act, the Ministry can issue Directions and argued t hat the Ministry is within its mandate 
to issue Directions to UGC and UGC has also within its ambit to regulate distance 
education. Chairman, UGC further stated that he was  happy about the transfer of DEC to 
UGC and that he had already put a system in place f or this purpose.   He claimed that 
they had cleared all pending cases before DEC after  the work was transferred to them in 
December, 2012.  He also informed the Committee tha t previously, DEC was regulated 
through guidelines.  But now, they had come up with  Regulations which had been sent to 
the Ministry of Human Resource Development for its concurrence. Once the concurrence 
of the Ministry is received, the Regulations would be notified. 
 
13. The Chairman, UGC expressed his opinion that th ere was no need to have another 
regulatory authority.  He was of the view that inst ead of creating a large number of 
regulatory bodies, we can have only one authority, an overarching body in the country for 
the purposes of regulating higher education, under which there could be a number of 
instruments to take care of the different facets of  education.  In conclusion, the 

Committee observed that a faux pas  was made by the Ministry of HRD by hurriedly 
repealing DEC and transferring its work to UGC by a n Executive Order and 
IGNOU did not put any kind of formal resistance to this.  The Committee was of the 
view that these questions would be best answered by  the Ministry of HRD. 
Accordingly, it decided to hear the Ministry of HRD  again before reporting the 
matter to the House. 
 
14. The Committee thereafter heard the Secretary, M inistry of Human Resource 
Development (Department of Higher Education) on the  matter on 28 February 2014. On 
the Committee’s query as to why a new legislation w as not brought before Parliament, 
the Secretary stated that the National Council for Higher Education and Research Bill to 
create one umbrella regulator for all educational i nstitutions has been pending before 
Parliament for the last four years. Due to this, he  submitted that it would not have been 
proper to bring in legislation affecting one partic ular sector of education.    He assured 
the Committee that the Ministry is committed to cre ating an independent Distance 
Education Council of India (DECI) by separate legis lation as recommended by the 
Madhava Menon Committee and that the Bill will be b rought before Parliament.  When 
the Committee wanted to know the time-frame by whic h this will be done, the Secretary 
replied that the Bill should be ready within three months to be vetted by the Law Ministry 
which will be taken to the Cabinet, thereafter. 
 
15. Despite the assurance given by the Secretary, D epartment of Higher Education, 
the Committee was not informed about the status in the matter nor was the Bill since been 
introduced in Parliament. Accordingly, D.O. letter was issued to the Secretary, 
Department of Higher Education on 23 September 2014  to furnish a status report 
regarding the Bill as assured to the Committee. In response, the Ministry, vide  their letter 
dated 15 October 2014 stated that draft Cabinet Note and draft Bill on Distance 
Education Council of India (DECI) have been prepare d and the concerned file is 
under submission of the Human Resources Minister (H RM). Upon approval of the 
same by HRM, further necessary action regarding seeking approval of Cabinet shall 
be taken . 

  
 
 
COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
16. The Committee after perusing the papers, docume nts, etc. furnished by the 
Ministry; facts and clarifications given during ora l evidences by the Ministry, the 
UGC and IGNOU feels that the demand of other ODL Un iversities to take DEC out 
from IGNOU fold was well taken.  Parliament, when I GNOU Act was passed in 
1985 for ODL system, had thought it prudent to give  the regulatory powers also to 
IGNOU, because the distance mode of education at th at time was at a rudimentary 
stage.  But in view of vast expansion of ODL system  during all these years, the 
Committee is of the view that might involve a confl ict of interest, therefore, DEC 
may be taken out of IGNOU fold and to provide it st atus of independent regulatory 
body through a separate Act of Parliament on the li nes of UGC and AICTE as they 
have their own Acts. 
 
17. The Committee is happy that the Ministry ultima tely has decided to take 
DEC out of the IGNOU but it expresses its serious r eservation about the manner in 
which DEC has been transfeered to UGC by an adminis trative order.  The 
Committee hastens to add that it does not have any reservation about the manner in 
which the DEC was abolished; it had been done as pe r the procedure laid down in 
the IGNOU Act and Statutes made thereunder. 
 
UGC and ODL 
 
18. The Committee is of the considered opinion that  transferring DEC and its 
mandate to the UGC and AICTE is legally untenable.  It also feels that abolition of 
DEC was done with undue haste for which no convinci ng explanation could be 
furnished, either by the Ministry or by the UGC.   
 

19. The Committee notes that nowhere in the UGC Act  it is specifically 
mentioned that UGC has the power to regulate distan ce education also.  The 
Committee feels that interpreting Section 12 of UGC  Act, 1956 to include distance 
education as well as fallacious and untenable. The Committee also notes that Section 
20(1) of the UGC Act only gives the Ministry the po wer to issue Directions which 
can never be extended to override the powers grante d to IGNOU (for regulating 
distance education) through IGNOU Act passed by Parliament. 
 
20. In this regard, the Committee would like to quo te the Madhava Menon 
Committee Report, paragraph no. 6.6, page 59 which says: 
 
"The provisions of the IGNOU Act suggest that the P arliament intended, 
for the purpose of regulatory arrangements, to trea t higher education 
through open and distance learning differently from  the conventional 
university system, in view of its unique characteri stics.  Therefore, while 
setting up a separate university, IGNOU, for impart ing higher education 
through ODL system, the Act also gave the responsib ility of 
development, coordination and determination of stan dards in the Open 
and Distance Education system to it, "notwithstandi ng anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in fo rce".  Accordingly, the 
IGNOU established the Distance Education Council in  the year 1991 to 
discharge the responsibilities as a Regulator of the ODL system".  
 
21. It is evident that while ODL system may have be en with UGC before, but the 
position changed after DEC was created in 1991 unde r IGNOU Act passed in 1985.  
To buttress this position, the Committee would furt her like to refer to paragraphs 
3.2, page 19 of the Menon Committee Report which al so argues that "with the 
enactment of the IGNOU Act, the legal position in r espect of regulation of ODL 
system changed.  IGNOU, besides being a University of Open and Distance 
Learning, was also entrusted with the responsibilit y of laying down norms and 

maintaining standards of distance education system in the country which is evident 
from the preamble" of the Act and its Sections 4 and 5 (2) as well.   
 
22. Therefore, the Ministry's contention that UGC h ad the powers to regulate 
higher education in general encompasses power to re gulate ODL as well is basically 
flawed.  This argument may have been acceptable bef ore the IGNOU was given 
power to regulate ODL.  Thus, the power to regulate ODL that may have been there 
in other law, ceased to exist after IGNOU Act came into being. 
 
AICTE and ODL 
 
23. As regards AICTE, the Committee notes that even  AICTE Act, 1987 does not 
specifically provide for regulating distance educat ion programmes.  A Notification 
(No. 44 of March 1995) of the MHRD has made approva l of DEC necessary for 
degrees awarded through distance education by unive rsities/institutions of national 
importance and wherever necessary AICTE also supported this interpretation.  . 
 
24. The Committee, in view of the nature and signif icance of technical education 
and the competitive advantage that India enjoys in this field world over, is also of 
the view that there should not be any confusion and  dilution regarding enforcement 
of the specifications/standards of technical educat ion in the country.  Besides, 
excluding technical education altogether from the O DL system may not be a 
desirable thing in view of its outreach, affordabil ity and popularity.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to  consider this aspect while 
drafting DECI Bill and also amending relevant provi sions of AICTE Act, if 
necessary.     
 
25. The Committee finds that it is very clear from the Preamble and Sections 4, 
5(2) & 24(j) of IGNOU Act, 1985 as well as AICTE Ac t and UGC Act that IGNOU  
as on date remains the sole authority for regulatin g distance education in the 
country and power of UGC and AICTE in this regard m ight be implied not 

expressed.  In other words, expressed provisions of  a law shall necessarily override 
the implied aspect of another law.  If there was a justifiable need and reason for 
transferring this responsibility from IGNOU to UGC & AICTE, it should have been 
done by making necessary amendments in IGNOU Act and by a separate enactment 
and not certainly through an administrative order. The Committee would like to 
reiterate that administrative orders cannot override a law passed by Parliament and 
assented to by the President of India.  The Committ ee accordingly recommends that 
while preparing DECI Bill, the IGNOU Act, 1985 shou ld be amended by 
deleting/amending the provisions which mandate IGNO U to regulate distance 
education such as the Preamble and Sections 4, 5(2)  & 24(j) of the Act.  This has 
been suggested by the Menon Committee as well that was set up by the Ministry. 
 
26. The Committee welcomes the assurance given by t he Secretary, Department 
of Higher Education before the Committee on 28 Febr uary 2014 that the Ministry is 
committed for creating an independent Distance Education Council of India (DECI) 
through a separate legislation and the time-frame o f three months within which the 
Bill would be ready for the same. The Committee, ho wever, found that the Bill for 
creation of DECI could be introduced in Parliament within the time frame given by 
the Ministry. The Committee notes that in response  to a D.O. letter from the 
Committee Secretariat in September, 2014, Ministry stated that  draft Cabinet Note 
and draft Bill on Distance Education Council of Ind ia (DECI) had been prepared 
and the concerned file was under submission of the Human Resources Minister 
(HRM) and that upon approval of the same by HRM, fu rther necessary action 
regarding seeking approval of Cabinet shall be take n accordingly. The Committee 
finds that there is apparent reluctance on the part  of the Ministry to bring a 
separate legislation for creating DECI for reasons better known to it.   The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the process should be expedited and the Bill 
should be introduced in Parliament at the earliest.   
 
27. It may be pointed out that the Parliamentary St anding Committee on HRD 
which was considering the Bill to constitute an ove r-arching body subsuming all the 

Regulators of Higher Education had submitted its re port rejecting the proposed 
body in December 2012 i.e.  long before the 25 June 2013 when the Ministry had  
informed this Committee that it was not bringing an y Bill for creating DECI on the 
ground that the former was pending before HRD Stand ing Committee.  The 
Ministry needs to clarify its position in this regard.      
 
28. Now, we have come to a situation where DEC has been abolished and its 
powers are being exercised by UGC and AICTE the ver y legal basis of which is 
under question.  The Ministry says that DEC in actu al practice, will not cease to 
exist after its disassociation with IGNOU; it will continue to perform its current 
duties but under UGC till the alternate arrangement is made.  It further complicates 
the situation in respect of technical education whi ch is under the AICTE.  The 
Committee feels that the new arrangement will create further confusion between the 
UGC (read DEC) and AICTE.  The Committee, therefore , is of the opinion that 
there should be a single regulator for distance edu cation-whether technical or 
general. The Committee hopes that the proposed Bill  would give the mandate of 
regulating all forms of distance education in the hands of DECI only. 
 
29. The Committee is concerned that the interests a nd rights of the employees of 
the erstwhile DEC of IGNOU may be adversely impacte d through their shifting 
from IGNOU to UGC. The Committee, therefore, urges the Ministry to ensure that 
the interests and rights of the employees of the er stwhile DEC are protected and 
that they are not adversely impacted/unduly disadva ntaged as a result of this 
shifting of DEC and also when the proposed DECI comes into being.   
 
30. The Committee questions both the manner as well  as urgency with which 
DEC was abolished and its mandate was shifted/trans ferred to UGC and AICTE. 
The Committee feels that as advised by the experts,  members of the DEC, VCs of 
the open universities and Members of Board of Manag ement of IGNOU, DEC could 
have remained with IGNOU until the DECI was set up by an independent Act of 
Parliament.  It is evident from the Minutes of the DEC on 27 
 May 2012 in which 

despite larger opinion being against doing this, it  passed a Resolution for deletion of 
Statute 28.   
 
31. While going through the minutes of the meeting of the Distance Education 
Council dated 8 June 2012 and that of the Board of Management, IGNOU dated 19 
 
September 2012, the Committee observed that there w ere two prominent views 
which were echoed by most of the Members, viz. (i) it would be appropriate if DEC 
is made an independent regulator rather than shifti ng it under the UGC and (ii) 
DEC should continue under IGNOU in the present set up. Some Members of DEC 
even raised the question on the ability of UGC to p erform such a role for DEC 
which was being performed by IGNOU for it and cauti oned against mixing of 
regulation of conventional and ODL systems which ar e two different modes of 
imparting education. The Chairman of DEC also stres sed to make DEC as an 
independent regulator for all practical purposes ra ther than shifting it to 
UGC/AICTE. 
 
32. The Committee also took note of the resolution passed by the Vice-
Chancellors of State Open Universities (SOUs) held on 18 September 2012 wherein 
they resolved that DEC should be made an independen t regulatory body and till 
such time it becomes an independent regulator, status quo  may be maintained. The 
Committee wondered how despite all opposition for s hifting of DEC to UGC, DEC/ 
Board of Management, IGNOU reached the resolution t o recommend the shifting of 
DEC to UGC.  
 
  
 
----------- 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
III 
 Third Meeting 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on the 30 th  July, 2013 in Room No.53, 
Parliament House, New Delhi.   
Present 
1. Shri Prakash Javadekar    In the Chair 
Members 
2. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
4. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
5. Dr.Bhalchandra Mungekar 
 
Secretariat 
1.  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
3.  Shri R.S.Rawat, Joint Director 
4.  Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director 
5.  Shri R.P.Shukla, Assistant Director 
6.  Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director 
 
Witnesses 
Representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource D evelopment (Department of 
Higher Education) 
1.  Ms, Amita Sharma, Additional Secretary  
2.  Shri Anant Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary  
Representatives of University Grants Commission (UGC) 
 Prof. Ved Prakash, Chairman 
Representatives of Indira Gandhi National Open University(IGNOU) 
 Prof. M. Aslam, Vice-Chancellor  
 
2. *** 
 
3. ***.   
 

4. ***. 
 
5. *** .  
 
II. Taking over of Distance Education Council of IG NOU by UGC through 
administrative order  
 
6. The Committee then heard the representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (Department of Higher Education), Vice- Chancellor, IGNOU and 
Chairman, UGC on the issue of taking over of Distan ce Education Council of IGNOU by 
UGC through administrative order without making the  necessary legislative enactments. 
The Convenor asked the Ministry to clarify whether the mandate of regulating ODL 
mode of education can be taken away from IGNOU simp ly by abolishing the DEC 
without amending the relevant provisions of the IGN OU Act, 1985 for this purpose.  He 
also asked about the specific Sections of an Act/Ru le/Statute, etc. under which the said 
mandate was shifted to UGC and AICTE.  The Committe e also questioned about the 
urgency with which DEC was shifted to UGC without w aiting till proper legislation in 
the matter is passed by Parliament.  
 
7. The Ministry could not give convincing and legal ly tenable replies to the queries 
raised by the Committee.  It could not deny the fac t that mandate to regulate standards of 
education through distance mode still remained with  the IGNOU Act and that it did not 
cease to exist merely on the repeal of Statute 28 a bolishing DEC.  On the question as to 
which Section of UGC Act empowers UGC to regulate d istance education, Chairman, 
UGC informed the Committee that Section 12 of the U GC Act empowers UGC to 
regulate distance education which says, “It shall be the duty of the Commission to  take, in 
consultation with the Universities or other bodies concerned, all such steps as it may 
think fit for the promotion and co-ordination of Un iversity education and for the 
determination and maintenance of standards of teach ing, examination and research in 
Universities..”  . He further stated that the Ministry has issued a  direction to UGC to take 

over DEC under Section 20(1) of UGC Act which says that the Central Government has 
the power to give direction to the UGC, which is binding.   
 
8. As regards the urgency, the Ministry replied tha t the Madhava Menon Committee 
was aware that passing of the Distance Education Co uncil of India Bill as suggested by it 
may take some time. It also felt that the position of UGC vis-à-vis IGNOU as a Regulator 
is stronger and more acceptable to the whole univer sity system including the open 
universities.   Therefore, the Madhava Menon Committee recommended  that the 
Government should issue a policy direction/notifica tion to UGC for assuming the 
responsibilities of maintaining standards in ODL system and creating a DECI like interim 
authority for the purpose. That is the reason why D EC had been shifted to UGC as an 
interim arrangement.  
 
9. The Ministry also informed the Committee that as  the Higher Education and 
Research Bill is unlikely to be cleared by Parliame nt, a decision has now been taken to 
have a separate legislative enactment as suggested by the Menon Committee for setting 
up of Distance Education Council of India and that the DECI Bill has been prepared.  A 
Cabinet Note would be prepared, the opinion of the Legislative Department would be 
taken and after following due procedure, the Bill will be introduced in Parliament.  
 
10. On the Committee’s query in regard to regulatin g technical education in distance 
mode, the Ministry clarified that even earlier when  the regulation of distance education 
was with DEC under IGNOU, it was only for general e ducation and that technical 
education is regulated by AICTE only.  An Order iss ued by the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development on 29 
th  December, 2012 gave direction to both UGC and AICT E 
to regulate distance education and that AICTE shall look at ODL for technical education. 
 
11. The Committee was further informed that DEC is not going out of existence 
because of its disassociation with IGNOU. DEC will be very much in existence, 
performing its current duties, but it will do so un der the UGC until the Higher Education 

and Research Bill is passed.  The Convenor, in his concluding remarks stressed that 
Parliament should not be bypassed. 
 
12. *** 
 
13. ****.  
 
14. ***.  
 
15. ***.  
 
16. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Com mittee was kept. 
 
17. The meeting adjourned at 1.13 p.m.  
 
MAHESH TIWARI 
DIRECTOR 
New Delhi 
30.07.2013 
 
 
*** Does not relate to the subject reported 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
VIII 
 Eighth Meeting 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on the 31 st  January, 2014 in Committee Room 
A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
Present 
1. Dr. Najma A. Heptulla    Chairperson 
Members 
2. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
4. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
5. Dr.Bhalchandra Mungekar 
6. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
 
Secretariat 
7.  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
8.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
9.  Shri R.S.Rawat, Joint Director 
10.  Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director 
11.  Shri R.P.Shukla, Assistant Director 
12.  Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director 
 
Witnesses 
Representatives of Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) 
1.  Prof. M. Aslam, Vice-Chancellor  
2.  Prof. Ravindra Kumar, Director  
 
 
Representatives of University Grants Commission (UGC) 
1.  Prof. Ved Prakash, Chairman 
2.  Shri Vikram Sahay, Director 
 
I. Issue of taking over of Distance Education Counc il of IGNOU by UGC through 
administrative order  
2. At the outset, the Committee decided to hear fir st the representatives of IGNOU 
on the matter. While initiating the deliberations, the Chairperson expressed the 

Committee’s apprehension about transferring the fun ction of regulating distance 
education from DEC to UGC when the latter was alrea dy overburdened.  She also sought 
to know as to why IGNOU agreed to it and whether IGNOU ever objected to the proposal 
of shifting of DEC to UGC.  
 
3. The Vice Chancellor, IGNOU stated that IGNOU Act  entrusted it with the 
responsibility of promoting, coordinating and maint aining the standards of distance 
education in the country and DEC was created as an authority of IGNOU under Section 
16(7) read with Section 5(2) of the Act for this pu rpose.  He stated that the ‘Madhava 
Menon Committee’ recommended to create an independe nt regulatory body for distance 
education through a separate legislation and also r ecommended that the government may 
issue a policy direction/notification for UGC to re gulate distance education in the 
meantime. This was accepted by the Government and S tatute 28 establishing DEC was 
repealed. Subsequently, the Ministry of Human Resou rce Development, by an Executive 
Order dated the 29 
th  December, 2012, authorized UGC and AICTE to regula te distance 
education.  He also stated that IGNOU was for making DEC an independent body. 
 
4. The Committee observed that as far as giving the  mandate of DEC to UGC is 
concerned, it was a decision taken on the basis of the Madhava  Menon Committee  
recommendation and accepted by Government/Ministry.   The Committee also observed 
that there was no note of dissent attached to the M inutes of the meeting presided over by 
Vice- Chancellor, IGNOU and that the Minutes were w ritten and re-written thrice which 
in the Committee’s view has been done with mala fide  intention.     
 
5. The Chairperson expressed that if the Government  had created an independent 
and autonomous body through a separate legislation to regulate distance education, the 
Committee would not have had any objection.  Repeal ing Statute 28 while not coming 
before Parliament and shifting this responsibility to UGC by an executive order without 
amending the IGNOU Act reflects badly both on IGNOU  and the Ministry.  The 
Committee felt that these questions would be best a nswered by the Ministry of HRD and 
UGC. 

 
6. The Committee then heard the representatives of UGC on the matter. The 
Chairperson enquired how UGC having been burdened w ith extra work of regulating 
distance education felt about it.  She sought UGC’s  reaction on the issue as the Ministry 
had given them neither any grant nor any manpower for the purpose.  
 
7. Chairman, UGC submitted to the Committee that pr ior to 1991, the entire higher 
education was regulated by UGC which has the mandat e to maintain standards of 
teaching, examinations and research in higher educa tion. He further stated that UGC is 
happy about the transfer of DEC to them and that th ey have already put a system in place 
for this purpose.   He claimed that they had cleare d all pendency which was there when 
the work was transferred to them in December, 2012.   He also informed the Committee 
that previously, DEC was regulated through guidelines.  But now, they had come up with 
Regulations which had been sent to the Ministry of Human Resource Development for its 
concurrence. Once the concurrence of the Ministry i s received, the Regulations would be 
notified.  
 
8. Stating that taking responsibility was fine but whether it was done legally or 
illegally was the moot question, Chairperson expressed the concern of the Committee that 
this decision was taken by the Ministry by an Execu tive Order which could not be done 
without amending the IGNOU Act and the UGC Act.  Re sponding to the Committee’s 
concern, Chairman, UGC replied that under Section 2 0(1) of UGC Act, the Ministry can 
issue Directions.  The Ministry is within its manda te to issue Directions to UGC and 
UGC has also within its ambit to regulate distance education. Chairperson countered this 
argument saying that such Direction can be issued o nly in extraordinary circumstances 
but even in that case it would be a temporary solution.    
 
9. She stated that there was a basic difference bet ween the nature of formal 
education and distance education. Therefore, IGNOU was established to regulate, among 
others, distance education in the country because o f its vast area and population.  She, 
accordingly, sought Chairman, UGC’s  opinion on mix ing the two.   Chairman, UGC 

stated that there was a conflict of interest in the  sense that on the one hand IGNOU was 
itself a University and on the other hand it was al so entrusted with the responsibility of 
regulating distance education in other Universities  of the country, to which other 
universities were taking objection. Madhava Menon C ommittee recommended that until 
the establishment of an independent DECI through a separate legislation, the work of 
regulating distance education may be transferred to UGC.     
 
10. The Chairman, UGC expressed his opinion that th ere was no need to have another 
regulatory authority.  He was of the view that inst ead of creating a large number of 
regulatory bodies, we can have only one authority, an overarching body in the country for 
the purposes of regulating higher education, under which there could be a number of 
instruments to take care of the different facets of  education.  The Chairperson of the 
Committee  remarked that UGC was doing the responsi bility which had been ‘thrust 
upon’ them and thanked Chairman, UGC for doing his best to carry out its new mandate.   
 
11. In conclusion, the Committee observed that a faux pas  was made by the Ministry 
of HRD by hurriedly repealing DEC and transferring its work to UGC by an Executive 
Order and IGNOU did not put any kind of formal resi stance to this.  The Committee was 
of the view that these questions would be best answ ered by the Ministry of HRD. 
Accordingly, it decided to hear the Ministry of HRD  again before reporting the matter to 
the House.  
12. ***. 
   
13. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Com mittee was kept. 
 
 The meeting adjourned at 5.17 p.m.  
MAHESH TIWARI 
DIRECTOR 
New Delhi 
31.01.2014 
 
***Does not relate to the subject reported 

 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
X 
 Tenth Meeting 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on the 28 th  February, 2014 in Room No.63, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.   
Present 
1. Dr. Najma A. Heptulla    Chairperson 
Members 
2. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
4. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
5. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
6. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
7. Shri Lalhming Liana 
8. Shri K. Parasaran                
9. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley  
 
Secretariat 
13.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
14.  Shri R.S.Rawat, Joint Director 
15.  Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director 
16.  Shri R.P.Shukla, Assistant Director 
17.  Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director 
 
Witnesses 
Representatives of Ministry of Human Resource Devel opment (Department of 
Higher Education) 
3.  Shri Ashok Thakur, Secretary  
4.  Shri Praveen Prakash, Joint Secretary  
 
Representatives of Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) 
Prof. S.V.S. Chaudhary, Registrar  
 
Representatives of University Grants Commission (UGC) 
Shri Upamanyu Basu, Secretary 

I. Issue of taking over of Distance Education Counc il of IGNOU by UGC through 
administrative order  
 
2. At the outset, the Committee first heard the rep resentatives of Ministry of Human 
Resource Development (Department of Higher Educatio n) on the issue of taking over of 
DEC by UGC through Administrative Order. While init iating the deliberations, the 
Chairperson of the Committee stated that the Commit tee had already heard Chairman, 
UGC and Vice-Chancellor, IGNOU on the matter and we re not convinced about the need 
for shifting DEC from IGNOU to UGC. She stated that  if the Ministry were able to 
convince the Committee about the reasons, the Commi ttee will consider them.  The 
Chairperson further stated that if the Government h ad created an independent and 
autonomous body through a separate legislation to r egulate distance education, the 
Committee would not have had any objection.   She a lso wanted to know the reason for 
reluctance to bring such a legislation before Parli ament, i.e. to create an independent 
body to regulate distance education. 
 
3. Secretary, Department of Higher Education stated  that IGNOU was started when 
the concept of distance education was a new subject  and accepted that Section 4 of the 
IGNOU Act clearly points out that IGNOU would set t he standards for distance 
education because at that time it was a new subject  and no other University was doing it.  
But with time, other Universities also started givi ng education in distance mode and were 
opposed to IGNOU, being an University itself, regul ating other Universities. He 
submitted that the Delhi High Court in IGNOU versus  Delhi University case said “One 
University cannot regulate another University”.  
 
4. On why a new legislation was not brought before Parliament, the Secretary stated 
that the National Council for Higher Education and Research Bill to create one umbrella 
regulator for all educational institutions has been  pending before Parliament for the last 
four years. Due to this, he submitted that it would  not have been proper to bring in 
legislation affecting one particular sector of educ ation.    He assured the Committee that 
the Ministry is committed to creating an independen t Distance Education Council of 

India (DECI) as recommended by the Madhava Menon Co mmittee. He assured that the 
Ministry will take a view on withdrawing the NCHER Bill and go to the Cabinet and 
Parliament with the suggestion for a separate Act.  When the Committee wanted to know 
the time-frame by which this will be done, the Secr etary replied that the Bill should be 
ready within three months to be vetted by the Law M inistry which will be taken to the 
Cabinet, thereafter.  
 
5. *** 
 
6. ***  
 
7. ***  
 
8. ***  
 
9. *** 
 
10. ***.  
 
11. *** 
 
12. ***. 
 
13. ***.  
 
14. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Com mittee was kept. 
 
 The meeting adjourned at 5.15 p.m.  
MAHESH TIWARI 
DIRECTOR 
New Delhi 
28.02.2014 