 1 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September , 2013/Bhadra, 1935 (Saka) 
 REPORT NO.  
211  
TWO HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
The Border Roads Engineering Services Group ‘A’ (Amendment) Rules, 1988  
 

 2 
C O N T E N T S 
      
        PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION 
 OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
(ii) 
3. REPORT ON THE BORDER ROADS 
ENGINEERING SERVICES GROUP ‘A’ 
(AMENDMENT) RULES, 1988 
 
 
1-9 
 
4. 
SUMMARY OF 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
 
 
10-12 
 
4A 
ANNEXURES 
 
13-56 
 
  
5. *MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be enclosed later 
 
 

 3 
 
LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RA 
JYA SABHA 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   08 th  MAY, 2013) 
 
1. Smt. Maya Singh   Chairperson 
2. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
4. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
5. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
6. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
7. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
8. Shri Mangala Kisan 
9. Shri Lalhming Liana 
10. Shri Rasheed Masood  
11. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar 
12. Shri K. Parasaran 
13. *Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda  
14. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
15. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
S
ECRETARIAT  
1.  Shri N.K.Singh , Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
3.   Shri R.S. Rawat, Joint Director 
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director  
5. Shri R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director  
6.   Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director  
 
* Nominated  w.e.f.  22 nd  July, 2013  
(i) 

 4 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordina te Legislation, having been authorized 
by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf, this Two Hundred and Eleventh Report of the 
Committee.  
 
2.  The Committee examined the matters that came up  while scrutinizing the Border Roads 
Engineering Services Group ‘A’ (Amendment) Rules, 1 988  and issues relating to them along 
with the comments received from the Government. 
 
3.   The observations and recommendations of the Co mmittee are contained in the Report.  
 
4.  The Committee considered and adopted the draft Re port in its meeting held on the 27 
th  
August, 2013. 
 
 
 
 
MAYA SINGH 
                                                                                                               Chairperson 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
                                                                                                                         Rajya Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI  
September 3, 2013 
 
 
 

 5 
Report  
on  
The Border Roads Engineering Services Group ‘A’ (Amendment) Rules, 1988  
 
 Government of India set up the Border Roads Develo pment Board (BRDB) on 14 th  
March, 1960 to expedite road construction work in N orth East and States bordering 
neighbouring countries for socio economic developme nt of remote and far flung areas and to 
provide better road connectivity along the borders.  To execute the road projects approved by 
Government of India and included in BRDB programme,  a self sufficient departmental road 
construction work force in the name of General Rese rve Engineering Force (GREF) popularly 
known as Border Roads Organisation (BRO) was raised on 16 th  June, 1960.  
2. The Border Roads Development Board transacts its  business according to the Rules of 
Business made by the Chairman, BRDB. According to t he BRDB Rules of Business, the Board 
exercises financial and administrative powers of th e Department of Government of India, 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways. The Financia l Advisor (Defence, Finance) is also 
financial advisor to the Board. 
3. Secretary, BRDB is an Ex officio  Joint Secretary to the Government of India, Minist ry of 
Road Transport & Highways and the Secretariat of BR DB is a department of the Ministry of 
Road Transport & Highways which is the administrati ve Ministry of GREF/BRO employees. 
GREF/BRO was made permanent department of the Centr al Government in 1969 and its 
employees were declared Central Government Civilian  employees. The service terms and 
conditions of the GREF employees are governed under  the CCA (CCS) Rules, 1965 and for 
limited purpose of discipline GREF employees are also subject to certain provisions of the Army 
Act, 1950 under Section 4(1) and 4(4) under Article  33 of the Constitution of India so that they 
can discharge their duty within strict discipline.   The fundamental right of GREF employees 
such as to form association, demonstration and stri ke against exploitation in service and 
interaction with press stand restricted as they are restricted for the Defence and Armed Forces of 
India such as Navy, Air Force, Army, CRPF ITBP, Assam Riffle, BSF etc.  
4. The Rules under examination i.e. the Border Road s Engineering Services Group ‘A’ 
(Amendment) Rules, 1988 (Annexure I ) were issued as an amendment to Schedule under  Ru le 
6 (i) of the BRES Service Rules 1977 published unde r G. S R 1554 dated 20 
th  September 1977. 

 6 
BRES Group ‘A’ (Amendment) Rules, 1988 deal with th e recruitment and appointment in the 
BRES Group “A’ Organised Central Engineering servic e and they are not merely framed for the 
recruitment but provides how the service terms and conditions of the BRES will be govern till 
the time of retirement.  
5. In context to these rules it was informed that t he Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways undertook the amendment in the Border Road s Engineering Service Rules in 
consultation with the Department of Personnel & Tra ining, Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions and Union Public Service Co mmission along with the Ministry of Law 
in 1988. In the course of amending BRES service rul es, a provision for recruitment of Army 
officers in the equivalent grade in the Army was ma de by amending Rule 6 (i) of the BRES 
Service Rules, 1977. To facilitate recruitment of M ilitary officers in the BRES Group ‘A’ 
Central Civil Service, a provision in column No. 11  & Column No. 12 of the BRES Service 
Rules, 1988 (amendment) Schedule reading “recruitme nt of Army officers on the basis of 
posting from Army and number of posts to be filled up by the Army in each grade is to be 
decided as per the manning policy approved by the C entral Government from time to time. The 
definition of the Central Government provided in BR ES 1977 service rules reads Central 
Government means Government of India.  
6. In this background, the Committee took up for ex amination the BRES Group ‘A’ 
(Amendment) Rules 1988 and discussed in its meeting  at Gangtok, Sikkim on 4 
th  June, 2007 
with the representatives of Ministry of Defence/BRD B and Border Roads Organisation. A study 
note prepared on the meeting held at Gangtok was fo rwarded to the Ministry of Shipping Road 
Transport & Highways for their comments thereof (copy of the comments enclosed at Annexure 
II ). Some of the points raised by the Committee and the comments furnished by the Ministry are 
as follows: 
a.  The Committee enquired whether there was a compendi um of 
rules/regulations governing Border Roads Organisati on. The Secretary, BRDB stated 
that rules were framed from time to time in this re gard but no comprehensive 
legislation was in place.  
 In response the Ministry informed that there are B order Roads Regulations and 
 Record Office Instructions (ROI), which are compen dium of rules and 
 regulations governing the organisation. These are used only for references within 
 the department and cannot be quoted an authority a t par with CCS (CCA) Rules 
 and Army Act. GREF being an integral part of the A rmed Forces for the purpose 
 of Article 33 of the Constitution, Army Act/Army R ules are applicable with 
 exceptions along with other Central Service Rules.  
 

 7 
The Committee notes that 6 th  Central Pay Commission has recommended 
framing of GREF Rules despite the fact no such rule  had been framed so far. It 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should make  all efforts to draft the 
General Reserve Engineering Force Act as soon as po ssible. The concerned 
subordinate legislation should also be framed accor dingly in the necessary time 
frame. This would clear the ambiguity regarding service rules presently imposed on 
the Civilian employees of GREF/BRO and would certai nly help to address the 
grievances of the employees. 
b.  The Committee next desired to know whether rules/re gulations framed 
concerning Border Roads Organisation had been laid on the Table of both the Houses of 
Parliament and on what date. The Secretary, BRDB was not sure about it. 
The Committee was informed that the existing rule a nd regulations are amended 
from time to time. In the past no rules/regulations  concerning BRO has been 
placed in the Parliament. Recruitment Rules of Group ‘A’ officers when amended 
will be placed in the Table of both the Houses. 
   The Committee while accepting the comments furni shed by the Ministry was 
hopeful that not only the Recruitment Rules of Grou p ‘A’ officers when amended would 
be laid before the Parliament but all Notifications  coming under the classification of 
subordinate legislation would be laid before the Pa rliament and would also be uploaded 
on the website of the Ministry for transparency and information.  
      c. The Committee noted that employees of GREF  were subject to Army Act,  1950 (as 
applicable to Army personnel/officers) but they are neither considered at par  with 
Army nor as a civilian. The pay scale sanctioned in  the 5 th  CPC has not been allowed to 
diploma engineers of BRO. Upto 4 th  Central Pay Commission, there was no 
 difference in pay scales of diploma engineers of B RO with respect to other 
similar  Central Government Department like CPWD, M ilitary Engineering 
Service and Railway.  But, in the BRO at the time o f implementation of 5 th  Pay 
Commission, diploma  engineers were put in lower sc ale, whereas officers of 
BRO and subordinates of other  categories were enjo ying the same pay scales as 
recommended by 5 th  CPC and accepted  by all Central Government depart ments. 
 In response the Ministry informed that the pay scal e of diploma Engineers BR-II, 
the 6 th  Pay Commission has recommended up-gradation and me rger of Overseer post 
with promotional post of Superintendent BR Grade-II  (present scale of Rs. 4500-7000) 
and the combined cadre extended to the scale of Rs.  5000-8000. Since the Commission 
has recommended merger of the scale of Rs.5000-8000 , Rs.5500-9000 and Rs.6500-
10500, the post will be placed in the revised pay b and PB-2 of Rs. 8700-34800 along 
with grade pay of Rs. 4200/-. Commission has also a dvised the government to implement 

 8 
this retrospectively from 1.1.96 at least for the p urpose of fixation of pay. However, 
Decision on the recommendation of 6 th  Pay Commission is to be taken by the 
Government for all employees of all Ministries/Departments.   
 d. The Committee expressed the view that members o f GREF were part and  parcel 
of the Armed Forces and they should not be discriminated against Extra  Regimental 
Employment officers/staff since they were working shoulder to shoulder and  doing 
same nature of job in GREF in terms of golden principle of ‘Equal pay for equal  work’. 
  
 The Ministry on its part stated that there was no discrimination in organisation. 
However, a comparison between Army personnel and GR EF personnel is not feasible 
because they are governed by different service rule s and regulations as per instructions 
issued by the Government from time to time. However , GREF personnel are provided 
facilities like single living accommodation, HRA, f ree clothing, free ration, CSD canteen 
while in service & after service retirement as admissible to Army personnel. 
 
 The Committee took note of the submission made by the Ministry and was of 
the opinion that resentment in the employees of an organisation was not conducive 
to its efficient functioning. Ministry should make all possible efforts to improve the 
service terms and conditions of the BRO employees s o that the working efficiency 
and morale of the employees is not adversely effected. 
  
e.      It has come to the notice of the Committee that vacancies earmarked for  GREF 
 employees are filled by Army personnel. Army perso nnel are getting regular 
 promotions whereas GREF subordinates are deprived of regular promotions. 
 
 The Ministry clarified that specific vacancies as p er laid down manning ratio are 
allotted to Army. GREF personnel get promotion in t heir own channel and posting of 
Army officers/personnel has no side effect on their  promotion. Recently the manning 
ratio at Chief Engineer and Superintending Engineer  has been imbalanced for which 
DGBR has been requested for correction. 
 
 The Committee is of the opinion that the posting a nd appointment of Defence 
Forces personnel and officers against the civilian vacancies should not be allowed on 
adhoc  basis unless there is a provision in the Service r ules of the post that to the 
personnel posted from the Defence Forces should be eligible to hold the post i.e. 
having needed qualification and experience to  hold the post. Any personnel policy for 
appointment against civilian posts has to be catere d for the reservation provided to 
the deprived and weaker section of the society. No manning policy should be made 
without due consideration of Govt. of India particu larly deployment of Defence 

 9 
Forces officers and personnel in the civilian posts  as this may lead to serious 
consequences on the defence preparedness of the cou ntry. Therefore while making 
any policy for employment of Military trained offic ers and personnel for road 
construction work Ministry/BRDB should take into account the sparability of officers 
and personnel for civilian jobs. The Ministry/BRDB should also ensure that 
employment of Defence Forces personnel should not a ffect the promotional avenues 
of the BRO Employees. 
 
7. The Committee after its meeting At Gangtok, Sikk im received a number of 
representations from employees of BRO. These repres entations were forwarded to the Ministry 
of Road Transport and Highways for its comments/clarifications. The representations along with 
the comments/clarifications submitted by the Minist ry were placed before the Committee for its 
consideration.  
 
8. Thereafter the Committee took up for discussion the said Rules on 17 
th August, 2009 
with the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances a nd Pensions (Department of Personnel & 
Training), Border Roads Organisation and Ministry/B RDB. In the course of the discussion the 
Committee took a strong view on the vacancies exist ing in BRO and urged the Ministry to 
expedite the process of recruitments. The Committee  also raised the issue of differential 
treatment given to BRES officers whereas officers on deputation from Army are holding the key 
positions in BRO and there have been complaint of d iscrimination in posting promotion and 
appointment etc. (copy of the minutes of the said meeting enclosed at Annexure III ). 
 
9. The Committee took up for discussion the said Ru les with the representatives from 
Ministry of Defence/BRDB, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways/BRO on 28 
th  June 2012 at 
Srinagar, Jammu & Kashmir. However, during the cour se of the discussion the Committee was 
informed that BRO is a department of Ministry of Ro ad Transport and Highways but for the 
purpose of administration it has been placed under Ministry of Defence. Further it was informed 
by Additional DG Border Roads that appointment agai nst BRES Group ‘A’ posts is done on an 
adhoc reservation policy provided for the appointme nt of Army officers against the BRES posts 
and there is no rules of recruitment for the appoin tment to the post of Director General post who 
is the head of the BRO. Keeping in view the gravity  of the issues raised and the strategic 
importance of diverting Military trained manpower f or under taking road construction work, it 
was decided that matter to be taken up for discussi on and clarification by calling Defence 
Secretary and Secretary Ministry of Road Transport and Highways along with all the concerned 

 10 
stake holders at New Delhi. (copy of the study note  of the said meeting enclosed at Annexure 
IV ).  
 
10. During the course of the said meeting the Commi ttee also took note of the Ministry of 
Road Transport & Highways submission regarding laying of copies of Recruitment Rules on the 
Table of both Houses of the Parliament. The Ministr y submitted that DoP&T in their guidelines 
regarding framing/amendment/revision of Recruitment  Rules issued vide their O.M. No.AB-
14017/12/87-Estt(RR) dated 18.03.1988 and subsequen t consolidated guidelines issued vide 
O.M. No.AB-14017/12/87-Estt(RR) dated 31/12/2010 cl arified that though the Recruitment 
Rules are statutory in nature, they are not require d to be laid on the Table of both the Houses of 
Parliament as Article 309 of the Constitution under  which these rules are framed does not 
prescribe for this. The Committee found the explana tion submitted by the Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways/BRDB untenable and drew attent ion to its recommendation as contained 
in its 82 
nd  Report, presented to the House on 1 st  June, 1990 which states the following: 
 
 “ The Committee is unable to accept the plea of the Ministry that it is not mandatory 
upon the Administrative Ministries/Departments to l ay the rules framed under 
Article 309 of the Constitution on the Table of each House of Parliament. 
 
 The Recruitment and Conditions of Service Rules ar e made by the Government 
either under Article 309 of the Constitution or und er various Acts of Parliament. 
Whereas the Rules made under various Acts of Parlia ment are laid before 
Parliament, those made under Article 309 are not no rmally laid. The Committee 
sees no reason why the Rules made under Article 309  of the Constitution should not 
be laid before Parliament. There have been some cases where the Rules made under 
Article 309 of the Constitution have been laid befo re the Parliament. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly feels and recommends  that in order to maintain a 
uniform practice all the Rules made under Article 3 09 of the Constitution should 
also be laid before Parliament. In case, however, G overnment feels that the non-
existence of the laying provision in Article 309 is  the reason for not laying the Rules 
made thereunder, the Committee recommends that Arti cle 309 of the Constitution 
be suitably amended, so as to ensure that all the R ules made thereunder are laid 
before Parliament.” 
 [Para 4.31 of 82 
nd  Report] 
(presented on 1.6.1990) 

 11 
 
 The Committee therefore reiterates the above recom mendation and directs the 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways/BRDB to make suitable arrangements to 
ensure that the Recruitment Rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution are 
also laid before the Parliament.  
 
  Further, the Department of Personnel & Training sho uld also take note of the 
above recommendation of the Committee and take suit able steps for ensuring the 
implementation of the same by not only the Ministry  of Road Transport & 
Highways/BRDB but also by other Ministries/Organisa tions which frame 
rules/recruitment rules under Article 309 of the Constitution. 
 
11. Meanwhile questionnaires’ were forwarded to Min istry of Defence, Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways and Department of Personnel & Training (Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievance & Pensions) for comments/clarifications o n the status and service rules of BRES 
Group “A” service in the Ministry of Road Transport  and Highways and amendment in the 
BRES Service rules 1988. The comments/clarification s furnished are enclosed at Annexure V, 
VI & VII .  
 
12. Thereafter, the Committee took up the said Rule s for discussion on 24 
th  June, 2013 with 
the representatives of Ministry of Defence, Ministr y of Road Transport & Highways, 
Department of Personnel & Training (Ministry of Per sonnel, Public Grievances and Pension) 
and BRO (copy of the minutes of the meeting enclose d at Annexure VIII ). During the said 
meeting the following issues came up for discussion  and consideration, which are enumerated in 
the succeeding paragraphs: 
 
13. The Committee sought to know the reasons for no t framing the Recruitment Rules for 
the post of Director General, Border Roads when the  recruitment rules for all the posts in BRO 
had been framed. In response the Additional Secreta ry, Ministry of Defence informed that BRO 
since the very beginning had been a mixed organisat ion and headed by an Army Officer. In 
1989, the post of Director General, Border Roads wa s upgraded to the rank of Lieutenant 
General. In 2006, the Cabinet Committee on Security  confirmed that the post of DG, Border 
Roads would be filled by an officer of the rank of Lieutenant General from the Corps of 
Engineers.      

 12 
14. The Committee was of the opinion that any appointme nt to the Central Civil posts 
shall be made in accordance to the proper Recruitme nt Rules made considering the 
various constitutional provisions and mandate based  on the laid down eligibility and 
qualification needed to fulfil the job requirement of the DG post. This would bring clarity 
on issues like age, experience, educational qualifications etc needed for the said post.  
 
15. The Committee reiterates that MoRT&H/BRDB shall  take step to frame the GREF 
Act and place it for the consideration of the Parli ament at the earliest. This had been 
conveyed to the Ministry on a number of occasions a nd had been recommended by the 
Sixth Pay Commission also. The Committee hopes that  the Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways/BRDB would take suitable steps to ensure the same. 
 
16. During the said meeting the Committee was infor med that the main problem in BRO 
arises from the confusion over the existing hierarc hy of the Border Roads Development Board. 
This is because, while administratively BRDB comes under the Ministry of Defence but 
Secretary, BRDB and BRES personnel come under the M inistry of Road Transport & 
Highways. This has lead to a number of procedural p roblems which have caused genuine 
grievances in the civilian personnel working in BRO . For example, some of the 
recommendations of the Fourth, Fifth & Sixth Pay Co mmission were yet to be implemented in 
BRO which would have taken care of the contentious issues. Another fact was that in the year 
2006, the Cabinet Committee on Security made all th e posts in BRO permanent and even fixed 
the number of posts in each grade. It was also deci ded that the vacancies created would be filled 
up in a three years period. However, even till date  the vacancies remained to be filled up. This 
had lead to a situation that BRO is short of critic al manpower for execution of many sensitive 
roads which are not only important for strategic co nsiderations but are necessary for socio 
economic development of the remote and far flung ar eas. The reason for huge deficiency in the 
Civil Engineering Cadre of BRO is mainly attributed  to the adhoc policy of hiring Defence 
Service officers in the higher posts due to which o fficers selected from UPSC at AEE (Civil) 
level are not joining or leaving BRO. Ministry/BRDB  shall consider priority of road 
construction as its prime motive and the issue of h iring Military officers for road construction in 
higher appointment of BRES service shall be address ed at appropriate level so the roads 
envisaged and needed could be built without further delay and cost overrun.  
 
17. The Committee was further informed of the fact that the last cadre review of the BRES 
(Civil) was done by DoPT in 1987 whereas the cadre review exercise in an organised Group “A’ 

 13 
service is ideally done at an interval of five year s. The Committee expressed its grave 
displeasure over this fact and recommends that cadr e review exercise of BRES Cadre 
should be taken up on priority basis and Ministry/B RDB and DoPT should extend all 
cooperation to ensure timely cadre review. Committe e is of the firm view that vacancies 
existing in BRO in Group ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ category shall be filled up in a time bound 
manner. Proper cadre review is essential to fulfil the aspi rations of BRES and is critical to the 
effective functioning of the organisation and specifically in the case of BRO keeping in view the 
nature of duties it performs. 
  
18. The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Defence d uring the course of the discussion 
informed the Committee that an internal committee headed by a Joint Secretary had been formed 
to look into the contentious issues plaguing BRO. T he Committee however was of the opinion 
that since BRO was mixed organisation consisting of  different stream of officials it would be 
more appropriate that an inter Ministerial Committe e consisting of representatives from the 
Ministries of Defence, Road Transport and Highways,  Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions and BRO be set up with a clear time bound mandate. This would ensure that all the 
concerned stake holders get to deliberate upon the issues. The Committee also recommends 
that a inter Ministerial Committee chaired by an of ficer at the rank of Secretary should be 
set up consisting of representatives from the Minis tries of Defence, Road Transport and 
Highways, Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions  and BRO. This committee should 
have a time bound frame-work and it must be ensured  that views of all the concerned 
stakeholders are taken into consideration by the co mmittee before finalizing its report. 
  
19. The Committee conveys its appreciation for the hard work and efforts made by the 
officers and employees of BRO in building and maint aining roads in difficult and inhospitable 
environment and great personal risk. The Committee therefore stresses upon Ministry of 
Road Transport & Highways/Border Roads Development Board to look into the genuine 
and legitimate grievances of the BRO/GREF employees . The present need of the nation is 
better road connectivity in border areas of country.  
 
20. The Committee wishes to point out the problems bein g faced due to duality in control of 
BRO between MORTH, Ministry of Defence and Army. Th e Committee appreciates the need 
and practical requirements for the existing arrange ment for strategic reasons, it, however, 
emphasises the need for ending the multiplicity in this regards. The Government should examine 
the issue and suggest a way out which meets our strategic as well as legal requirements. 

 14 
 
 
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
21. The Committee notes that 6 th  Central Pay Commission has 
recommended framing of GREF Rules despite the fact no such rule had been 
framed so far. It therefore, recommends that the Ministry should make all efforts to 
draft the General Reserve Engineering Force Act as soon as possible. The 
concerned subordinate legislation should also be fr amed accordingly in the 
necessary time frame. This would clear the ambiguit y regarding service rules 
presently imposed on the Civilian employees of GREF /BRO and would certainly 
help to address the grievances of the employees.  
22.  The Committee took note of the submission made by the Ministry and was of 
the opinion that resentment in the employees of an organisation was not conducive 
to its efficient functioning. Ministry should make all possible efforts to improve the 
service terms and conditions of the BRO employees s o that the working efficiency 
and motivation and morale of the employees is not adversely effected. 
 
 23.  The Committee is of the opinion that the posting a nd appointment of 
Defence Forces personnel and officers against the c ivilian vacancies should not be 
allowed on adhoc  basis unless there is a provision in the Service r ules of the post that 
to the personnel posted from the Defence Forces should be eligible to hold the post i.e. 
having needed qualification and experience to hold the post. Any personnel policy for 
appointment against civilian posts has to be catere d for the reservation provided to 
the deprived and weaker section of the society. No manning policy should be made 
without due consideration of Govt. of India particu larly deployment of Defence 
Forces officers and personnel in the civilian posts  as this may lead to serious 
consequences on the defence preparedness of the cou ntry. Therefore while making 
any policy for employment of Military trained offic ers and personnel for road 
construction work Ministry/BRDB should take into account the sparability of officers 
and personnel for civilian jobs. The Ministry/BRDB should also ensure that 
employment of Defence Forces personnel should not a ffect the promotional avenues 
of the BRO Employees. 

 15 
24. “The Committee is unable to accept the plea of the Ministry that it is not 
mandatory upon the Administrative Ministries/Depart ments to lay the rules framed under 
Article 309 of the Constitution on the Table of each House of Parliament. 
 
 The Recruitment and Conditions of Service Rules ar e made by the Government 
either under Article 309 of the Constitution or und er various Acts of Parliament. 
Whereas the Rules made under various Acts of Parlia ment are laid before 
Parliament, those made under Article 309 are not no rmally laid. The Committee 
sees no reason why the Rules made under Article 309  of the Constitution should not 
be laid before Parliament. There have been some cases where the Rules made under 
Article 309 of the Constitution have been laid befo re the Parliament. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly feels and recommends  that in order to maintain a 
uniform practice all the Rules made under Article 3 09 of the Constitution should 
also be laid before Parliament. In case, however, G overnment feels that the non-
existence of the laying provision in Article 309 is  the reason for not laying the Rules 
made thereunder, the Committee recommends that Arti cle 309 of the Constitution 
be suitably amended, so as to ensure that all the R ules made thereunder are laid 
before Parliament.” 
 [Para 4.31 of 82 
nd  Report] 
(presented on 1.6.1990)  
 
 The Committee therefore reiterates the above recom mendation and directs the 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways/BRDB to make suitable arrangements to 
ensure that the Recruitment Rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution are 
also laid before the Parliament.  
 
 
25. Further, the Department of Personnel & Training  should also take note of the 
above recommendation of the Committee and take suit able steps for ensuring the 
implementation of the same by not only the Ministry  of Road Transport & 
Highways/BRDB but also by other Ministries/Organisa tions which frame 
rules/recruitment rules under Article 309 of the Constitution. 
 
26. The Committee was of the opinion that any appoi ntment to the Central Civil posts 
shall be made in accordance to the proper Recruitme nt Rules made considering the 
various constitutional provisions and mandate based  on the laid down eligibility and 

 16 
qualification needed to fulfil the job requirement of the DG post. This would bring clarity 
on issues like age, experience, educational qualifications etc needed for the said post.  
 
27. The Committee reiterates that MoRT&H/BRDB shall  take step to frame the GREF 
Act and placed it for the consideration of the Parl iament at the earliest. This had been 
conveyed to the Ministry on a number of occasions a nd had been recommended by the 
Sixth Pay Commission also. The Committee hopes that  the Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways/BRDB would take suitable steps to ensure the same. 
 
28. The Committee expressed its grave displeasure o ver this fact and recommends that 
cadre review exercise of BRES Cadre should be taken  up on priority basis and 
Ministry/BRDB and DoPT should extend all cooperatio n to ensure timely cadre review. 
Committee is of the firm view that vacancies existi ng in BRO in Group ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ 
category shall be filled up in a time bound manner. 
 
29.   The Committee also recommends that a inter Mi nisterial Committee chaired by an 
officer at the rank of Secretary should be set up c onsisting of representatives from the 
Ministries of Defence, Road Transport and Highways,  Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions and BRO. This committee should have a time  bound frame-work and it must be 
ensured that views of all the concerned stakeholder s are taken into consideration by the 
committee before finalizing its report. 
  
30. The Committee therefore stresses upon Ministry of R oad Transport & 
Highways/Border Roads Development Board to look int o the genuine and legitimate 
grievances of the BRO/GREF employees. The present n eed of the nation is better road 
connectivity in border areas of country.  
 
 
  
 