1. 
\ 
)/ 
C. S. xoa 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINA1E 
LEGISLATION 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
(Pres ented on the xsth Novemb er, X971) 
I _ ... 
RAJ'fi\ SABHA SECRETARL'\T 
NEW DELHI 
NOV!iMBI!R,tm 

1. CnMrosiTios oP CoM ... ~tm£ 
:>. RFPOitt-
J Introduction 
CO~ TEXTS 
II. The Prftid\"IUlal :and \'i.:<:-l'resid=111 Electicru 
(Amendment) Rill<$. 1969 ( S. 0. 330% of J~). 
Ill. The lnJian Tc!"11faph Ele,-mth Amcodmc;:t) Rule; 
1910(GSR >OJOof 1!170). 
J\' '11>< F.mplo>=' StJI< Jn,uron<e (Central) Amend ­
ment Rule., t971 (GSR 36: of t9;t'. 
\'.The Conduct of ElC\:tiom (SeconJ AmcoJmen~ 
RuJ., 197• (S. 0. ·l-9 ot 1971). 
VI. l be Shipping Oc-.clopmcnt fu.od Leans Am<ndment 
Rule. . 1970 (GSI~ 1074 uf <970). 
VII. l'ht N.:\tl(lnal \X'dfn-rc: Bo:srd ro~ Sea·F:trt!li (Amend .. 
mont) Rule>, 1~70 (GSR >055 of 1970) 
1. Al1illliS01t.;L$-
t. Cnmment:. Clf the MinistrY of .l.A\\ an\.1 justice and of 
rhe ntcccion Comml~ion. 
Il. Minute11 of lh~ ~lttlng.i of Lhe Committee 
P•AA NO'- PA0£.5: 
(I) 
•-3 
4-7 1-3 
~to 3-·1 
n-q -I-s 
•s-16 6 
17-•9 6-S 
2o-zs S-9 
1()..-(2 
lJ-19 

CO};lPOSlTlON OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION 
1. Shri J aisukh Ia! Hathi 
2. Shri ll!. Anandam 
3. Shri T. V. Anandan 
4. Shli Sriman Prafulla Goswami 
5 Shrl U. K Lakshmana Gowda 
6. Slui Syed Hussain 
7. Shri B. V. Abdulla Koya 
8. Shli Nawal Kishore 
9. Shri Mulka Govinda Reddy 
10. Shri D\vijenclralal Sen Gupta 
ll. Shn N. K. Sbejwalkar 
12. Shl'i Awadheshwar Prasad Sinha 
13. Shri Swaisingh Sisodia 
14. Shri T K. Sril1ivasan 
15 Shri Shyam Lal Yadav. 
SECRETAll!AT 
Shri S. S. Bhalerao, Joint SecretJiry. 
Shri M. S. Panigrahi, Deputy SecretaMJ. 
Shri :'\'!. K. Jain. Under Secretary. 

r 
REPORT 
I 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, as 
authorised by the Conuruttee, do present on its behalf the Eleventh 
Report of the Committee. 
2. Subsequent to the presentation of its Tenth Report, 1~ 'orders' 
\\ere cxanuncd. The Committee held three sittings and considered 
and adopted the Report al its sitting held on the 23rd October, 1971. 
3. Observations of ihc Committee on matters arising aut of the 
examination of the 'orders'. which, in !he opinion of the Committee, 
should be brought to the notice of the House, together with the t'C· 
commendations of the Committee thereon, are contained In the sue· 
cccding pnt·agr~phs of the Report. I 
u 
THE PRESIDENTIAL AND VICE-PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS 
{AMENDMENT) RULES, 1969 (S.O. 3302 OF 1069) 
4. Sub-rule (4) of Rule 19 of the Presidential and Vice-Presi­
dential Elections Rules. 1952, as amended by S. 0. No. 3302 dated 
the 14th August, 1969, provides as follows:-
" (4) (a) I! owing to blindness or other physical :infirmity or 
J!litcracy or any other cause an elector is unable to read tho 
ballot paper or make a mark thereon the presiding officer shall 
record the \'Otc on the ballot paper in accordance \\ith the 
wishes or the elector; 
(b) the elector shal: then himself or with the assistance of 
the presiding officer fold up the ballot paper so as to conceal his 
vote and insert it into the ballot box; and 
(c) while acting under this sub-rule, the presiding officer 
shall observe as much secrecy as is feasible and shall keep n 
brief record or each such instance but shall not indicate therein 
the manner in which any \'Ote has been cast." 

2 
5. The expression .. or otlu~r cause" in para (a) of the aid sub-rule 
{4) seems to have been inserted io cover cases other than those of 
bhndness or other Physical infu:mity or illiteracy. But tt also 
appears to leave a very wide discretion to the presiding officer to re­
cord vole on behalf o£ an elector. Since rule 19 (4) (a) is an ex­
ception to the basic princ.ple of an election law that an elector him­
se!C should cast hlS vote, it was felt that the circumstanc~'S in which 
a presiding officer would record the vote on behalf of a particular 
elector should be specified clearly and precisely in the rule and that 
no discretionary powers should be .,ested in the presiding officer 
6. The matter was therefore taken up with the Ministry' or Law 
and Juslicc and they forwarded the comments of the Election Com­
mission on the matter, which are reproduced below:-
"2. The Commission is not in favour of omitting the words 
"o1· nny other cause'' in rule 19 (4) (a) of the said Rules as sug­
gested by the Committee for lhc following reasons. There is a 
substantial disllnction between lhe wording of the provisions or 
the Representation of the People Act, 1951 and I he wording or 
the prov isions of the President ial and Vice-Presidential Elections 
Act, 1952 in this respect . Section 59 of the Representation or 
the Peop le Act, 1951 and section 9 of the Presidentinl and Vice­
Pres idential Elections Act. 1952 are identical in language. Each 
o( the sections is couchcd in the following Janguagc:-
"Manner of voting at elect.ions.-At every eleclion where 
a poll is taken, vot<.'S shall be given by ballot in such man­
ner as may be Prescribed and no votes shall be received by 
proxy." 
But the identity in language ends there . Section 169 or the Re­
presentation of the People Act, 1951 which confers powers on the 
Central Goverrunent to make rules for carrying out the t>urposes of 
the Act a!ter consulting the Election Commission provides in sub­
st-clion (2) (c) as follo\\s:-
" (c) the manner in which votes are to be gi"en both gene­
rally and in the ca$C of illiterate voter or voter undeT Physical 
or any other di.<.-ability: •·. 
But section 21 of the Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections 
Act , 19S2 which also confers power upon the Central Go\'crnment to 
mnke rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act after consulting 
the Election Commission provides in sub-section 12) (g) as fol­
lows:-
"(g) the place nnd hours of polling, the manner in which 
votes om to be given and the procedure as to \'oting to be fol· 
lowed at elections:". 

3 
F1-om the above it is clear that the limiting word.~ in section 
169 (2) (c) of the former Act wliich have been underlined are not to 
be found in section 21 (2) (g) of the latter; and this accounts for the 
difference in the language in rule 40 and 40A read "ith rule iO of 
the Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961 on the one hand and in rule 
19 ( ~) (a) of the Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections Rules, 
1952 on the other. In Yie\V of this important difference and also in 
view of the extent and nature of electorate in a Presidential or Vice­
Presidential election, the Commission feels that no amendment is 
called lor as sug!lC ted by the Committee on Subordinate Legislation 
of the Rajya Sabh.o and desires that this aspect of the matter may 
be brourtht to the notice of that Committee by the Government. 
7. The Committee has carefully considered the matter and is of 
the opinion that either the causes, if any, besides those of blindncsfi 
r or other physical infirmity or illiteracy, shauld be specifically nnd 
precisely provided in the rule it.sel! or the words ''or any other 
cause" in the rule should be deleted therefrom as they arc too g~nc­
ra.l nnd wide In their import. The Committee therefore recommend 
lhat rule 19(4) should be amended accorclingly. 
m 
THE INDIAN TELEGRAPH (ELEVENTH MIENDMENT) RULES, 
1970 (GSR 2030 OF 1970) 
8. Rule 451B {new) of the Indian Telegraph Rules, 1951, provides 
as follows:-
"Subscriber Trunk Dialling Barring Facility.-Thc Subscrl· 
bcr Trunk Dialling Barring Facility may be made available to 
a subscriber at the discretion of the telegraph authority at such 
rates and on such conclitions as may be determined by that 
authority." • 
9. The above-mentioned rule appeared to vest a wide discretion 
rn the telegraph authority inasmuch as it did not indicate any con­
ditions under which the telegraph authority could either grant or 
refuse the STDB facility. It was felt that some broad guide-lines 
or general conditions under which STDB facility could be made 
available to an applicant should be specified in the rule. Moreover, 
according to section 7 (2) (e) of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, the 
conditions and restrictions subject to which any telegraph line, 
appliance or apParatus for telegraphic communication shall be es· 
tablishcd, maintained. worked, repaired, transferred. •hifted, with­
drawn or disconnected are lo be provided by rules. Rule 451B did 
not thus nppear to conform to this provision also. 

4 
10. The Conunittee notes that the Department of Communicatioru. 
(P & T Board) with whom the above-mentioned point was taken up 
have since amended the rule as follows:-
"451B. Sub.cnber Trm~k Dialling Barring Facility on. 
PABXs.-The Subscriber Trunk Dialling Barring Facility on 
PABXs may be made available to a subscriber at the following 
rates, namely:-
(a) mitial charge 'bf liity rupees per junction; 
(b) rental charges of one hundred rupees per junction 
per year or part thereof: 
Provided that twenty per cent of the junctions termi­
nated on PAZXs. subject to a minimum of one, shall not be 
provided \\ith this facility." (Vide Notification CSR 11:11 
dntt)tl 31-7-1971). 
IV 
l'HE EMPLOYEES' STA'J.'.E INSURANCE (CENl'RAL) 
AMENDMENT RULES. 1971 (CSR :!62 ot' 1971) 
11. Sub-rule (4) o( rule 5 of the Employees' State ln~ul'ance 
(Central) Rules, 1950, prior to its amendment by GSR 362 of 1971 
provided os follows:-
" ( 4) A non-official member of the Corporation, the Stand­
ing Committee or the Medical Benefit Council who happens to 
be a Member of Parliament will not be entitled to draw any daily 
allowance in connection with the work of the Corpotation, 
St..1nding Committee, Medical Benefit Council or any o( th<>ir 
Sub-committees during the period when Parliament <:1r any 
Committee of Parliament on whleh he may be serving is in &l'S· 
sion, a! 1\e will be drawmg allowances under section 3 of the 
Salaries Md Allowances of Members of Parliament Act, 195-1 
(30 of 195-1), from the Parliament Secretariat concerned. How­
ever, if the :Member of Parliament concerned certifies thnt he 
was prevented from attending the session of P:lrliament or the 
Committee of Parliament because of his work connected with 
lhc Corporation, Standing Committee, Medical Benefit Council 
or any of their sub-committee and did not draw any daily allow­
ance !rom Parliament he will be entitled to draw dally allow­
nnce nt the rate of mpees thirty-one per day," 

5 
12. 1'he underhned portion of the sub-rule was amended by GSR 
362 of I 971 as follows: -
For ''rupees thirty -one," substitute ·'fixed by the Central 
Government from time to lime." 
Under $ection 15 of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, 
members of the Employees' State Insurance Corporation, the Stand· 
ing Commitlee or the Medical Benefit Council shall receive such fees 
and alluwancL"S as may from time to time be prescribed by rule by 
the Central Government. In view of this pro,'ision, it was felt that 
the Iotter mode of cmpm•enng the Central Government to fix allow­
ance$ !rom time to time was not strictly in conformity with section 
15 of the Employees' State Insurance Acr. 
13 The matter was accordingly taken up wit.!J. the Ministry of 
Labour, Employment and Rehabilitation (Department of L;,boUI 
und Employment) who in reply stated as follow~:-
"!. Consequent on enhancement of the rent of D.A. lor 
.Members of Parliament !rom Rs. 31 toRs. 51 per day, it became 
necessary to llm<wd the Employees' State Insurance (Central) 
Rule, 1950 to provide for payment of D.A. nl the existing rate to 
those Memb~rs of Parliament who are prevented rt·om attending 
the session of lhe Parliarn.omt or Cotrunittee o( ParJiQmcnt be­
cause of Lbe wod1: connected with the Employees' State Insu• 
rance Corpnration and do not draw any druly allowance The 
rates of D .A. (or Member of Parliament can, however, be chang­
ed from time to lime. Therefore, in order to ~void !rcquen l 
amendment of the Rules, it was considered desirable to make 
such a Provision in the Rules as would nt~t require :frequent am­
endment. 
2. The rules were published as drait in the Gazette of Indio 
inviting objcstioru; suggestions but no objections suggestions 
\\Cre received. The Rules have been amended and published. 
3. In these circumstances the lfinistry do not think it nc­
ccSS<try to make any further amendment in the Rules." 
14. In this connection it may be stated that the rates of D A. o1 
1\fc·mbers of Parliament do not frequently change. Th~> Commilteo 
therefore desire that the Ministry can more appropriately provide 
thnt a Member of Parliament would be entitled to D .A. at the rntes 
udmiss1ble to him under Ule Salareis and Allowances of Members 
of Parltament Act, 1954. and the Rules made thereunder !rom time 
to time. The Committee recommends that the rule should be 
amended suitably. 

6 
v 
THE COl\'DUCT OF ELECTIONS (SECO:t\'D AMEl\'DMENT) 
RULES, 1971 (S.O. 4i9 OF 1971) 
15. The Conduct of Elections (Second Amendment) Rules, J9il, 
were published in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary) on the 27th 
January, 19il and were latd en the Table of the House on Morch 
:!9, 1971 after the completion of the general elections held in March, 
1971. Toe Committee therefore enttuired £rom the ~finistry of Law 
and Justice as to the circumstances wbich nece,;sitated rroming or 
these Rules just Prior to the elections. The comments of the Mi· 
nistry of Law and Justice and o! the Election Commission in the 
rna Iter are reproduced in Appendtx 1. 
16. The Committee's attention was drawn to the fact that a Joint 
Committee of the two Houses of Parliament has been appointed to l 
'"amm,. the en lire eledion law of the country Although the np­
poinlment of such a Committee would not preclude Lhis Commht"c 
from cxamtning such Rules in detail, if It so desir<)S, this Committee 
rcfromed from doing so. The Committee, however, felt thnt this 
matlct· may be brought before the Joint Committee of the two 
Houses of ParUamenl on Election Law and they may considc1· whe· 
thcr in the law itsel:f a Provision should be made whcthct· such im-
portont matters should provide that rules to be framed tbercunder 
would not come into force unless they have been appt'oved by P:lr-
lia mcnt. I 1 
VI 
THE SHlPPING DEVELOP1fENT FUND (LOANS) A!.fENDl\IENT 
RULES, 1970 (GSR 1074 OF 1970) 
17 Rule 8 of the Shipping Development Fund 1Loans) Rules, 
1961, pro,idcs as follows:-
''8. Pnor APprot·al of Goternment: Every decision of the 
Committee to grant a loan exceeding Rs. 100 lakhs shall be &Ub· 
ject to the approval by the Central Government and such app­
roval shall be sought by the Secretary before the dacision of the 
Committee is communicated to the Directorate." 
Prior to its amendment by GRS 1074 of 1970, the limit upto which 
the Shipping Development Fund Committee could {!rant a loan with· 
out the approval of the Central Government wa> Rs. 25 lakhs. As 
thts lnvoh•cd delegation of ''ery wide financial powers to a Commit· 
tee, the Ministry of Shipping and Transpon were requestcJ to ex· 

l)lain lhe circumstances which. necessitated this enlargement or pow­
ers to grant loans. The M.inistry have, in reply, stated as follows:-
.. (I) ... before lhe amendment of the SDFC (Loan) Rules, 
the Committee were required t~ obta.in the aPproval of the Cen· 
trnJ Government before granting any loan cxceed.ing Rs. 25 lakhs. 
These rules were framed in :\larch 1961, and the working o( the 
rules re\-caled that a very large number of loans granted by the 
Committee were for amounts in excess of the limtt of Rs. 25 
lakhs and lhe CollUillttee had t<r seek appro,·al of the Go,·em· 
ment in all these cases. 
(2) A statement• showing the loans granted br the SDFC 
since its inception m 1959-60 upto 1970-71 and another state· 
ment• showing the number of loans granted yearwisc, for Rs. 25 
lakhs and below, lhe number of loans for Rs. 25 lakhs to 100 
lnkhs and the number of loans which were for more than ns. I 
crore are forwarded herewith. 
(3) lt woulcl be seen that out of 131 loans sancti<med, only 
21 were for Rs. 25 lakhs and below and even out ol this, as many 
os 17 wore prior to 1965-66. Even ouL of the 110 loans which 
were for <JVer Rs. 25 lal<hs, only 36 were for amounts ranging 
from Rs. 25 Jakhs to Rs. 100 lakhs. As many as 74 loans were 
for amounts e.xceeding Rs. 1 crore. 
(4) Since 1961, shipping trends and prices hav!.' under{!oM 
changes. Presently larger shiPS are being acquired nnd tlu~se 
require bigger loans. Shlp prices have also gone up stteply. 
The prices of vessels of 20,000 DWT have gone up by 33 per cent 
and of the vessels of about 55,00 DW'l' by about 47 per cent in 
recent times. 
(S) In these circumstances it was felt that tha requirement 
that the Committee should take approval of the Government for 
granting any loan exceeding Rs. 25 lakhs was restrictive and 
necc<sltated reference of a yery large number of cases to Gov· 
emmcnt for approval. The Committee consists of senior Gov. 
ernment officers generally of the rank of and above Joint Secre· 
tary and is presided over by the Tr3nsport Secret:~ry. It was 
therefore felt that the Committee can be safely delegated fur· 
ther powers to grant loans upto Rs. l. 00 crore The Rules were, 
therefore. amended acrordingly. Howe,·er to ensure that the en­
hanced powers are exercised by the Commit;ee onl~· "ith the 
concurrence of the Finance Member of the Committee, Govern­
ment ha,·e issued instructions to the Committee that the powel'li 
•Not reproduced. 

8 
to sanction lodllS b~tween Rs. 25 lakhs «lld Rs. 100 lo.kh• with­
out the aPproval of the Central Government should be exercised 
only in cases in which the representatives of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Ex-penditure) on the Committee has 
aloo agreed; otherwise. the gro.nt of such loans shall require 
the approval of the Central Government." 
18. The instructions referred to in the last paragraph of the Mi­
nistry's Office Memorandum are as follows:-
''It may, however. Jtindly be noted that the po .. ers to sanc­
tion loarts between Rs. 25 lakbs and Rs. 100 lakhs without the 
approval o! the Central Government should be exercised only 
in cases to which the representative of the Ministry of Financt> 
(Department of Expenditure) on the Committee has also agreed; 
othenvise the grant of such loans shall require the approval o! 
ihe Central Government.'' 
19. From tl1c reply of the Ministry it will appear that there is 
sumcient justification for raising the limit of Rs. 25 lakhs to R~. I()') 
lakhs. However, w:ith a view to continue to some exterll the Cen­
tral Government's power of financial control when lar~:c sums lli'C' 
advanced as loans, the Committee feels that, a~ a matter of nbun­
tlunt prccoution, the administrative lnstructiollS issued to tha Ship­
ping Development Committee should be incorporated in the rule. 
The Committee recommends that the rule should be amended suit­ably. 
vn 
THE NATIONAL WELFARE BOARD FOR SEA-FARERS 
(AMENDMENT} RULES, 1970 (GSR 2~55 OF 1970) 
20. Rule 4 of the National Welfare Board for Sea-farers Rule~, 
1963 provides !or the composition of the Board constituted under 
section 218 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. Prior to its amend­
ment by GSR 2055 of 1970, the Board consisted, among other s. of 
three members of Parliament of whom two were to be nominated 
from the Lok Sabha and ooe from the Rajya Sabha. By the am­
ending Rules of 1970, however, the composition of the Board was 
considerably changed so as to reduce the membership of the Bonr<l 
from 44 to 27. In thP process of reduction of the membership, the 
number of members of Parliament on the Board was also reduced 
from 3 to 2 and only one member from each House of Parliament 
was to be nominated oo the Board. Incidentally this also disturbed 
the proportion of representation of the Rajya Sabha and the Lok 
Snbbn on a slotutory body which is by convention in the ratio of l: 2. 

9 
The effect of the changed rule has been:-
(!) the reduction in the number of members of Parliament 
on the statutory Board; and 
(2) the non-adherence to the ratio of 1: 2 for the Rajya 
Sabha and the Lok Sabha on the Board. 
21. lL was also observed that neither the Act nor the Rules Pro­
vided for the manner in which members of Parliament were to be 
nominated from the Rajya Sabha or the Lok Sabha. The usual mode 
or nomination of members to a statutory body is through the Pre­
siding Officer of the House concerned. But this mode does not seem 
to have been adopted ever since the constitution of the Board in 1963. 
22. The above-mentioned points were therefore taken up with the 
Ministry of Shipping and Transport. 
23. On the point about M P. 's representation on the Board, the 
Ministry stated that the National Weliare Board for Sea-farers wns 
or the opinion that the Board as constituted then was rather un­
wield ly and it had become clifficult to arrange for meetings, accommo­
dation etc. for so many members at a Lime and that it also entailed 
some :~voidable expenditure on T .A. etc. Hence it was decided to 
reduce the mcmbersWp on the Board. 
24. The Committ.ee however notes that the Ministry hnve, recon­
sidered the matter and have now restored the statu.$ quo ante in so 
far as I he numbct· o£ members of Parliament and their ratio is con­
cerned. (vidt Ministry's notification G.S.R. No. 621 dated 1'1.4 1971) 
25. On the quC'stion regarding the manner of nomination of the 
Membt>r. of Parliament on the .Board, the Ministry have stated that 
at present members of Parliament were nominated by the Minister 
of Parliamentary Affairs. subjeet to the approval of the Prime Mi­
nister. It may: however, be pointed out that nominations to similar 
statutory bodies are made by the Presiding Officer of each House of 
Parliament. The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead 
of the eXJsting Procedure, the usual procedure followed in rnnnina­
tion of Members of Parliament to other statutory bodles should also 
be followed in the matter or nomination m Members of Parliament 
on the Shipping Board, i.e .. the nomination to the Shipping Bo~rd 
should be made by the Presiding Officer ot each Htn~se. 
Nr.w DELHI; 
Tile 23td October, 1971. 
JAISUK.HLAL HATHI, 
Chairman, 
Committee or. Subordi?tate Legislation. 

APP ENDIX I 
(vide para 15 of the Report) 
(i) COMME.<'ITS OF THE :\1INISTRY OF L..\W Ai'lD JUSTICE 
(LEGISLATIVE DEPART:\IENT) 
2. The Conduc~ of Elections (Second Amendment) Rules, 1971, 
rdate to the amendment of roles, 27, 49, 55, 56 and 59 and Forms 
13-0, 16A (then existing Form 16) and 20 of the Conduct of Elec­
tions Rules, 1961. Except the amendments w rules 55 sod 56, the 
other amendments are of a minor or consequential nature. In the 
main, the amending rules relat<' to the chnnges introduced in the 
procedure for counting of vo~s. Sections (64 to 67 A of the Repre­
sentnticm of the People Act, 1951, deal with the counting of votes. 
In addition lo these provi>ions in the Act , detailed provisions are 
contained in Lbe Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961, for regulating the 
vanous details of procedure regarding the counting of voles (~ide 
Part V rules fiO to 66). Amendments were made to sub-rttle {J) of 
rule 55 and sulrrules {1), (4) and {7) of rule 56. Nt•mcrous repre­
scnlntions were received by the Election Commission from several 
quarters thnt counl.ing of votes should not be done polling-stu!ion­
wise ns it PnfLbl~d not only the counting staff but also the candidates 
and their COUilling agents to know in favour of which candidate the 
majority of the voters assigned to a particular polling station hnd 
cast their voh•s. Tllis in turn caused the voters not to turn up at 
the polling stations for the purpose of casting their votes, becnuse 
of fear that they may therea!ter be inlimidated. pressuriscd and co· 
creed by influential persons after declaration of results. It was this 
factor, more oflcm than not, which deterred voters, especially those 
belonging to the weaker sections of the community, from ccming 
to o polling station to cast their votes. Under the new procedure 
the votes were to be rountcd constituency -wise. All the ballot 
papers found in the ballot boxes of all the polling stations in an 
As.'lembly Constituency within a Parliamentary Constituenc\• are 
required to be mixed together nnd therea!tcr taken up for cou.ntin~. 
Jn this process. lhe mixing of the ballot papers would reduce the 
chances of any one making an intelligent guess about the trend of 
voting by the voters in any particular lociility which may lead to 
coercion etc. being practised as a consequence thereof. After tak!n~ 
all facts and circumstances into consideration, the Election Com. 
mission fell that it was necessary to amend rules 55 and 56 of Con· 
ro 

11 
duct of Elections Rules, 1961, so as 1.0 introduce a new procedur~ 
which was also m line wllh the practice _obtaining in Great Britain 
The Government accepted the recommendmiorr of the Election Com­
mission and the amendments were notified on 27-1-1971. The ch3nge 
thus affected had been done solely with a view to prevent the 
w~aker sections o( the community being threatened for the way in 
which they m1ght have cast their votes. Intimidation and coercion 
are the two evils that have been rampant generally during elections 
and it is absolutely necess •• y to put down these two evils for en· 
surmg free and fair elecbons so that the voter may vote wilhou~ 
the slightest fear or apprehension of any danger. 
3. The amendments were incorporated in the rules in view of 
the urg('ncy explained by the Election Commission. Had the issue 
of notification been withheld till the Session of Parliament, the 
benefit of the amendments would not have been available during 
the last general elections, to the Lok Sabha and certain State Legis-
r lath•e Assemblies. 
4. The changes In the counting procedure effected by the Conduct 
o( Elections (Second Alnendment) Rules, 1971, before the lost 
General Elections were also raised b'y certain membet·s in the Rajyll 
Sabha during lhe discussion on !.he Motion of Thanks on the Presi­
dent's Address during the last session of the Rajyn Sabha. The 
circumstonces in which and the re9son for which the above nmend­
mcnt rule~ wc.re notified by the Government \\'ere explained in 
great detail by the Minister of Law & Justice when he intervened 
in the debate In the Rojya Sabha on 5-4·71. I•t this connection, 
attention is invited to pp 366-378 of the uncorrected copy of Rajya 
Sabha Debates on 5-4-7L 
(il) COMMEJ'<TS OF THE ELECTION COMMISSION 
I am directed to say that it bas been represented to the Com­
mission by many quarters that the counting oi votes should not be 
done polling stationwise as it enables not only the counting staff 
but al~o the candidates, their election agents and their counting 
agent:; to know in £•vour of which candidate the majority of the 
voters nssigned to a particular !)Oiling station have cast their votes. 
This in its tum may cause the voters not to turn up at polling sta­
tions for lbe purpose of casting their votes because or their fear 
thnt thereafter they may be intimidated, pressurised and coerced 
by inftuential persons after t.he declaration of the results. Th" 
Commission feels that there is a great iorce in these complainl~ and 
i l is desirable to avoid the present system of counting of votes as 
far as practicable in the interests of the general electorate. ln fact, 

12 
the public is acclaiming this new system on the ground that it is 
conducive to free and fair election and a right step towards that 
end. ln this connection, I am to enclose a copy of a circular letter 
sent to all the Chief Electoral Officers or tlie States and Union terri­
tories which fully explains the reasons for the necessity o! changes 
Ill the rules in this behalf. Accordingly, the CoiDJnission recom­
mends to the Government of India the proposals as indicated in the 
enclosed draft Notification containing the amendments to the Con­
duct of Elections Rules, HUH. A lninor change has also been sug· 
gested in rule 56 (4) nlso for substituting the word "Rejected" for the letter "R" in that rule. 
2. Though the postal ballot papers are generally despatched to 
the electors entitled for the privilege of voting by postal ballot, 
within 48 hours after 3 p.m. on ~he last date for withdrawn! of 
candidatures, considerable diffkulty is felt in the case o! receipt of 
the postal ballot by the Returning Officer concerned particulurly 
from those belonging to armed forces who are stationed in inocccssi­
blc places on the frontiers of the country. lJ: their votes are not 
counted due lo the delay in the transmission, there wlll be legiti­
mate ground f:or complaint. tn the coming elections, the Commis­
sion bas issued a direction that the counting Will take place only 
on the last day of the poll in any o£ the States or Union Territories. 
In some States and Union Territories, the poll would be completed 
on the 1st March, 1971, but tbe counting would be commenced only 
()h 9-3-1971. '!'here is no reason why the postal ballot papers receiv­
ed during this period should not be counted. It is therefore sug­
gested that rule 27 of the Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961 should 
be amcndecl so as to provide that the postal ballot papers should 
rench the Returning Officer before the hour fixed for the counting 
of votes in any constituency. Consequential changes will he requir­
ed in Form 13-D appended to the Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961. 
3. Certain conseqttential changes have become necessary ber.ause 
of the amendments suggested above and those consequent!~! amend­
ments are indicated in the draft Notification. 
4 The amendments suggested in the enclosed draft No•.ification may be notified immediately." 

APPENDIX U 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE 
1 
F'!RST MEETL'IfG 
Th~ Commiltee met at 10.30 A.M on Wednesday. the 7th July, 
1971. 
Pre.-,:ent 
1 Sbri Jaisukhlal Hathi-Citairmrm 
MEMBERS 
2 Sbr i M. Anandam 
' 3. Shri ·r. V. Anandan 
4. Shri Sriman Prafulla Goswaml 
5. Shri N awal Kishore 
6. Sbrl Mulka G ov lnda Reddy 
7. Shri Dwijendralnl Sen Guptn 
8. Shrl N. K Shejwalkar 
9. Sbri Awadeshwut Prasad Sinha 
10. Shri Swa isingh Sisodia 
11. Shri T. K. Srmivasan 
12. Shri Shyam L;tl Y~dav 
SECRETARIAT 
Sbri S. S. Bhalerao Joittr Se<'retary. 
Shri M. S PanigTahi. Deputy SecrettlMJ 
• 
0 • 
.-
.-.. .. ( 
2. The Chairman welcomed the newl) nominated rnl'mbers nf the 
Committee. 
3. The Committee considered and took de-cision> on th~ followml{ 
memoranda prepared by the Secrelariat:-
(i) Memorandum No. 7 o 19i1-The Prestclenual and V•<"e·PrC#t• 
den tiel Electiom tA mertdmcnt) Ru/P.s. 1969 (S.O 3302 Of 1969). 
4. Rule 4 of the Prestdential and Vice-Presidential Elections 
Rules. 19a2, as amended, mter alia orovides !or the rc<:mdinl( of 

14 
vote on the ballot paper by the Presidlng Officer on behalf of a 
voter who o 'ing lo blindness or other physical infirmity or lllitc­
rucy 011 any other cau>;e is prevented from recording his vote h•m­
self. It was felt that the words "or any other cause" are too wide 
:.nd general in their import. The Committee was therefore, ot the 
opin1on that elthcr the causes, if any, besides those of blindness or 
other phys1cal mfirmity or illiteracy. should be specified precisely 
m the rule or if 1t cannot bl! done the words "or any other cause" 
be dclc.-ted therefrom. 
The Committee nlso considered wheth<.>r this rule should be 
brought in line wtth rule .JO of the Conduct of Elections Rules. 1961, 
10 so far as permitting n blind etc. voter to take a c •mpanion with 
him for recording of his vote is concerned. The Committee felt 
that the existing provision of rule 4 of the Presidt·nti31 and Vice­
Presidential Elections Rules 1952 in this regard should continue. 
(il) Mem!lrandum No. 8 of 1971-The Indian Telegraph (Eleve>lth 
Amendment) Rules. 1970 (G.S.R. 2030 of 1970) 
f>. Rule 451B of the Indian Telegraph Rules, 1951, prov1d(•s that 
the Subscriber Trunk DiuJling Bat'ring facility mny be made avnil. 
able to a subscriber at the discretion of the telegraph at1thority nl 
such rntes ~nd on such conditions as may be determined by that 
nulhorlty It was felt that some broad guide-lines or genernl eond!­
fions nn which STDB facility could he mnde available to a sub· 
scribcr should be spccied in the rule so that the rule is broltght in 
confnrmfty with section 7 12) (e) of the Tndian Telegraph Act, 1885. 
The Committee noted tbat the Posts and Telegraphs Department 
with whom the above-mentioned point was taken up have agreed 
to Rll'Qild the rule suitably. 
(iiil Jlfemorandu., No. 9 Of 1971-The Employees' State InsuTance 
(Central) Ame>tdment RlliCS, 1971 (G.S.R. 362 of 1971) 
6. Rule 5 (1) 01 the Employees' State Insurance (Central) Rules, 
1950. nro\••de! that a member of Parliament serving as a non-official 
mnmb..r on th Corporation, the Standing Committee or the Meriienl 
Benefit Cour ·il will be rn!itled to draw daily allowance at the rate 
Rx•: I lw th<! Central Government from time to time in conni'Ction 
wit', t h,. work or the Corporation. etc. Tt was ielt that the rule 
w~s. not in cqnfn"lllitv with •ec'ion 15 of Employees State Insurance 
.\~1 1948 io s much ns under tr.at section f<'es and allo~::ancr~ of 
member>< of the Corporation "tc. hnve to be prescribed bv Rules. 
The Committee dcslrcd.I.hat the rule should be amcnded.so as to 

• 
rS 
provide that membe:rs of Parliament serving on the Corporation 
etc. shall be entiUed to allowances at the rates admissible to them 
under the Salaries and Allowances 01 Mo.:mbers of Parliament Act, 
195t and the Rules made thereunder. 
(iv) Memorand~<m No. 10 oj 1971-The Condl~t of Elecuon.< 
(Second Amendment) Rules, 1971 (S.O. 479 of 1971) 
7. The Commiuee considered the no.cs irom the Ministry of 
Law and Just1ce and the Election Commission explaimng the cir­
cumstances which n~-cessitated the .framing of the nbove-rnenwoncd 
Rules just prior to the General Elecnons held .n ~larch 1971. The 
Chairman o[ the Committee invited the at·ennon o[ members to 
the appointment of a Joint Committee oi the two Hou~es of Parlia­
ment lo e.'<amlne the entire election law o( the country and opined 
that it would not prevent the Committee !rom examining these 
Rul~s in detail i( ii so desired . The Committee, however, did not 
go into the merits o( the Rules but felt that important Rules such 
as the present one should not come into force unl~ss Padiument 
had, by o resolution, approved them. The Committee, therefore. 
decided to recommend that in legislatiOn dealing with impot·tant 
maters Governmenri should provide that the Rules framed \here· 
under would not come into force unless they have been approved 
by Parliament, except in cases where urgent action is necessary 
8. The Committ-ee also decided to cons1der n.t its next nwctinf 
the question whether legislation on the lines of the UK. Statutory 
Instruments Act, 1946 should be enacted in India or not. 
0. The Commitee authorised the Chairman to fix the date of its 
next meeting. 
10. The Commitee then adjoumed at 12.00 NooN. 
n 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Saturday, the 18Th Seplcm· 
ber, 1971. 
}'res&nt 
I. Shrl Jaisukhlal Hathi-Chainnan 
2 Shr• M. Anandam 
3. Shrl T. V. Anandan 

I 
r 
4. Shri Sriman Pl'afulla Goswami 
5. Shti Syed Huss..in 
6. Shri B. V. Abdulla Koya 
7 Shti Nawal Kishore 
8. Shri Mulka Govinda Reddy 
9. Shri Dwijcndrala! Sen Gupta • 
10. Shri N K Shejwalkar 
11. Shra Awadheshwar Prasad Sinha 
12. Shri Swalsingh Si.sodia 
13 Shrl T. K Srinivasan 
14. Shri Shyam La! Yadav. 
SECRETAIUAT 
Shri S. S. Bhalerao, Jomt Se<!retary, 
Shri M. K. Jain, U1tder Secreta'ry. 
2. The Committee consid!!red and took decisions on U1e following 
memoranda prepared by the Secretariat:-
(I) Merr\OtQ!Idum No. 11 of 1971-Legislatio, on the lines of tile 
U.K. Statutory lnslnm~ents Act. 1946 
3. The Commi!lee noted !l'om lhe comments of the Ministry of 
Law and Justice that the Indian Law CommJssion had considered 
the question whether legislat.ion on the lines of the U.K. Statutory 
Instruments Act, 1946, should be enacted in India or not, and that 
the report of the Commission in the matter had not yet been fina­
lised. The Committee. therefore decided to await !or the report 
and postponed consideration of the Memorandum until then. In 
the meantime the Committee des1red that the Ministry of Law and 
Justice should be requested to obtain a copy of the report as early 
u possible lor consideration by the Committee. Members also 
desired that the following matetial should be made avadable to them:-
(a) Extracts from the Report of the Committee on Subordi­
nate Legislation of the Lok Sabha which had considered the matter. 
(b) A copy of the earlier note of the Ministry of Law & 
Justico to the Lok Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legisla­tion on the subject. 

(ii) Memo·randl"" No. 12 oj 1971-The Shipping Development Fund 
(Loans) t1mendmem Rules, 1970 (GSR 1074 of 1970) 
·1. Rule 8 oi the Shippjng Development Fund (Loans) Rules, 1961, 
;~s amended, enhances the powers of the Shipping Development 
f'und Committee set up under section 15 of the Merchant Shipping 
Act. 1958 to grant a loan !rom Rs. 25 lak:hs to Rs. 100 lakhs without 
the approval of the Central Government. As the amended provision 
gave a very wtde financial power to th.e Committee, th.e Ministry 
or Sh.ippmg & Transport was requested to explain the circumstances 
which nl>ees.,italcd this provision. 
5. Frum the explanation ot the Ministry of Shipping and Trans­
pan the Committee noted that it was justifiable to delegate more 
financial power to the Shipping Development Fund Committee. 
The Committee also felt that the administrative instructtons issued 
by the Ministty to the said Committee to he following effect should 
be incorporated in lhe Rules:-
"Th~ powers to sanction loans between Rs. 25 lakhs and 
lh. 100 lakhs without Lhe approval of the Central Government 
shou ld be exercised only ill cases in which the representative 
of' ihc Mi11istry of Finance ('Department of Expenditure) nn 
tlw Comm•ttee has also agreed; otherwise the grant of such 
loans shn'l rl'quito the :.pproval of the CentTal Govcrn\1'\ent." 
G. Shl'i M. Anandan1 suggested that where the Joan sanctioned 
worked out to be more than 60% of the price of the ship, even 
thou!:h such a loan was between Rs. 25 lakhs and Rs. 100 lakhs, 
prior approval of ,he Central Government should invariably be 
obtained. The Chairman agreed to refer this suggestion to the 
Mimstry for its consideration. 
(iii) Memorandum No. 13 of 1971-The National Welfare Board for 
Sea-farc>rs (Amendmem) Rules. 1970 (GSR 2055 of 1970) 
i. The C<•mmittee noted that on lhe point being taken up, the 
Mimstry of Shippmg & Transport have provided in rule 4 of the 
National We ' r" Board Sea-farers Rules. l963. for th.e nomination 
of three members of Parliament instead of two as had been done 
originally , 
8. The Committee Eelt that Members of Parliament should be 
nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses. in 
stend of by Government and the rule should be amended accord· 
ingly. ll 

tS 
The Commihee then adJourned at 11.55 A.M. to meet again at 
3.30 P.M. on Saturday, the 23rd October. J97L 
m 
THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at :1.30 P.M. on Saturday, the 23rd October, 
1971. 
Present 
I Shri Jaisukhlal Hathi-Chairnutn 
MnmEBS 
2. Shri M. Anandam 
3. Shri Sriman Praiulla Goswami 
4. Shri Syed Hussain 
5. Shri B. V. Abdulla Koya 
6. Shri Nawal Kishore 
7. Shri Mulka Govinda Reddy 
8. Shtl Dwijendralnl Sen Gupta 
9. Shri N. K Shejwalkar 
10. Shri Awadheshwar Prasad Sinha 
11. Shri Shy am La! Y adav 
SECRETARrAT 
Shrl M. S. Panigrahi, Dl!puty Secretary . 
Sbri M. K. Jain, Unde?" Secretary. 
(i) Memffl'andum No. 14 of 1971 regardtng the Monopo!W?s and Res· 
trictil:e Trade Practice.~ (Information) Rules, 1971 (GSR 607 of 1971) 
(ii) MemOTandum No. 15 of 1971 regaTding the Monopolies and Res­
trictive Trade Practices (Amendment) Rules, 1971 (GSR 672 of 
1971). 
2. The Committee discussed the points arising out of the above­
mentioned memoranda and decided to hear the views of the Secre­
tary of the Department of Company Affairs before taking decisions 
on the Memoranda. 
Memorandum No 16 of 1971 regarding legislation on the lines of 
the U.K. Statutory Instruments Act, 194.6. 
3. The Committee postponed consideration oi the l'.{emorandum 
to Its future sittings. 

19 
4. The Committeo considered and adopted the Draft Eleventh 
Reporl 
5 The Chairman invttcd the Comnnttee's attention to paragrnplb; 
15·16 of the Draft Eleventh Report [regarding the Conduct of Elec­
tions (Second Amendment) Rules, 1971] and informed the Com­
mittee that the Joint Committee of Houses or Parliament on amend­
ments to Ek-ction Law is to present its Repor: to Parliament by the 
next st-ssion of the Lok Sabha. A~-cordingly. pending the presenta· 
Uan of the Eleventh Report to the House, the Committee authorised 
the Chairman to address the Chairman of the Joint Committee re­
questing him to place the Committee's ''iews before the Joint Com­
mitteP. for Jts consideration. 
G. The Committee also authorised the Cbrurman or in his absence 
Shri Nawal Kishore or Shrl Shyam Lal Yadav to present its Ele­
venth Report to the House. 
7. The Chairman informed the Commillee that the Report will 
be prese nted to the House on th~ 15th November, 1971. 
8. The Committee then adjourned al 4.55 P.M. to meet again at 
3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 9th November. 1971, to hear the views of 
tho Secretary of the Department cf Company Affail·s on Memo­
randa Nos. 14 and 15 of 1971 menti<,.,ed in paragraph 2 above. 
OMCIPND-~S 1-995 RS-23 · 11-71-500. 