181         COSL 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-FIRST REPORT 
(Presented on 20th February, 2009) 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
February, 2009/Phalguna, 1930 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE............................................ (i) 
2. I NTRODUCTION..................................................................... (iii) 
3. R EPORT:  
 I. Amendment in the Schedule M of the Drugs and   
  Cosmetics (Eighth Amendment) Rules, 2001...................  1-11 
 II. State Bank of Mysore Officers' Service Regulations,   
  1979–Implementation of 128th Report of the  
  Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha ........ 12-17 
4. A NNEXURES ........................................................................ 18-22 
5. S UMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS ........................................... 23-27 
6. M INUTES............................................................................ 28-30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE 28TH MAY, 2008) 
 
 1. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla    ------ Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 2. Prof. P. J. Kurien 
 3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 4. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 5. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
 6. Shri Vikram Verma 
 7. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
 8. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
 9. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
 10. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
 11. Shri Abani Roy
  
 12. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 13. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
 14. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
 15. Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
S
ECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
 3. Shrimati Shubhashree Panigrahi, Deputy Director 
 4. Shri R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director 
 5. Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Research Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
1. I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its beha lf, do hereby present this 
One Hundred and Eighty-First Report of the Committee. 
1.2 The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 18 th 
February, 2009 
1.3  The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various 
Rules/Regulations and issues, relating to them along with the comments received from the 
Government. The observations and recommendations of the Committee are contained in 
the succeeding paragraphs of the Report. 
 
 
DR. (SHRIMATI) NAJMA  A. HEPTULLA 
Chairperson, 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
Rajya Sabha 
NEW DELHI; 
18th February, 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
REPORT 
I 
Amendment in the Schedule M of the Drug and Cosmetics  
( Eighth Amendment) Rules, 2001 
1.  The Committee was informed that the National Human Rights Commission 
(NHRC) in its investigation of certain complain ts relating to quality of Intravenous (I.V.) 
Fluids had in their order dated 31st March, 1999 made exclusive recommendations in 
respect of manufacture, distribution and storage of the drugs and the need to upgrade 
Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) given unde r Schedule M. In its submission before 
NHRC, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had promised to revise the 
requirements of the GMPs under the Drug and Cosmetics Rules. It was also informed by 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare that World Health Organisation (WHO) had 
prescribed such guidelines for the member countries and that th e guidelines were 
periodically revised. The Ministry also  submitted that adherence to such Good 
Manufacturing Practices under Schedule M was essential for sustaining the export of 
drugs and pharmaceuticals to other countries. 
2.   The Committee was informed that th e Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 framed 
under the Sections 12 and 33 of the Drug and Cosmetics Act, 1940, needed to be 
amended. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare further informed the Committee 
that objections and suggestions from the public were invited for 45 days since the 5th 
January, 2001. Thereafter the Government in consultation with the Drugs Technical 
Advisory Board notified the amendments on the 11th December, 2001. The application of 
such amendments on licensed manufacturers was initially deferred till the 31st December, 
2003. 
3.   Rules 71, 74, 76 and 78 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules 1945 provided for 
Schedule M, which prescribed the ‘Good Manufacturing Practices and Requirements of 
Premises, Plant and Equipment for the Pharma ceutical Products’. The Amendment also 
required each licensee to evolve appropriate methodology, system and procedures which 
shall be used exclusively for the production of drugs and no other manufacturing activity 
were to be undertaken in the premises. It was informed by the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare that the new amendments lay stress on: 
z Adequate documentation at every stage of production 
z  Validation of process and equipments 
z Efficient Standard Op erative Procedures (SOPs) at every stage of 
manufacture and quality control operations 
z Adequate and periodic training to the technical personnel in the industry 
4.   The Committee examined the amended Rules and the views of the Ministry were 
ascertained through a questionnaire and a subsequent meeting with the Secretary, 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Following issues were raised with the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare: 

Issue I 
 If the revised Schedule M would be detrimental to the interests of the small 
scale manufacturers and may even lead to  large scale unemployment due to closure 
of such units. 
Ministry’s Reply 
 The revised Schedule M was not detrimental to the interests of small scale 
units and a large number of such units ha d already upgraded their facilities or were 
in process of doing so. 
Issue II 
 If the SSI sector as a whole or only a select associations were consulted on 
the subject. 
Ministry’s reply 
 All the sectors of pharmaceutical indust ry were consulted. Consultations were 
held with the Indian Drug Manufacturers’ Association (IDMA), which also has 
SSIs as its members. 
Issue III 
 If the apprehensions of the SSI units justified that application of revised 
Schedule M would require large investment in equipments, increase in area, large 
amount of documentation and validations that may further require increase in 
personnel. 
Ministry’s Reply 
 Eighty per cent of the Schedule M norms require proper application of norms 
and good practices and do not require any investment. Only 20% requires a change 
in infrastructure facilities. However, as per the representations from the industry 
some changes have been made in schedule like deletion of requirement for 
additional space. 
Issue IV 
 If the contention of SSI sector was genuine that the revised Schedule M were 
formulated by those with limited exposure only to big manufacturers. 
Ministry’s Reply 
 Inputs had been taken from the drug regulatory authorities of various States 
who were conversant with the status of  small scale industries in their respective 
States. Also the industry organizations li ke IDMA with sizable SSI membership 
were consulted. 
 
 
 
 
 

Issue V 
 What is the mechanism for monitoring the compliance of the revised 
Schedule M. 
Ministry’s Reply 
 States have begun to audit firms to ensure the compliance of the norms. The 
status of compliance varied from State to State. 
Issue VI 
 If the Government had any plan for the SSI sector in respect of 
implementation of revived Schedule M 
Ministry’s Reply 
 The Government had convened workshops in various parts of the country for 
educating the SSIs on Good Manufacturing Practices as prescribed in the revised 
Schedule M. The National Institute for Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
(NIPER) has also conducted training programmes for the production and analytical 
staff of the SSI units. 
Issue VII 
 The Licensing Authority has been given the discretionary powers to relax the 
provisions regarding nature and extent of manufacturing operations, equipments, 
areas etc. of the Schedule M. Whether such  discretionary power were likely to be 
misused. 
Ministry’s Reply 
 Such discretionary powers were available in earlier version of the Schedule 
M and such discretionary powers to the licensing authority have been given only for 
chemical and pharmaceutical aids, bandages, medical gases, empty gelatin capsules 
etc. for which the Schedule M does not prescribe specific requirements of space and 
equipments. 
Issue VIII 
 Which of the demands of the small scale manufacturers were accepted and 
what specific demands were found unacceptable. 
Ministry’s Reply 
 Demands of small scale manufacturers like use of alternative material instead 
of aluminum, removal of ancillary area, us age of non-linting cleaning material in 
the sterile area for cleaning etc. have been accepted. 
5.   The Committee also acknowledged th e observations made by the Department 
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare in their 12th 
Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2005, wherein the Committee has 
recommended stringent measures against ma nufacturing spurious and sub-standard 
medicines and drugs. 
6.   The Committee noted from the representation of All India Small Scale 
Pharmaceutical Manufacturers’ Association dated the 19th February, 2001 that it had 

objection over a few counts pertaining to disposal of waste, warehousing area, ancillary 
area and requirements of Plant and equipment which prescribed the minimum area 
required. The representation submitted that 
“The problem of specified area is in all the categories where you have enhanced the 
area for minimum requirement. Pharmaceu tical Units are mostly located in 
metropolitan cities and minimum area requi red for SSI sector will increase the 
cost.” 
  In this regard the Committee found distinct difference of opinion of the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare and the Ministry  of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSME). 
  The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare submitted that 
“The apprehensions expressed by the SSI are not realistic. On the average 80% of 
the Schedule M norms require change of mind set of technical persons and 
observance of good practices... This does not call for any investment but require 
good documentation. The rest 20% require ch ange in infrastructure facilities which 
may involve some financial investment.” 
  However, the Ministry of MSME has been more candid in this regard. It concurred 
with the apprehensions raised by the small scale manufacturers. It submitted in writing 
that: 
“It is indeed a fact that implementation of revised Schedule M norms involves 
additional infrastructural requirements in most cases. One of the major 
requirements is that of space mainly for additional equipments like air handling 
units etc. Since a large number of small scale pharma units are located in old 
industrial estates or congested localities in  cities, the scope of expansion of their 
existing premises is very limited. Relo cating in new premises will involve 
considerable expenditure.” 
7.   The Committee also took note of the is sues raised in the representations made by 
the associations of small scale drug manufactu rers and the Secretary, Ministry of Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) pertaini ng to difficulty faced by the small scale 
manufacturers in abiding the timeline. It also observed that the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare had tried to accommodate the requests made by the industry associations 
in this regard and the last date for compliance had been repeatedly extended upto the 30th 
June, 2005. However grievances from sm all scale manufacturers regarding the 
cancellation or non renewal of licenses on the grounds of non-compliance of Schedule M 
still remain unaddressed. The Ministry of MSME informed the Committee that its request 
on behalf of Confederation of Indian Pharma  Industry (CIPI) for another extension was 
not conceded by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
8.   The Committee also took cognizance of the complaints of closure of certain small 
scale pharma units in certain States. Upon th e query regarding the extent of such cases of 
closure due to non-compliance of Schedule M, the representative of the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare submitted before the Committee – 

“It is very difficult to tell. We have already sent a communication to the State 
authorities and we are getting feedback from  them. We are in process of collecting 
the feedback. There are substantial numbers of units which have already adopted 
the revised norms. There are substantial number of units which are serious about 
it.” 
9.   The Committee was informed that the Ministry of MSME had a continuing Credit 
Linked Capital Subsidy scheme for the modernisation and technology upgradation in the 
small scale sector and that the Department of Chemical too had proposed a scheme for the 
Planning Commission’s approval whereby 5% intere st subsidy were to be provided on an 
amount up to Rs. one crore. 
10.   The Committee was also cognizant of the enabling provisions of new MSME 
Development Act, 2006. The Act has enhanced the investment limit in plant and 
machinery upto Rs.5 crores for small scale units and Rs. 5-10 crores for medium scale 
units. The Act also provides for the proc urement preference policy wherein the 
Government Ministries/Departments, aided ins titutions and Public Sector Units will be 
required to procure goods produced by micr o and small units. Further the MSME Act, 
2006 also provides for the creation of Funds where the Grants from the Government for a 
specific purpose could be credited. 
11.   The Committee is in agreement with  the amendments proposed in the 
Schedule M of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, which it feels will ensure 
adherence to the good manufacturing practices and requirements of premises, plants 
and equipment for the pharmaceutical products by the manufacturers. Not only 
these amendments are in sync with the stated objective to make the country an 
international hub in drug and pharmaceutical manufacturing, but such standards 
are also desirable to protect the inte rests of consumers. The Committee also 
acknowledges that the Ministry of Health  and Family Welfare had undertaken an 
elaborate consultative process with the indus try experts, representative associations 
and had given 45-days window for the stakeholders to submit their views and 
comments on the proposed amendments an d that the timeline was extended till 30th 
June, 2005. The Committee concurs with th e concerns expressed by the Secretary, 
Ministry of MSME during his evidence before  it that despite some of their concerns 
being accommodated, the small scale manufa cturers find it difficult to meet the 
deadline. Further, compliance with the am endments will require significant capital 
investment. 
12.   The Committee recommends that the G overnment should proactively reach 
out to the SSIs in pharma sector to support them during the transitory phase as they 
graduate to become Schedule M compli ant. Government should promote the 
Schemes like Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) and Credit 
Guarantee Fund Scheme among the small sc ale drug manufacturers to enable them 
to access the institutional credit. 
13.   Under the amended Schedule M, the manufacturers are expected to evolve 
appropriate methodology, systems and procedures which should be documented and 
maintained fo r inspection and reference. The Committee recommends that the 

coverage of Certification Reimbursement Sc heme should be extended to cover the 
expenditure incurred by the small sc ale manufacturers in maintaining the 
documentation. Also special package for the small scale pharma units should be 
made under the Micro and Sm all Enterprise Cluster Development Programnme, so 
that, such Units could avail the integrated infrastructure facilities. 
14.   The Committee takes note that the Department of Chemical had submitted a 
proposal with the Planning Commission to provide 5% interest subsidy on the credit 
upto Rs. 1 crore. The Committee suggests that  the in addition to interest subsidy the 
said scheme should be linked with the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme to 
provide upfront relief in capital investment. The Committee recommends to expedite 
this policy for early implementation. 
15.   The Committee takes cognizance  of the apprehen sions regarding 
interpretation and enforcement of provisions by the relevant authority. Considering 
that there remains a possibility of mis-interpretation of provisions during initial 
years of any rule/regulation, the Committee considers it an imperative that Ministry 
of Micro, Small and Medium Enterp rises should involve NIPER and the 
representative SSI organizations under its Entrepreneurship and Business 
Development Programmes to conduct work shops for the field level enforcement 
agencies of the Government and the technical personnel of such small 
manufacturing units. Such workshops will help the stakeholders  to interact and 
understand the functional constraints in implementing the amended provisions. 
16.   The Committee expresses its serious di sapproval over inexplicable delay in 
framing the rules pertaining to establishm ent of Funds as provided in the Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises Act,2 006. The Committee recommends that the 
Government should without any further de lay finalise rules for setting up such 
Funds specially to support the small scale drug manufacturers to meet the 
requirements prescribed in the amended Schedule M. 
17.   Also the Committee finds it unacceptabl e that rules and policies under the 
enabling provisions contained in the said Act have not been finalized. The Section 11 
of the Act provides for Procurement Preference Policy by the Central Government 
Ministries/Departments, aided institutions and PSUs in favour of goods and services 
produced by small and micro units. Howeve r, such policy has not been formulated 
as yet. The Committee noted that in absence of such policy, the Government 
Departments, institutions and PSUs have been imposing unreasonable 
conditionalities for placing orders of su pply. The Committee recommends that the 
Government must expedite the formulation of Purchase Preference Policy to remove 
handicaps faced by the small scale units in getting Government orders. 
18.   However, the Committee takes a very seri ous view of instances of closure of 
small scale units in certain States. The Committee takes into cognizance the concerns 
raised by the small drug manufacturers over the possibility that the proposed 
amendments were likely to favour the big manufacturers and the MNCs and deny 
the smaller units the level-playing field even in the domestic market. The Committee 
also notes the significant contribution of the small manufacturers in the annual 
medicine production. The Committee recogniz es that the presence of small scale 

sector in pharmaceutical industry is vital to bring about competition in this sector 
and to restrain the possible monopoly of few companies. In this respect the 
Committee found it conspicuous that two concerned Ministries i.e. Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare and the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises had different views over the impact of amended Schedule M on the SSIs 
in pharma sector. The Committee therefor e recommends that the Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises Development Organisation alongwith the Drug Technical 
Advisory Board should conduct a survey to ascertain the extent of cases of closure of 
SSIs in pharma sector due to non-complian ce of revised Schedule M ever since it 
became applicable from 1st July 2005. 
19.  The Committee has noted with concern the rising prices of drugs after the 
introduction of MRP base d excise regime. The regime has benefited certain 
companies who have either se t up their units in Exci se Free Zones or have 
contracted the production to units in such Excise Free Zones. This has defeated the 
entire purpose of introducing the MRP based excise regime to increase the revenue 
and has also denied the small scale manu facturers the level-playing field. The 
Committee is informed that the issue has been  considered at the highest levels in the 
Government, yet the anomaly remains. The Committee recommends that 
Government must dispel such impressi on. The Government must restore level-
playing field in the pharmaceutical and drug  manufacturing sector by rationalizing 
the fiscal incentives to avoid any misuse to skew the competition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

II 
The State Bank of Mysore Officers’ Service  
Regulations, 1979––Implementation of 128th Report of the  
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha 
  The State Bank of Mysore Officers’ Se rvice Regulations, 19 79 was examined and 
the Committee in its 128th Report, which was presented to the House on the 14th March, 
2000 recommended as follows: 
The Committee during the course of the discussion at Mumbai did not agree 
with the replies of the State Bank of Mysore on definition of the word 
‘perquisite’, regulation 19 (1), and 38. The Committee desired that these 
regulations should be amended as per the suggestions of the Committee on the 
lines of similar regulations of the State Bank of India. The Committee, 
however, reviewed its earlier suggestions on regulations 3 (h), 15 (3), 16 (1) and 
36 and noted the comments of the Bank. As regards regulation 36, the 
Committee felt that the Ministry of Finance/Bank should find out the 
feasibility to rationalize th e provisions relating to maternity leave as per the 
provisions available in the Central Government Rules (Para 5). 
The Committee discussed the subject at its meeting held on March 1, 2000. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance/The State Bank of 
Mysore should take immediate steps to amend regulations 3 (definition of the 
word perquisites), 19 (1),38 as desired by it (Para 6). 
2.   Relevant extracts from the report were forwarded to the Ministry of Finance 
(Banking Division) on the 16th March, 2000 for necessary action. 
3.   The Ministry vide their communication dated the 23rd October, 2000 furnished the 
Action Taken Report. The Committee’s recommendation and the Ministry’s Action 
Taken Note is as under:–– 
(i) Regulation 3  
 The Committee desired that the term  “perquisites” may be defined in 
Regulation 3 entitled ‘Definitions’. 
Action Taken 
 The recommendation has been accepted  and State Bank of India has been 
advised to define the term “Perquisites” in the Regulation 3 of Officers Service 
Regulation of its Associate Banks. 
(ii) Regulation 19 (1)  
 The words “at its discretion” and “at the discretion of the executive 
committee” respectively appearing in the fi rst and third proviso be substituted with 
“for reason to be recorded in writing.” 
Action Taken 

 The recommendation made by the Committee has been accepted and State 
Bank of India has been advised to make necessary amendments in the Service 
Regulations of Associate Banks. 
(iii) Regulation 38  
 Upon a plain reading of Regulation 38 the confusion still remains inspite of 
the Bank’s reply to the questionnaire. Why not redraft this provision as per the 
discussions with nationalized banks, IBA and Ministry of Finance. 
Action Taken 
 The recommendation has been accepted  and State Bank of India has been 
advised to make modifications in Service Regulations of Associate Banks on the 
same lines as has been done by nationalized banks. 
(iii) Regulation 36: Maternity Leave  
 The Committee felt that the Ministry of Finance/banks should find out the 
feasibility to rationalise the provisions relating to Maternity Leave as per the 
provisions available in the Central Government rules. 
Action Taken 
 The service conditions in banks are broadly determined in pursuance of 
Bipartite Settlements/Understandings signed/reached by the workmen 
unions/officers associations with Indi an Banks’ Association (representing the 
Banks Managements). Hence, the same may not be exactly in conformity with the 
provisions applicable to Central Government employees. In the recent Bipartite 
Settlement Indian Banks Association had with the workmen unions, the provision 
for Maternity Leave has been modified . A statement indicating for existing 
provisions with regard to Maternity Leave in the Government and existing 
provisions in banks and the modi fied provisions is placed at Annexure-I. The 
question of modifying Officer Service Regulations on the same lines for bank 
officers are under consideration of Indian Banks’ Association. 
4.   The Ministry have since notified the amendments to Regulations 3 and 38 vide their 
notification SBD No.2/2002 dated the 11th February, 2002 (Annexure-II) and 
notification SBD No. 5/2002 dated the 25th May, 2002 (Annexure-III) respectively, as 
per the recommendations of the Committee. 
5.   However, further clarification was sought from the Ministry on the notification 
pertaining to amendment to State Bank of Mysore (Officers’) Service Regulations, 1979. 
The point referred to the Ministry and the comments/clarifications received thereon are 
reproduced below: 
 
Point referred 
 Regarding proper format in so far as the requirements of mentioning the 
G.S.R. No./S.O. No.; short title and date of commencement is concerned. 

Ministry’s comments (24th July, 2002) 
 The matter has been examined in consultation with State Bank of India. The 
Bank has reported that instead of G.S.R. or  S.O. No., they, as per past practice, are 
numbering all their notifications for publication in Gazette of India, as SBD No. for 
example SBD No. 5/2002. While SBD repres ents the name of their department viz. 
Subsidiary Banks Department, 5/2002 indicat es that the said notification was the 
5th Notification of the year 2002. The Bank has further reported that the different 
banks/institutions are following different practices and prefixing their notifications 
differently in the Gazette of India. As regards the short title and the date of 
commencement, the bank has reported that most of the amendments to the Service 
Regulations are carried out as per advise s of Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) and 
no change is made at their end. Similarl y, the title and date of commencement of 
their amendment to Regulation 38, is as per advice received from IBA. Incidentally, 
Regulation 38 has been further amended as per IBA advises and since been 
published in the Gazette of India dated 25th May, 2002 vide their notification SBD 
No. 5/2002. 
 Regarding amendment to Regulation 19 (1), the Ministry informed that the 
same is being examined by the Bank, and, Rajya Sabha S ecretariat, will be 
informed in the matter as soon as the amendment is finalized. 
6.  The Ministry on the 18th October, 2004 informed as under:- 
“Regulation 19 of the Officers’ Service Regulation is common to all State Bank 
of India group banks and amendment to Regulation 19 of the State Bank of 
Mysore (Officers’) Service Regulations,  1979 can be carried out only after 
similar amendment is made in the service rules of State Bank of India”. 
  The Ministry, accordingly, requested for extension of time up to the 31st December, 
2004 for carrying out the amendments which was acceded to. 
7.   The Ministry vide their communications dated the 21st February, 2005, the 22nd 
March, 2006, the 28th June, 2006 and the 25th October, 2006 had repeatedly sought 
extension of time for finalization/notification of the amendment to regulation 19(1) but it 
was not done so during the extended period. 
8.   The Ministry in its last communication to the Ministry on the 26th September, 2008 
while furnishing a status note on the subject stated thus: 
 “The SBI Officers Service Rules are ma de by the Central Board of the State 
Bank of India in terms of the powers conf erred by sub section (1) of Section 43 of 
the State Bank of India Act, 1955. Similarly, the Associate Banks Officers Service 
Regulations, 1979 are framed by the Central Board of Directors of SBI in 
consultation with the Board of the Directors of the Associate Banks with the 
previous approval of RBI in terms of powers conferred by Section 63 of the SBI 
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959. 
 Keeping the above provisions of the Act in view, SBI has been advised to 
revisit the matter in the light of the recommendations of the Committee.” 

9.   The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services) has carried out amendments in Regulations 3 and 38 of the State 
Bank of Mysore Officers’ Service Regulati ons, 1979, as recommended by it. The 
Committee however takes a serious view on  the inordinate delay in carrying out 
amendments to Regulation 19(1). The Committee notes the fact that Regulation 19 of 
the Officers’ Service Regulation is common to all State Bank of India group banks 
and amendment to Regulation 19 of the State Bank of Mysore Officers’ Service 
Regulations, 1979 can be carried out only after similar amendment is made in the 
service rules of State Bank of India. Th e Committee expresses its dismay over the 
fact that despite its reiteration desired amendments to Regulation 19(1) which is 
adversely affecting the interest of the offi cers of the State Bank of Mysore could not 
be carried out. The Committee is also surp rised that the Ministry has not yet given 
any explanation regarding non-acceptance of the Committee’s recommendation. By 
simply delaying the process, the Ministry  has put the career of these officers in 
doldrums. The Committee is of the opinion that there should be uniformity in the 
service regulations of SBI and its associate banks as this will also help in 
smoothening the proposed merger with its associate banks. The Committee therefore 
reiterates its earlier st and regarding amendment to Regulation 19(1) and 
recommends that the Ministry should carry out the amendment expeditiously, under 
intimation to it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-I 
STATEMENT INDICATING PROVISIONS OF MATERNITY LEAVE 
In Government In Banks 
 Existing as  Modified provision  
 Regulation 36 for Award Staff as  
  per VIIth Bipartite  
  Settlement.  
(i)  Maternity Leave 
(1) a female 
Government servant 
(including an 
apprentice) with less 
than two surviving 
children may be 
granted maternity 
leave for 135 days 
from the date of its 
commencement. 
2. During such 
period leave salary 
will be equal to the 
pay drawn 
immediately before 
proceeding on leave. 
In the case of a 
person to whom the 
employees’ State 
Insurance Act, 1948, 
applies, the amount 
of leave salary 
payable shall be 
reduced by the 
amount of benefit 
payable under the 
said Act for the 
corresponding 
period. 
3. Maternity leave 
not exceeding 45 
days in the entire 
service may be 
granted to a female 
Government Servant 
Leave upto a period of 3 
months at a time may be 
granted by way of 
maternity leave including 
in respect of post-natal 
period or at the time of 
miscarriage or abortion, so 
however, that not more 
than 12 months of such 
leave shall be available 
during the entire period of 
service of the officer. 
An officer on maternity 
leave shall be entitled for 
full emoluments for period 
of maternity leave. 
26 Maternity Leave 
The earlier provisions 
relating to maternity leave 
as in clause 13.37 and 
clause 13.38 of Bipartite 
Settlement dated 19th 
October, 1966 shall be 
substituted by the 
following: 
(a) Maternity leave, which 
shall be on substantive pay, 
shall be granted to a female 
employee for a period not 
exceeding 6 months on 
anyone occasion and 12 
months during the entire 
period of her service. 
(b) Within the overall 
period of 12 months, leave 
may also be granted in case 
of 
miscarriage/abortion/MTP. 

(irrespective of 
number of surviving 
children) in case of 
miscarriage, 
including abortion, 
on production of 
medical certificate as 
laid down in Rule 19. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-II 
STATE BANK OF INDIA  
ASSOCIATES & SUBSIDIARIES GROUP  
MUMBAI 
SBD.No. 2 / 2002   February 11, 2002 
NOTIFICATION 
  In exercise of the powers under Sub-section (1) of Section 63 of the State Bank of 
India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, and as approved by the Reserve Bank of India and 
the Board of Directors of the concerned Associate Banks, the State Bank of India has 
approved incorporation of sub-regulation (r) under Regulation No.3 of State Bank of 
Bikaner & Jaipur / Hyderabad / Indore/Myso re / Patiala / Saurashtra / Travancore 
Officers’ Service Regulations 1979, defining the term ‘Perquisite’ as given below : 
  Regulation 3(r)  
“Perquisite means the various facilities that have been specified in Chapter VI”. 
 
By the Order of the Central Board 
 Sd/- 
(R. Sundararaman) 
Dy. Managing Director & 
Group Executive (A&S Group) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STATE BANK OF INDIA  
ASSOCIATES &. SUBSIDIARIES GROUP 
SBD. No. 5 /2002    MUMBAI April 30, 2002 
  In exercise of the powers under Sub-section (1 )of Section 63 of the State Bank of 
India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, and as approved by the Reserve Bank of India and 
the Board of Directors of the concerned Associate Banks, the State Bank of India has 
approved the undernoted amendment to Regulation No. 38 of State Bank of Bikaner & 
Jaipur / Hyderabad / Indore / Mysore / Patiala / Saurashtra / Travancore Officers’ Service 
Regulations, 1979 :-  
Regulation No. 38 
  Save as provided below, all leave to  the credit of an officer shall lapse on 
resignation, retirement, death, discharge, dismissal or termination. 
  Provided that where an offi cer retires from the Bank’s serv ice, he shall be eligible 
to be paid a sum equivalent to the emoluments of any period, not exceeding 240 days, of 
privilege leave that he had accumulated. 
  Provided further that where an officer dies  while in service, there shall be payable 
to his legal representatives, a sum equivalent to the emoluments for the period not 
exceeding 240 days of privilege leave to his credit as on the date of his death. 
  Provided also that where an officer resi gns from service on or after1st April 2001 
after’ giving due notice as in Sub-Regulation (2) of Regulation 20 he may be paid a sum 
equivalent  to the emoluments in respect of privilege leave to the ex tent of half of such 
leave to his credit on the date of cessation of service, subject to a maximum of 120 days. 
 
By the Order of the Central Board 
 
 Sd/- 
(R. Sundararaman) 
Dy. Managing Director & 
Group Executive (A&S Group) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
Amendment in the Schedule M of the Dr ug and Cosmetics (Eighth Amendment) 
Rules, 2001 
  The Committee is in agreement with  the amendments proposed in the 
Schedule M of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules 1945, which it feels will ensure 
adherence to the good manufacturing practices and requirements of premises, plants 
and equipment for the pharmaceutical products by the manufacturers. Not only 
these amendments are in sync with the stated objective to make the country an 
international hub in drug and pharmaceutical manufacturing, but such standards 
are also desirable to protect the inte rests of consumers. The Committee also 
acknowledges that the Ministry of Health and family Welfare had undertaken an 
elaborate consultative process with the indus try experts, representative associations 
and had given 45-days window for the stakeholders to submit their views and 
comments on the proposed amendments and that the timeline was extended till 30 
June 2005. The Committee concurs with the concerns expressed by the Secretary, 
Ministry of MSME during his evidence before  it that despite some of their concerns 
being accommodated, the small scale manufa cturers find it difficult to meet the 
deadline. Further, compliance with the am endments will require significant capital 
investment. (Para 11) 
  The Committee recommends that the G overnment should proactively reach 
out to the SSIs in pharma sector to supp ort during the transitory phase as they 
graduate to become Schedule M compliant. Government should promote the 
Schemes like Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) and Credit 
Guarantee Fund Scheme among the small sc ale drug manufacturers to enable them 
to access the institutional credit. ( Para 12) 
  Under the amended Schedule M, the manufacturers are expected to evolve 
appropriate methodology, systems and procedures which should be documented and 
maintained fo r inspection and reference. The Committee recommends that the 
coverage of Certification Reimbursement Sc heme should be extended to cover the 
expenditure incurred by the small sc ale manufacturers in maintaining the 
documentation. Also special package for the small scale pharma units should be 
made under the Micro and Sm all Enterprise Cluster Development Programnme, so 
that, such Units could avail the integrated infrastructure facilities.    ( Para 13) 
  The Committee takes note that the Department of Chemical had submitted a 
proposal with the Planning Commission to provide 5% interest subsidy on the credit 
upto Rs 1 crore. The Committee suggests that the in addition to interest subsidy the 
said scheme should be linked with the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme to 
provide upfront relief in capita investment. The Committee recommends to expedite 
the policy for early implementation. (Para 14) 
  The Committee takes cognizance of the apprehen sions regarding 
interpretation and enforcement of provisions by the relevant authority. Considering 

that there remains a possibility of mis-interpretation of provisions during initial 
years of any rule/regulation, the Committee considers it an imperative that Ministry 
of Micro, Small and Medium Enterp rises should involve NIPER and the 
representative SSI organizations under its Entrepreneurship and Business 
Development Programmes to conduct work shops for the field level enforcement 
agencies of the Government and the technical personnel of such small 
manufacturing units. Such workshops will help the stakeholders  to interact and 
understand the functional constraints in implementing the amended provisions.
(Para 15) 
  The Committee expresses its serious di sapproval over inexplicable delay in 
framing the rules pertaining to establishm ent of Funds as provided in the Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises Act,2 006. The Committee recommends that the 
Government should without any further de lay finalise rules for setting up such 
Funds specially to support the small scale drug manufacturers to meet the 
requirements prescribed in the amended Schedule M.      ( Para 16) 
  Also the Committee finds it unacceptable that rules and policies under the 
enabling provisions contained in the said Act have not been finalized. The Section 11 
of the Act provides for Procurement Preference Policy by the Central Government 
Ministries/Departments, aided institutions and PSUs in favour of goods and services 
produced by small and micro units. However such Policy has not been formulated as 
yet. The Committee noted that in abse nce of such policy the Government 
Departments, institutions and PSU have been imposing unreasonable 
conditionalities for placing orders of su pply. The Committee recommends that the 
Government must expedite the formulation of Purchase Preference Policy to remove 
handicaps faced by the Small scale units in getting Government orders.(Para 17) 
  However, the Committee takes a very se rious view of instances of closure of 
small scale units in certain States. The Committee takes into cognizance the concerns 
raised by the small drug manufacturers over the possibility that the proposed 
amendments were likely to favour the big manufacturers and the MNCs and deny 
the smaller units the level-playing field even in the domestic market. The Committee 
also notes the significant contribution of the small manufacturers in the annual 
medicine production. The Co mmittee recognizes that the presence of small scale 
sector in pharmaceutical industry is vital to bring about competition in this sector 
and to restrain the possible monopoly of few companies. In this respect the 
Committee found it conspicuous that two concerned Ministries  i.e.  Ministry of 
Health and Family welfare and the Ministry of MSME had different views over the 
impact of amended Schedule M on the SSIs in pharma sector. The Committee 
therefore recommends that the MSME De velopment Organisation alongwith the 
Drug Technical Advisory Board should con duct a survey to ascertain the extent of 
cases of closure of SSIs in pharma sector due to non-compliance of revised Schedule 
M ever since it became applicable from 1st July 2005. (Para 18) 
  The Committee has noted with concern the rising prices of drugs after the 
introduction of MRP base d excise regime. The regime has benefited certain 
companies who have either se t up their units in Exci se Free Zones or have 

contracted the production to units in such Excise Free Zones. This has defeated the 
entire purpose of introducing the MRP based excise regime to increase the revenue 
and has also denied the small scale manu facturers the level-playing field. The 
Committee is informed that the issue has been  considered at the highest levels in the 
Government, yet the anomaly remains. The Committee recommends that 
Government must dispel such impressi on. The Government must restore level-
playing field in the pharmaceutical and drug  manufacturing sector by rationalizing 
the fiscal incentives to avoid any misuse to skew the competition.       (Para 19) 
State Bank of Mysore Office rs’ Service Regulations, 19 79-Implementation of 128th 
Report of the Committee on Subordinate Lesdslation, Rajya Sabha. 
  The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services) has carried out amendments in Regulations 3 and 38 of the State 
Bank of Mysore Officers’ Service Regulati ons, 1979, as recommended by it. The 
Committee however takes a serious view on  the inordinate delay in carrying out 
amendments to Regulation 19(1). The Committee notes the fact that Regulation 19 of 
the Officers’ Service Regulation is commo n to all State Bank of India Group Banks 
and amendment to Regulation 19 of the State Bank of Mysore Officers’ Service 
Regulations, 1979 can be carried out only after similar amendment is made in the 
service rules of State Bank of India. Th e Committee expresses its dismay over the 
fact that despite its reiteration desired amendments to Regulation 19(1) which is 
adversely affecting the interest of the offi cers of the State Bank of Mysore could not 
be carried out. The Committee is also surp rised that the Ministry has not yet given 
any explanation regarding non-acceptance of the Committee’s recommendation. By 
simply delaying the process, the Ministry  has put the career of these officers in 
doldrums. The Committee is of the opinion that there should be uniformity in the 
service regulations of SBI and its associate banks as this will also help in 
smoothening the proposed merger with its associate banks. The Committee therefore 
reiterates its earlier st and regarding amendment to Regulation 19(1) and 
recommends that the Ministry should carry out the amendment expeditiously, under 
intimation to it. (Para 9) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON  
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
 The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on 18th February, 2009 in the Committee Chairperson's 
Room 126-C, Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 1. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla   –– Chairperson  
 2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 3.  Shri Vikram Verma 
 4.  Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
 5.  Shri Penumalli Madhu 
 6.  Shr Ali Anwar Ansari 
 7.  Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 8. Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
SECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri N.K.Singh, Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Subhashree Panigrahi, Deputy Director  
 3. Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Research Officer 
The Chairperson welcomed the Members and following items were taken up: 
z 179th Report on the various rules/regulations examined by the Committee regarding 
Senior Citizens’ Savings Scheme, 2004, The Animal Birth Control (Dogs) Rules, 2001 
and the implementation of the 136th Report of the Committee regarding Coir Board 
(Registration and Licensing) Rules, 1956. 
z 180th Report on Statutory Orders Laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha during its 
214th Session. 
z 181 st Report on Drugs and Cosmetics (Eighth Amendment) Rules, 2001 and the 
implementation of the 128th Report of the Committee regarding State Bank of Mysore 
Officer’s Service Regulations, 1979. 
 The Committee then adopted the Reports unanimously. The Committee also authorized 
the Chairperson and in her absence Shri Vikram Verma and Shri Ali Anwar Ansari to present 
the Reports to the House on 20th February 2009. 
2. The Chairperson during the discussion noted with concern that certain Ministries had 
been seeking repeated extensions for furnishing their replies to the Committee’s 
questionnaires and the queries raised by the Members during the meetings, thereby delaying 
the preparation of the Committee’s reports until the issue looses its relevance. The Members 
were of the view that the Committee’s questions should be treated at par with the 
parliamentary questions by the concerned Ministries and that the issue of delay in replies 
should be addressed urgently with a view to prescribe a time limit. 

3. Another issue the Committee considered was the usage of modern techniques by the 
Ministries in communicating with the Secretariat about the notifications to be laid on the 
Table of the House. The Committee was of the view that in order to increase efficiency a 
possibility should be explored if the electronic copy of list of laying items in a standardized 
prescribed format could be provided by the Ministries to the Secretariat. 
4. The Committee also decided to undertake a study visit during March/April 2009 to 
Ahmedabad, Jamnagar and Mumbai for an on-the-spot appraisal of the environment/pollution 
related and other rules/regulations under the consideration of the Committee. As the Hon’ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha had already granted his approval to the Committee to visit 
Ahmedabad the Committee authorized the Chairperson of the Committee to obtain other 
necessary approvals and decide upon the tentative itinerary of the study tour. 
5.  The meeting was adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 
 
 