193rd Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/193rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:03]
    PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY THIRD REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 178TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE UNLOCKING OF
SURPLUS ASSETS OF CPSEs TO GENERATE RESOURCES FOR REVIVAL
AND
THE STATUS OF ANCILLARY UNITS  OF CPSES:
A CASE STUDY OF HMT LTD.
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  23RD NOVEMBER, 2006)
   (LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON  24TH  NOVEMBER, 2006)
                              RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
                 NEW DELHI
 
              NOVEMBER, 2006/AGRAHAYANA, 1928 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 1.       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 2.        INTRODUCTION                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                   
 3.        REPORT
                                                                                                                    
            (i)         CHAPTER – I                                                                                            
  Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.        
(ii)                CHAPTER–II                                                                                                         
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue for   now in view of the   Government's
replies                                                             
(iii)               CHAPTER–III                                                                                         
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the   Committee has not accepted replies of   the Ministry  and has asked the Ministry to
review the reply or has  raised queries over the reply furnished by the Ministry.
(iv)      CHAPTER–IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final  replies of the Ministry have not been    received
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of constitution 5th August, 2006)
 
 
                  Shri Santosh Bagrodia              —        Chairman
    
      RAJYA SABHA
2.
      Shri  G. Sanjeeva Reddy
3.      Dr. Prabha Thakur     
4.      Shri Kalraj Mishra      
5.      Smt. Hema Malini      
6.      Dr. K. Malaisamy      
7.      Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
8.      Dr. Vijay Mallya        
9.      Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan       
10.  O.T.Lepcha
                   
                           LOK SABHA
 
11.
  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri S.K. Biswamuthiary        
13.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty           
14.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty                 
15.  Shri Subhash   Sureshchandra Deshmukh        
16.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan         
17.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria         
18.  Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani                                     

193rd Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/193rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:03]
19.  Shri Kishanbhai V.  Patel
20.  Shri P.Rajendran        
21.  Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna
22.  Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana
23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana   
24.  Shri Rajnarayan Budholiya
25.  Shri K.C. Pallanisamy            
26.   Kunwar  Manvendra Singh                
27.  Shri Ganesh Singh                  
28.  Shri V.K. Thummar                
29.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
30.  Shri Umakant Yadav
31.  Shri Mohan S. Delkar
 
     Secretariat
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Girija Shanker Prasad, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been  authorized   by the Committee, hereby
present this  One hundred and Ninety  Third Report on Action taken Report submitted by the Government on the One Hundred and Seventy Eighth
Report of the Committee on the issue of          ‘Unlocking of Surplus assets of CPSEs to generate resources for revival and the status of Ancillary units  
of CPSEs:  A case study of HMT Ltd..
 
2.         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry considered and adopted the Draft report at its meeting held on the 20
th
November, 2006.
 
3          I thank the Department of Heavy Industries, the State Government of Karnataka, management of HMT Ltd. and its subsidiaries and the
representatives of the ancillary association and other industrial associations of Karnataka for providing valuable inputs to the Committee. 
NEW DELHI;        
20
th November , 2006             
                                                                                      
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary
                    Standing Committee on Industry
 
REPORT
 
1.         This  One Hundred and  Ninety  Third Report deals with action taken by the Government on the One Hundred and Seventy Eighth Report of
the Committee on the issue of ‘Unlocking of Surplus assets of CPSEs to generate resources for revival and the status of Ancillary units  of CPSEs:  A
case study of HMT Ltd..
.
 2.            Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Heavy Industries  in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as
follows :-
 
Chapter -I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
 
Chapter -II- The recommendation/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies.
 
Chapter -III- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has either not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review the reply or has
raised queries over the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee desired that the Ministry should furnish the logical explation in respect of these recommendations.
 
Chapter -IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been received. In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV. The
Ministry has either furnished the interim replies or mater has been forwarded to other agency/Department whose reply is awaited or couched its language in vague terms like noted for
compliance/guidance.
 
3.             Therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of recommendations categorised in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as
per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
CHAPTER I
Recommendations/observations which has been  accepted by the Government
 
Recommendation in 178th Report
 
1.         The Committee is of the opinion that the CPSE as commercial enterprises must be encouraged to generate their finances through their internal
resources. The Committee accordingly appreciates the initiatives being taken by the Company.
( Para 11)
Action Taken Report
 

193rd Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/193rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:03]
2.         The Department of Heavy Industry agrees with the recommendation of the Committee. The PSEs are being encouraged to generate finances
through their internal resources.
CHAPTER II
Recommendations/observations which Committee desired to pursue in view of the reply given by the Ministry has been  accepted by the
Government
 
Recommendation in 178th Report
 
1.         The Committee observes that since their inception the CPSEs had initiated a wave of industrialization in their adjoining region. The CPSEs
were direct mainstay for several small  scale ancillaries and supplies and many more indirectly. These Units had thrived on the orders from CPSEs.
The Committee is of the view that if the trend could continue this would have benefited both parent company and the ancillary units.
(Para 27)
Action Taken Report
 
2.         Originally, Ancillaries were established as suppliers for components to mother factories during 1960-70’s when manufacturing was at its
infancy in the country.
 
3.         Manufacturing industry started growing from 1980 onwards, with industries being set up viz, State Government Assisted, Small Scale and
Private Enterprises as small and medium Units. The larger units (automobile or capital goods like Machine Tools etc.) in turn commenced sourcing
their requirement of components and assemblies from these units, also, in order to obtain competitive process and advanced technology.
 
4.         Today the Small Scale Units, other than Ancillary Units established in the country have taken a lead to upgrade and equip their facilities with
modern high-tech machines viz, CNC machines, adopting processes and manufacturing methods that have significantly reduced the cost of
manufacture.
 
5.         Simultaneously with   this development, the requirements of the mother Industries’ also changed and in order to compete effectively the large
industries shifted to products of higher standards and higher technologies that require higher quality parts, in low volumes with shortened  deliveries.
 
6.         While these transformations were taking place the Ancillaries failed to upgrade the manufacturing facilities and with their existing old units
and machinery are able to take up only primary machining operations on the raw material supplied by the mother factories and are not in a position to
supply the high quality components required by the manufacturing industries.
 
7.         Today outsourcing has permeated to such an extent that finished components ready for assembly, are available. This has been the primary
reason for the shift that has taken place in out-sourcing by mother industries from Ancillary to other small scale and medium industries.
 
8.         However, the Ancillaries are still being supported by mother industries to the extent they are able to supply high quality parts. In addition to
the above mother factories have been providing technology support by way of engineering, inspection etc. despite the limitation for utilizing the
services of ancillaries as on date.
 
Further Recommendation of the Committee
 
9.         The Committee acknowledges the efforts made by the mother CPSEs to enable the ancillaries to meet their requirements. The Committee also
impresses upon the ancillaries to upgrade technologically and diversify their products and market profile so that the CPSE does not suffer due to the
drawbacks of ancillaries. The Committee is of the view that   in a competitive and open market, the CPSE is entitled to minimize its cost to remain
competitive, yet efforts should be made to utilize these  existing facilities by upgrading them.
CHAPTER III
 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted the reply of the Government
 
Recommendation in 178th Report
 
1.         Considering the resource requirement of the HMT for its revival and the Committee’s consistent   emphasis on need to encourage the CPSE to
generate their own resources to assume full autonomy, also appreciating the long association of ancillaries with their present HMT Company and
taking a view of their offer to purchase the sheds at the price ascertained by State Government agency TECSOK as against the market prices which is
demanded by the HMT,  the Committee recommends that the CMD of the HMT, in exercise of the powers vested  in him, on taking a lenient and
favourable view  on demand of the ancillary owners, constitute a sub-committee in the Board of Directors to review the issue in consultation with
stakeholders within the parameters  of the Company’s financial requirements, such sub- committee should furnish its report to the Board of Directors
of the Company with in a time frame who may then take a final view on the issue in its earliest meeting.
(Para 29)
 
Action Taken Report
 
2.         In February 2005, CMD, HMT Limited constituted a Committee comprising Director (Operations), Director (Finance), HMT Ltd, Managing
Director, HMT Machine Tools, Company Secretary and the Chief of Asset Management to examine all the relevant issues concerning the demands of
the HMT Ancillary Units Entrepreneur’s Association including the transfer of the industrial sheds. The Committee has submitted its report which was
deliberated twice in the Board Meeting of HMT Limited and the following works consider:
 

193rd Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/193rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:03]
3.         The demand of the Entrepreneurs Association to transfer the ownership of the industrial sheds to the existing Licensees at the concessional
rates as per the TECSOK Report would have serious implications on the Company as it was presently faced with severe financial constraints and was
dependent on the Government for financial support. Moreover, the Company had drawn up revival plans for its Subsidiaries, which was being partly
funded by the Government and partly by unlocking of surplus assets at market value. In case the proposal was considered, the loss to the Company
would be around Rs. 25 Crore (for sheds) based on the current market price for these industrial sheds.
 
4.         The Company had in the past transferred the ownership of one of the industrial Sheds to its licensee at the Market Price and any concessions
shown to other licensees in this regard would be discriminatory in nature raising legal issues.   
 
5.         Similar demands would be made by the employees, when in fact the Company  has not shown any concession to the proposal of HMT
Employees Co-operative House Building Society for purchase of land at market value, either on account of time or on account of the price for the
same.
 
6.         Being a listed Company and accountable to various regulatory agencies and to its shareholders, the Company would have to follow best
practices in regard to such matters. Moreover, any form of concession shown to the private entrepreneurs would attract serious objection and
comments form audit and C & AG.
 
7.         In case the Company was compelled to accept the demands from the Entrepreneurs Associations, the loss on account of the same would have
to be compensated / reimbursed by the Government in the form of grant.
 
8.         In fact the Company had all along extended a lot of concessions to the licensees of these sheds over the years in terms of placement of orders
and charging of concessional license fees. Moreover, the Company had never initiated action for eviction of these licensees and they could continue
operating their sheds based on mutual terms in this regard.
 
9.         In view of the above, it is once again felt that the transfer of ownership of the industrial sheds to the existing licensees could be considered
only at the market price. However, the right of refusal to the highest offer received through the tender process may be given to the existing licensees.
In case the entrepreneurs are not willing to consider owning of industrial sheds the Company would consider their continuing the lease arrangement
subject to the mutually agreed terms.   
 
Further Recommendation of the Committee
 
10.       The Committee has not been informed if the Committee constituted by the CMD, HMT to look into the issue, at all consulted the stakeholders
including the representatives of ancillary associations and the TECSOK. It is apparent that the stakeholders were not part of the Committee. To that
extent the recommendation of this Committee has not been adhered to. The Committee is of the view that conclusions of the HMT’s Committee
lacked the views of wider spectrum of stakeholders.    The Committee therefore, desired the Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises to
furnish  clarification in this regard.
 
CHAPTER IV
Recommendations/observations  in respect of which final reply has not been received
 
 
Recommendation in 178th Report
 
1.         The Committee recommends that the Government should formulate a common policy for CPSEs for disposal of their surplus assets in a way
to maximize the returns
(Para 30)
 
Action Taken Report
 
2.         There are 34 operating PSEs under the Department of Heavy Industry out of which 21 PSEs are loss making, many of the loss making
companies are sick and registered under BIFR. These sick companies have been disposing off their land as per the directions of BIFR and in
accordance with the procedures laid down by BIFR. Surplus assets of land, is also being utilized by the PSEs to fund their own revival plans in a
number of cases presented to BRPSE/Government. The money realized through the sale of land etc. is ploughed back to fund the revival schemes of
such companies. While disposing off land, urban land norms as prescribed by the State Government are followed.
 
3.         As the land held by the PSEs is of varying types ie on limited time lease or free-lease or free-hold in their own name and is not a property of
the Central Government the policy of this Department is to encourage the PSEs to use such asset in their own best interest.
 
4.         However, the Ministry of Urban Development has already initiated the process of formulation of policy guidelines relating to land held by the
Government including held by CPSEs/ Statutory/Registered bodies. These guidelines are at present under discussion/formulation. The intention is to
prepare a uniform policy for land management with a common set of transparent and remunerative procedure for disposal which would be applicable
to all the land holding of Central Ministries/Departments. This would facilitate uniformity and common standards of efficiency and transparency in
land management and disposal practices in Central Government.
 
Further Recommendation of the Committee
 

193rd Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/193rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:03]
5.         The Committee observes recurrence of disputes between the CPSEs and concerned State Governments and other stakeholders over the
disposal of surplus assets including land. The Committee also agrees that disposal of such assets is critical of the viable revival of the CPSEs.
However, such disposal should be transparent and the proceeds should ensure a sustainable revival of the concerned CPSE. In order to make disposal
transparent the Ministry of Urban Development should expedite the formulation of the guidelines in consultation with the State Governments, who
have provided the lands to the CPSEs. The Committee recommends that the BRPSE, as the nodal body to recommend the disposal of surplus assets of
CPSEs for their revival, too should engage with such exercise by the Ministry of Urban  Development.
 
6.         The Committee desires to be apprised of the guidelines to be prepared by Ministry of Urban Development, on this issue.  
 
7.         As a follow up, the Committee held a meeting with the management of HMT, representatives of the State Government   and the ancillary
associations at Bangalore on 14
th July 2006
 
8.         The Committee noted that out of 52 ancillary sheds allotted under license, only 22 sheds are supplying to HMT whereas 6 sheds are not
supplying. Remaining sheds are carrying out commercial activities. While HMT purchased supplies worth Rs. 147 lakhs in 2005-06, the ancillary
units owed Rs.47.76 lakh to HMT towards license fee and electric charges. The Committee recommends that first all the pending dues between the
parties should be cleared urgently. The Committee would also like to know the status of 6 units that were not supplying to HMT anymore.
 
9.         Furthermore, the Committee was informed by the ancillary associations through a representation that the ancillary units sought the transfer of
only about 10 acres out of total 22 acres at the concessional rates fixed by TECSOK. The HMT was likely to loose Rs. 7.86 crores on these 10 acres.
However, as per the version given by HMT, the Company is likely to loose Rs 25 crores.    During the interaction, the representative of the State
Government too supported the claim of ancillary associations. The Committee also took note  that the HMT has not sought an eviction of the sheds
and is agreeable to continue the lease arrangement at a mutually agreed terms.
 
10.       The Committee desires to know the reason for difference in rates suggested by the TEKSOC and the rates notified by other State Government
agencies promoting the industries in and around Bangalore.
 
11.       The Committee notes the apprehensions expressed by the HMT management regarding the likely comments from C&AG in case such sheds
are transferred to ancillary owners. The Committee would like to know about the rationale behind such apprehensions if the sheds are to be
transferred at the rate decided by a State Government agency, TECSOK.
 
12.       The Committee while acknowledging that the HMT needs funds for its revival and also for its subsidiaries, would like to know if the revival as
approved by the  BRPSE  also included the disposal of surplus land for generating internal resources and if so, did the BRPSE also consider the
claims of ancillaries before deciding the revival package. And if such a revival packages has been endorsed by the relevant Cabinet Committee
without taking the views of the State Government into account.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that the CPSE as commercial enterprises must be encouraged to generate their finances through their internal
resources. The Committee accordingly appreciates the initiatives being taken by the Company.
( Para 11)
 
           The Committee observes that since their inception the CPSEs had initiated a wave of industrialization in their adjoining region. The CPSEs
were direct mainstay for several small scale ancillaries and supplies and many more indirectly. These Units had thrived on the orders from CPSEs.
The Committee is of the view that if the trend could continue this would have benefited both parent company and the ancillary units. (Para 27)
            Considering the resource requirement of the HMT for its revival and the Committee’s consistent  emphasis on need to encourage the CPSE to
generate their own resources to assume full autonomy, also appreciating the long association of ancillaries with their present HMT Company and
taking a view of their offer to purchase the sheds at the price ascertained by State Government agency TECSOK as against the market prices which is
demanded by the HMT,  the Committee recommends that the CMD of the HMT, in exercise of the powers vested  in him, on taking a lenient and
favourable view  on demand of the ancillary owners, constitute a sub-committee in the Board of Directors to review the issue in consultation with
stakeholders within the parameters  of the Company’s financial requirements, such sub- committee should furnish its report to the Board of Directors
of the Company with in a time frame who may then take a final view on the issue in its earliest meeting.
Para 29)
            The Committee recommends that the Government should formulate a common policy for CPSEs for disposal of their surplus assets in a way
to maximize the returns (Para 30)
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
Minutes of the Meeting
 
***
Briefing meeting with the representatives of Department of Heavy Industries and Cement Corporation of India on the Dalmia-Dadri 
Cement Limited
 (Acquisition and transfer of Undertakings) Amendment Bill, 2006
 
The Committee met at 10.30 a.m. on Wednesday, the 16th October 2006 in the Committee Room C, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
Present
 
Shri Santosh Bagrodia – Chairman

193rd Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/193rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:03]
 
Rajya Sabha
 
1. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy
2. Shri Kalraj Mishra
3. Dr. K. Malaisamy
4. Shri Piyarimohan Mohapatra
5. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
6. Shri O.T. Lepcha
Lok Sabha
7. Shri Guharam Ajgalle
8. Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
9. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
10. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
11. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
12. Shri Kishan Bhai V. Patel
13. Shri P. Rajendran
14. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
15. Shri Sarvey Satyanarayana
16. Shri Rajnarayan Budholiya
17. Shri V.K. Thummar
18. Shri Umakant Yadav
Secretariat
 
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Girija Shanker Prasad, Committee Officer
Witnesses
 
 
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
( D/O Heavy Industries)
 
Shri R.C. Panda, Secretary
Shri A. Didar Singh, Joint Secretary
 
Cement Corporation of India
 
Shri A.K. Srivastava, CMD
 
Ministry of Law and Justice
 
Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary, D/O Legal Affairs
Shri V.K. Bhasin, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
 
2.         The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members and the representatives of the Department of Heavy Industries, Ministry of
law and Justice and the Cement Corporation of India.
 
3.         In his opening remarks the Chairman raised questions pertaining to the circumstances of acquisition of Dalmia-Dadri Unit by the
Government in 1981 and the factors that led the Unit into incurring recurrent losses in successive years since 1985. The Chairman also sought
to know about the efforts made to revive the Unit and the cost incurred upon the Government. The Chairman sought the views of the
management of the Company regarding the prospects of the CCI in view of rapid growth in Cement sector and with growing competition from
larger players in the cement sector. He asked about the inputs and opinions of the Government Directors of the CCI during the loss making
years of the Unit. Regarding the valuation of the Unit, the Chairman raised the issue of valuation of land.
 
4.         The Members raised concern over quality of management of the Unit. They were of the view that despite growth projections in cement
sector by the Planning Commission, the CCI as the public sector undertaking, has not been able to capitalize.  
 
5.         Members were also of the view that the protracted procedure for taking a decision of such loss making units, only makes such units
more unviable due to cumulative losses and liabilities. Therefore there was a need to expedite the disposal of such Units.
 
6.         The CMD of the Cement Corporation of India responded to the observations and queries made the Chairman and the Members of the
Committee. He also informed the Committee about the constraints faced by the Units with respect to technology and the inferior lime stone.
Regarding the valuation of the Unit, the CMD informed the Committee that under the direction of BIFR a fresh valuation of the Unit was
being done.

193rd Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/193rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 13:06:03]
 
 
7.         The Chairman than asked the Secretary, Department of Heavy Industries to furnish written replies to the questions raised by the
Committee.
 
8.
                  The meeting was adjourned at 1.00 pm.
 
17th October 2006 K.P. Singh
Under Secretary
 