 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2021/ Shravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
308 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON MSME SECTOR AND 
MITIGATION STRATEGY ADOPTED TO COUNTER IT  
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th July, 2021) 
 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th July, 2021) 
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2021/ Shravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON MSME SECTOR AND 
MITIGATION STRATEGY ADOPTED TO COUNTER IT  
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th July, 2021) 
 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th July, 2021) 
 

 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
                                                                                                                              PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………………   (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………    (ii) 
 
3. ABBREVIATION…………………………………………………………       (iii) -  (v) 
 
 
4. REPORT ………………………………………………………………………     1 -  30 
 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A            
    GLANCE………………………………………………………………………… 31 - 41 
 
 
6. MINUTES………………………………………………………………………   42 - 44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted  w.e.f.  13th September, 2020) 
 
 
 1.  Dr. K. Keshava Rao         -       Chairman 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 2.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya    
 3. Shri Subhasish Chakraborty 
 4. Shri Shwait Malik 
 5. Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 6. Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
 7. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
 8. Shri Sanjay Seth 
 9. Dr. Amee Yajnik 
     10.  Vacant* 
     LOK SABHA 
 11.   Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
 12.   Ms. Mimi Chakraborty 
 13.   Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
 14.   Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse  
 15.   Dr. S. T. Hasan 
 16.   Ms. S. Jothimani 
 17.   Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya 
 18.   Shri Ravindra Kushawaha 
 19.   Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
 20.   Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
 21.   Shri Rampreet Mandal 
 22.   Shri Vincent H. Pala 
 23.   Shri Chirag Paswan 
 24.   Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
 25.   Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy  
 26.   Shrimati Gomati Sai 
 27.   Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alias Ravi Kishan 
 28.   Shri Sunil Soren 
 29.   Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
      30.   Shri Su Thirunavukkarasar 
      31.   Vacant@ 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3.  Smt. M. Sasilekha Nair, Director 
4.  Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
5.  Smt. Sreeja. V, Deputy Secretary 
6.  Shri. Ajin J R, Under Secretary 
7.  Shri  Anuj Verma, Assistant Research Officer 
*Vacancy caused due to the resignation by Shri Jose K. Mani, M.P.  on 11 th January, 2021. 
@Vacancy caused due to appoint ment of Smt. Annapurna Devi as Minister w.e.f 7th July,2021. 
(i) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this T hree 
Hundred and Eighth Report on Impact of COVID -19 Pandemic on MSME Sector 
and Mitigation Strategy Adopted to Counter It, pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 
2.  The Committee took up the subject for detailed examination. As part of 
examination of the subject, the Committee deliberated in detail in its meeting held on 
18th & 19 th January and 8 th April, 202 1 wherein it heard the views of Ministry of 
Micro, Small & Mediu m Enterprises ; views/suggestions of MSME Industry 
Associations like FICCI, FISME, ASSOCHAM, PHDCCI etc. ; views of Department 
of Financial Services; and views of CMDs of leading Banks respectively.  The 
Committee also obtained information through its  Questionnaires on the subject from 
the M/o MSME, MSME Associations, Department of Financial Services and Banks.  
 
3.  This Report is based on the submissions  made by the AS&DC, M/o MSME, 
MSME Associations ; AS, Department of Financial Services ; CMDs of Banks ; and 
other materials such as the Background Notes, Presentations and replies to the 
questionnaire furnished to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Industry in connection with the examination of the subject . 
 
4. The Committee expresses its sincere gratitude to the M/o MSME, Department 
of Financial Services, CMDs of Banks and MSME Associations for placing their 
valuable suggestions in connection with the examination of the subject before the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry. 
 
5. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft report at its meeting 
held on 23rd July, 2021. 
 
 
   Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
New Delhi 
23 July, 2021 
Shravana 1, 1943 (Saka) 
 
(ii) 
 

 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
 
 
 ASSOCHAM Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India 
BG Bank Guarantee 
CGSSD Credit Guarantee Scheme for Subordinate Debt  
CGTMSE Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small 
Enterprises 
CFITL Covid Funded Interest Term Loans 
CHAMPIONS Creation and Harmonious Application of Modern  
Processes for Increasing the Output and National Strength 
CMD Chairman and Managing Director 
CPs Commercial Papers 
CPSEs  Central Public Sector Enterprises 
DFS Department of Financial Services 
DISCOM Distribution Company 
ECLGS Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme 
EMIs Equated Monthly Instalments 
FI Financial Institutions 
FICCI  Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry 
FISME Federation of Indian Micro and Small & Medium 
Enterprises 
FITL Funded Interest Term Loan 
FoF Fund of Funds 
FY Financial Year 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GECL Guaranteed Emergency Credit Line 
GFR General Financial Rules  
GST Goods and Services Tax 
  HFCs 
 
 
 
Housing Finance Companies 
 
                        (iii) 
 

 
 
  
IBC Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
 
KVI Khadi and Village Industries 
 
KVIC Khadi and Village Industries Commission  
LLP Limited Liability Partnership 
LWCA Liberalized Working Capital Assessment  
MCLR Marginal Cost of Funds based Lending Rate 
MFE Micro Food Enterprises 
MFIs Micro Finance Institutions 
MLI Member Lending Institution  
MoHUA Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs 
MSMEs Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
MSEs Micro and Small Enterprises 
MGIRI Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Rural Industrialization 
MUDRA Micro Units Development and Refinance Agency 
NBFCs Non-Banking Financial Companies 
NCGTC National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company 
NPAs Non Performing Assets 
NSIC National Small Industries Corporation  
OTR One time restructuring 
PAN Permanent Account Number 
PCGS Partial Credit Guarantee Scheme  
PHDCCI PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
PMEGP Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme 
PM SVANidhi  Pradhan Mantri Street Vendor's Atmanirbhar Nidhi 
PPoB Principal Place of Business 
PSBs  Public Sector Banks 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
 RBI Reserve Bank of India 
R&D Research & Development 
 
 
 
                      (iv) 

 
 
 
 
 
RLLR  
 
 
 
Repo Linked Lending Rate 
RMA Raw Material Assistance 
SCBs Scheduled Commercial Banks 
SEZ Special Economic Zone 
SFURTI Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of Traditional Industries 
SIDBI Small Industries Development Bank of India 
SMA Special Mention Account 
SME Small and Medium Enterprises 
TAT  Turnaround Time 
TCs  Technology Centres 
TCS Tax Collection at Source 
TDS  Tax Deduction at Source 
TReDS Trade Receivables Discounting System 
UAM Udyog Aadhaar Memorandum 
WCDL Working Capital Demand Loan 
WCTL Working Capital Term Loan 
WHO World Health Organization 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                            (v) 
 

1 
 
Report 
 
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) Sector has emerged as a 
highly vibrant and dynamic sector of the Indian economy over the last five 
decades. It contributes significantly in the economic and social development of the 
country by fostering entrepreneurship and generating large -scale employment 
opportunities at comparatively lower capital cost, next only to agriculture. It not 
only generates employment opportunit ies but also work s hand-in-hand towards the 
development of the backward and rural areas reducing regional imbalances, 
assuring more equitable distribution of national income and wealth. MSMEs are 
now widening their domain across various sectors of the econ omy from Defence to 
Space, producing diverse range of products and services to meet demands of 
domestic as well as global markets and also proving to be a boon for aspiring 
entrepreneurs in India. 
 
COVID-19 (SARS-CoV2) Pandemic in India: 
 
2. The Corona Vir us (SARS-CoV2) is reported to have originated in the Wet 
Market in Wuhan city of China in December, 20 19. By the end of March 2020, the 
virus spread to more than 180 countries and considering the severity of the disease, 
the World Health Organization (WHO)  declared the Covid -19 outbreak a global 
Pandemic on the 11th March, 2020. The first case of Covid -19 in India was 
detected on the 30th January, 2020 in the State of Kerala in a student who had 
returned from Wuhan, China. Thereon, owing to wide -spread of the virus to many 
states of the Country, the Government of India declared Covid -19 Pandemic as 
National Disaster on the 14th March, 2020. 
 
3. The effective measure found to contain the rapid spread of the highly 
infectious virus was to break the cycle of t ransmission through social distancing. 
The nationwide lockdown was therefore, inevitable to restrict the movement of 
people, which would have otherwise spread the disease very rapidly among large 
population resulting in high fatalities. The lockdown was al so necessary to ramp up 
the health infrastructure across states and setting up of dedicated Hospitals with 
sufficient beds, ICU facility with ventilators, training of doctors and paramedics, 
production of Medical disposables like PPE Kits, Ventilators, Oxy gen 
concentrators, hand sanitizers, masks etc. to combat the pandemic. The first phase 
of the nationwide Lockdown was imposed for a period of 21 days w.e.f.              
25th March, 2020 to 14th April, 2020 with certain exceptions as detailed below: 

2 
 
 
 Closure of all services and shops except pharmacies, hospitals, banks, 
grocery shops and other essential services 
 Closures of commercial and private establishments 
 Suspension of all education, training, research institutions  
 Closure of all places of worship 
 Suspension of all non-essential public and private transport 
 Prohibition of all social, political, sport, entertainment, academic, cultural, 
religious activities 
 
4. The lockdown had to be extended thrice in phases easing the restrictions, 
initially for 19 days from 15 th April to 3 rd May, 2020; for 14 days from 4 th to         
17th May, 2020 and again for another 14 days from 18 th to 31 st May, 2020 
respectively. As situation improved, t he lockdown was unlocked in a calibrated 
manner to install normalcy through a gradual process. 
 
Impact of Covid-19 Pandemic on MSME Sector 
 
5. The Covid-19 Pandemic in India had a disastrous impact on almost all the 
sectors of the economy but the MSME Sector despite being the steering force of 
Indian economy, was one of the w orst hit sector s.  With the prolonged nationwide 
lockdown and social distancing norms, most of the business activities of majority 
of the MSMEs came to a stand -still. Lack of funds, business losses, low or no 
orders, non-availability of work force due to mo bility restrictions , non-availability 
of raw materials and transport infrastructure made conditions worse for MSMEs.  
 
6. In this regard, the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry held meetings with the Officers of the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises, Department of Financial Services, KVIC, Heads of 
Nationalized Bank s viz. State Bank of India, P unjab National Bank, Bank of 
Baroda and Canara Bank and the representatives of MSME Industry Associations 
like F ICCI, ASSOCHAM, PHDCCI, FISME etc. to assess the impact of the 
nationwide lockdown induced by Covid Pandemic and relief measures adopted by 
them to tide over the crisis.   
 
Views of Ministry of MSME 
 
7. The Ministry of MSME informed the Committee that Covi d-19 Pandemic 
battered the economy as a whole but the MSME sector has been the most adversely 

3 
 
impacted. The major issues highlighted were related to the non -availability of 
credit facilities and working capital, delayed payments, labour problems,            
non-availability of raw materials/increased raw material prices etc. and other issues 
arising due to C ovid-related restrictions imposed by the Government. The major 
financial stability concerns arising out of Covid-19 are :- 
 
 Supply chain disruptions 
 Decreasing consumer confidence/spending 
 Global recession 
 Financial impact on operations and/or liquidity and capital  
 Workforce reduction/employee stress 
 Impact on tax and trade issues 
 Lower productivity 
 Lack of information for decision making 
 
8. Further, the Ministry of MSME informed the Committee that with regard to 
exports, except carpet and ceramic products , all other sectors performed badly in 
comparison to the performance of the previous year. The maximum impact of 
Pandemic was felt on gem an d jewellery sector, leather sector, man -made yarn and 
fibres sector. As these are highly labour -intensive sectors, as a consequence their 
employment prospects were also badly affected by Covid P andemic. Besides, the 
maximum impact of pandemic was felt on l odging, tourism, airlines, retail sector, 
steel, apparel, automotive  sector etc. The following diagram shows the impact of 
Covid-19 Pandemic on various segments of the Industry :- 
 
 
 


4 
 
9. Further, the negative growth in a few c ommodities in MSME Sector and 
their export trends from April to November, 2020 is displayed in the graph below:- 
 
 
 
10. The graph depicting the g eographical patterns of Covid -19 incidents and its 
impact on Industry across states are as under :- 
 
 
11. Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC) : KVIC is a statutory 
body under the Ministry of MSME charged with the planning, promotion, 
organisation and implementation of programs for the development of Khadi and 
other Village Industries in the rural areas in coordination with other  agencies 
engaged in rural development.  Khadi Sector provides employment to artisans and 
workers at large scale and contributes significantly in employment generation at 
lower capital, especially in rural areas.  However, Khadi and Village Industry 


5 
 
(KVI) units are the most vulnerable ones because of their size, scale of operation  
and limited financial resources.  
 
12. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of MSME that most of the 
KVI units remained closed during the nationwide lockdown except those involved 
in manufacturing of essential items like masks, sanitizers, food processing units 
etc., thereby causing losses to sales and employment.  However, the units that 
remained open faced problems like non -availability of raw materials, 
transportation of semi -finished/finished products etc. and lack of demand for the 
finished products. Consequently, t he KVI units were not able to cope with the 
difficulties that were forced on them by the unprecedented Pandemic and t heir 
activities suddenly cam e to a grinding halt and remained suspended for more than 
three months during the nationwide lockdown announced on 25 th March, 2020.  
 
13. The Committee was also informed that u nder Scheme of Fund for             
Re-generation of Tradition Industries (SFURTI), work orders received in the 
clusters could not be executed due to shortage of labour, raw materials etc. and as a 
result, no new orders were received by the clusters during the lockdown periods 
thus leading to reduction in production. In addition, finished products could not be 
sold in the market due to non -availability of transportation and lesser demand in 
the market. Due to lack of capital, there was grave difficulty in making payment of 
wages and salaries, utilities, purchase of raw material etc. 
 
14. COIR INDUSTRY : Coir Board promot es the overall development of coir 
industry including export promotion of Coir and Coir products and improvement of 
the living conditions of the workers engaged in this traditional industry in India. 
The Coir Sector in India is very diverse and involves hous eholds, co -operatives, 
NGOs, manufacturers and exporters  who produce beautiful artifacts, handicrafts 
and utility products from coconut husks, which  is otherwise a waste product.  It 
employs about 7.37 lakh persons of whom majority are from rural areas be longing 
to the economically weaker sections of the society. Nearly 80  per cent of the coir 
workers in the fibre extraction and spinning sectors comprise of women.  
 
15. During the nationwide lockdown, the coir i ndustry was also severely 
impacted and produc tion, movement of raw material, finished products, marketing 
etc. were badly affected as a consequence. When the lockdown measures were 
relaxed in phases, corresponding increase was felt in the activities of Coir Sector. 
An estimated loss of 80,000 MTs of coir fiber production due to the lockdown had 

6 
 
been reported. It has been estimated that there was a loss of coir export worth     
Rs. 80 crores during the 1st and 2nd phases of the lockdown itself. 
 
16. The Committee was apprised that the performance of Mahatma Gandhi 
Institute for Rural Industrialization (MGIRI) which is engaged in accelerating rural 
industrialization for sustainable village economy was badly affected due to the 
Covid Pandemic. C onsequently, technology development activities such as 
equipment and machinery/product/process development activities got delayed. In 
addition, skill/entrepreneurship training programs were withheld, external activities 
like conference/seminar/exhibition/awareness programs could not be conducted 
and pr ocurement of equipment, laboratory items and infrastructure development 
work etc. were put on hold. 
 
17. The Committee was also informed that t he National Small Industries 
Corporation Ltd. (NSIC), a certified Government of India Enterprise under the 
Ministry of MSME , which is  working to promote , aid and foster the growth of 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in the country by providing integrated 
support services encompassing marketing, finance, technology and other services 
faced various challenges during the lockdown such as :-   
 
 All the physical movements of officials were stopped and no logistics were 
available for business.  
 All MSMEs were closed down and there were no supply of raw materials. 
Payment-related issues and liquidity crunch were also great challenges for 
the MSMEs during the lockdown.  
 NSIC Technical Centres were closed to follow the social distancing norms.  
 Customers could not  reach NSIC for business as per the Government 
guidelines. 
 
Views of the Department of Financial Services: 
 
18. The Department of Financial Services  (DFS), Ministry of Finance,  in their 
written submission stated that India's GDP contraction in April to June               
(Q1 FY2020-21) quarter reflects the unparalleled effect of the C ovid-19 Pandemic 
and the contain ment measures that had been taken to control the Pandemic. With 
the economy brought to a standstill for two complete months, the inevitable effect 
was a 23.9 per cent contraction in GDP as compared to quarter  of previous year. 
MSMEs were no exception and indeed it was feared that the impact on them would 
be even more severe as they lack deep pockets to withstand loan disruption.  

7 
 
 
19. Further, DFS apprised the Committee that prior to the Pandemic, on a yearly 
basis, overall outstanding advances to MSMEs fro m Scheduled Commercial Banks 
(SCBs) and Non -Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs), was exhibiting a steady 
rising trend up to March, 2020 as given in table below :- 
 
Outstanding Advances to MSME Sector 
( Rs. in crores) 
  31-03-2017 31-03-2018 31-03-2019 31-03-2020 30.09.2020 
  Outstanding 
Advances 
Outstanding 
Advances 
Outstanding 
Advances 
Outstanding 
Advances 
Outstanding 
Advances 
Micro 
Enterprises 
5,29,519.42 5,66,137.92 6,75,200.50 7,46,043.67 7,36,948.09 
Small 
Enterprises 
5,40,610.05 5,83,215.90 6,38,030.79 6,67,734.90 6,54,810.04 
Medium 
Enterprises 
2,26,269.34 1,74,885.52 1,97,419.22 1,99,803.60 2,50,246.08 
Total 
MSME 
12,96,398.81 13,24,239.34 15,10,650.52 16,13,582.17 16,42,004.21 
 
Views of MSME Associations: 
 
20. The Committee also heard the views of MSME Industry Associations viz. 
ASSOCHAM, FICCI, PHDCCI, FISME who appeared before the Committee on 
19th January, 2021  to have a first -hand information on the magnitude of damage 
inflicted by the Pandemic and subsequent lockdowns . The views expressed by the 
MSME Associations on the impact of Covid Pandemic on MSME Sector are as 
under :- 
 
 MSMEs run their businesses on very thin margin and limited resources. The 
Pandemic has severely disrupted their cash inflows  and their payments got 
delayed. MSMEs did not get their dues timely from large corporate s 
including CPSEs , which caused severe impact on availability of their 
working capital.  
 Due to a sharp fall in business , most of the MSMEs faced an acute cash 
crunch and needed immediate liquidity to cope with the unprecedented 
circumstance. It is estimated that almost 25 per  cent of MSME loans could 
slip into default as several MSMEs are finding it tough to draw working 
capital from banks.  
 Lack of working capital an d non -payment of loan EMIs led many of the 

8 
 
MSMEs to be on the verge of closing the operations.  
 Government had issued advisory to companies including MSMEs to pay 
salaries to their workforce. MSMEs were already in financial stress due to 
Pandemic and the burden of salary bills forced them into existential crisis. 
The immediate challenge regarding paying salary  bills, fixed charges, 
statutory dues and pressing creditors etc. remained a huge problem for  
MSMEs.  
 MSMEs due to decrease in sales and revenue, face d cash crunch. Hence, 
MSME loans taken from NBFCs c ould lead to  a considerable increment in 
default payment levels.  
 Vast majority of MSMEs are either sole proprietorship or partnerships. The 
problems of the MSMEs were further compounded by the high taxes 
imposed by the Government and numerous compliance measures.  
 MSME S ector faced challenges related to financial liquidity, debt 
repayments, meeting fixed expenses like electricity, rent, wages/salaries 
and statutory dues etc. Disruptions caused by the P andemic adversely 
impacted MSMEs’ earnings by 20 -50 per cent.  Enterprises working in 
essential commodities business were better off in terms of demand of their 
products but, faced other challenges in organizing their manufacturing and 
supply chain operatio ns due to restrictions on movement of material and 
people. 
 MSMEs faced operational challenges with low or zero manpower 
because migrant workers shifted to their hometown due to Covid induced 
lockdown. Even, truck drivers shifted to their native states which resulted 
in workforce shortage for MSMEs in their units.  According to an 
analysis conducted by McKinsey, nearly 40 million jobs were put at risk 
during the period April-September 2020, with significant job losses in 
construction and manufacturing sectors, which are mostly prevailed by 
MSMEs. 
 MSMEs with perishable raw material incurred huge losses due to            
non-operations in lockdown period. 
 
Strategy for revival of MSME Sector: 
 
21. The Committee was informed that as part of the Special Economic Package - 
Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyaan – the Government has planned t o revive the 
economy from the fall-out of the Covid-19 Pandemic. A special economic package 
of Rs. 20 lakh crore (equivalent to 10  per cent of GDP) was announced to make 

9 
 
India independent against the tough global Supply Chain competition and help to 
empower the labourers, poor & migrants badly affected by the Pandemic. 
 
22. Further the Committee was informed about the highlights of the stimulus 
package announced in tranches under the Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyaan, which are 
as under :- 
 
 Rs. 3 lakh crores collateral free automatic loan under the Emergency Credit 
Line Guarantee S cheme (ECLGS) for businesses including MSMEs – a 
move likely to benefit 45 lakh Units. 
 Rs. 20,000 crores Subordinate Debt for Stressed MSMEs – Beneficiaries are 
2 lakh MSMEs. 
 Rs. 50,000 crores Equity infusion for MSMEs through Fund of Funds. A 
Fund of Funds with corpus of Rs. 10,000 crores to help Units to expand 
capacity. 
 New Definition of MSMEs (Manu facturing/Services) based on Annual 
Turnover and Investment criteria. 
 Global tender to be disallowed up to Rs. 200 crores in Government 
procurement. 
 E-Market linkage for MSMEs to be promoted to act as a replacement for 
trade fairs and exhibitions.  
 Liquidity relief of Rs. 2,500 crores EPF for Businesses and Workers for 3 
more months – likely to benefit 72 lakh employees. 
 Rs. 6,750 crores liquidity support through reduction in EPF contribution for 
business and workers for 3 months (statutory PF contribution of both 
employer and employee reduced to 10  per cent  each from existing 12            
per cent each for all establishments covered by EPFO for next 3 months).  
 Rs. 30,000 crore Special Liquidity Scheme for NBFCs/HFCs/MFIs.  
 Rs. 45,000 crore Partial Credit Guarantee Scheme 2.0 for NBFCs. 
 Extension of up to 6 months for contractors (without costs to contractor) to 
be provided by all Central Agencies.  
 Extension of Registration and completion date of Real Estate Projects under 
RERA. 
 Rs. 50,000 crore liquidity through TDS/TCS reductions. 
 Rs. 90,000 crore Liquidity Injection for DISCOMs.  
 Rs. 1,500 crore interest Subvention for MUDRA Shishu Loans. Interest 
subvention of 2 per cent for prompt payees for a period of 12 months.  

10 
 
 Rs. 10,000 crores scheme for Formalizati on of Micro Food Enterprises 
(MFE) – like to benefit 2 lakh MFEs. 
 Enhancement of Ease of Doing Business through IBC related measures.  
 Decriminalization of Companies Act Violations involving minor technical 
and procedure defaults. 
 
23. The Committee observes that the stimulus package announced by the 
Government for the economic revival from the P andemic hit economy has 
been found to be inadequate as the measures adopted were more of loan 
offering and long -term measures instead of improving the cash flow to 
generate demand as immediate relief. In the process of economic recovery 
post-first wave of the P andemic, the second wave even more vigorously ripped 
the economy particularly the MSME Sector. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Government should immediately come out with a larger 
economic package aimed at bolstering demand, investment, exports and 
employment generation  to help the economy , including MSMEs to recover 
from the Pandemic fall-out.  
 
24. The Committee expresses concern over the grim situation of the Small 
Enterprises due to C ovid-19 Pandemic. Unlike Large and Medium 
enterprises, Small enterprises depend on regular cash flows to stay afloat. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that to ensu re the survival of the Small 
enterprises, it is imperative for the government to provide them with         
much-needed liquidity support to keep their businesses running  and generate 
job opportunities for the workforce. 
 
25. The Committee notes from the written replies furnished by the Ministry 
that no intensive study has been conducted by the M inistry of  MSME to 
ascertain the actual losses suffered by the MSME Sector as a whole due to 
nationwide lockdown imposed by the Government.  More so, the second wave 
of the Pandemic exposed the vulnerabilities of MSMEs like never before  and 
highlighted the problems faced by them such as delayed payments, high 
informality, low financial resilience, scarcity in raw material availability etc. 
The Committee, th erefore, is of the opinion that a detailed study needs to be 
conducted to make an assessment of the actual losses suffered by the MSME 
Sector so  as to chalk out an effective plan for revival of the MSME Sector , 
which has the potential to contribute signifi cantly in achieving the much 
coveted target of making India a $5 trillion economy . 
 

11 
 
26. MSME Sector employs a sizeable portion of the Indian workforce, more 
than 30 per cent of the production comes from MSMEs and about 45  per cent of 
exports also come from the MSME sector. Therefore, any sharp decline in the 
performance of this sector is bound to have a ripple effect on the  national economy, 
employment generation, export, entrepreneurship etc. 
 
27. The Committee observes that a lar ge number of jobs were lost due to 
Covid-19 Pandemic and economic conditions of the households suffered a jolt 
and their regular income declined significantly during lockdown periods.  The 
Committee recommends that Government should focus on employment 
generation and ensure that new means of livelihood are generated  especially 
for the youth of the country . A new National Employment Policy may be 
considered along with exploring the feasibility of establishing a  National 
Electronic Employment Exchange and building a skill -based database to 
provide employment to skilled manpower in their area of expertise. Besides, 
the Ministry should facilitate the MSMEs to scale up their capacity building 
and technical knowhow through extensive training and up-skilling programs. 
 
New Definition of MSMEs 
 
28. The Ministry of MSME informed the Committee that t o strengthen the 
growth of MSMEs, the Government of India had notified a composite criteria of 
classification based on investment in plant and machinery and annual tu rnover as 
an initiative towards achieving the goal of Atmanirbhar Bharat. Also, the revised 
definition removes the distinction between manufacturing and service enterprises. 
A notification in this regard has been issued by the Ministry of MSME and the 
revised definition is applicable from 1st July, 2020 which is as under :- 
 
              (Figures in Rs. in crore) 
Category Investment Turnover 
Micro 1 5 
Small 10 50 
Medium 50 250 
 
29. The Committee was also informed that the new criteria is said to be a growth 
inducing criteria, which entails a non -discretionary, transparent and objective 
classification system for MSMEs.  This change in criteria for classification is 
expected to bring about many benefits that will aid MSMEs  to grow in size and 
expand their business. As a measure to encourage exporters to export more,  the 

12 
 
turnover with respect to exports are not to be counted in the limits of turnover for 
any category of MSME units, whether Micro, Small or Medium. With this change 
in criteria of classification of MSMEs , the difference between manufacturing and 
services has been removed, which is yet another step towards ease of doing 
business, as this is likely to attract more investments and will lead to creation of 
more jobs in the MSME Sector. 
 
Udyam Registration Portal 
 
30. To facilitate the process of MSME registration in accordance with the 
revised MSME definition, the Ministry of MSME launched a new Portal, Udyam 
Registration Portal ( https://udyamregistration.gov.in/), on 01.07.2020 and  the 
registration process is said to be free of cost, simple, paperless and digital and it 
doesn’t require any documents or proof for registration of MSME.  The Portal has 
been so integrated that it will fetch the information from IT and GST databases for 
verification of investment and turnover & exports. It will also enable creation of an 
authentic and active MSME database due to its linkage with PAN and GST  data. 
Further, with a view to facilitate MSME participation in Government procurement, 
seamless link has been provided on the Udyam Registration Portal with 
Government e-Marketplace (GeM) Portal. The Ministry of MSME informed that as 
on 11.01.2021, 17,66, 651 new MSMEs have registered on Udyam Registration 
Portal and 2,82,627 MSMEs have migrated from Udyog Aadhar Memorandum 
(UAM) to Udyam.  
 
31. As per the detailed analysis of the registration of classified enterprises till 
31st December, 2020 (for 14,10,45 5 enterprises, Micro - 13,06,383; small - 88,882 
and Medium - 15,232), the broad trend and picture can be seen from the facts as 
given below :- 
 
 5.4 lakh enterprises have registered under manufacturing category whereas 
8.7 lakh enterprises under service sector. 
 Share of Micro enterprises is 92.61  per cent  whereas Small and Medium 
Enterprises are 6.30 per cent and 1.07 per cent respectively. 
 11.31 lakh enterprises are owned by Male whereas 2.4 lakh enterprises are 
owned by Female entrepreneurs. 
 20,463 enterprises are owned by Divyangjan entrepreneurs. 
 Major Industrial Sectors of registrations are - Food products, Textile, 
Apparel, Fabricated Metal products and Machinery & equipments. 
 1, 47,40,589 persons have been given employment by these registered units.  

13 
 
 5 leading states for Udyam registrations are  Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, 
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Gujarat. 
 Registration without P AN & GST was permitted up  to 31.03.2021 as a 
transitional arrangement. 
 
32. From a scrutiny and analysis of the registration data of the classified 
enterprises, it is observed that enterprises owned by men far outnumber those 
owned by women.  In fact the male owned enterprises is almost a whopping five 
times more than that owned by women entrepreneurs.  Besides, Registrations ha ve 
been constricted to a select few industrial sectors, whereas a majority of other 
important sectors seem to have not come onboard. Further, only a limited number 
of States have taken a lead in getting registered in the Udyam Portal.  
 
33. The Committee is of the view that the M/o MSME may make all -out 
efforts to instill confidence in more women entrepreneurs to on -board the 
Udyam Portal.  Likewise, majority of industrial sectors, including the 
ancillary ones as well as more States may be en couraged to register in the 
Portal so that they can avail the benefits of Government packages.  These can 
be done by creating awareness campaigns in the form of seminars/conferences 
in vernacular languages, advertisement in local dailies etc., which can be  
easily assessed by the MSME entrepreneurs.  
 
34. It has been observed that after reclassification of criteria of MSME s and 
subsequent introduction of Udyam Registration P ortal, less number of 
MSMEs have got registered on the new Udyam Portal since 1 st July, 2020. It 
appears that MSMEs feel better off without regist ration as the compliance 
costs would be much greater than the benefits that would accrue post 
registration.  Besides, without registration, they find it more convenient to 
escape the income tax net and compliance structure. Accordingly, t he 
Committee recommends that the Government may provide  incentives to 
attract more and more MSMEs to register themselves on the Udyam Portal. 
 
35. The Committee notes that as per the new guideline s, it is mandatory to 
have PAN & GSTIN for every enterprise to get registered in the new Udyam 
Registration Portal. However, due to lack of publicity and awareness among 
the MSMEs regarding migration to the new Udyam Registration Portal, many 
have not been able to register within the mandatory timeline of 31.03.2021, set 
for registration. The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that the 
mandatory timeline for registration with PAN & GSTIN may be extended to 

14 
 
facilitate the MSMEs. The Committee also desir es that the Ministry of MSME 
should make concerted efforts to create awareness regarding the launch of a 
new Udyam Registration Portal so that maximum number of MSMEs get 
registered in the Portal and avail the relief packages and benefits offered by 
the Government.  
 
Receivables of MSMEs:  
 
36. Under the Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyaan, the Government had announced 
that MSME dues should be cleared by the Government agencies and CPSEs within 
45 days. In this direction, various instructions and communications have been 
issued by the Ministry of MSME to all Secretaries of Government of India , 
including State governments,  and CMDs of all CPSEs to clear all pending dues 
pertaining to MSMEs as per the new stipulation.  
 
37. The Ministry further informed that a special online reporting system has 
been developed for monitoring the issue of delayed payments with Central 
PSUs/Central Ministries. The details of payments made to MSMEs during the 
period from May to December, 2020 are as under:- 
 
Reported Month Total Dues by 
close of month 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Paid during the 
month (Rs. in 
Crores) 
Pending at the end 
of month (Rs. in 
Crores) 
May 2020 
 (25 Ministries & 79 CPSEs) 
2349.53 1787.89 561.64 
June 2020  
(25 Ministries &  86 CPSEs) 
2553.94 1905.11 648.83 
July 2020 
 (30 Ministries & 108 CPSEs)  
4124.34 3155.16 969.19 
August  2020 
 (26 Ministries & 104 CPSEs) 
3811.13 2954.48 856.65 
September 2020  
(25 Ministries & 105 CPSEs 
Reported) 
4858.18 3814.44 1043.74 
October 2020  
(26 Ministries & 108 CPSEs ) 
5124.13 4102.43 1021.70 

15 
 
Reported Month Total Dues by 
close of month 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Paid during the 
month (Rs. in 
Crores) 
Pending at the end 
of month (Rs. in 
Crores) 
November 2020 
 (26 Ministries &110 CPSEs) 
5184.92 4279.67 905.24 
December 2020 
 (25 Ministries & 82 CPSEs) 
( As on 11th Jan., 2021) 
5317.75 4364.57 953.18 
 
Grand Total 
 (as on 11.01.2021) 
33,323.92 26,363.75 6,960.17 
 
 
38. The Committee observes that the directions issued by the Government 
of India to its agencies and CPSEs to release payments to MSMEs within 45 
days has yielded some positive results and outstanding payments ha ve been 
released by PSUs/CPSEs to MSMEs. However, it is observed that many 
PSUs/CPSEs have still not released payments. Though there is a provision for 
1 per cent  penalty on delayed payment s, in practice , the penalty clause is 
seldom invoked, which encourage s the defaulting entities to flout the 
prescribed timeline. The Committee recommends that strict provisions 
against delayed payments need to be put in place to ensure timely release of 
payments by CPSEs which will immensely help the MSMEs to meet their 
working capital/credit requirements. 
 
39. The Committee also recommends that necessary guidelines should be 
issued for mandatory reporting of the delayed /pending payments (beyond 45 
days) to MS MEs, by CPSEs/PSUs in their Annual Reports , in a separate 
section, as it would impress upon the  CPSEs/PSUs to make payments to  
MSMEs in a time-bound manner.   
 
40. The working cycle of MSMEs in a large number of cases extends much 
beyond 90 days period as from the date of purchase of raw materials till the date of 
making sales which spreads over a period of 90 days and thereafter, it takes 
another 30 to 90 days to re alize the bills and receivables. Hence, the working 
capital cycle of MSMEs keeps prolonging due to delays in realization of sales 
receivables. Due to such delays which have become a general business practice 
now, MSMEs find it extremely difficult to servic e their debt installments or 
interest obligations in time, as a result of which, many of them default and their 
dues become irregular and overdue, leading to their classification into NPAs. There 

16 
 
is a need to reconsider the provision of 90 days limit for c lassifying their over dues 
into NPAs. 
 
41. The Committee is of the view that the 90 days limit fixed by RBI for 
classifying overdue s of MSMEs should be increased to 180 days so that 
MSMEs are not constrained to divert their working capital towards servicing 
of their loan -installments and clearing their dues  at the cost of normal 
business operations. This proposed change in the RBI guid elines will save a 
large number of MSMEs from turning sick or getting closed resulting in loss 
of economic activity and employment. It will also prevent avoidable 
classification of bad debts and unwarranted litigation by banks , thereby 
saving the banks too, from losses. 
 
Subordinate Debt for Stressed MSMEs 
 
42. The Committee was informed that under the S ubordinate debt for Stressed 
MSMEs of Rs. 20,000 crore, nearly 2 lakh MSMEs were likely to be benefitted. As 
per the proposal, the funding of Banks/Lending institutions to the Promoter(s) of 
the Stressed Units is proposed to be classified as ‘sub -debt’ (Subordinate Debt). 
The rationale of the scheme was that  many MSMEs get financially stressed 
because of comme rcial and non -commercial reasons which are beyond their 
control. MSME entrepreneurs of such stressed units find it difficult to bring in 
additional equity and therefore, it becomes difficult for them to survive. Infusion of 
capital in such units in the for m of equity o r sub-debt would be of substantial help 
in sustaining and reviving th ose stressed MSMEs, which have either become NPA 
or are on the brink of becoming NPA. Under the scheme, lenders will grant sub -
debt to the promoters of stressed MSMEs who wil l infuse back the same as equity 
only in the venture. The Scheme is showing signs of increased impact and as on 
13.01.2021, 34 banks have got themselves registered with Credit Guarantee Fund 
Trust of Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) as Member Lending I nstitution 
(MLI) for Sub-debt Scheme and 13 banks have started availing the guarantees.  
 
43. The Committee notes that the subordinate debt scheme was supposed to 
benefit nearly two lakh MSMEs who se non-performing assets are stressed.  
However, it has been observed that only a few MSME s have availed the 
Scheme. The Committee feels that the sub -debt scheme in the present form 
has not been utilized much for the benefit of stressed MSMEs. The Committee 

17 
 
therefore, recommends that the Government should re -visit the scheme for 
restructuring as to cover and benefit maximum number of stressed MSMEs. 
Equity infusion for MSMEs through Fund of Funds  
 
44. On 01.06.2020 CCEA approved the proposal of Fund of Funds (FoF ) with a 
corpus of Rs.1 0,000 crore intended to provide equity funding for MSMEs with 
growth potential and viability. The Fund structure will help leverage of Rs.50,000 
crore of funds. NSIC Venture Capital Fund Ltd., the subsidiary company of 
National Small Industries Corporation  Ltd. (NSIC) has been identified for 
anchoring the Funds.  
 
DIGITAL UPGRADATION INITIATIVES 
 
45. Due to the Covid -19 Pandemic, t he Ministry of MSME took concerted 
efforts to alleviate the challenges faced by MSMEs by adopting new technologies 
at all levels to address the immediate and evolving needs of MSMEs.  Some of the 
recent interventions are mentioned below: 
 
46. Portal for Redressal of Grievances: An online Portal CHAMPIONS 
(Creation and Harmonious Application of Modern Processes for Increasing the 
Output and National Strength) , a unified, empowered, robust, and a technology 
driven platform, was launched on 1 st June, 2020 and has been designed for helping 
and promoting the MSMEs. It covers many aspect of e-governance including 
grievance redressal and handholding of MSMEs. It has been launched to achieve 
basic objectives  of helping the MSMEs in this difficult situation in terms of 
finance, raw mate rials, labour, permissions, etc; helping the MSMEs capture new  
opportunities including manufacturing  of medical items & accessories and; t o 
identify the sparks, i.e. the bright MSMEs who can withstand at present and 
become national and international champions. 
 
47. A Central Control Room in Delhi and 68 State Control  Rooms in different 
States have been set-up for expeditious redressal of issues faced by MSMEs. As on 
08.01.2021, 26,142 grievances were received on CHAMPIONS Portal, out of 
which 25,666 grievances have been replied. Out of these received grievances, 45  
per cent grievances were related to Policy, MSME Definition and Registration; 35  
per cent to Startup, Credit and Finance; 15  per cent to Technology and Quality; 3  
per cent  related to Marketing and Skilling and 2  per cent  to infrastructure and 
logistics issues.  

18 
 
48. KVIC is providing support under various schemes viz., PMEGP, SFURTI, 
Honey Mission, Kumhar Sashaktikaran Programme for generation of sustainable 
employment opportunities for the unemployed youth . In this regard, the Committee 
was informed that considering the need to fight against Covid -19 Pandemic, KVIC 
has taken initiatives to manufacture Khadi mask, made from cotton Khadi and silk 
Khadi.  With this initiative, on one side rural artisans g et the opportunity of getting 
more employment  during Covid period and on the other side, people get the 
opportunity to wear reusable and washable Khadi mask at low price to fight the 
Pandemic. To make the mask widely available across the length and breadth of the 
country, the same is available through GeM Portal and online sale for end-users.  
 
49. In response to a query of the Committee regarding conduct of any study by 
the Ministry of MSME to ascertain the impact/losses suffered by MSME Sector 
due to COVID-19 Pandemic and lockdowns, the Ministry of MSME in their written 
submission informed that KVI C had been assigned the task of conducting a 
National level evaluation of the PMEGP Scheme to Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu  
India LLP. Further, the agency had been instructed to assess the impact of COVID -
19 on the PMEGP Units in addition to the current scope o f the assignment by the 
Ministry of MSME and KVIC. While Deloitte was conducting the field surveys, 
the second wave of COVID-19 Pandemic grappled the country.   
 
50. Also the Committee was informed about t he key observations of the study 
which was that the  small businesses were worst hit by th e economic fallout of 
Covid-19 P andemic. Unprecedented lockdown and other containment measures 
have resulted in supply chain disruptions and massive demand drop especially for  
Micro units and significant economic losse s in general to MSME s. Further as per 
the survey data, 88  per cent of the beneficiaries of PMEGP units reported that they 
were negatively affected due to C ovid-19 Pandemic and the remaining 12  per cent 
stated that they were not affected. In terms of benefi ciaries (88 per cent) who were 
negatively affected, around 57  per cent  stated that their units were shut down 
during this period, 30  per cent  reported that there was drop in production and 
revenue, 28 per cent stated issues pertaining to raw material avail ability or supply 
chain issues.  In terms of beneficiaries (12  per cent) who were positively affected, 
around 65 per cent stated that there is an increase in business activity as they had 
units in retail and health sector, 53  per cent  stated an increase in telephonic 
supply/delivery and around 25  per cent  stated that their units were dealing with 
essential commodities or services. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should take immediate suitable action to rescue the small busin ess 

19 
 
units from collapsing, by providing additional financial support, relaxation or 
waiver of interest, marketing support etc. 
 
51. The Committee notes that there is abundant scope for job creation in 
domestic Agarbatti making industry as huge gap presently exists between the 
demand and supply of Agarbatti due to certain policy measures taken by the 
Government such as import restriction on raw Agarbatti and increase in import 
duty on bamboo sticks, etc. The Committee app reciates the initiatives taken by the 
Ministry of MSME to implement the pilot project, Khadi Agarbatti Atmanirbhar 
Mission, through KVIC, paving the way for large scale employment opportunities 
in Agarbatti making industry in different parts of the country , by enhancing 
domestic production substantially, with low investment.  The Committee is of the 
view that this new initiative would be a boon to the artisans in rural areas who 
have lost their jobs due to Covid -19 Pandemic as it would not only restore 
livelihood to them but also generate large scale employment opportunities to 
the unemployed youth.   
 
52. The Committee was also informed that the MSME Technology Centres 
develop innovative products to fight Covid like Box to sanitize office files and 
other articles using UV lights, plasma based sanitizers, accurate IR thermometer, 
non-contact dispensers and also manufacture indigenous components for Corona 
Testing Equipments, hot tape sealing (critical operation for PPE coveralls), masks 
coveralls, WHO quality alcohol based sanitizer, sanitizer pumps, face shields etc.  
 
53. The Committee notes that the production of Covid related medical and 
auxiliary items are very much required in large quantities during  the present 
times to fight the P andemic and production of such items by the MSME s will 
help t hem to stabilize their livelihood. The Committee  is of the opinion that 
the Ministry should extend all possible assistance to those MSMEs engaged in 
the manufacture of medical and auxiliary items, to meet t he domestic 
requirement to overcome the Pandemic.  
 
54. The Ministry of MSME in their written submission also informed that 
various remedial steps were taken by the N ational Small Industries Commission 
(NSIC) viz. conducting countrywide online survey to assess the pulse of MSMEs ; 
constituting a COVID Cell to assimilate suggestions/queries on its schemes an d to 
respond to them in time; handling go -downs of essential commodities like 
Polymers to carry out opera tions through service providers; validating S ingle Point 
Registration Scheme , enlistment certificates of MSMEs expiring on or after 

20 
 
01.03.2020 and during lockdown period along with discount (50 per cent) offer on 
Annual membership in MSMEmart was extended up  to 30.06.2020;  first 
Moratorium was provided to all MSME units availing credit facility w.e.f. 
01.03.2020 to 31.05.2020 for repayment of outstanding dues. Moratorium was 
further extended for three months up  to 31.08.2020 as per RBI guidelines for 
MSMEs whose accou nts we re standard on 29.02.2020; time relaxations were 
provided to units to deposit the outstanding amount in order to facilitate the units 
to attain sustainability  and; r ate of interest under RMA against BG and Bill 
Discounting Scheme were reduced by 1.50 per cent per annum on 01.06.2020 and 
again by 0.50  per cent  per annum on 01.10.2020 to provide cheaper financial 
assistance to MSME units.  
 
55. In order to overcome the Pandemic situation, NSIC Technical Services 
Centers started online classes  on Digital marke ting, software development, web 
designing, accounting (tally), Beauty & wellness, Internet of things (IOTs) and diet 
assistant etc. As these cases are purely job/entrepreneurship courses, the candidates 
would be skilled to start their own enterprise. 
 
56. The Ministry of  MSME informed the Committee that during C ovid 
Pandemic, MSME Technology Centres (TCs) developed/manufactured 
various medical and auxiliary products such as Sanitizers, Thermometers, 
Masks, Parts of PPE Kit and Corona Testing Kit etc. and su pplied them to 
various Central/State Governments, Bank s, PSUs and shared these with 
MSMEs for domestic/indigenous production and marketing. The Committee 
notes that these Technology Centres contributed significantly by 
manufacturing various C ovid-related products indigenously thus fulfilling the 
domestic demands. The Com mittee recommends that M inistry of  MSME 
should focus on setting up  of more such Technology Centres across the 
country to make India Atmanirbhar in manufacturing in situations like Covid 
Pandemic. 
 
57. At present, t he biggest concern for MSME is non -availability of raw 
materials on time and at reasonable price. Traders are hoarding the raw 
materials and rigging the market with their whims and fancy pricing. The 
Committee recommends that NSIC should make suitable arrangements so that 
raw materials are made easily available at reasonable price for Micro 
enterprises, on credit basis. 
 

21 
 
58. MSMEs are finding it difficult to procure raw material to run their 
businesses normally due to non availabili ty of raw materials. Moreover, a  
steep hike in the prices of raw material like steel etc. has adversely affected 
the business environment. The Committee recommends that the Public Sector 
Enterprises should not impose penalty or black list the MSME s in the event of 
cancellation of orders by them since increase in prices of raw materials is a 
Force Majeure event , beyond the control of the MSMEs. Besides, t he 
Government should also allow import of all steel materials based on cost and 
quality requirements at zero import duty (no anti dumping) and also ban 
export of iron ore and steel products for the time being. Better GDP growth 
can be realized only if value -added products are exported rather than raw 
materials. Further, GST -based funding is needed for MSMEs at marginal 
rates, which will encourage them to purchase raw materials easily. 
 
Relief Measures by Reserve Bank of India  
 
59. As a relief to the economy r eeling under the financial stress due to Covid -19 
Pandemic, the RBI took several remedial measures from time to time  as mentioned 
below:- 
 RBI permitted a term -loan moratorium and working capital interest 
deferment w.e.f. 1.3.2020 to 31.8.2020 along with an asset classification 
standstill for this period and other measures to enhance liquidity.  
 RBI advised banks to link all floating rate loans to Medium Enterprises 
from 1.4.2020 to an external benchmark rate.  
 On 17 thApril, 2020, RBI announced Rs. 15,000 crore Special Refinancing 
Facility for Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) as a 
specific response to Covid Pandemic for on -lending/refinancing purposes. 
SIDBI has also announced schemes for Special liquidity  to provide support 
to NBFCs, Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) and banks through term loans 
of up to one year for on lending to MSMEs across all sectors.  
 On 6.8.2020, RBI extended the one -time restructuring scheme for MSMEs 
till 31.3.2021 for entities that were in default but ‘standard’ as on 1.3.2020, 
with a condition that the accounts that have slipped between 2.3.2020 and 
date of implementation could be upgraded on restructuring as per the 
scheme guidelines. As on 04.12.2020, a total of 80,209 accoun ts amounting 
to Rs.4321.92 crore have been restructured in terms o f RBI circular dated 
06.08.2020. 
 RBI has issued guidelines on Priority Sector Lending dated 4th September, 

22 
 
2020 and credit flow to MSMEs has been categorized under priority sector. 
Total Priority Sector target is 40 per cent of Adjusted Net Bank Credit 
(ANBC) for all domestic commercial banks. A sub -target of 7.5 per cent of 
ANBC is fixed for Micro enterprises set under priority sector lending. The 
targets are going to be increased to 45  per cent, 50 per cent, 60 per cent and 
75 per cent in the subsequent FY 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024 respectively.  
 
Trade Receivable e-Discounting System (TReDS)   
 
60. The Committee  was informed by the Ministry that TReDS is an electronic 
platform for facilitating the discounting of trade receivables of MSMEs through 
multiple financiers. As on 31.12.2020, out of 4599 companies hav ing turnover of 
more than Rs.500 crores , as identified by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs , 1461 
companies have registered themselves on TReDS platform. 170 CPSEs and 3903 
MSMEs registered with these CPSEs have also been on -boarded on the platform.  
Totally, 11690 MSMEs have on -boarded. However, MSMEs have been exempted 
from paying on-boarding charges on TReDS platform till 31 st March, 2021.   
 
61. The TReDS initiative by the Government is a useful tool for MSMEs to 
access the immediate fund at a cheaper cost with an option to select the offer 
from various banks without recourse to borrowing. Currently, it is mandatory 
for all CPSEs and companies having annual turn over of more than Rs. 500 
crore to register on TReDS platform. The Committee recommends that the 
registration should be made mandatory  for all CPSEs having a turnover of 
more than Rs.250 crores as it would enlarge the ambit of TReDS.  Despite the 
mandate of the Government that all CPSEs sign up on the TReDS Platforms 
to improve the cash flows of MSMEs, many have yet to comply with the 
mandate. Necessary steps should be taken by the Ministry to onboard more 
and more CPSEs on the TReDS platform. 
 
62. It has also been observed that MSMEs do not publish their invoices on 
TReDS platform despite having the registration due to unsaid pressure from 
corporate (buyers). Further it is seen that corporate (buyers) do not approve 
the published invoices of MSMEs on TReDS platform, which defies the sole 
purpose of the platform, as Banks cannot fund such invoices.  The Committee 
is of the view that every  tax invoice raised by GST registered MSMEs should 
reflect automatically on the respective TReDS platforms. After the delivery of 
Services or Goods, within a certain number of days, the corporate must accept 
or reject the automatically published invoice of  MSMEs. After the stipulated 

23 
 
period, the published invoice should be deemed accepted and should be 
available for banks to provide fund to MSMEs. If the CPSEs rejects any 
invoice, a mandatory clarification must be sought which should be visible to 
Banks and respective MSMEs .  Consequently, MSMEs would be encouraged 
to get themselves registered on GST and TReDS Platforms as their invoices 
would automatically get published on TReDS which would open the doors for 
them to have access to easy and cheaper funds. I t would also provide 
significant business potential for banks due to rise in number of invoices 
available on TReDS. The Committee feels that it would also make CPSEs 
responsible and cautious while rejecting any invoice raised by MSMEs and 
help them financi ally in this critical juncture.   The proposal if implemented, 
would thereby, become a win -win situation to MSMEs, CPSEs and Banks as 
each one of them are likely to benefit. 
 
Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) 
 
63. As part of the Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyaan  and as a specific response to 
the C ovid-19 Pandemic, the Government of India on 23.05.2020 launched 
Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) to support eligible MSMEs 
and business enterprises in meeting their operational liabilities a nd restarting their 
business disruption caused by the Covid-19 Pandemic.  
 
64. ECLGS 1.0  provides for a fully guaranteed and collateral free Guaranteed 
Emergency Credit Line (GECL) for eligible MSME units, business enterprises and 
individual loans for busi ness purposes, having outstanding credit of up to Rs.50 
crore as on 29.2.2020 and the borrower accounts were less than or equal to 60 days 
past due as on 29.2.2020. The GECL could be up to 20 per cent of their entire 
outstanding credit as on 29.2.2020 thro ugh the Member Lending Institutions 
(MLIs), consisting of Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs), Financial Institutions 
(FIs) and Non -Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs). 100 per cent credit 
guarantee for credit extended under the Scheme is being provided by the 
Government through National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Ltd. (NCGTC). 
The loans provided under ECLGS 1.0 have 4 -year ten ure, with a 12 -month 
moratorium on repayment of principal. Interest rates under the Scheme are capped 
at 9.25 per cent for banks  & FIs and at 14 per cent for NBFCs. An ‘opt -out’ option 
has been provided to the eligible borrowers to enable them to choose whether they 
wish to avail of the GECL facility. 
 

24 
 
65. ECLGS 2.0: The Scheme has been extended through ECLGS 2.0 for the 26 
sectors identified by the Kamath Committee  and the health care sector. Entities 
from those sectors with outstanding credit above Rs. 50 crore and not exceeding 
Rs. 500 crore as on 29.2.2020, which were less than or equal to 30 days past due as 
on 29.2.2020 are eligible under ECLGS 2.0. The eligibl e entities/borrower 
accounts shall be eligible for additional funding up to 20 per cent (which could be 
fund based or non-fund based or both) of their entire outstanding credit (fund based 
only) as a collateral free GECL, which would be fully guaranteed by  NCGTC.  The 
loans provided under ECLGS 2.0 have 5 -year tenure, with a 12-month moratorium 
on repayment of principal. 
 
66. ECLGS 3.0 : The scope has been further extended through introduction of 
ECLGS 3.0 to cover business enterprises in Hospitality, Travel & Tourism, Leisure 
& Sporting sectors which had, as on 29.02.2020, total credit outstanding not 
exceeding Rs. 500 crore and overdue, if any, were for 60 days or less, as on 29th 
February, 2020. ECLGS 3.0 would involve extension of credit of up  to 40 per cent 
of total credit outstanding across all lending institutions as on 29.02.2020. The 
tenure of loans granted under ECLGS 3.0 shall be  6 years including a moratorium 
period of 2 years on repayment of principal.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
 
67. The Committee was informed that a s on 31.3.2021, 228 MLIs are registered 
with NCGTC. The scheme is valid till 30.06.2021 or till guarantees for an amount 
of Rs. 3,00,000  crore is sanctioned under the GECL (taking into account both 
ECLGS 1.0 , 2.0 and 3.0), whichever is earlier. As informed by the implementing 
agency of ECLGS  i.e. NCGTC, as on 31.3.2021, the amount of loan sanctioned 
under the scheme  is Rs. 2.49 lakh crore. NCGTC has informed that, as on 
31.03.2021, guarantees for an amount of Rs. 2.36 lakh crores have been issued 
under ECLGS to 95.41 lakh borrowers. Moreover, Guarantees for an amount of 
Rs. 1.60 lakh crore have been issued to 90.44 lakh MSME borrowers. The details 
of Guarantees issued to MSMEs as on 31.3.2021 are as under:- 
  
Entity Type-wise 
Guarantee Issued as on 
31.3.2021 
 
Guarantee 
Nos. 
 
 
% 
Guarantee 
Nos. 
 
Guarantee 
Amount 
( In Rs. 
Crore) 
% 
Guarantee 
Amount 
 
Micro 8337286 87% 61144.84 25.81% 
Small 450254 5% 61849.53 26.11% 
Medium 257858 3% 37085.31 15.65% 
Other Business Enterprises 496056 5% 76837.42 32.43% 

25 
 
 
68. The Committee notes that though the Emergency Credit Linked 
Guarantee Scheme recorded a high success rate , yet, around 50 per cent  of 
total guarantee amount only has been issued to MSMEs . As a result, a large 
number of MSMEs hard hit by the Covid Pandemic remained deprived from 
the benefit of the scheme. More so, it is observed that the complete amount of 
sanction has not been disbursed to the borrowers’ vis-à-vis sanctions, for fear 
of loan defaulting by MSMEs in the backdrop of the 2 nd wave of the 
Pandemic. The Committee recommends that the Banks should be more liberal 
at this juncture in extending credit facilities to MSMEs and ensure that loans 
are disbursed without delay after sanction. 
 
69. The Committee notes that the T raders, Retailers as well as Wholesalers 
have all now been reinstated in MSME category by the Government which is 
a welcome step. Hence nearly 2.5 crore T raders are likely to be eligible for 
obtaining credit facilities under the ECLGS. The Committee recommends 
benefits of the S cheme may be extended to small traders/dealers too as they 
have no access to institutional finances meant for MSMEs, as of now .   
 
70. PUBLIC SECTOR BANKS : During the Covid -19 Pandemic, role of the 
Public Sector Banks have assumed much significance in the context of addressing 
concerns of businesses and support to livelihood as well as providing consumers 
with seamless banking services, offering credit relief to firms and consumers.   
 
71. State Bank of India (SBI) : The Committee was apprised by the Chairman, 
SBI, that u nder the GECL Scheme, all the eligible customers were identified and  
requested through SMS to avail the facility.  As GECL is a pre -approved product, 
offer cum acceptance letters were also centrally generated and provided to 
branches to enable them to issue to the eligible MSMEs . The status of achievement 
under GECL as on 31.03.2021 is as under:- 
 
 WCTL Sanctions WCTL Disbursement 
No. of accounts Amount 
(in Rs.) 
No. of Accounts Amount 
(in Rs.) 
GECL-1 5,52,797 26,461.34 2,99,523 23,349.37 
GECL-2 362 3,650.83 240 2,251.89 
TOTAL 5,53,159 30,112.17 2,99,763 25,601.26 
 
 

26 
 
72. Further, ex-gratia payment aggregating Rs.41.21 crores was made to 
6,91,597 (for MSME borrowers outstanding up to Rs.2 crores).  Payment for the 
remaining eligible borrowers is under process.  They also organized more than 125 
E-Town Hall meetings to MSME customers and explained the various relief 
measures available to them.  Besides, SBI c onducted webinars to educate its 
employees on products and relief measures available  to MSMEs affected by 
Covid-19 Pandemic. 
 
73. Bank of Baroda : Regarding the Scheme,  the officers of BoB informed the 
Committee that the Credit Guarantee Scheme for Sub -ordinate Debt (CGSSD) was 
introduced on 24th July, 2020 and the status of loan sanction and disbursement  is as 
under:- 
Eligible 
borrowers as per 
the scheme 
Eligible loan 
amount 
As on 26.03.2021 Cumulative 
Disbursement 
No. of Accounts Amount 
(Rs. in crores) 
No. of 
Accounts 
Amount 
(Rs. in crores) 
No. of 
Accounts 
Amount 
(Rs. in 
crores) 
 2207 24.00 799 12.00 187 3.00 
 
74. Punjab National Bank  (PNB): the Committee was apprised by the officers 
of PNB about the  status of achievement under GECL as on 23.03.2021 is as 
under:- 
 
Particulars Sanctioned Amount 
(Rs. in crores) 
Disbursed Account Disbursed Amount 
(Rs. in crores) 
GECL 1.0 11,272 178775 10,075 
GECL 2.0 1,689 97 1,010 
TOTAL 12,961 178872 11,085 
 
75. Further, they informed the Committee that t he Performance of Guarantee 
Scheme for Sub-ordinate Debt (CGSSD) as on 28.03.2021 is as under: - 
 
Proposals Sanctioned Proposals Disbursed 
Account Amount 
(in crores of Rs.) 
Account Amount 
(in crores of Rs.) 
238 15.29 171 13.86 
 
76. The Committee was informed by the Industry Associations that in many 
instances the Banks have not been forthcoming to accord credit facilities to 
the MSMEs or have not been showing considerate approach towards the 

27 
 
MSMEs interested for availing the loan facility. The Committee desires that 
separate counters should be opened at every MLI exclusively to deal with the 
MSMEs and handhold them to avail the eligible credit facility in a hassle-free 
manner and take benefit of all the Governmental Schemes meant for them.   
 
77. The second wave of the Covid Pandemic hit the Country in April 2021 at a 
most unexpected time when the economy started recovering gradually from the 
disaster impacted b y the first wave almost a year ago. It is observed that t he 
Characteristics of both the waves have been quite different and the Government’s 
approach in dealing with the two waves ha ve also been different. Since the second 
wave has been mostly localized, the Government felt that instead of imposing a 
National lockdown it was left for the States to decide whether or not to impose 
curfew/lockdowns depending on the local impact of the virus on the respective 
States.  However, if both the waves are compared, t he initial data on jobs, income, 
household income, consumer sentiments and demand show that the second wave 
too has had a devastating impact on India’s economy, especially on poorer citizens 
and smaller business. Rising unemployment has emerged as the bigge st economic 
concern during the second Covid -19 wave. Though no nationwide lockdown was 
imposed during the 2 nd wave, the local complete lockdown imposed across many 
large states had a vast economic setback. 
 
78. ECLGS 4.0: The Committee was briefed that to  support Covid hit MSMEs 
further, the Government announced a three month extension of its Rs. 3 lakh crore 
Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme to September 30, 2021 from June 30, 
2021 or till guarantee for an amount of Rs. 3 lakh Crore are issued. The r epayment 
tenure has been raised from 4 year to 5 years. 
 
79. The Committee notes that, after the emergence of second wave of the 
Covid-19 in April, 2021, the Government has recently announced ECLGS 4.0 
with the Scheme period extended up to 30.9.2021. Howev er, there has been no 
increase in the earmarked amount sanctioned under the Scheme. Keeping in 
view the efficacy of the Scheme, the Committee recommends that the 
Government should enhance the guarantee amount as nearly 2.5 crore traders 
have also become eligible for the Scheme as per the Government policy.  
 
MSME SECTOR: THE ROAD AHEAD 
 
80. The Government of India has envisioned doubling the Indian economy to 
US$ 5 trillion in five years. In order to achieve this goal, career opportunities for 

28 
 
the young population need to be generated . As the MSME Sector has the potential 
to serve as a key employment generator , the Government need s to nurture the 
MSME Sector in order to create new job opportunities.  
 
81. The Committee is of the view  that in order to achi eve the target  of 
generating employment opportunities for the unemployed , investment should 
be made in providing more back -end services to improve performance of the 
MSME sector.  In the absence of  suitable technology-based production 
activities as well as low investment in R&D activities , the MSME Sector is not 
able to compete with its global counterparts and the condition has become 
more conspicuous during the pandemic era. Therefore, steps should be taken 
to bring in technical knowhow and the same could b e made available to 
indigenous MSMEs at subsidized rates so that the MSME s are enabled to 
compete with their global counterparts and achieve the export target . Besides, 
research and development (R&D) services of various Technical Institutions 
may be garnered for product innovation. 
 
82. At present, an MSME who wish es to sell online is mandated to obtain GST 
registrations (PPoB) for every state where it wants to conduct business. However, 
there has been a delay in availing GST registration which is stalling on-boarding of 
MSMEs on e -commerce platforms. Apart from application errors, major reasons 
for delay in availing GST registration are ‘physical visit -business not present’ and 
‘trade license/professional tax certificate not present. 
 
83. The Covid -19 Pande mic has emphasized the need and importance of 
accelerated digital adoption in business and MSMEs are no exception. 
Therefore, the MSMEs need to switch over to digital platform from core 
traditional selling platforms through newer technology adoption which can 
not only facilitate access to e -markets and customers, but also streamline 
payments, obtain finance for expansion of business etc. A large faction of 
MSEs are located in rural areas and, mostly being in unorganized business 
without any access to modern  technology. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should take initiatives to create awareness among the MS MEs 
about digital marketing and extend handholding for a smooth transition to 
digital e -commerce platforms which would help them in situations l ike 
COVID pandemic. 
 
 84. Ecommerce is growing at a very fast pace and it is expected to grow to 
US$200 billion by 2026. It plays a major role in streamlining business 

29 
 
processes right from receiving a product order, to managing deliveries, 
keeping track of stock and even analyzing consumer feedback and data. The 
future is the age of online marketing. The Committee is of the view that the 
Ministry may study the working of  big ecommerce players to adopt efficient 
and successful practices for strengthening the entry and survival of MSMEs in 
ecommerce. Through ecommerce, MSMEs not only can sell in i ndigenous 
markets but also get into  markets abroad, which will definitely be a  booster 
for MSMEs. 
 
Import Substitution Development through MSMEs 
 
85. Since independence, replacing foreign import s with domestic products have 
been the priority of policy makers. But on many occasions , it was reliant on large 
scale imports from other co untries that were cheaply available in terms of cost.  
However, in the mi dst of Covid -19 P andemic, world trade witnessed a sharp 
decline as economies around the world entered into a lockdown and consumer 
demand fell to a historic low. The business shut -down globally stalled imports 
from foreign countries which adversely impacted the manufacturi ng and economic 
activities of the country. To protect the domestic economy and maintain seamless  
supply chain, the Import substitution industrialization is the need of the hour.   
86. The Committee notes that the Government is focusing on indigenous 
development strategy upon Import Substitution and Make in India which is a 
welcome effort. However, the Government should develop a framework to 
support enterprises which are capable to develop Import Substitution as 
more investment would be required in such are as. Availability of soft loans to 
MSMEs at minimal interest rate of 3 -4 per cent with extended repayment 
tenure, Easy land acquisition, less parameters of compliances etc. could help 
in developing import substitution in the country. Besides, SEZ focusing u pon 
import substitution could be developed across the country and special 
benefits should be given to MSMEs for establishing units in such SEZs. It is 
suggested that Government should aggregate large adjacent land parcels at 
suitable manufacturing and logi stics locations, which are free from 
encumbrances and make it available for the MSMEs at a fair market value 
for developing such export zones. 
 
87. Import Substitution strategy cannot be effective unless Indian 
enterprises are made well aware about the products which are being 
imported. Government should put out a list of such products along with their 

30 
 
production specifications so that enterprises could be able to venture into such 
production areas. The Committee recommends that onli ne exhibitions of the 
samples of such products, along with their market potential, could be 
organized by the Ministry in coordination with MSMEs Associations for 
information of MSMEs.  
 
88. Promoting Start up Innovations: MSME start -ups have ideas which 
sometimes look impractical to be operationalized but many such ideas have 
become unicorns (billion -dollar companies). Israel has a start -up system in 
which the Government allows minimum support by providing basic funding, 
office, infrastructure, broadband an d other facilities to the start -up, free of 
cost. The Committee is of the view that in order to encourage and incentivize 
potential entrepreneurs and new Start Ups with their ideas for 
implementation, initiatives should be taken to facilitate them with basic 
infrastructure and financial support. 
 
89. The Committee is deeply concerned about the possibility of impending 
third wave of the COVID -19 pandemic in the near future as predicted by 
experts.  The Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry should 
adopt a proactive approach and take pre -emptive measures to meet the 
unforeseen challenges arising out of the possible third wave to save the 
MSMEs, which are already reeling under the devastation of first and second 
wave of COVID pandemic.  
 
90. Most of the policies formulated are aimed at benefit o f Medium and 
Large enterprises in the country whereas the position should be contrary. 
Policies & Schemes needs to be designed for the benefit of Micro & Small 
enterprises which constitute the majority of Indian MSME sector.  The 
Committee recommends that while formulating policies/schemes, the Ministry 
should consider the benefits of MSEs which are often deprived of the benefits 
of various policies/schemes announced by the Government. The stimulus 
package announced by Government last year could not percolat e down 
properly to the lower levels of MSME sector.  The Committee feels that extra 
efforts need to be taken on this front. 
 
******** 
 
 
 

31 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A GLANCE 
 
1. The Committee observes that the stimulus package announced by the 
Government for the economic revival from the P andemic hit economy has 
been found to be inadequate as the measures adopted were more of loan 
offering and long -term measures instead of improving the cash flow to 
generate demand as immediate relief. In the process of economic recovery 
post-first wave of the P andemic, the second wave even more vigorously ripped 
the economy particularly the MSME Sector. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Government should immediately come out with a larger 
economic package aimed at bolstering demand, investment, exports and 
employment generation  to help the economy , including MSMEs to recover 
from the Pandemic fall-out.   
(Para 23) 
 
2. The Committee expresses concern over the grim situation of the Small 
Enterprises due to C ovid-19 Pandemic. Unlike Large and Medium 
enterprises, Small enterprises depend on regular cash flows to stay afloat. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that to ensu re the survival of the Small 
enterprises, it is imperative for the government to provide them with         
much-needed liquidity support to keep their businesses running  and generate 
job opportunities for the workforce. 
(Para 24) 
 
3. The Committee notes from the written replies furnished by the Ministry 
that no intensive study has been conducted by the M inistry of  MSME to 
ascertain the actual losses suffered by the MSME Sector as a whole due to 
nationwide lockdown imposed by the Government.  More so, the second wave 
of the Pandemic exposed the vulnerabilities of MSMEs like never before  and 
highlighted the problems faced by them such as delayed payments, high 
informality, low financial resilience, scarcity in raw material availability etc. 
The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that a detailed study needs to be 
conducted to make an assessment of the actual losses suffered by the MSME 
Sector so  as to chalk out an effective plan for revival of the MSME Sector , 

32 
 
which has the potential to contribute significantly in achieving the much 
coveted target of making India a $5 trillion economy . 
(Para 25) 
4. The Committee observes that a large number of jobs were lost due to 
Covid-19 Pandemic and economic conditions of the households suffered a jolt 
and their regular income declined significantly during lockdown periods.  The 
Committee recommends that Government should focus on employment 
generation and ensure that new means of livelihood are generated  especially 
for the youth of the country . A new National Employment Policy may be 
considered along with exploring the feasibility of establishing a  National 
Electronic Employment Exchange and building a skill -based database to 
provide employment to skilled manpower in their area of expertise. Besides, 
the Ministry should facilitate the MSMEs to scale up their capacity building 
and technical knowhow through extensive training and up-skilling programs. 
 
(Para 27) 
 
5. The Committee is of the view that the M/o MSME may make all -out 
efforts to instill  confidence in more women entrepreneurs to on -board the 
Udyam Portal.  Likewise, majority of industrial sectors, including the 
ancillary ones as well as more States may be encouraged to register in the 
Portal so that they can avail the benefits of Governme nt packages.  These can 
be done by creating awareness campaigns in the form of seminars/conferences 
in vernacular languages, advertisement in local dailies etc., which can be 
easily assessed by the MSME entrepreneurs. 
 
(Para 33) 
 
6. It has been observed that after reclassification of criteria of MSME s and 
subsequent introduction of Udyam Registration P ortal, less number of 
MSMEs have got registered on the new Udyam Portal since 1 st July, 2020. It 
appears that MSMEs feel better off withou t regist ration as the compliance 
costs would be much greater than the benefits that would accrue post 
registration.  Besides, without registration, they find it more convenient to 
escape the income tax net and compliance structure. Accordingly, t he 
Committee recommends that the Government may provide  incentives to 
attract more and more MSMEs to register themselves on the Udyam Portal. 
 

33 
 
(Para 34) 
 
7. The Committee notes that as per the new guidelines, it is mandatory to 
have PAN & GSTIN for every e nterprise to get registered in the new Udyam 
Registration Portal. However, due to lack of publicity and awareness among 
the MSMEs regarding migration to the new Udyam Registration Portal, many 
have not been able to register within the mandatory timeline of  31.03.2021, set 
for registration. The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that the 
mandatory timeline for registration with PAN & GSTIN may be extended to 
facilitate the MSMEs. The Committee also desires that the Ministry of MSME 
should make concerted  efforts to create awareness regarding the launch of a 
new Udyam Registration Portal so that maximum number of MSMEs get 
registered in the Portal and avail the relief packages and benefits offered by 
the Government.   
 
(Para 35) 
 
8. The Committee observes that the directions issued by the Government 
of India to its agencies and CPSEs to release payments to MSMEs within 45 
days has yielded some positive results and outstanding payments ha ve been 
released by PSUs/CPSEs to MSMEs. However , it is observed that many 
PSUs/CPSEs have still not released payments. Though there is a provision for 
1 per cent  penalty on delayed payment s, in practice , the penalty clause is 
seldom invoked, which encourage s the defaulting entities to flout the 
prescribed timeline. The Committee recommends that strict provisions 
against delayed payments need to be put in place to ensure timely release of 
payments by CPSEs which will immensely help the MSMEs to meet their 
working capital/credit requirements. 
 
(Para 38) 
 
9. The Committee also recommends that necessary guidelines should be 
issued for mandatory reporting of the delayed /pending payments (beyond 45 
days) to MS MEs, by CPSEs/PSUs in their Annual Reports , in a separate 
section, as it would impress upon the  CPSEs/PSUs to make payments to  
MSMEs in a time-bound manner. 
(Para 39) 
 

34 
 
10. The Committee is of the view that the 90 days limit fixed by RBI for 
classifying overdue s of MSMEs should be increased to 180 days so that 
MSMEs are not constrained to divert their working capital towards servicing 
of their loan -installments and clearing their dues  at the cost of normal 
business operations. This proposed change in the RBI guid elines will save a 
large number of MSMEs from turning sick or getting closed resulting in loss 
of economic activity and employment. It will also prevent avoidable 
classification of bad debts and unwarranted litigation by banks , thereby 
saving the banks too, from losses. 
(Para 41) 
 
11. The Committee notes that the subordinate debt scheme was supposed to 
benefit nearly two lakh MSMEs who se non-performing assets are stressed.  
However, it has been observed that only a few MSME s have availed the 
Scheme. The Com mittee feels that the sub -debt scheme in the present form 
has not been utilized much for the benefit of stressed MSMEs. The Committee 
therefore, recommends that the Government should re -visit the scheme for 
restructuring as to cover and benefit maximum number of stressed MSMEs. 
(Para 43) 
 
12. Also the Committee was informed about the key observations of the 
study which was that the small businesses were worst hit by the economic 
fallout of Covid -19 Pandemic. Unprecedented lockdown and other 
containment measures have resulted in supply chain disruptions and massive 
demand drop especially for Micro units and significant economic losses in 
general to MSMEs. Further as per the survey data, 88 per cent of the 
beneficiaries of PMEGP units reported that they we re negatively affected due 
to Covid-19 Pandemic and the remaining 12 per cent stated that they were not 
affected. In terms of beneficiaries (88 per cent) who were negatively affected, 
around 57 per cent stated that their units were shut down during this pe riod, 
30 per cent reported that there was drop in production and revenue, 28 per 
cent stated issues pertaining to raw material availability or supply chain 
issues. In terms of beneficiaries (12 per cent) who were positively affected, 
around 65 per cent sta ted that there is an increase in business activity as they 
had units in retail and health sector, 53 per cent stated an increase in 
telephonic supply/delivery and around 25 per cent  stated that their units were 
dealing with essential commodities or service s. The Committee recommends 

35 
 
that the Ministry should take immediate suitable action to rescue the small 
business units from collapsing, by providing additional financial support, 
relaxation or waiver of interest, marketing support etc. 
(Para 50) 
 
13. The Committee notes that there is abundant scope for job creation in 
domestic Agarbatti making industry as huge gap presently exists between the 
demand and supply of Agarbatti due to certain policy measures taken by the 
Government such as import restrictio n on raw Agarbatti and increase in 
import duty on bamboo sticks, etc. The Committee appreciates the initiatives 
taken by the Ministry of MSME to implement the pilot project, Khadi 
Agarbatti Atmanirbhar Mission,  through KVIC, paving the way for large scale 
employment opportunities in Agarbatti making industry in different parts of 
the country, by enhancing domestic production substantially, with low 
investment. The Committee is of the view that this new initiative would be a 
boon to the artisans in rural are as who have lost their jobs due to Covid -19 
Pandemic as it would not only restore livelihood to them but also generate 
large scale employment opportunities to the unemployed youth.   
(Para 51) 
 
14. The Committee notes that the production of Covid related medical and 
auxiliary items are very much required in large quantities during the present 
times to fight the Pandemic and production of such items by the MSMEs will 
help them to stabilize their livelihood. The Committee is of the opinion that 
the Ministry should extend all possible assistance to those MSMEs engaged in 
the manufacture of medical and auxiliary items, to meet the domestic 
requirement to overcome the Pandemic. 
(Para 53) 
 
15. The Ministry of  MSME informed the Committee that during C ovid 
Pandemic, MSME Technology Centres (TCs) developed/manufactured 
various medical and auxiliary products such as Sanitizers, Thermometers, 
Masks, Parts of PPE Kit and Corona Testing Kit etc. and supplied them to 
various Central/State Governments, Bank s, PSUs and shar ed these with 
MSMEs for domestic/indigenous production and marketing. The Committee 
notes that these Technology Centres contributed significantly by 
manufacturing various C ovid-related products indigenously thus fulfilling the 

36 
 
domestic demands. The Com mittee recommends that M inistry of  MSME 
should focus on setting up  of more such Technology Centres across the 
country to make India Atmanirbhar in manufacturing in situations like Covid 
Pandemic. 
(Para 56) 
 
16. At present, t he biggest concern for MSME is n on-availability of raw 
materials on time and at reasonable price. Traders are hoarding the raw 
materials and rigging the market with their whims and fancy pricing. The 
Committee recommends that NSIC should make suitable arrangements so that 
raw materials a re made easily available at reasonable price for Micro 
enterprises, on credit basis. 
(Para 57) 
 
17. MSMEs are finding it difficult to procure raw material to run their 
businesses normally due to non availability of raw materials. Moreover, a  
steep hike in the prices of raw material like steel etc. has adversely affected 
the business environment. The Committee recommends that the Public Sector 
Enterprises should not impose penalty or black list the MSME s in the event of 
cancellation of orders by them since increase in prices of raw materials is a 
Force Majeure event , beyond the control of the MSMEs. Besides, t he 
Government should also allow import of all steel materials based on cost and 
quality requirements at zero import duty (no anti dumping ) and also ban 
export of iron ore and steel products for the time being. Better GDP growth 
can be realized only if value -added products are exported rather than raw 
materials. Further, GST -based funding is needed for MSMEs at marginal 
rates, which will encourage them to purchase raw materials easily. 
(Para 58) 
 
 
18. The TReDS initiative by the Government is a useful tool for MSMEs to 
access the immediate fund at a cheaper cost with an option to select the offer 
from various banks without recourse to borrowing. Currently, it is mandatory 
for all CPSEs and companies having annual turn over of more than Rs. 500 
crore to register on TReDS platform. The Committee recommends that the 
registration should be made mandatory for all CPSEs having a turnover of 
more than Rs.250 crores as it would enlarge the ambit of TReDS.  Despite the 
mandate of the Government that all CPSEs sign up on the TReDS Platforms 

37 
 
to improve the cash flows of MSMEs, many have yet to comply with the 
mandate. Necessary steps should be taken by the Ministry to onboard more 
and more CPSEs on the TReDS platform. 
(Para 61) 
 
19. It has also been observed that MSMEs do not publish their invoices on 
TReDS platform despite having the registration due to unsaid pressure from 
corporate (buyers). Furthe r it is seen that corporate (buyers) do not approve 
the published invoices of MSMEs on TReDS platform, which defies the sole 
purpose of the platform, as Banks cannot fund such invoices.  The Committee 
is of the view that every tax invoice raised by GST regi stered MSMEs should 
reflect automatically on the respective TReDS platforms. After the delivery of 
Services or Goods, within a certain number of days, the corporate must accept 
or reject the automatically published invoice of MSMEs. After the stipulated 
period, the published invoice should be deemed accepted and should be 
available for banks to provide fund to MSMEs. If the CPSEs rejects any 
invoice, a mandatory clarification must be sought which should be visible to 
Banks and respective MSMEs .  Consequen tly, MSMEs would be encouraged 
to get themselves registered on GST and TReDS Platforms as their invoices 
would automatically get published on TReDS which would open the doors for 
them to have access to easy and cheaper funds. It would also provide 
significant business potential for banks due to rise in number of invoices 
available on TReDS. The Committee feels that it would also make CPSEs 
responsible and cautious while rejecting any invoice raised by MSMEs and 
help them financially in this critical junctur e.  The proposal if implemented, 
would thereby, become a win -win situation to MSMEs, CPSEs and Banks as 
each one of them are likely to benefit.  
(Para 62) 
 
20. The Committee notes that though the Emergency Credit Linked 
Guarantee Scheme recorded a high succ ess rate , yet, around 50 per cent  of 
total guarantee amount only has been issued to MSMEs . As a result, a large 
number of MSMEs hard hit by the Covid Pandemic remained deprived from 
the benefit of the scheme. More so, it is observed that the complete amoun t of 
sanction has not been disbursed to the borrowers’ vis-à-vis sanctions, for fear 
of loan defaulting by MSMEs in the backdrop of the 2 nd wave of the 
Pandemic. The Committee recommends that the Banks should be more liberal 

38 
 
at this juncture in extending credit facilities to MSMEs and ensure that loans 
are disbursed without delay after sanction. 
(Para 68) 
 
21. The Committee notes that the T raders, Retailers as well as Wholesalers 
have all now been reinstated in MSME category by the Government which is 
a welcome step. Hence nearly 2.5 crore Traders are likely to be eligible for 
obtaining credit facilities under the ECLGS. The Committee recommends 
benefits of the S cheme may be extended to small traders/dealers too as they 
have no access to institutional finances meant for MSMEs, as of now . 
(Para 69) 
 
22. The Committee was informed by the Industry Associations that in many 
instances the Banks have not been forthcoming to accord credit facilities to 
the MSMEs or have not been showing considerate approach towards the 
MSMEs interested for availing the loan facility. The Commit tee desires that 
separate counters should be opened at every MLI exclusively to deal with the 
MSMEs and handhold them to avail the eligible credit facility in a hassle-free 
manner and take benefit of all the Governmental Schemes meant for them. 
(Para 76) 
 
23. The Committee notes that, after the emergence of second wave of the 
Covid-19 in April, 2021, the Government has recently announced ECLGS 4.0 
with the Scheme period extended up to 30.9.2021. However, there has been no 
increase in the earmarked amount sa nctioned under the Scheme. Keeping in 
view the efficacy of the Scheme, the Committee recommends that the 
Government should enhance the guarantee amount as nearly 2.5 crore traders 
have also become eligible for the Scheme as per the Government policy.  
 
(Para 79) 
 
24. The Committee is of the view  that in order to achieve the target  of 
generating employment opportunities for the unemployed , investment should 
be made in providing more back -end services to improve performance of the 
MSME sector.  In the absen ce of  suitable technology-based production 
activities as well as low investment in R&D activities , the MSME Sector is not 
able to compete with its global counterparts and the condition has become 
more conspicuous during the pandemic era. Therefore, steps s hould be taken 

39 
 
to bring in technical knowhow and the same could be made available to 
indigenous MSMEs at subsidized rates so that the MSME s are enabled to 
compete with their global counterparts and achieve the export target . Besides, 
research and developme nt (R&D) services of various Technical Institutions 
may be garnered for product innovation. 
(Para 81) 
 
25. The Covid -19 Pandemic has emphasized the need and importance of 
accelerated digital adoption in business and MSMEs are no exception. 
Therefore, the MSMEs need to switch over to digital platform from core 
traditional selling platforms through newer technolo gy adoption which can 
not only facilitate access to e -markets and customers, but also streamline 
payments, obtain finance for expansion of business etc. A large faction of 
MSEs are located in rural areas and, mostly being in unorganized business 
without an y access to modern technology. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should take initiatives to create awareness among the MS MEs 
about digital marketing and extend handholding for a smooth transition to 
digital e -commerce platforms which would help th em in situations like 
COVID pandemic. 
(Para 83) 
 
26. Ecommerce is growing at a very fast pace and it is expected to grow to 
US$200 billion by 2026. It plays a major role in streamlining business 
processes right from receiving a product order, to managing d eliveries, 
keeping track of stock and even analyzing consumer feedback and data. The 
future is the age of online marketing. The Committee is of the view that the 
Ministry may study the working of big ecommerce players to adopt efficient 
and successful practices for strengthening the entry and survival of MSMEs in 
ecommerce. Through ecommerce, MSMEs not only can sell in i ndigenous 
markets but also get into  markets abroad, which will definitely be a booster 
for MSMEs. 
(Para 84) 
 
27. The Committee notes that the Government is focusing on indigenous 
development strategy upon Import Substitution and Make in India which is a 
welcome effort. However, the Government should develop a framework to 
support enterprises which are capable to deve lop Import Substitution as 

40 
 
more investment would be required in such areas. Availability of soft loans to 
MSMEs at minimal interest rate of 3 -4 per cent with extended repayment 
tenure, Easy land acquisition, less parameters of compliances etc. could help 
in developing import substitution in the country. Besides, SEZ focusing upon 
import substitution could be developed across the country and special 
benefits should be given to MSMEs for establishing units in such SEZs. It is 
suggested that Government should aggregate large adjacent land parcels at 
suitable manufacturing and logistics locations, which are free from 
encumbrances and make it available for the MSMEs at a fair market value 
for developing such export zones. 
(Para 86) 
 
28. Import Substitution strategy cannot be effective unless Indian 
enterprises are made well aware about the products which are being 
imported. Government should put out a list of such products along with their 
production specifications so that enterprises cou ld be able to venture into such 
production areas. The Committee recommends that online exhibitions of the 
samples of such products, along with their market potential, could be 
organized by the Ministry in coordination with MSMEs Associations for 
information of MSMEs. 
(Para 87) 
 
29. Promoting Start up Innovations: MSME start -ups have ideas which 
sometimes look impractical to be operationalized but many such ideas have 
become unicorns (billion -dollar companies). Israel has a start -up system in 
which the Gover nment allows minimum support by providing basic funding, 
office, infrastructure, broadband and other facilities to the start -up, free of 
cost. The Committee is of the view that in order to encourage and incentivize 
potential entrepreneurs and new Start Ups with their ideas for 
implementation, initiatives should be taken to facilitate them with basic 
infrastructure and financial support. 
(Para 88) 
 
30. The Committee is deeply concerned about the possibility of impending 
third wave of the COVID -19 pandemic in the near future as predicted by 
experts.  The Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry should 
adopt a proactive approach and take pre -emptive measures to meet the 

41 
 
unforeseen challenges arising out of the possible third wave to save t he 
MSMEs, which are already reeling under the devastation of first and second 
wave of COVID pandemic.   
(Para 89) 
 
31. Most of the policies formulated are aimed at benefit of Medium and 
Large enterprises in the country whereas the position should be contrary. 
Policies & Schemes needs to be designed for the benefit of Micro & Small 
enterprises which constitute the majority of Indian MSME sector.  The 
Committee recommends that while formulating policies/schemes, the Ministry 
should consider the benefits of MSEs which are often deprived of the benefits 
of various policies/schemes announced by the Government. The stimulus 
package announced by Government last year could not percolate down 
properly to the lower levels of MSME sector.  The Committee feels that  extra 
efforts need to be taken on this front. 
(Para 90) 
 
******** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
MINUTES 
__________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
IX 
Ninth Meeting 
The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 
10.30 a.m. on Friday, the 23 rd July, 2021 in Room No. ‘63’, Parliament House, New 
Delhi. 
Present 
1.   Dr. K. Keshava Rao      -    Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
      2.  Shrimati Ranee Narah 
      3.  Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
 4. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
 5. Shri Sanjay Seth 
      6. Dr. Amee Yajnik 
   
LOK SABHA 
 7.  Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
 8.  Ms. S. Jothimani 
 9.  Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya 
 10.  Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato     
 11.  Shri Vincent H. Pala  
 12.  Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh  
 13.  Shrimati Gomati Sai 
      14.  Shri Sunil Soren  
 15.  Shri Su Thirunavukkarasar 
       
SECRETARIAT  
1.     Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2.    Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary  
3.      Smt. Sasilekha Nair, Director 
4.      Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
5.      Smt. Sreeja .V, Deputy Secretary 
6.      Shri Ajin. J. R, Under Secretary 
 
 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting.  
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft 308 th Report on “Impact of 
Covid-19 Pandemic on MSME Sector & Mitigation Strategy Adopted to Counter It” 
pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. After a brief 
discussion, the Committee adopted the draft 308th Report unanimously. 
 

44 
 
2. The Committee then decided to present/lay the 308 th Report in both the Houses  of 
Parliament on Tuesday, the 27 th July, 2021. It was decided that the Report  will be 
presented in the Rajya Sabha by the Chairman and in his absence by Shri Sanjay Seth,  
MP, and in his absence by Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli , MP. Likewise, the Committee 
decided that in the Lok Sabha, Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato, MP, and in his absence Shri 
Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi, MP would lay the Report. 
 
 
3. *     *     * 
 
 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.50 a.m. to meet again at 3.30 pm on                 
3rd August, 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
*pertains to other matter 