  
                            
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA                       
 
                                                   
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY- THIRD REPORT 
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-2013) 
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)  
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26TH APRIL, 2012) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 25th APRIL,2012) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
APRIL, 2012 VISAKA, 1932 SAKA) 
233

  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
                                                    
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY- THIRD REPORT 
 
ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-2013) 
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)  
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26TH  APRIL, 2012) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 25TH APRIL, 2012) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
APRIL, 2012 VISAKA, 1932 SAKA) 

  
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………… ( ) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………. ( ) 
 
3. REPORT……………………………………………………………………. 
 
4. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A 
 GLANCE………………………………………  
 
5. MINUTES…………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 31st August, 2011) 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
1.   Shri Tiruchi Siva  — Chairman 
2. Vacant 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4.   Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
5.   Vacant 
6.   Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor 
7.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
8.   Shri Srinjoy Bose 
9.   Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna 
10.  Dr. Vijay Mallya 
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.   Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
13. Shri Sabbam Hari 
14. Smt. Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15. Shri Ramsingh Kaswan 
16. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
17. Smt. Putul Kumari 
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
19. Smt. Ingrid Mcleod  
20. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
21. Shri Somen Mitra 
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23. Shri Kishn  V. Patel  
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26. Shri Ramsingbhai Patalbhai Rathwa 
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
28. Shri E. G. Sugavanam 
29. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
30. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware  
31. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director 
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director 
 
 
 

  
 
 
(i) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-re lated Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Thirty-third Report on the Demands for Gran ts (2012-13) pertaining to the Ministry 
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises). 
 
2.  This report is based on the material supplied by the Department of Public 
Enterprises such as the background note, Annua l Report, Answers to Questionnaire sent 
by the Secretariat and submissions made by the Secretary of the Department and its 
senior officers and Secretary, BRPSE on 9
th April, 2012. 
 
3.  The Committee considered and adopted the Draft report at its meeting held on 
20
th April, 2012. 
 
 
 
 
TIRUCHI SIVA        
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
New Delhi 
April, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
Public Sector Enterprises constitu ted key and critical part of our 
mixed economy which were conceive d and put into operation after 
independence for transforming India into a modern and industrially 
advanced nation. The underdevelopmen t and retardation of our economy 
caused by colonial rule coul d never have been addre ssed except by the large 
scale mobilization and deployment of human, economic a nd technological 
resources of the State through these ente rprises.  Primacy given to the PSEs 
arose out of the fact that the priv ate enterprises were not adequately 
equipped to undertake the mammoth task of creating infrastructure and other 
facilities which were indispensable for na tion-building.  The role played by 
the public sector enterprises in discha rging their responsibilities to generate 
wealth, create employment opportunities  and provide necessary conditions 
for industrialization and economic regeneration of our country has been well 
documented.  While our first Prime Mi nister Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru hailed 
the public sector enterprises as the commanding heights of the economy he 

  
simultaneously wanted those enterprise s to be run on business principles 
combining both the public purposes and profit generation.   
 
2. The country is proud of the public enterprises for their role in taking 
our economy forward and ensuring th e resilience and strength of our 
industrial sector.  In spite of the a doption of the economic reforms and the 
importance given to the private and cor porate sector as the engines of the 
economic growth in 21 st century India, we have to fully harness the 
potentialities of  the public sector enterprises in boosting our economic 
growth.  Rather these enterprises have been revitalized to face the challenges 
of a market and globalised economy  which is increasingly driven by 
competition, innovation, good co rporate governance, research & 
development and greater quality consciou sness.  The Prime Minister of our 
country Dr. Manmohan Singh while giving away the MoU and SCOPE 
Awards to the best performing Central  Public Sector Undertakings in 
January 2012 acknowledged that these en terprises remained critical to the 
process of nation-building even toda y.  Stating that the Government 
remained committed to a strong public sector in our country he made it clear 
that both public and private sectors ne ed to work together to meet the 
demands of our rapidly growing econom y.  He also assured that the 

  
Government remained supportive of t hose public enterpri ses which needed 
assistance to become viable again.     
 
3. The significance of our public sector enterprises has been better 
understood in the context of the financ ial crisis which originated in the 
United States of America.  It is boldly articulated by the top leadership of 
our nation that India could withstand the challenges posed by that crisis 
primarily due to the resilience of these enterprises.  This renewed 
affirmation of faith on public sector enterprises augurs well for our economy 
which has to be a mix of both public and private sectors.   
4. The number of CPSEs has increased from five during the first five 
year plan to 250 during the Twelfth Fi ve Year Plan.  The nodal Ministry for 
the public sector enterprises is the Mini stry of Heavy Industries and Public 
Enterprises.  The Department of Pub lic Enterprises which is part of the 
Ministry had its origin in 1965 in the form of a Bureau of Public Enterprises 
which was set up on  the recommendati on of the Report of the Estimates 
Committee of the Third Lok Sabha.  The Department is entrusted with the 
responsibilities to frame policies for th e central public enterprises and issue 
guidelines for their functioning.  It pe rforms its duties in coordination with 
other concerned Ministries and centr al public sector undertakings.  Its 
principal responsibilities are:- 

  
 
(i) Co-ordination of matters of genera l policy of non-financial nature 
relating to Public Sector Enterprises. 
 
(ii) Issue of Presidential Directiv es and Guidelines to public 
enterprises & formulation of polic ies pertaining to Public Sector 
Enterprises. 
 
(iii) Policy matters relating to composition of Board of Directors of 
CPSEs, delegation of powers to th e Board, categorization of top 
posts, scheduling of CPSEs & investiture and review of 
Maharatana /Navratana/ Miniratna status to CPSEs. 
 
(iv) Publication of the annual survey of CPSEs known as Public 
Enterprises Survey. 
 
(v) Memorandum of Understanding (MoU ) between the Public Sector 
Enterprises and the administrative Ministries/Departments. 
 
(vi) Policy relating to Voluntary Re tirement Scheme & Counselling, 
Retraining and Redeployment Scheme (CRR) for rationalized 
employees of CPSEs. 
 
(vii) Matters relating to Board for Re construction of Public Sector 
Enterprises (BRPSE). 
 
(viii) Settlement of disputes thr ough Permanent Machinery of 
Arbitration (PMA) among Public S ector Enterprises and between 
Public Sector Enterprises & Government Departments except 
disputes relating to tax matters. 
 
(ix) Matters relating to Internat ional Centre for Promotion of 
Enterprises (ICPE) & Standing C onference of Public Enterprises 
(SCOPE). 
 
5. While examining the Demands for Gr ants of the Department of Public 
Enterprises, it is important to bear in  mind not only the work profile of the 
Department but also its vision and mission.  While the vision is “To  evolve 
policies, reform programs, guidelin es and mechanisms towards the 

  
establishment of a strong and eff ective public sector” its mission is “To 
continuously improve the management  of public sector enterprises by 
professionalizing manage ment, goal setting and reviewing performance, 
developing a comprehensive Manage ment Information System (MIS), 
evolving guidelines for corporate gove rnance and social responsibility and 
strengthening institutional mechanism for revival of sick units”.   
 
6. The Committee is aware that th e Department while finalizing the 
targets for Memorandum of Understanding for different central public sector 
enterprises gives weightage, among othe rs, to research and development, 
manpower management and net worth whic h are integral to the successful 
and vibrant functioning of the CPSEs.  It is acknowledged now that one of 
the reasons for which such enterprise s lacked ability to  compete both at 
domestic and international markets is absence of adequate research and 
development capabilities.  The Committee strongly feels that the vision 
and mission of the DPE must be fur ther expanded to include issues like 
research & development capabilities  and manpower planning in the 
absence of which the CPSEs quite often do not generate greater 
productivity and incur loss leading to  their sickness and closure.  The 
issue of research & development is of course the responsibility of the 
concerned public sector enterprises.  But if the DPE is guided by vision 

  
and mission to enhance the researc h & development capability and 
other critical factors which are essential for making our PSEs 
technologically advanced and competit ive, then it would better help the 
DPE to take the cause of public s ector enterprises forward.   The 
Committee feels that the vision and mission of the DPE incorporating 
such factors would be more impac tful on the CPSEs for making them 
competitive and result oriented.  It  would also make the CPSEs more 
aware of the fact that for their surv ival and growth these have to stand 
on their own and prove the ir worth in the expanding market and global 
economy.  Such a modified vision and mission statement would also 
enable the DPE officials to empha sise on the issue during their 
interactions  with CPSE representatives.  
Overview of Demands for Grants 
7. The table below shows the bud getary estimates (BE), revised 
estimates (RE) and the actual amount s spent both under the plan and non-
plan heads. 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actual 
 Plan  Non 
-plan 
Total Plan  Non 
-plan 
Total Plan  Non 
-plan 
Total 
2010-11 10.50 5.22 15.72 10. 33 7.85 18.18 9.41 7.70 17.11
2011-12 11.00 7.69 18.69 10. 16 8.29 18.45 7.79 7.06 14.85
2012-13 13.00 8.93 21.93 - - - - - - 
 

  
8. It is evident that the budgeta ry estimate under the planning head 
which stood at 10.5 crores for the year  2010-11 has been reduced to 10.33.  
The reduction has also taken place fo r the year 2011-12 and the budgetary 
estimate which stood at 11 crores was re duced to 8.29 crores.  However, if 
we examine the figures which were used  for actual spending we find that in 
both the years the actual spent amount has been less than the revised 
estimates.  What is noteworthy is th at the non-plan expenditure for both 
2010-11 and 2011-12 have been increa sed and the actual spending in this 
respect has been less than the revised estimates.  The figures clearly indicate 
that money earmarked under the revise d estimates could not be utilized.  
When the Committee wanted to know the reasons for re duction of budget 
estimates amounting to 10.33 crores unde r the planned expenditure to 10.50 
crores the Department of Public Enterp rises stated that the reduction to the 
tune of 0.17 crore took place to divert that amount for non-plan expenditure 
for the purpose of meeting the foreign vi sit of Secretary, DPE for the years 
2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11.  It was also explained to the Committee that 
the actual expenditure was reduced to Rs.9.41 crores due to non-receipt of 
complete bill and, therefore, Rs.0.89 crore was surrendered.  The details of 
the explanation of the Ministry in this  respect has been given in       
(Appendix –I).   

  
9. The Committee finds th at non-plan expenditure for the year 2010-11 
which stood at 5.22 crores was increased to 7.85 crores.  However, the actual 
expenditure of Rs.7.70 crores was less th an the revised estimates.  Same is 
the case for the year 2011-12.  The Department of Public Enterprises 
explained that the increased amount in the revised estimates was allocated to 
meet expenses which included:  
 
1. T A  &  D A  t o  m e m b e r s  o f  T a s k  F o rce, Bureau for Restructuring of 
Public Sector Enterprises and Search Committee  
2. Printing of Public Enterprises Survey 2008-09 
3. Payment of bills like telephone, pe trol, taxi charges, payment of 
wages to daily workers  
4. Charges for computer stationery, payment of arrears arising out of 
grade pay of Assistant/PA/class IV employees.   (Appendix – I) 
 
10. Similarly, the Department explai ned that the reasons for differences 
during the year 2011-12 for plan expend iture could be attributed to the 
decision of the Governments of Od isha, Assam and Madhya Pradesh to 
spend their own amount for research, development and consultancy for their 
state level public enterprises.  Orig inally the DPE was supposed to spend 
money under the scheme Research Development and Consultancy.  
However, when the con cerned state Governments spent their own money, 
the DPE decided to re-appropriate 0.6 cr ore from the plan head to non-plan 
head.  (Appendix – II)      

  
11. The Department of Public Enterp rises also explained the reasons for 
which money from plan head was transf erred to non-plan head to meet the 
expenditure arising out of TA & DA to  members of Task Force, BRPSE and 
Search Committee.  (Appendix – III)   
 
12. The Department also explained the reasons that the plan budgetary 
estimates for 2012-13 was increased due  to introduction of the new scheme 
called ‘Skill Development/Training Programme of Executives of State Level 
Public Sector Enterprises’ for which a sum of Rs.1 crore has been allotted.  
Similarly, the budget for the sc heme ‘Counselling,  Retraining and 
Redeployment’ was increased to Rs .8.60 crore from Rs.7.80 crore to 
restructure the entire scheme.  (Appendix – IV)  
13. The DPE explained that the non- plan expenditure which stood at 
Rs.11.65 crore at the budgetary estimat e level was reduced to Rs.8.93 crore 
due to the previous pattern of reduced  expenditure the account of which has 
been given in the preceding paragraphs .  The detailed explanation of the 
DPE can be seen in the (Appendix – V). 
 14. The Committee is given to understand that normally money 
earmarked for spending under the plan  head is not transferred to the 
non-plan head.  Of course, the Depa rtment must have re-appropriated 
the money under the explicit approval of the Finance Ministry.  

  
However, it is to be borne in mind that the lack of funds to meet the 
non-plan expenditure is indicative of  absence of sound planning by the 
DPE.  It must foresee and anticipa te such spending and approach the 
Finance Ministry for allocation of funds for the purpose of meeting non-
plan expenditure.  It strongly recommends that the DPE must not divert 
funds from the plan to non-plan head .  The officials of the DPE must 
foresee the non-plan expenditure and accordingly submit their estimates 
to the Ministry of Finance for ad equate allocation of funds.  The 
Committee hopes that the Department will adopt a proper strategy so 
that it does not divert the plan fu nd for the non-plan expenditure.  The 
Committee strongly feels that the Department must spend the money 
put under the plan head to achieve the desired results.   
 
Scheme for Skill Development/Train ing programme of Executives of 
State Level Public Enterprises (SLPEs) 
 
15. Skill development is central to the manpower planning.  It also 
constitutes a critical factor for enab ling the employees to augment their 
capacity so that they can enhance th e productivity of the enterprise and 
contribute to the wealth generation of our country.  As mentioned earlier, the 
DPE has taken up a new scheme called ‘Skill Development/Training 
programmes of Executives of State Le vel Public Sector Enterprises’ and a 
sum of Rs.1 crore has b een allocated for this pur pose.  The Committee also 

  
was informed that the amount in plan head in the budgeted estimates for the 
year 2012-13 has been increased due to the introduction of this new scheme 
the objective of which is to im part training/knowledge to the 
managers/executives/employees at the St ate Level Public Sector Enterprises 
for improving their skills.  It was placed before the Committee that the funds 
will be released as grant in aids to  States and Union Territories based on 
policy guidelines formulated by DPE.    
16. The Department, while answering a query of the Committee, informed 
that the Scheme is yet to be introduced  as the allocation of Rs.1.00 crore is 
tentative and may need to be increas ed.  As for the modus operandi, the 
Committee was informed that each Stat e/UT will be asked to undertake a 
SWOT (Strength, Weakness, Opportunity  and Threats) analysis of their 
SLPEs.  They will be asked to ignore the strength and focus on 
weaknesses/‘WOT’, and accordingly identify the training needs.   
17. The Committee takes note of the  fact that the DPE intends to 
focus attention on the deficiencies and weaknesses of the employees of 
the SLPEs so that it could take measures to mitigate or rectify them and 
improve their capabilities.  But, while doing so, it would be self-
defeating to ignore the strengths of the employees whose skills are to be 
developed.  In the syllabus of the modern management discipline SWOT 
(Strength, Weakness, Opportunity and Threats) has been adopted to get 

  
a broad view of the dark and br ighter sides of the human resources 
deployed in an enterprise.  In ignori ng the strengths the positive aspects 
would be completely lost sight of.  The concept of ‘Core Competence’ 
has been increasingly emphasized in the modern organization to 
highlight the inherent resilience and ca pabilities of the employees.  It 
would be appropriate for the Department to stress on ‘Core 
Competence’ while adopting the SWOT analysis.  This would enable the 
Department and the concerned enterpri ses to have a better grasp of the 
talent pool available at their disp osal and their plus and minus 
dimensions.  The Committee recomme nds that the good performance of 
the SLPEs may be factored into any decision to allocate funds for skill 
development.  Besides, the weightage  also should be given to the 
enterprises which function in core  areas of our economy which are 
critical to economic growth and expansion.  The Committee also hastens 
to add that the SLPEs utilizing lo cally available resources and creating 
job opportunities may be accorded priority.   
18. The Committee, while taking no te of the programme for skill 
development of SLPEs, is constrained to observe that the Department of 
Public Enterprises has no  scheme for training its own officers both at 
the national level institutes and in  the reputed training establishments 
located in some of the world cla ss universities and institutes.  The 

  
officials of the DPE are quite o ften engaged in imparting training 
facilities.  They are also engage d in finalizing the MoUs where 
weightage is given to several para meters which are indispensable for 
enhancing growth, produc tivity and competitiven ess of the PSEs.  If 
these officers are not adequately trained, both at the national and 
international levels, their exp ertise and competence will remain 
stagnant.  It is, therefore, strongly recommended that a separate scheme 
for the employees and officers of the DPE should be formulated for 
their training within India and abroad.   
19. Apart from skill development, th ere must be in place a proper 
succession planning to fill managerial  post in different PSEs.  The 
Committee is aware of th e fact that 23 posts of Chief Executives are 
presently lying vacant in several Centra l Public Sector Enterprises.  The 
Department of Public Enterprises, in replying to the question of the 
Committee concerning the number of vacancies of CMDs existing in 
different public sector enterprises, replied that the selection and appointment 
of CMDs and Directors in the Central Public Sector Enterprises is done by 
the Public Enterprises Selection Board af ter the proposals to this effect are 
made by the administrative Ministry to Public Enterprises Selection Board.   
20. The Committee is given to unders tand that the Public Enterprises 
Selection Board (PESB) is part of  the Department of Personnel and 

  
Training.  The Committee is surprised to note that it is the DoPT which 
is the administrative Ministry fo r the PESB.  Possibly the PESB was 
made part of the DoPT when th ere was no Department of Public 
Enterprises.  Now, that the DPE is in existence for several years, it 
would be prudent to bring the PESB under the control of the DPE.  The 
Committee strongly recommends that such a change must take place for 
the purpose of streamlining and qui ckening the process of succession 
planning in the PSEs.  Apart from the PSEs and their administrative 
Ministry, the domain knowledge concerning the functioning of the PSEs 
is with the DPE.  It fi nalises their MoUs and se ts their targets both in 
the financial and non-financial sectors.  It is, therefore, appropriate that 
PESB must function under the jurisdict ion of DPE.  At a time when the 
Government of India is emphasizing on the need to reform the 
functioning the Central Public Sector  Enterprises, it is extremely 
important to include within the reform  process the decision to transfer 
the PESB from the control of DoPT to DPE. Realising the importance of 
the recommendation it must be done irrespective of any resistance from 
any quarter. 
 
Counselling, Retraining and Rede ployment Scheme for Separated 
Employees of CPSEs (CRR). 
 

  
21. Following the economic reforms in troduced in 1991, the Government 
took a bold decision to restruct ure the CPSEs by rationalizing their 
functioning and rightsizing the manpower employed.  It resulted in giving a 
fresh look at the number of people in the rolls of the PSEs.  It was found that 
many of the employees would have to be  separated.  To meet the expenses 
arising out of the adoption of the Voluntary Retirement Scheme and the need 
to rehabilitate those employees by re training them, the Government set up a 
National Renewal Fund in 1992.  Late r in 2001-02 it was replaced with a 
scheme called CRR.  It aims at achieving the following objectives: 
 
• Reorient separated employees  through short duration 
programmes. 
• Equip them for new vocations. 
• Engage them in income generating wage/self-employment. 
• Help them rejoin the productive process for the growth of 
economy. 
 
22. To further improve the effectiv eness of the scheme  some major 
modifications were made in 2007.  Th e most important was to widen its 
scope and coverage by in cluding dependent of each VRS optee, if the VRS 
optee himself/herself is not interested. 
23. During the course of examina tion of demands, the Committee was 
informed that the CRR Scheme was bei ng further restructured by the year 
2012-13.  When the details of the same were sought the Department 
submitted that during the modification of the scheme in 2007, the 

  
Expenditure Finance Committ ee (EFC) wanted DPE to  consider the merger 
of the scheme with the Skill Developm ent Programmes of the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment.  However, when  this was attempted it was noted 
that convergence is difficult since CR R is a Central Scheme whereas Skill 
Development Mission is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme implemented by the 
states. Nevertheless, in the 12 th Five Year Plan, it was proposed to further 
restructure the existing CRR Scheme to make it more efficacious and market 
oriented through necessary changes. This would better equip the trained 
Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS)/ Voluntary Separation Scheme (VSS) 
optees or their dependents with  ‘Minimum Skill Set/Minimum 
Entrepreneurship Set’ to start their own business or get suitable employment.  
24. The Committee takes note of the fa ct that the DPE is periodically 
reviewing the CRR scheme to make it  useful to the beneficiaries. A 
scheme like CRR becomes more me aningful when the targeted 
beneficiaries are made employable thro ugh training imparted to them.  
The skills they acquire need to be cer tified by an accredited agency so 
that the training they received is recognized and valued.   
25. In reply to a query of the Comm ittee, the Department furnished the 
year-wise budget allocations (BE&RE) for CRR scheme during the Eleventh 
Plan period and percentage of utilization of funds as below. 
      Table -1 

  
Training ImpartedYear Funds 
allocated (Rs. 
In crore) 
Percentage 
of utilization 
(%) 
Target 
for 
Training 
 Actual % 
2007-
08 
10.00 85.70 9000 9728 108.1 
2008-
09 
8.70 91.95 8000 9772 122.1 
2009-
10 
7.45 95.03 8000 7400 92.5 
2010-
11 
8.90 96.97 8000 9265 115.8 
2011-
12 
8.90 91.80 9000 9400 104.4 
 
 
26. As per the Budget Documents, the allocations for the CRR scheme during 
the last 3 years has been as below: 
 
    Table -2                                                                            (Rs. In crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
2010-11 7.85 7.58 8.03 
2011-12 7.80 7.80      - 
2012-13 8.60        -      -  
 
 
27. The figures in the Budget Documents at Table 2 shows that the 
allocation (RE) for the Scheme of  CRR for 2010-11 wa s Rs.7.58 crore, 
but the Actuals for the year is show n as Rs.8.03 crore.  The Committee 
fails to understand as to how th e utilization figures for 2010-11 were 
higher than the allocation made for the  year.  Furthermore, if the Table 
1 figures for allocation (Rs.8.90 crore) is taken in face value, the Actuals 
for 2010-11 in the Budget Document  should have been Rs.8.63 crore 

  
(96.97% of Rs.8.90 crore) instead of  Rs.8.03 crore.  Similarly, while 
considering the figures of Table-1, the allocation for 2011-12 as 
furnished by DPE is Rs.8.90 crore whereas in the Budget Document 
puts it at Rs.7.80 crore. 
 
28. The Committee observes that such variation in figures presented 
before a Parliamentary Committee, engaged in scrutinizing the Demand 
for Grants is totally unacceptable. The Committee expects a clear cut 
explanation in this regard.  It is imperative that the Department shall 
take note of this and ensure strict compliance in future. 
Scheme of Research, Development and Consultancy (RDC) on Generic 
issues relates to CPSEs & SLPEs 
 
29. With the opening of our econo my and adoption of reforms for 
ensuring greater role to the private s ector in the development and growth of 
economy, the public sector enterprises faced stiff competition to cope with 
the new challenges emanating from market.  It required overhauling of their 
functioning and a new outlook to innovate and adopt new strategies based on 
modern management practices.  It is a matter of satisfaction to note that the 
DPE by organizing series of workshop s and seminars sensitized the PSE 
functionaries to make them more co mpetitive and market oriented.  A new 
scheme entitled ‘Research, Developm ent and Consulta ncies on Generic 

  
Issues of CPSE’ was formulated by the Planning Comm ission in 2008-09 
and made operational under the jurisdiction of the DPE.  One of the major 
activities to be covered unde r the Scheme was to br ing out annual survey on 
the performance of State Level Pub lic Sector Enterprises (SLPEs), on 
similar lines as in the Public Enterprises Survey for CPSEs. 
 
30. Coming to the Budget allocation of  the scheme, it was noted that Rs. 
1.50 crore was allocated (BE) for the y ear 2011-12. However, at the Revised 
Estimates (RE) Stage, this was reduced  to Rs.0.66 crore. Replying to the 
query of the Committee on the reasons fo r reduction in funds and the extent 
to which the objectives of the scheme  were affected by the reduction, the 
Department submitted that Rs.1.50 cror e approved as B.E. was reduced to 
Rs.0.66 crore at RE stage in view of  the lower expenditure incurred by the 
third quarter of 2011-12 on this plan  scheme. The reducti on in expenditure 
was mainly on account of (a) savings  arising from three workshops at 
Odisha, Assam and Madhya Pradesh that  were organised by the respective 
states and DPE did not have to in cur any expenditure from RDC, (b) 
postponement of the proposed work shop for the North-East Zone and 
Performance Monitoring  System (PMS) Workshop at Mumbai on account 
of unavoidable reasons, which will be he ld in the current financial year and 

  
(c) approvals  of expenditures incurred on the workshops conducted at Jaipur 
and Chandigarh that could not materialise quickly.   
31. The Actual expenditure for Resear ch, Development and Consultancies 
(RDC) was Rs.23 lakhs as against th e RE of 66 lakhs. However, the 
Department informed that they plan to improve the utilization of funds by 
using the amount separately for publi cation, other administrative expenses 
and professional services.  
32. The Committee is not happy to  note that the reduction in 
expenditure took place because some  States organized their workshops 
on their own due to delayed approvals of the workshops to be conducted 
by the DPE.  It also established the point that there was a lack of 
coordination between the DPE and the  States concerned.  Even earlier 
the Committee has observed that lack of coordination among Ministries 
and several Departments of Gov ernments have resulted in policy 
paralysis and adversely affectin g the functioning of PSEs.  The 
Committee recommends that funds allocated for such important 
schemes should be fully utilized.   
 
Allocation for North Eastern Areas 
 
 
33. From the Budget figures of DPE fo r 2012-13, it is found that the 
actual expenditure for the North East ern Areas for the year 2010-11 was 

  
‘nil’.  The Committee wanted an explana tion in this respect and desired to 
know as to how the Department proposed  to spend the current allocation of 
Rs. 1.30 crore in a prudent manner.  
34. While giving answer to the Committee, the Department submitted that 
during 2010-11, against a target of  training 1100 VRS optees under CRR 
scheme in NE region, 700 VRS optees we re trained and Rs. 6 crore utilized. 
Besides, approval for training 400 mo re VRS optees in NE region were 
accorded towards the end of the fina ncial year 2010-11. As such some 
training programs scheduled for 2010-11 spilled over to the next year and 
were completed in 2011- 12. In 2011-12, 900 VRS opt ees have been trained 
in NE Region with fund utilization of Rs. 77.40 lakhs. 
 35. The Committee was fu rther informed that in 2012-13 the DPE plans 
to utilize funds, earmarked for North Ea stern Region to cover the backlog of 
VRS optees, if any, under CRR scheme . Besides, some state specific 
proposals involving CPSEs and SLPE s would also be considered and 
implemented. 
36. The Committee has persistently noted that funds allocated to 
North Eastern Areas and are taken forw ard to next financial years.  Of 
course, the Committee appreciates the fact that in case of North Eastern 
Region, the funds allocated would not lapse.  The North Eastern Areas 
of the country do always get the special attention of the Union 

  
Government.  Fund earmarked for this region has to be utilized 
properly for the cause of improving that region and accelerating the 
process of industrialization.  It is important, therefore, to accelerate the 
process of utilization of funds for training VRS optees.  The Committee 
also finds it difficult to fathom as  to why the Budget Document reflects 
the Actual expenditure for the North Ea stern Areas for 2010-11 as ‘nil’, 
when the Department claims to have utilized Rs. 6 crore. This sort of 
anomalies in figure may lead to mi sunderstanding and, therefore, the 
Committee demands an explanation fr om the Departments concerned. 
The Committee firmly recommends tha t the Department should iron 
out such incongruities and improve  their performance in the North 
Eastern Areas. 
MoU System 
 
37. The MoU system has proved to be  a robust mechanism to make our 
PSEs competitive, performance oriented and dynamic in the globalised 
market economy.  It has helped to evaluate the performance of the 
enterprises by setting the targets a nd adopting both financial and non-
financial parameters.  Introduced in 1997-98, the MoU system now has been 
accepted as a major determinant for overall improvement of the public sector 
enterprises.   

  
38. The MoU rating for the year 2010- 11 in respect of 160 CPSEs whose 
MoU performance were evaluated vis-a-vis MoU targets is as shown below : 
 
Sl. 
No. 
MoU Ratings 
 
No. of CPSEs 
1 Excellent 67 
2 Very Good 43 
3 Good 24 
4 Fair 24 
5 Poor 02 
39 It may be seen that 110 CPSEs (67 Excellent + 43 Very Good) have 
successfully achieved their MoU targ ets for the year 2010-11. 197 CPSEs 
signed MoU in 2011-12. Performance evaluation of MoUs for the year 
2011-12 will be carried out after finali zation of audited data, balance sheet 
by CPSE and submission to DPE in September-October 2012. 
40. During the discussion on Dema nd for Grants for 2012-13 the 
Committee wanted to know the reasonablen ess in continuing with the equal 
weights of 50% to financial and non- financial parameters for performance 
evaluation of CPSEs which was r ecommended by NCAER way back in 
2003. The Committee also wanted to know  the extent to which the feedback 
from CPSEs influenced the finaliza tion of MoU targets. Department 
submitted before the Committee that  the MoU involved three way 
participation, i.e, the administrativ e ministry, the CPSE and the DPE, 
assisted by the Task Force.  Hen ce, it was put forth that after due 
deliberation and discussion targets were set by incorporating the views of the 

  
administrative Ministry and the concer ned PSEs.  The DPE maintained that 
it is never done unilaterally by the De partment.  It was informed to the 
Committee that the Department is open to review the MoU system.   
41. The Committee takes note that the  MoU System as it exists today 
is broadly based on the recommendati on of NCAER made in the year 
2003.  It is the considered opin ion of the Committee that the MoU 
system, which has an overarching infl uence on the performance of the 
CPSEs has to be in tune with the late st trends for successful operation 
of the PSEs.  Accordingly, it is recommended that DPE may engage an 
accredited organization to revisit the  MoU system and assess it for the 
purpose of revitalizing it and making  it more effective.  The system 
should be more flexible and receptive  to the feedback received from the 
CPSEs. It is worthwhile to note that certain profit making organizations 
must not be allowed to opt for soft targets solely on the ground that they 
have performed better.  In fact, in  a highly competitive environment 
such organizations need to set be tter targets for themselves for full 
flowering of their potentialities.  The Prime Minister of our country 
while giving away the MoU and SCOPE Awards to best performing 
Central Public Sector Enterprises re ferred to the MoU system and said 
that, “We cannot be satisfied with the status quo”.  He made that 
observation in the context of the determination of the Government to 

  
make CPSEs stronger and competitiv e.  An overhauled MoU system 
must serve this cause.   
42. The Committee was constrained to note that there are certain 
Central Public Sector Enterprises which do not subscribe to the MoU 
discipline and protocol.  It has no ted that such departure from MoU 
discipline has taken place in spite of the intervention of the Cabinet 
Secretary.  It is a sad commentary on the functioning of our system.  
The Committee finds it unacceptabl e that certain PSEs are not 
amenable to MoU regime.  The Comm ittee is sad to note that certain 
CPSEs do not submit certain documents  at the time of evaluation of 
their functioning.  The Committee was informed that 36 CPSEs failed to 
submit the required documents to  the DPE for evaluation.  The 
Committee feels that action must be initiated against such organizations 
which remain out of the ambit of  the MoU.  The Committee notes that 
incentives are there for CPSEs to su bmit to the MoU system.  The 
Committee strongly recommends that there must be stringent action 
and disincentives as well to enforce the MoU system.      
43. Further, the Committee is strong ly in favour of introducing 
disincentives and punitive measures  against those PSEs which desist 
from entering into MoU discipline a nd those which do not comply with 
the MoU agreements already signed.   

  
 
 
Annual Compliance Reports 
 
44. As per DPE guidelines of 20 July 2010 all CPSEs were to submit their 
Annual Compliance Reports regarding implementation of their guidelines 
within 30 days from the end of th e preceding financial year to their 
respective Administrative Ministries.  Th e administrative Ministries in turn, 
would consolidate the same for all CPSEs under their control and forward it 
to DPE by 30 th June every year.  When asked about the status of 
implementation of this guideline and the highlights of the compliance 
reports filed till date, the Department responded that  it has not received 
Annual Compliance Reports from any Mi nistry/Department in the format 
prescribed and a reminder had been sent to Administrative 
Ministries/Departments to expedite  submission Annual Compliance Reports 
of CPSEs under their administrative control.  
45. The Committee is surprised to note that there is failure on the 
part of the DPE to secure the Annual Compliance Reports from the 
CPSEs.  An appropriate strategy ha s to be devised to receive such 
Reports from the concerned PSEs.  It is important that Committee must 
be informed about the action taken in this regard.  
 
Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE)
 
 

  
46. The Government constituted BRPSE vide Resolution dated 6 th 
December, 2004 as an advisory body to  address the task of strengthening, 
modernization, reviving, and restruct uring of CPSEs and to advise the 
Government on strategies, measures and schemes related to them.  Proposals 
are sent to them; they appraise them and make recommendation.  The 
recommendation then, through the Department, goes to the Cabinet.  Cabinet 
approves a package to be presented befo re the BIFR.  It is the BIFR award 
which has statutory force for all sick co mpanies.  So, BIFR is the final body 
as far as sick companies are concerned.   
47. During the discussion on Demands for Grants 2012-13, it was brought 
to the notice of  the Comm ittee that BRPSE was only th e first step for a sick 
CPSE seeking restructuring / revival.  It was also submitted that BIFR which 
had a mandatory role similar to th at of BRPSE cut into the latter’s 
functioning in a negative way, someti mes.  The functioning of BRPSE is 
adversely impacted by the fact that fo r every small thing the sick companies 
have to approach BIFR, which had the final say in matters concerning 
restructuring / revival of CPSEs.  In nutshell, the involvement of Board of 
Industrial & Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) retards the pa ce of revival/ 
restructuring of PSEs as the entire process becomes quite laborious and 
draconian.  Further, it was informed th at the BIFR was to be soon replaced 
by another body the National Company Law Tribunal in the near future. 

  
48. The Committee finds that the time  taken to process the proposal 
for revival and restructuring of a PSU is too long.  The delay caused in 
this regard compounds the problem.  The Committee was given to 
understand that BRPSE cannot take punitive action or even a strong 
view if its recommendations are not fo llowed.  In contrast, the views of 
BIFR are given importance due to the fact that it has a statutory 
backing.  The Committee is given to understand that the BIFR is soon to 
be replaced by the National Comp any Law Tribunal ( NCLT).  In this 
scenario, the Committee recommends that when NCLT is put in place, 
its mandate should avoid any duplication of work with BRPSE.  The 
Committee also strongly feels that the  revival proposal of sick PSEs 
must be disposed of within a specified time avoiding unnecessary delay.   
 
Boards of PSEs 
 
49. The issue of Professionalization of Boards was first enunciated in the 
Industrial Policy Statement of 1991, wh erein it was, inter alia, mentioned 
that “Boards of public sector companies  would be made more professional 
and given greater powers”. In line with above polic y statement, Department 
of Public Enterprises (DPE) had issu ed the guidelines vide OM dated 
16.3.1992 which provided for appoint ment of requisite number of 
functional, Government and non-official Directors. The Government has laid 

  
down the specific criteria for pers ons who can be considered for 
appointment as non-official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs. 
50. It is deplorable that there are 300 vacant positions of non-official 
Directors on the Boards of more than 100 scheduled CPSEs. However, 
the recommendations of Search Co mmittee for filling up 100 of these 
vacant positions have already been conveyed to the concerned 
Ministries for obtaining approval of competent authority. This must be 
done expeditiously. 
51. The Committee is of the view that professionalization of Boards of 
CPSEs is an indispensable necessity  for making them more competitive 
and viable in the emerging mark et economy.  The good corporate 
governance can be ensured by profession alization of board of directors.  
The existing vacancies of 300 posts of non-functional directors must be 
filled up urgently without which the effective performance of CPSEs 
would be adversely affected.  These vacancies indicate lack of vision, 
planning and non responsive attitude  to vital issues concerning the 
functions of PSEs.  The Committee wo uld like to reiterate the point that 
DPE has to be the nodal Departme nt under the jurisdiction of which 
must function the Public Enterprise s Selection Board.  The Committee 
strongly recommends fo r the filling up of vacancies of non-officials 
Directors in CPSEs within a minimum period of one month and also to 

  
ensure that such vacancies do not exis t beyond the period of a financial 
quarter in any case.    
 
********** 

  
Appendix- I 
Details of surrender of saving for the year 2010-2011. 
                                                                                                                                      (Rs. in thousands)                    
                                                                                                                                                      
 Reasons for savings 
A. IFW have concurred in the proposal in March, 2011. However, due to shortage  of time, the proposal 
could not be moved to the Department of Admini strative Reforms and Public  Grievances for getting 
75% grant from their plan scheme of modernization of Government offices.   
B. Due to non receipt of Medical bills as being the nature of head and non receipt of bills from Ministry of 
External Affairs on account of Secretary, PE Foreign Visit.  
C. The numbers of PSEs and VRS optees are compar atively less in the NE Region. Hence CRR 
programme could not be implemented. 
D. Due to appreciation of INR as against US $. 
E. Nodal Agency failed to identify  target in newly selected Cochin EAC (Employees Assistance 
Centre) 
F. Due to non receipt of proper and complete bills from the parties.  
 
SN Head of A/c Amount 
 REVENUE SECTION    
 Major Head 3451-Secretariat Economic Services  
00.090 Secretariat ( Minor Head ) 
34-Department of Public Enterprises 
34.01 – Establishment 
Plan Non-
Plan 
Total 
1. 34.01.06 Medical Treatment -- 250 250
2 34.01.12 Foreign TA -- 902 902
 60 Board for Reconstruction of Pu blic Sector Enterprises (BRPSE)  
6 60.00.06 Medical Treatment  69 69
 34.99 Information Technology  
10 34.99.50 -Other charges 1000 A ---- 1000
 Total Major Head 3451 1000  1221 
B
2221
 Major Head 2552-North Eastern Areas 
317 – Others(Other  Expenditure- Industries (Minor Head)  
 
1 01-Counseling/retraining/Redeployment, setting up of new 
Centres/Addition of Nodal Agencies, etc. 
01.00.31-Grants-in-aid 
 
 
4480 C 
 
 
----
 
 
4480
 Total MH 2552 4480 4480
 Major Head 2852 Industries  
1 80 Gen. (Sub Major Head) 
80.798 International Cooperation (minor Head) 
03 International Centre for Promotion of Enterprises 
03.00.32 Contribution 
  
 
 
55 D
 
 
 
55
 80.800 Other Expenditure (Minor Head)  
1. 13 Counseling/retraining/Redeployment, setting up of new 
Centres/Addition of Nodal Agencies, etc. 
13.00.31-Grants-in-aid 
 
 
1563 E 
 
 
    ---
 
 
1563
 27 Research, Development and Consultancy on Generic issues 
related to CPSEs and SLPEs 
27.00.31 Grants-in-aid                                                                         
 
1804 F 
 
-
 
1804
 Total 2852-Industries 3367 55 3422
 Grand Total 8847 1276 10123

  
 
Appendix- II 
 
Reasons for differences during Year 2011-12 
 
Plan 
 
 At the revised estimate (RE) stage, the budget estimate has been reduced 
to Rs. 10.16 Crore  i.e. under the scheme Research, Development and 
Consultancy (RDC)the budget estimate re duced to Rs. 0.66 crore from Rs. 1.50 
crore  due to  less expenditure incurred then anticipated under the scheme RDC 
as some states like Odisha, Assam and Madhya Pradesh organized the State Level 
Public Enterprises(SLPEs) workshop in th eir states on their own, and due to non 
receipt complete bills of SLPEs work shops held. Rs. 0.60 crore has been re-
appropriated to Non-plan to meet the expenditure on account of salary, Office 
Expenses, / Printing of Public Ente rprises Survey / SLPEs Survey and TA/DA 
Sitting fees of members of Task fo rce MOU and BRPSE. Hence, the actual 
Expenditure is lower at Rs. 7.79 crore due to reasons as above. 

  
Appendix- III 
 
Non-Plan 
 
The Department porposed Rs. 9.35 Crore in RE 2011-12. Ministry of 
Finance provided Rs. 8.29 Crore in RE 2011-12.  
 
BE 2011-12 was Rs. 7.69 Crore. It was increased to Rs. 8.29 Crore at RE 
stage because payments due in 2010-11 Amounting to Rs. 0.60 Crore on account 
of sitting fees, TA/DA to Members of TF, MOU, and BRPSE and Search 
Committee, Printing of PE Survey 2009-10, salary of officials of DPE, essential 
services bills like Telephone , Petrol, Hiring of Taxi, AMC, Computer stationary 
etc. and Payment to wages to daily W agers (through out-sourcing) has to made 
from the allocation of 2011-12. The escala tion in the cost of goods to be 
purchased and the services to be hired from outsource have also added to the 
expenditure. Hence, Rs. 0.60 Crore re-appropriated from Plan to Non-Plan to 
meet the excess expenditure in Non-Plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
Appendix – IV 
 
Reasons for differences during Year 2012-13 
 
Plan 
 
  Increase in plan BE-2012-13 is due to introduction of New Scheme “Skill 
Development / Training programmes of Execu tives of State Level Public Sector 
Enterprises (SLPEs)” for which a sum of  Rs. 1 Crore has been made. Budget for 
the Scheme Counselling, Retraining and Re deployment (CRR) increase to 8.60 
crore from 7.80 crore to further restructure the existing CRR scheme.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
Appendix – V 
 
Non-Plan 
 
  The Department proposed Rs. 11.65 Crore in BE 2012-13. Ministry of 
Finance provided Rs. 8.93 Crore in BE-2012-13. Rs. 11.65 Crore were proposed 
keeping in view the trend of expenditu re in the past year and anticipated 
expenditure for 2012-13. Pending  bills of GOI  press, price escalation in the cost 
of the goods to be purchased and the servic es to be hired  outsourced, activities 
like Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR ), SLPEs, Maharatna Scheme etc. and 
expansion and widening of existing ac tivities under MOU (bringing all CPSEs 
under its ambit, mid- year review of MOU performance, etc.), Survey of SLPEs 
(Survey like PE Survey), Management Po licy (autonomy and accountability 
through  compliance of guidelines on cor porate governance) etc., has resulted in 
increased expenditure in the hiring of veh icles, incidental, purchase of essential 
items, stationery etc. and TA/DA and sitti ng fees of the members of Task Force 
MoU, BRPSE and Search Committee. The escalation in the cost of the goods to be 
purchased and the services to be hired from outsource have also added to the 
expenditure. The Department have to meet the expenditure for hiring of space, 
office expenditure and sitting fees to Consultants for setting up and running a 
separate cell in DPE as based on the approval of the cabinet , DPE has notified 
the Policy for Acquisition of Raw Material overseas by CPSEs.” 
 
 
 
………………………………. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE-AT A GLANCE 
The Committee strongly feels that the vi sion and mission of the DPE must be 
further expanded to include issues like  research & development capabilities and 
manpower planning in the absence of whic h the CPSEs quite often do not generate 
greater productivity and incu r loss leading to their sickne ss and closure.  The issue 
of research & development is of course the responsibility of the concerned public 
sector enterprises.  But if the DPE is gu ided by vision and mission to enhance the 
research & development capability and oth er critical factors which are essential for 
making our PSEs technologically advanced and competitive, then it would better 
help the DPE to take the cause of public  sector enterprises forward.   The 
Committee feels that the vision and missio n of the DPE incorporating such factors 
would be more impactful on  the CPSEs for making them competitive and result 
oriented.  It would also make the CPSE s more aware of the fact that for their 
survival and growth these have to stand on their own and prove their worth in the 
expanding market and global economy.  Such a modified vision and mission 
statement would also enable the DPE officials to emphasise on the issue during their 
interactions  with CPSE representatives.             (Para 6) 
 
The Committee is given to understand that normally money earmarked for 
spending under the plan head is not transf erred to the non-plan head.  Of course, 
the Department must have re-appropriat ed the money under the explicit approval 
of the Finance Ministry.  However, it is to be borne in mind that the lack of funds to 
meet the non-plan expenditure is indicati ve of absence of sound planning by the 
DPE.  It must foresee and anticipate such spending and approach the Finance 
Ministry for allocation of funds for the purpose of meeting non-plan expenditure.  It 
strongly recommends that the DPE must not divert funds from the plan to non-plan 
head.  The officials of the DPE must  foresee the non-plan expenditure and 
accordingly submit their estimates to the Ministry of Finance for adequate 
allocation of funds.  The Committee hopes that the Department will adopt a proper 
strategy so that it does not divert the pl an fund for the non-plan expenditure.  The 
Committee strongly feels that the Depar tment must spend the money put under the 
plan head to achieve the desired results.                 (Para 14) 
 

  
The Committee takes note of the fact th at the DPE intends to focus attention 
on the deficiencies and weaknesses of the employees of the SLPES so that it could 
take measures to mitigate or rectify them and improve their capabilities.  But, while 
doing so, it would be self-defeating to ig nore the strengths of the employees whose 
skills are to be developed.  In the syll abus of the modern management discipline 
SWOT (Strength, Weakness, Opportunity and Threats) has been adopted to get a 
broad view of the dark and brighter side s of the human resources deployed in an 
enterprise.  In ignoring the strengths the positive aspects would be completely lost 
sight of.  The concept of ‘Core Competence’ has been increasingly emphasized in the 
modern organization to highlight the inhe rent resilience and capabilities of the 
employees.  It would be appropriate fo r the Department to stress on ‘Core 
Competence’ while adopting the SWOT analysis.  This would enable the 
Department and the concerned enterprises to  have a better grasp of the talent pool 
available at their disposal and their pl us and minus dimensions.  The Committee 
recommends that the good performance of the SLPEs may be factored into any 
decision to allocate funds fo r skill development.  Besides, the weightage also should 
be given to the enterprises which function  in core areas of our economy which are 
critical to economic growth and expansion.   The Committee also hastens to add that 
the SLPEs utilizing locally available resources and creating job opportunities may 
be accorded priority.               (Para 17) 
 
The Committee, while taking note of th e programme for skill development of 
SLPEs, is constrained to observe that the Department of Public Enterprises has no 
scheme for training its own officers both at  the national level institutes and in the 
reputed training establishments located in  some of the world class universities and 
institutes.  The officials of the DPE are quite often engaged in imparting training 
facilities.  They are also engaged in finaliz ing the MoUs where weightage is given to 
several parameters which are indispensable for enhancing growth, productivity and 
competitiveness of the PSEs.  If these officers are not adequately trained, both at the 
national and international levels, thei r expertise and competence will remain 
stagnant.  It is, therefore, strongly reco mmended that a separate scheme for the 
employees and officers of the DPE should be formulated for their training within 
India and abroad.               (Para 18) 

  
 
The Committee is given to understand that the Public Enterpri ses Selection Board 
(PESB) is part of the Department of Personnel and Training.  The Committee is 
surprised to note that it is the DoPT wh ich is the administrative Ministry for the 
PESB.  Possibly the PESB was made pa rt of the DoPT when there was no 
Department of Public Enterprises.  Now, that the DPE is in existence for several 
years, it would be prudent to bring the PESB under the control of the DPE.  The 
Committee strongly recommends that su ch a change must take place for the 
purpose of streamlining and quickening the process of su ccession planning in the 
PSEs.  Apart from the PSEs and their administrative Ministry, the domain 
knowledge concerning the functioning of the PSEs is with the DPE.  It finalises their 
MoUs and sets their targets both in the fi nancial and non-financial sectors.  It is, 
therefore, appropriate that PESB must function under the jurisdiction of DPE.  At a 
time when the Government of India is emphasizing on the need to reform the 
functioning the Central Public Sector Ente rprises, it is extremely important to 
include within the reform process the decision to transfer the PESB from the control 
of DoPT to DPE. Realising the importance of the recommendation it must be done 
irrespective of any resistance from any quarter. 
                                                                                           (Para 20) 
 
The Committee takes note of the fact th at the DPE is periodically reviewing 
the CRR scheme to make it useful to the beneficiaries. A scheme like CRR becomes 
more meaningful when the targeted beneficiaries are made employable through 
training imparted to them.  The skills they acquire need to be certified by an 
accredited agency so that the training they received is recognized and valued.   
(Para 24) 
 
 The figures in the Budget Documents at Table 2 shows that the allocation 
(RE) for the Scheme of CRR for 2010-11 was Rs.7.58 crore, but the Actuals for the 
year is shown as Rs.8.03 crore.  The Co mmittee fails to understand as to how the 
utilization figures for 2010-11 were higher than  the allocation made for the year.  
Furthermore, if the Table 1 figures for a llocation (Rs.8.90 crore) is taken in face 
value, the Actuals for 2010-11 in the Budget  Document should have been Rs.8.63 

  
crore (96.97% of Rs.8.90 crore) instea d of Rs.8.03 crore.  Similarly, while 
considering the figures of Table-1, the allocation for 2011-12 as furnished by DPE is 
Rs.8.90 crore whereas in the Budget Document puts it at Rs.7.80 crore. 
(Para 27) 
The Committee observes that such varia tion in figures presented before a 
Parliamentary Committee, engaged in scrutinizing the Demand for Grants is totally 
unacceptable. The Committee expects a clear cu t explanation in this regard.  It is 
imperative that the Department shall take note of this and ensure strict compliance 
in future.                                                                                                             (Para 28) 
 
The Committee is not happy to note that the reduction in expenditure took 
place because some States organized thei r workshops on their own due to delayed 
approvals of the workshops to be conducted by the DPE.  It also established the 
point that there was a lack of coordina tion between the DPE and the States 
concerned.  Even earlier the Committee has observed that lack of coordination 
among Ministries and several Departments of Governments have resulted in policy 
paralysis and adversely affecting the functioning of PSEs.  The Committee 
recommends that funds allocated for such important schemes should be fully 
utilized.                                                                                                                (Para 32) 
 
 The Committee has persistently noted th at funds allocated to North Eastern 
Areas and are taken forward to next fina ncial years.  Of course, the Committee 
appreciates the fact that in case of Nort h Eastern Region, the funds allocated would 
not lapse.  The North Eastern Areas of the country do always get the special 
attention of the Union Government.  Fund  earmarked for this region has to be 
utilized properly for the cause of improving that region and accelerating the process 
of industrialization.  It is important, therefore, to acceler ate the process of 
utilization of funds for training VRS optees.  The Committee also finds it difficult to 
fathom as to why the Budget Document reflects the Actual expenditure for the 
North Eastern Areas for 2010-11 as ‘nil’, when the Department claims to have 
utilized Rs. 6 crore. This sort of anomalie s in figure may lead to misunderstanding 
and, therefore, the Committee demands an  explanation from the Departments 

  
concerned. The Committee firmly recommends that the Department should iron out 
such incongruities and improve their performance in the North Eastern Areas. 
                                                                                                                  (Para 36) 
The Committee takes note that the MoU System as it exists today is broadly 
based on the recommendation of NCAER made in the year 2003.  It is the 
considered opinion of the Committee th at the MoU system, which has an 
overarching influence on the performance of the CPSEs has to be in tune with the 
latest trends for successful operation of the PSEs.  Accordingly, it is recommended 
that DPE may engage an accredited organiz ation to revisit the MoU system and 
assess it for the purpose of revitalizing it and making it more effective.  The system 
should be more flexible and receptive to the feedback received from the CPSEs. It is 
worthwhile to note that certain profit maki ng organizations must not be allowed to 
opt for soft targets solely on the ground that they have perf ormed better.  In fact, in 
a highly competitive environment such orga nizations need to set better targets for 
themselves for full flowering of their po tentialities.  The Prime Minister of our 
country while giving away the MoU and SCOPE Awards to best performing Central 
Public Sector Enterprises referred to the MoU system and said that, “We cannot be 
satisfied with the status quo”.  He made that observation in the context of the 
determination of the Government to make  CPSEs stronger and competitive.  An 
overhauled MoU system must serve this cause.                                               (Para 41) 
 
The Committee was constrained to note that there are certain Central Public 
Sector Enterprises which do not subscribe to the MoU discipline and protocol.  It 
has noted that such departure from MoU di scipline has taken place in spite of the 
intervention of the Cabinet Se cretary.  It is a sad commentary on the functioning of 
our system.  The Committe e finds it unacceptable that certain PSEs are not 
amenable to MoU regime.  The Committee is sad to note that certain CPSEs do not 
submit certain documents at the time of  evaluation of their functioning.  The 
Committee was informed that 36 CPSEs faile d to submit the re quired documents to 
the DPE for evaluation.  The Committee feel s that action must be initiated against 
such organizations which remain out of  the ambit of the MoU.  The Committee 
notes that incentives are there for CPSEs to submit to the MoU system.  The 

  
Committee strongly recommends that th ere must be stringent action and 
disincentives as well to enforce the MoU system.      
(Para 42) 
 Further, the Committee is strongly in favour of introducing disincentives and 
punitive measures against those PSEs wh ich desist from entering into MoU 
discipline and those which do not comply with the MoU agreements already signed.   
                                                                                                                (Para 43) 
 
The Committee is surprised to note that there is failure on the part of the 
DPE to secure the Annual Compliance Report s from the CPSEs.  An appropriate 
strategy has to be devised to receive such Reports from the concerned PSEs.  It is 
important that Committee must be informed about the action taken in this regard.  
48. The Committee finds that the time taken to process the proposal for revival 
and restructuring of a PSU is too long.  The delay caused in this regard compounds 
the problem.  The Committee was given to understand that BRPSE cannot take 
punitive action or even a strong view if its recommendations are not followed.  In 
contrast, the views of BIFR are given im portance due to the fact that it has a 
statutory backing.  The Committee is given to understand that the BIFR is soon to 
be replaced by the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT).  In this scenario, the 
Committee recommends that when NCLT is pu t in place, its mandate should avoid 
any duplication of work with BRPSE.  Th e Committee also strongly feels that the 
revival proposal of sick PSEs must be di sposed of within a specified time avoiding 
unnecessary delay.                                                                                          (Para 45) 
                      
 It is deplorable that there are 300 vac ant positions of non-official Directors 
on the Boards of more than 100 scheduled  CPSEs. However, the recommendations 
of Search Committee for filling up 100 of these vacant positions have already been 
conveyed to the concerned Ministries  for obtaining approval of competent 
authority. This must be done expeditiously. 
                                                                                                                           (Para 50) 
                                                                                                        

  
 The Committee is of the view that professionalization of Boards of CPSEs is 
an indispensable necessity for making th em more competitive and viable in the 
emerging market economy.  The good corporate governance can be ensured by 
professionalization of board of directors.  The existing vacancies of 300 posts of non-
functional directors must be filled up urgently without which the effective 
performance of CPSEs would be adversely a ffected.  These vacancies indicate lack 
of vision, planning and non responsive at titude to vital issu es concerning the 
functions of PSEs.  The Committee would lik e to reiterate the point that DPE has to 
be the nodal Department under the jurisdicti on of which must function the Public 
Enterprises Selection Board.  The Committee strongly recommends for the filling up 
of vacancies of non-official s Directors in CPSEs within a minimum period of one 
month and also to ensure that such vacanci es do not exist beyond the period of a 
financial quarter in any case.                                                                              (Para 51) 
 
 
……………………….. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 