Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON INDUSTRY
 
REPORT NO. 
239
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 21st March, 2013)
Action Taken Note on the Two Hundred Twenty Ninth Report 
of the Committee on the Credit Facilities to MSME Sector 
pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
Action Taken Note on the Two Hundred Twenty Ninth Report
of the Committee on the Credit Facilities to MSME Sector
pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  21 st March, 2013)
(Laid on the table of the Lok Sabha on  21 st March, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—12
(i) Chapter–I
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Ministry ............................................................................................................... 2—5
(ii) Chapter–II
Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee does not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .......................................... 6—10
(iii) Chapter–III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the
Ministry to review its replies ......................................................................... 11
(iv) Chapter–IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the
Ministry have not been received .................................................................... 12
4. M
INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 13—16

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2012)
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Narendra Budania
3. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
4. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
5. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
6. Shri Basawaraj Patil
7. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
8. Shri Vivek Gupta
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
10. Shri M.P. Achuthan
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
12. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa
13. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16. Shri Hassan Khan
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar
18. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod
19. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
20. Shri Somen Mitra
21. Shri P.R. Natarajan
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi
24. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
25. Shri B.Y . Raghavendra
26. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
28. Ch. Lal Singh
29. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
30. Shri E.G . Sugavanam
31. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Roshan Lal, Deputy Director
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,
having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred Thirty-Ninth Report
on Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred Twenty-Ninth Report on the Credit
Facilities to MSME Sector.
2. I thank the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for furnishing the Action
Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred Twenty-Ninth
Report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 19
th March, 2013 considered and adopted the
Report.
TIRUCHI SIV A
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
19th March, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry.

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two
Hundred Twenty-Ninth Report on the Credit Facilities to MSME sector pertaining to Ministry of
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. These have been
categorized as follows:
Chapter-I– The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations
as mentioned in the Chapter–I of the Report.
Chapter-II–  The recommendation/observations, which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies.
In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and
explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore do not want to pursue them for the present.
Chapter-III–  The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has
either not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply.
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of recommendations
contained in Chapter–III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanations therefore.
Chapter-IV–  The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the
Ministry have not been received.
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished the
interim replies or couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance,
therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects
of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and
spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry
Recommendation/observation
1. The Committee is of the view that as per RBI guidelines, credit flow to women
entrepreneurs must be augmented to bring more and more women to the mainstream of the
economic development. Keeping this in mind the women entrepreneurs should be allowed
loans on liberal and relaxed terms. (Para 3 of ATN)
Action taken/Comments
On the above issue, the RBI has reported that to help overcome the hurdles being faced
by women in accessing bank credit and credit plus services, the Government had drawn up a
14-point action plan (now 13-point action plan) in the year 2000 for implementation by public
sector banks. The public sector banks were advised to earmark 5 per cent of their Adjusted Net
Bank Credit (ANBC) for lending to women. As on March 31, 2011, the amount outstanding
towards credit to women was Rs.1,82,667.41 crore forming 7.46 per cent of ANBC of public
sector banks. Out of 26 public sector banks, 23 banks have achieved the target of 5% of adjusted
net bank credit for lending to women. As at the end of March 2011, eleven public sector banks
have opened 31 specialized branches for women.
SIDBI provides credit assistance to micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs),
including Women Entrepreneurs, to encourage them to do their business smoothly. In order to
encourage banks to provide collateral free loans to MSEs, the Government through Ministry of
MSME alongwith SIDBI set up the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises
(CGTMSE) in 2000. The guarantee cover under the Credit Guarantee Scheme is at an enhanced
level of 80% for MSEs operated and/or owned by women entrepreneurs. Cumulatively, CGTMSE
as on March 31, 2012, has extended guarantee approvals to 1,40,369 women entrepreneurs
covering credit assistance of Rs. 5,618.06 crore.
To set up micro enterprises under Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme
(PMEGP), women entrepreneurs are entitled to a higher rate of margin money subsidy, viz.,
@ 35% in rural areas and @ 25% in urban areas in comparison to 25% and 15% respectively for
general category. Also women entrepreneurs are required to pay lower beneficiary contribution, viz.,
5% of the project cost in comparison to 10% for general category.
Further, IBA has informed that loans on liberal terms and special relaxation to women
entrepreneurs are considered by individual banks.
Recommendation/observation
2. Keeping in view the global development in industrial sector and the competition
which has resulted in the improved working of the banks, the Committee is of the view that
RBI should adopt more liberal approach to encourage the banks for opening branches
specifically in industrial belts. (Para 4 of ATN)
2

3
Action taken/Comments
The recommendation was taken up with the Department of Financial Services and also with
the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and Indian Banks’ Association (IBA). However, specific
information relating to opening of branches in industrial belts has not been provided.
On the above issue the RBI has reported that with a view to facilitate branch opening the
branch authorisation policy for opening branches has been liberalized by RBI. Domestic scheduled
commercial banks (other than RRBs) are permitted to open branches/Mobile branches/
Administrative offices/Central Processing Centres (CPCs)/Service branches in Tier 3 to Tier 6
centres (with population upto 49,999 as per Census 2001) without permission from RBI in each
case, subject to reporting. Domestic scheduled commercial banks (other than RRBs) are also
permitted to open branches/Mobile branches/Administrative offices/Central Processing Centres
(CPCs)/Service branches in rural, semi-urban and urban centres in North Eastern States and Sikkim
without permission from RBI in each case, subject to reporting.
Recommendation/observation
3. The Committee endorses the cluster based approach for growth and expansion of the
MSME. The banks must deal with such clusters to reduce their transaction cost and improve
their infrastructure and other facilities. (Para 8 of ATN)
Action taken/Comments
RBI has informed that the banks have been advised to adopt one cluster and explore the
financing requirements of units in such clusters. Further, all banks have been advised vide circular
dated June 29, 2010 that they should open more MSE focused branch offices at different MSE
clusters which can also act as Counselling Centres for MSEs. Each lead bank of a district may
adopt at least one MSE cluster.
MoMSME had forwarded to the Convenors of State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC) the
list of 25 MSME clusters identified as innovative clusters, comprehensive list of 2,441 clusters in
the registered MSME sector as per Fourth All India Census of MSMEs (2006-07), list of 472
clusters taken up for development under Micro and Small Enterprises-Cluster Development
Programme (MSE-CDP) and based on field level information on bank branches existing in the
clusters, list of such MSME clusters indicating the banks/financial institutions in the clusters and
the position of available banking facilities, for displaying on website of SLBC Convenor banks so
that the banks operating in the State/UT come forward to provide necessary banking facilities/
services in these clusters. The Lead Banks in the districts where the MSME clusters are located
may focus on their credit requirements and enhance credit flow to MSMEs. The RBI has also
advised the SLBC Convenor banks in this regard.
SIDBI and its associates have adopted cluster based approach for providing credit and non-
credit support to the MSME sector which includes rendering technical services for technology
transfer, providing financial support including promotion of clean production, energy efficiency
measures, organising cluster development programme under its Promotional and Development
activities, etc.
Recommendation/observation
4. The Committee feels that each Bank should identify the branches having potential
for financing Micro and Small Enterprises for greater credit flow to this critical sector.
Online registration of application and tracking system should be made operational at the

4
earliest so as to check the status of such applications and speedy disposal of proposals from
Micro and Small Enterprises. (Para 9 of ATN)
Action taken/Comments
As informed by IBA that banks have already taken steps to identify the branches which have
more potential for financing to Micro and Small Enterprises. Banks are initiating steps for on line
registration of applications and tracking system.
The RBI has informed that the Banks have been advised vide circular dated January 4, 2012
that they should mandatorily acknowledge all loan applications, submitted manually or online, by
their MSME borrowers and ensure that a running serial number is recorded on the application form
as well as on the acknowledgement receipt. Banks are further encouraged to start Central
Registration of loan applications. The same technology may be used for online submission of loan
applications as also for online tracking of loan applications.
As regards online tracking of applications, SIDBI has taken following steps:
• The electronic loan application in Excel sheet form has since been hosted on the
website. The application form can be downloaded by the potential borrower, which can
then be forwarded electronically.
• The branches have been advised to communicate approvals like Letter of Intent,
modifications, etc. to the clients electronically.
• The status of loan applications received from the borrower is published on the website
on trial basis since December 1, 2011, via a link “know your application status”.
Further, E-tracking of applications is being developed for Prime Ministers’ Employment
Generation Programme (PMEGP), which will include the aspect of on-line registration of
applications (in addition to the option of filing a paper application).
Recommendation/observation
5. SIDBI has been created exclusively for promotion, financing and development of
MSME sector. It now operates under the administrative control of the Ministry of Finance.
The Committee feels that the Government should explore the possibility to bring SIDBI
under the Ministry of MSME so that its functions could be monitored by it for ensuring its
greater flow of credit to the MSME sector. (Para 13 of ATN)
Action taken/Comments
The recommendation was taken up with the Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial
Services. Department of Financial Services has opined that SIDBI has been created exclusively for
promotion, financing and development of MSME sector. It now operates under the administrative
control of the Ministry of Finance. Ministry of Finance is alive to this role being played by SIDBI
and actively engaged in developing a suitable business plan for this Organisation. Department of
Financial Services is of the view that at present there is no need to change the supervision of
SIDBI especially where SIDBI Act is being amended in consultation with M/o MSME.
Recommendation/observation
6. When there is a dispute between entrepreneurs and banks concerning loans, the
entrepreneurs are driven from pillar to post to resolve the issue. As a matter of fact, the

5
entrepreneurs do not get relief at a reasonably short time. The Committee is of the opinion
that there should be a proper redressal mechanism at the circle level of the banks to
dispose of the cases quickly and effectively. (Para 15 of ATN)
Action taken/Comments
As informed by RBI, banks have been advised vide DBOD circular dated May 5, 2003 that
their Board of Directors should lay down an appropriate grievance redressal mechanism within the
organization to resolve disputes arising in this regard. Such a mechanism should ensure that all
disputes arising out of the decisions of lending institutions’ functionaries are heard and disposed
of at least at the next higher level. The Board of Directors should also call for periodical review
of the compliance of the Fair Practices Code and the functioning of the grievances redressal
mechanism at various levels of controlling offices. A consolidated report of such reviews may be
submitted to the Board at regular intervals, as may be prescribed by it. The Fair Practices Code,
which may be adopted by banks and financial institutions, should also be put on their websites and
given wide publicity.
IBA has informed that many banks have grievance redressal mechanism at regional/circle
level for disposal of cases quickly and effectively. Banks have adopted “Code of Bank’s
Commitment to Micro and Small Enterprises”, which is being monitored by Banking Codes and
Standards Board of India (BCSBI).
Further, SIDBI has put in place a Complaints and Grievance Redressal Policy and
mechanism for attending to the complaints and grievances of the public or customer.

6
CHAPTER-II
Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies
Recommendation/observation
1. The Committee observes that there should be adequate delegation of powers to the
officer working at branch level. Regular meetings with MSME entrepreneurs should be
conducted and procedural formalities to procure the credit should be simplified. Besides, a
time bound action for setting up of specialised branches and conducting sample surveys
pertaining MSME accounts is required on priority. (Para 1 of ATN)
Action taken/Comments
The recommendation was taken up with the Department of Financial Services and also with
the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) and Indian
Banks’ Association (IBA). However, specific information relating to adequate delegation of powers
at the branch level, regular meetings with MSME entrepreneurs and simplification of procedural
formalities for credit have not been provided. In this regard, the position is reported to be as under:
(i) As informed by the RBI, all Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) have been
advised that sufficient delegation of powers for sanction/rehabilitation of SMEs
should be made at the field level. SIDBI has also put in place a Board approved
Delegation of Powers at branch level and SIDBI holds regular meetings with
MSME entrepreneurs at cluster/ branch level. Further, IBA has informed that banks
have delegated enough powers to take decisions on the credit proposals from the
MSME entrepreneurs. The branch personnel in a routine manner explain all the
procedural formalities to procure credit to these entrepreneurs. As regards setting
up of dedicated specialized branches for MSME, individual banks have policy to
open MSME branch in potential centres.
(ii) Empowered Committees on MSMEs have been constituted at the Regional Offices of
Reserve Bank of India, under the Chairmanship of the Regional Directors with the
representatives of State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC) Convenor banks, SCBs,
SIDBI, Director of Industries of the State Government, one or two senior level
representatives from the MSME Associations in the State, etc. The Committee meets
at least once in a quarter to review the credit flow to MSE sector including progress
in rehabilitation of sick MSE units. It is required to coordinate with other banks/
financial institutions and State Governments in removing bottlenecks, if any, to
ensure smooth flow of credit to the sector. At Central Office of RBI, a Standing
Advisory Committee has been constituted with Deputy Governor as Chairman,
officials of Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, Banks and
Associations as members to discuss issues concerning of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises. The Committee examines issues relating to improving of credit to the
MSME sector, difficulties/ constraints being experienced and steps being taken to
overcome them, etc. Earlier the meetings of the Committee were on annual basis, but
now it meets twice in a year.
6

7
(iii) Public sector banks were advised in August 2005 to operationalise at least one
specialized MSE branch in every district and centre having a cluster of MSE
enterprises. So far, there were only 1220 specialised MSE branches as at the end of
March, 2011.
(iv) RBI conducts periodic studies through its Regional Offices on issues relating to MSME
credit flow.
Recommendation/observation
2. The Committee finds that the banks some time show reluctance in coming forward
to consider the credit requirement of the units under MSME sector. This attitude needs to
be changed and on the basis of the financial position of the units and their track record,
the flow of credit to MSME units should be made more smooth. (Para 2 of ATN)
Action taken/Comments
In regard to the initiatives taken by banks in sensitizing their branch level functionaries on
various MSE policies, and provide them with training so as to appreciate the needs of the MSME
customers, the RBI had advised all banks to report the requisite data on trainings conducted and
MSME campaigns held. As on September 2011 public sector banks (PSBs) have conducted 1,009
trainings in the year 2011-12 and have trained 23,318 staff members. Regarding MSME campaigns,
PSBs have conducted 2,708 campaigns and granted loans to 69,421 entrepreneurs. However, the
progress in this regard needs to be monitored at the RBI level.
Further, IBA has informed that the Banks are sensitive to the development of the MSME
sector. Banks generally do not refuse credit proposals unless there are any adverse reports. If the
track records are good and financial position of the unit is good, banks definitely extend credit to
such MSME units.
Recommendation/observation
3. The Committee understands that a Task Force under the Prime Minister has
prepared and submitted a report for the overall development of the MSME sector and made
a number of recommendations. The Committee therefore recommends that these
recommendations of the Task Force should be implemented in true spirit to support the
MSME sector at the earliest so that many more entrepreneurs could be benefited.
(Para 6 of ATN)
Action taken/Comments
In terms of the recommendations of the Prime Minister’s Task Force on MSMEs, the RBI
has advised the Scheduled Commercial Banks as under:
(i) Achieve a 20% year-on-year growth in credit to micro and small enterprises to ensure
enhanced credit flow;
(ii) The allocation of 60% of the MSE advances to the micro enterprises is to be achieved
in stages viz., 50 per cent in the year 2010-11, 55 per cent in the year 2011-12 and
60 per cent in the year 2012-13; and
(iii) Achieve a 10% annual growth in number of micro enterprise accounts.

8
Action has been completed in respect of a majority of recommendations of the Task Force.
Implementation of the recommendations is being monitored periodically by the Steering Group
constituted under chairmanship of Principal Secretary to Prime Minister.
Recommendation/observation
4. Revival of sick SME has to be considered with sympathy by the banks and financial
institutions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that every State Government should
come forward with a support scheme, through District Industries Centres for revival of such
units. (Para 7 of ATN)
Action taken/Comments
A mechanism for rehabilitation of potentially viable sick MSEs already exists as per the
extant guidelines of RBI to Scheduled Commercial Banks. The State Level Inter Institutional
Committee (SLIIC) has been set up in each State under the Convenorship of RBI to deal with the
problems of co-ordination for rehabilitation of sick small enterprises. The Committee is presided by
Secretary, Industry of the State Government concerned. It provides a useful forum for interaction
between State Government officials and State level institutions on the one hand and term lending
institutions and banks on the other hand. Further, at the Regional Offices of RBI, Empowered
Committees (EC) have been constituted with the Regional Director of Reserve Bank as the
Chairman to review various issues relating to MSE sector particularly, the progress in MSE
financing and rehabilitation of sick MSE units and to co-ordinate with other banks/financial
institutions and the State Government in removing bottlenecks, if any, to ensure smooth flow of
credit to the sector. These Regional level Committees also decide of the need to have similar
Committees at cluster/district levels. However, since it was found that there was duplication of
deliberations at the meetings of SLIIC and Empowered Committee (EC), it was decided that the
matter of continuation or otherwise of the SLIIC forum may be left to the individual State/Union
Territory.
As reported by SIDBI, it has been extending Rehabilitation package to its assisted and
potentially viable MSME sick units which provides for relief and concessions (in the form of
reschedulement, reduction in interest rate, funding of overdue/future interest, waiver, etc.) as well
as need based additional financial assistance for their revival on viable lines.
Recommendation/observation
5. The Committee recommends that limit of the composite loan sanctioned by the Banks
and Financial Institutions should be fixed for all banks and both term loan and working
capital loan should be approved along with the project loan. (Para 10 of ATN)
Action taken/Comments
RBI has reported that extant guidelines already provide for it. RBI has reiterated instructions
in this regard on March 11, 2010, that a composite loan limit of Rs.1 crore can be sanctioned by
banks to enable the MSME entrepreneurs to avail of their working capital and term loan
requirement through Single Window. As on December 2011, public sector banks have disbursed
2,84,030 composite loans amounting to Rs. 10472.05 crore.
Recommendation/observation
6. The Committee understands that the rating of the MSME sector as done by the
various credit rating agencies in co-ordination with NSIC and SIDBI should be more

9
transparent. The entrepreneur should be made to understand the shortcomings so that it
could try to improve its performance. It means that the rating scores should be discussed
with the borrower by the banker/credit rating agency without which improvement in rating
on the part of borrower would be difficult and could hinder the credit prospects and growth
of SMEs. (Para 11 of ATN)
Action taken/Comments
The ‘Performance and Credit Rating Scheme’ is being implemented with a view to create
awareness amongst micro and small enterprises (MSEs) about the strengths and weakness of their
existing operations and to provide them an opportunity to enhance their organizational strengths and
credit worthiness. All rating agencies have been following a uniform rating scale based on the rating
methodology which covers a combination of credit and performance factors measuring operation,
financial, business and management risks. The rating under the scheme serves as a trusted third
party opinion on the capabilities and creditworthiness of the MSEs. As per the rating process
prescribed under the Scheme, the rating is finalized after onsite meeting with the management of
the applicant unit. A copy of the rating report, wherein strength and weaknesses of the existing
operations of the unit are explained, is also provided to the unit for its information and taking
appropriate action for the improvements.
Recommendation/observation
7. The Committee feels that to provide real advantage of finance and credit to MSME,
seminars, workshops, etc., should be organized on financial management as to enable the
MSME to effectively manage their funds, ensure regular repayments to the financial
institutions, avoid misuse of funds and prevent creation of non performing assets. It will
enable the MSME to apply for credits for establishing new ventures and expanding projects.
(Para 12 of ATN)
Action taken/Comments
As informed by IBA, seminars, workshops, etc., are regularly being conducted by banks for
the benefit of the MSME borrowers.
The RBI has reported that, Banks are holding MSME campaign periodically and as per the
data submitted by Public Sector Banks (PSBs) for the quarter ended September 2011, PSBs have
conducted 2,708 campaigns and granted loans to 69,421 entrepreneurs. Further, Industry
Associations/chambers were advised to train and educate their members, if necessary with faculty
support from banks, in business planning, preparation of financial statements, etc.
Recommendation/observation
8. There is a general lack of publicity for the availability of the collateral free credit
facilities to MSME sector. The Committee, therefore, stresses upon all bankers to
prominently display the particulars of the concerned credit schemes at all the branches and
provide due publicity to them in electronic and print media. The Committee also
recommends that a campaign must be launched to spread awareness among entrepreneurs
about availability of such credit facilities. (Para 14 of ATN)
Action taken/Comments
IBA has informed that the banks do display details about schemes through posters,
literatures and placement on bank’s website.

10
RBI has reported that all Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) have been advised to set up
a SME Portal on their website, where they could put in all information/products of their bank for
their MSE clients, as well as information on awareness programmes etc., organized by them. The
SCBs were also advised to understand the problem of the sector and devise strategies to gear up
their credit mechanism structure so as to achieve the prescribed target of lending to the sector.
Sensitivity on the issue to be developed at various hierarchical levels, such as, discussion of the
issue in the Board meetings, management level meetings once in three months. Branch manager’s
conference on financing to the micro sector to be held and the local NGOs, KVIC could be
involved so as to appreciate the problems of the sector and flagging major issues to remove
constraints/bottlenecks in financing. The performance of branch managers in dealing with the
sector should be made a criterion in their performance appraisal.
Further, in order to sensitise the bankers and other stakeholders, Credit Guarantee Fund
Scheme for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) cumulatively, as on March 31, 2012, has
conducted 2,953 workshops/seminars/exhibitions.
Recommendation/observation
9. As a general practice, the banks expect account holders to provide all the papers in
multiple sets and that too on several occasions. The Committee is not  happy with this
practice and urge upon all the banks to get rid of this cumbersome procedure and adopt a
simple and easy method so that entrepreneurs could apply for loans without much problem.
(Para 16 of ATN)
Action taken/Comments
As informed by IBA, banks have appended check list to their loan applications to help
entrepreneurs provide all documents necessary for loan appraisal in one go.
RBI has advised all banks vide circular dated May 4, 2009 that application forms, may be
so designed that all documents required to be executed by the borrower on sanction of the loan
forms its part. The forms should invariably have a Checklist of the documents required to be
submitted by the applicant along with the application and the formalities required to be completed,
post sanction. Further, IBA has designed a uniform loan application for loans up to Rs.25 lakh and
all banks have been advised to make use of the same.

11
CHAPTER-III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee
has either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked
the Ministry to review its replies
Recommendation/observation
1. The Committee is of the opinion that the credit rating and risk assessment of the
SMEs should be taken into consideration by the bankers for reduction of their cost on loans
and structuring the rate of interest depending on the ratings. (Para 5 of ATN)
Action taken/Comments
Though the banks have their own procedure and parameters for judging the strengths and
weaknesses of an enterprise based on which they extend the credit facilities, the Evaluation Study
of the ‘Performance and Credit Rating Scheme’ for micro and small enterprises held in July, 2007
revealed that banks are giving due weightage and recognition to the rating assigned to small
enterprises.
SME Rating Agency of India Limited (SMERA), a joint initiative of SIDBI, Dun &
Bradstreet Information Services India Private Limited (D&B) and leading banks is empanelled as an
approved rating agency by the NSIC under the ‘Performance & Credit Rating Scheme’. SMERA
has been successful in entering into MoUs with 35 banks, financial institutions & trade
associations. SMERA has tied up with various banks to offer preferential interest rates to MSMEs
based on the ratings and banks internal policy.
A good rated enterprise by an independent agency strengthens its case for credit with the
bankers. Some of the banks have issued instructions to their branches to provide concessions in
interest rates based on the ratings. However, it is felt necessary that all the banks provide such
concessions to MSEs under ‘Performance and Credit Rating Scheme’.
Further Recommendation/observation
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Government but further
recommends that it should take up the issue with Department of Financial Services to issue
guidelines regarding performance and credit rating to be followed compulsorily by the Public
Sector Banks to provide concessions in interest rates to MSMEs under the Scheme.
11

CHAPTER-IV
The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Ministry have not been received
NIL
12

MINUTES

XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 03.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 19 th March, 2013 in Committee Room A,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
3. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
4. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
5. Shri Basawaraj Patil
6. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
7. Shri. Vivek Gupta
8. Shri M.P. Achuthan
LOK SABHA
9. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat
10. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
11. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
12. Shri Jayaram Pangi
13. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat
14. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
15. Shri E.G . Sugavanam
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Roshan Lal, Deputy Director
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members and briefed them that
the agenda for the meeting, was to consider and adopt the 236
th ATR pertaining to the Department
of Public Enterprises on MoU performance, 239 th ATR on the Credit Facilities to MSME sector
pertaining to Ministry of MS&ME, 238 th, 240 th and 241 st ATRs pertaining to the Department of
Heavy Industry, Ministry of MS&ME and Department of Public Enterprises, respectively, on their
respective Demands for Grants (2012-13).
15

16
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up the Reports for consideration. After some deliberation,
the Committee unanimously adopted all the Draft Reports.
3. Afterwards, the Committee decided to present/lay five of its reports i.e., the 236 th ATR
pertaining to the Department of Public Enterprises on MoU performance, 239 th ATR on the Credit
Facilities to MSME sector pertaining to Ministry of MS&ME, 238 th 240 th and 241 st ATRs pertaining
to the Department of Heavy Industry, Ministry of MS&ME and Department of Public Enterprises,
respectively on 21
st March, 2013 in both the Houses of Parliament. The Committee authorized its
Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu, Member, Rajya Sabha, and in absence
of both Shri M.P. Achuthan, Member, Rajya Sabha to present the 236
th, 238 th, 239 th, 240 th and 241 at
Reports in the Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized Shri Ijyaraj Singh Member, Lok Sabha
and in his absence Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat, Member, Lok Sabha to lay copies of the same
Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
The meeting adjourned at 03.58 
P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.