178th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/178threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:48]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
    
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY EIGHTH  REPORT
ON
UNLOCKING OF SURPLUS ASSETS OF CPSES TO GENERATE RESOURCES FOR REVIVAL
AND
THE STATUS OF ANCILLARY UNITS  OF CPSES:
A CASE STUDY OF HMT LTD.
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  13.03.2006)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 13.03.2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
2006, FEBRUARY/FALGUN, 1927 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
                                 
            1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
            2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                             
3.                  REPORT                                                                                                                                           
4.                  OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                             
            5.         MINUTES                                                                                                                                                         
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of constitution 5th August, 2005)
 
                  Shri Santosh Bagrodia              —        Chairman
    
      RAJYA SABHA
2.
      Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
3.      Prof. M.M. Agarwal  
4.      Shri Surendra Lath     
5.      Shri Suresh Bhardwaj 
6.      Dr. K. Malaisamy      
7.      Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
8.      Dr. Vijay Mallya        
9.      Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan       
10.  Vacant
                    
                           LOK SABHA
11.
  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri Kailash Baitha     
13.  Shri Rajnarayan          
14.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty     
15.  Shri Bapu Hari  Chaure          
16.  Shri Subhash   Sureshchandra Deshmukh        
17.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan         
18.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria         
19.  Smt. Susmita Bauri                 
20.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato       
21.  Shri Prakash Paranjpe            
22.  Shri Kishanbhai V.  Patel        
23.  Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna

178th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/178threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:48]
24.  Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana
25.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana   
26.  Smt. Rubab Sayeda               
27.   Kunwar  Manvendra Singh                
28.  Shri Ganesh Singh                  
29.  Shri Suraj Singh                     
30.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
31.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi      
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under  Secretary
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad,  Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been  authorized   by the
Committee, hereby present this  One hundred Seventy eighth Report on the issue of             ‘Unlocking of Surplus assets of CPSEs to
generate resources for revival and the status of Ancillary units  of CPSEs:  A case study of HMT Ltd..
.
 
2.         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry considered and adopted   the Draft report at its
meeting held on the  21st February, 2006.
 
3          I thank the Department of Heavy Industries, the State Government of Karnataka, management of HMT Ltd. and its
subsidiaries and the representatives of the ancillary association and other industrial associations of Karnataka for providing valuable
inputs to the Committee. 
NEW DELHI;        
21
st February ,
2006                                                                                                   
                                                                                    
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary
                    Standing Committee on Industry
 
Report
 
1.      The Committee took up the issue pertaining to unlocking of surplus assets of the CPSEs to generate resources for their revival
and the status of ancillary units of such CPSEs. In the process of its examination the Committee took up the issue of HMT Ltd.  The
Committee interacted with the management of the HMT Ltd., representatives of Department of Heavy Industries, State Government
of Karnataka and those of the ancillary associations during its visit to Bangalore on 14
th November 2005 at Bengalore and on 21 st
February 2006 at Delhi once again heard the Secretary, Department of Heavy Industries and management of HMT Ltd.on the issue.
 
2.
      While considering the issue of disposal of surplus assets, the Committee took a look at  the mandate of the Board for
Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises advising the Government about the sources of funds in respect of unviable   CPSEs.
Such source of funds could also include the sale of surplus assets including land of the enterprise for the payment of all legitimate
dues and compensation to workers and other costs in case of their closure.
 
Revival of HMT Ltd.
 
3.
      The Committee noted that the HMT is the premier engineering conglomerate but over last few years its financial conditions
has been on decline. Though last year the Company’s performance in respect of production and sales performances have shown
growth of 19 % and 12% respectively, however the achievements still fall short of the annual growth targets. In 2004-05, the
HMT as a  group incurred a loss of Rs. 23.87 crore and this year proposes to earn a marginal profit of Rs. 0.15 crores only after
selling its Non-functional assets and waiver of interest by the Government in respect of HMT Bearings Ltd.
 
4.
      The Committee was informed that the Company has undertaken to re-align its product profile to the customer needs and
redesign its marketing strategy. The Company has also undertaken to consolidate its finances by recasting its debts and retiring
high cost borrowings, mobilizing internal resources including the disposal of non-functional assets and also by negotiating a one-
time settlement with Financial Institutions and Bond Holders. Further  the Committee noted that HMT had consolidated its
manufacturing facilities at Bangalore and Pinjore and closed the unviable units and divisions to reduce the cost.
 
5.
      The Committee was apprised that the Company and its subsidiaries had entered into technology collaborations with TVL, UK

178th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/178threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:48]
for the manufacturing of Trantors and Gudel System, Switzerland for supply and integration of automated systems.
 
6.      To address the long-terms issues and improve prospects, the six companies of HMT have sought an assistance of Rs. 1743.69
crores from the Central Government.  Of these two revival plans in respect of HMT Bearing Ltd. and Praga Tools Ltd. have been
approved and are under implementation whereas   the one for HMT Machine Tools has been approved by the BRPSE and was
being considered by the Committee of Secretaries og the Union Government.  The revival plans for HMT Ltd. and HMT Watches
have been submitted for BRPSE’s consideration. The Committee was also informed that the Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs had recommended merger of Praga Tools Ltd. with HMT Machine Tools to consolidate the resources and minimize the
costs so as to make the unit leader in manufacturing machine tools in the country.
 
7.
      The Committee was informed that the Revival Plans entailed fresh infusion of equity for capital expenditure, conversion of
Government loans into equity and waiver of interest on GOI loans as also the Government Guarantees for raising loan for
working capital.
 
Unlocking Of Assets of Company
 
8.
      The Committee was also informed by the Secretary, Department of Heavy Industries that the HMT like other CPSEs was
allocated land in its initial years by the State Government free of cost or at rather nominal rates.
 
9.
      In the meeting on the issue on 21st February 2006, the Secretary, Department of Heavy Industries stated that the Government
considered unlocking of assets of the CPSEs as a vital source of financing their revival.
 
10.
  The Committee was informed that in cases of HMT Machine Tools and HMT Watches, a subsidiary of HMT Rs. 470 crore
and Rs. 264 crores respectively would be realized by the disposal of surplus immovable properties. While in case of HMT Ltd.
Rs. 726 crores could be realized. The amount would be used towards servicing and repayment of GOI Guarnteed Bonds and
settlement of Bank borrowings of HMT Ltd. to the extent of Rs. 719.40 crores. The HMT Watches Ltd. will utilize these funds  
for liquidating existing high cost debts and settlement of Bank borrowings and also for the separation of 1000 employees. The
HMT Machine Tools will repay the Zero Coupon Preferential share capital of Rs. 443 crores to the Government. The Committee
was informed that the process of disposing of the surplus assets has been initiated to maximize the returns.
 
11.
  The Committee  is of the opinion that the CPSEs as commercial enterprises must be encouraged to generate their finances
through their internal sources. The Committee accordingly appreciates the initiatives being taken by the Company.
 
Ancillarisation
 
12.  The Committee has also undertaken the study to assess the impact of sickness among CPSEs on the industrialization of
adjoining region and more so over the ancillaries of respective CPSEs.
 
13.
  The Committee took cognizance of the Guidelines of the May 1978, issued by the then Bureau of Public Enterprises asking
all the CPSEs to boost ancillarisation. All the CPSEs were required to establish Plant Level Committees under their Chief
Executives with members from State Industries Department, SISI and representatives of ancillary associations. The focus of such
a guidelines was that the CPSEs and Ancillaries should share a relationship that was akin to Mother/Parent-Child.
 
14.
  The Plant Level Committees were the major organ of interface between the CPSE and its ancillaries. Non-core activities of a
CPSE were opened up for identified Ancillaries. Arrangements were such that half the product of an ancillary were off taken by
the parent CPSE. The pricing too ensured sufficient margin for the ancillaries.
 
15.
  However the system of Plant Level Committee was deleted from guidelines with the liberalisation of the economy where
private players and MNCs had greater flexibility to procure supplies either through imports or from the open market at a
competitive price. As a consequence the ancillaries restricted the choice of a CPSE to secure competitive prices for its supplies.
 
16.
  The Committee was also apprised of the steps taken by the Small Industries Development Organisation (SIDO), which
conducts nation-wide Vendor Development Programmes and Sub-Contracting Exchanges, which have proved to be useful for the
vendors supplying to CPSEs and other Government Departments like Defence or Railways.
 
17.
  The Committee, however noted that the infirm financial conditions of the CPSEs adversely affected their ancillaries. Several
CPSEs particularly in the engineering sector lacked working capital as a result orders to ancillaries too dried down gradually.
There were also instances where CPSEs owed unsettled dues to its suppliers. The Committee observed that the sickness of a
CPSE had a cascading adverse affect over industrialization of its adjoining region.
 
Ancillaries of the HMT

178th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/178threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:48]
 
18.  In case of HMT the twin issues of disposal of surplus assets to generate resources for revival and the status of ancillaries got
inter-twined.
 
19.
  The Committee was informed that 52 ancillary sheds were constructed with HMT funds during 1960-64. These sheds were
allotted to entrepreneurs as ancillary units on license basis. 
 
20.  During its interaction on 14th November 2005 with the stakeholders of HMT, the representatives of the ancillary associations
sought the transfer of ownership of industrial sheds in HMT Industrial Estate, Jalhalli, Bangalore at the rates determined by an
independent evaluation done by the State Government agency, TECSOK. The Committee was also informed that the State
Government of Karnataka too had requested to transfer the industrial shed to the entrepreneurs at independent valuation rates by
TECSOK.
 
21.
  The Committee was informed by the representatives of the associations that other CPSEs like HAL, BHEL and ITI did
transfer the ownership to the ancillary entrepreneurs at concessional rates.
 
22.
  Having heard the representatives of the ancillary association in its meeting on 14 th November 2005 at Bangalore, the
Committee however advised the Department of Heavy Industries and the representatives of HMT to look into the request
earnestly and judiciously.
 
23.  In the last meeting of the Committee on the issue on 21 st February 2006, at New Delhi the Committee was informed by the
Secretary, Department of Heavy Industries and the CMD, HMT that the issue was considered at various for a and that the Board
of Directors of the Company directed the transfer of ownership to the ancillaries at the market rates. Further, the decisions of the
Board of Directors had been conveyed to entrepreneurs. It was also informed that HMT Ltd. had already sold five industrial
sheds to the highest bidders through a tender process including to an erstwhile licensee at the prevailing market rate during 2003-
05.
 
24.
  The Committee was informed by the HMT that though the ancillaries were asking the ownership of the sheds on the plea of
modernizing these Units, these units were essentially engaged in their own commercial activity and hardly supplement the needs
of HMT. The CMD of HMT further conveyed to the Committee that the Company had no intentions to dislodge these Units from
their present premises.
 
25.
  The Committee was informed by the CMD, HMT that in certain cases the CPSEs were granted perpetual lease of the land and
not the ownership. Furthermore in case of HMT, the land had been mortgaged to the Banks for the loans to garner capital for the
Company. The Committee was also apprised that the price that was being offered by the entrepreneurs for the sheds, was far less
than what the HMT expected to collect for its revival plan.
 
26.
  Upon the query regarding other CPSEs like ITI and HAL having offered land to their ancillaries at reasonable price, the
Secretary, Department of Heavy Industries, submitted that offers could differ case to case depending upon the resource
requirement of the concerned CPSE.
 
27.
  The Committee observes that since their inception the CPSEs had initiated a wave of industrialization in their adjoining
region. The CPSEs were direct mainstay for several small-scale ancillaries and suppliers and many more indirectly.   These Units
had thrived on the orders from CPSEs. The Committee is of the view that if the trend could continue this would have benefited
both parent company and the ancillary units.
 
28.
  But the ancillaries too have adversely been affected due to the sickness of the PSE and are at the verge of bankruptcy. They
have been forced by the circumstances to diversify their activities for which they require working capital which may be raised by
taking loans from the Banks and Financial Institutions who extend the loan if the shed or premises are owned by the ancillary
owners so that they can mortgage their sheds/premises. The Committee is of the opinion that since the ancillary owners are
diversifying under compulsion and in view of their long association with the PSE the onus of taking a lenient view in respect of
the survival of its ancillaries falls on the PSE itself. Since the revival of the PSE itself does not wholly depend on the sale of its
land and other assets, it can surely take a lenient view towards its ancillaries.
 
 
29.
  Considering the resource requirement of the HMT for its revival and the Committee’s consistent emphasis on need to
encourage the CPSEs to generate their own resources to assume full autonomy, also appreciating the long association of
ancillaries with their parent HMT Company and taking a view of their offer to purchase the sheds at the price ascertained by State
Government agency TECSOK as against the market price which is demanded by the HMT, the Committee recommends that the
CMD of the HMT, in exercise of the powers vested in him, on taking a lenient and favourable view on demand of the ancillary

178th Report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/178threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:48]
owners, constitute a sub-Committee in the Board of Directors to review the issue in consultation with stakeholders within the
parameters of Company’s financial requirements. Such sub-Committee should furnish its report to the Board of Directors of the
Company, within a time frame who may then take a final view on the issue in its earliest meeting.
 
 
30.
  The Committee also recommends that the Government should formulate a common policy for all the CPSEs for disposal of
their surplus assets.
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  AT A GLANCE
 
 
The Committee  is of the opinion that the CPSEs as commercial enterprises must be encouraged to generate their finances
through their internal sources. The Committee accordingly appreciates the initiatives being taken by the Company.( Para 11)
 
The Committee observes that since their inception the CPSEs had initiated a wave of industrialization in their adjoining
region. The CPSEs were direct mainstay for several small-scale ancillaries and suppliers and many more indirectly.   These Units had
thrived on the orders from CPSEs. The Committee is of the view that if the trend could continue this would have benefited both
parent company and the ancillary units. ( Para 27)
 
Considering the resource requirement of the HMT for its revival and the Committee’s consistent emphasis on need to
encourage the CPSEs to generate their own resources to assume full autonomy, also appreciating the long association of ancillaries
with their parent HMT Company and taking a view of their offer to purchase the sheds at the price ascertained by State Government
agency TECSOK as against the market price which is demanded by the HMT, the Committee recommends that the CMD of the
HMT, in exercise of the powers vested in him, on taking a lenient and favourable view on demand of the ancillary owners, constitute
a sub-Committee in the Board of Directors to review the issue in consultation with stakeholders within the parameters of Company’s
financial requirements. Such sub-Committee should furnish its report to the Board of Directors of the Company, within a time frame
who may then take a final view on the issue in its earliest meeting.  ( Para 29)
The Committee also recommends that the Government should formulate a common policy for the CPSEs for disposal of their
surplus assets in a way to maximize the returns.( Para 30)