PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED - FIFTH  REPORT
 
ON
ACTION TAKEN  BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED  IN  COMMITTEE '
S  64TH REPORT ON  MODERNISATION, RESTRUCTURING AND EXPANSION  PROGRAMMES AND
POST DISINVESTMENT PERFORMANCE  OF  HINDUSTAN ZINC. LTD (HZL)
(MINISTRY OF COAL AND MINES )
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2002)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2002/AGRAHAYANA, 1924  (SAKA)
 
            
 
C O N T E N T S
 
 
                                                                                                                                         
1.            COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
                                                              
2.            INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                 
3.            REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                         
4.            OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  AND             RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE  COMMITTEE AT A
GLANCE       
 
5.            MINUTES                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
 
C
OMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution - 1st January, 2002  )
 
Dr. P.C. Alexander*            — Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
3. Dr . Abrar Ahmad
4. Shri Jayantilal Barot
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
6. Smt. Saroj Dubey
7. Shri Faguni Ram
8. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
9. Shri P.K. Maheshwari
10. Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12. Shri S. Sivasubramanian
13. Smt. Sushree Devi
14. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
15. vacant
 
LOK SABHA
 
16.  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Kumari Mamata Banerjee
18.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
19.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
20.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
21.  Shri Deepak Kumar
22.  Shri Thomas Hansda
23.  Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
24.  Shri A.C. Jose
25.
  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
26. Shri Brijlal Khabri
27. Shri Sunil Khan
28. Shri Manjay Lal
29.
  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
__________________________________________________________________________
 
* Appointed Chairman and Member of the Committee w.e.f.12th .November, 02 vice Shri T.N. Chaturvedi who  ceased
to be the Member of the Committee and Rajya Sabha with effect from 20th August, 02
 
 
34.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
35. Shri Malyala Rajaiah
36. Shri P. Rajendran
37.
  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
38.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
39.  Shri Ramanand Singh
40.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
41.  Chowdhary Talib Hussain
42. Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
43.
  Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
44.  Shri Beni Prasad Verma
45.vacant
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
Shri Tapas Das Gupta,  Joint  Secretary
Shri  A.K. Singh,  Deputy  Secretary
Shri  D.P. Ahuja ,Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
 
 
I N T R O D U C T I ON
 
 
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having   been
authorised  by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred - fifth    Report on the Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in  the   Committee 's 64
th  Report on  Modernisation, Restructuring  and Expansion
Programme of Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (HZL)  and  post disinvestment performance of  Hindustan  Zinc Ltd in the
background of the shareholders agreement.
 
2. Hindustan Zinc Limited (HZL),  one of the leading producers of lead and zinc, was incorporated  in January 1968 as a
public sector Company after the take over of the erstwhile Metal Corporation of India Limited, to develop mining and
smelting capacities to meet the domestic demand of zinc and lead metals. The Government held 75.92% of the equity as
24.08% of its equity was disinvested during the period 1991-93.  Government decided to further disinvest 26% equity
capital of HZL to a strategic partner with an appropriate role in management. On 11 th April,,2002, the Government has
disinvested 26% equity of HZL and management of the company has been transferred to the Strategic Partner  (S.P.)
namely, M/s Sterlite Opportunities and Ventures Ltd. with this  disinvestment the stake  of the Government in the
Company has come down    to 49.92% .
           
3.         The Committee   examined the information furnished by  Department of Mines  regarding   the performance of  
Hindustan Zinc Ltd.   in the post disinvestment  phase  in the background of the  shareholders  adequate.  
 
4.         The Committee at its meeting held on  17
th December., 2002 considered and adopted the Report.
 
 
NEW DELHI;
17
th December., 2002
DR. P.C. ALEXANDER
Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Industry
 
 
 
REPORT
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Mines (Ministry of Coal and
Mines) on the Recommendations contained in the  64
th  Report (of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry) on  Modernisation, Restructuring  and Expansion Programme of Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (HZL) 
and  post disinvestment performance of  Hindustan  Zinc Ltd in the background of the shareholders agreement.  
Hindustan Zinc Limited (HZL),  one of the leading producers of lead and zinc, was incorporated   in January 1968 as a
public sector Company after the take over of the erstwhile Metal Corporation of India Limited, to develop mining and
smelting capacities to meet the domestic demand of zinc and lead metals..   The authotrised share capital of HZL is Rs.
500 crore and the paid up capital is Rs. 422.53 crore.  The Government held 75.92% of the equity as 24.08% of its
equity was disinvested during the period 1991-93.  Government decided to further disinvest 26% equity capital of HZL
to a strategic partner with an appropriate role in management. On 11
th April,,2002, the Government has disinvested 26%
equity of HZL and management of the company wastransferred to the Strategic Partner  (S.P.) namely, M/s Sterlite
Opportunities and Ventures Ltd. with this  disinvestment the stake  of the Government in the Company has come
down    to 49.92% . Sub-Committee   on Ministry of Mines and Coal under the  convertion of Shri A.C Jose  (LS) 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
visited HZL , Nagpur on 11th to 14th September, 2002 and on the basis of that visit  64th  Report  was presented /laid on
the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on  the  8th March, 2002. 
 
2.         The Department of Mines was requested   for furnishing action taken note  vide O.M. No. RS.15/2/2002 –Ind.
dated  14th March, 2002.  The Department of  Mines  vide O.M. No.2(5)/2002-Met.II dated 20th May, 2002 stating that
the Government  has disinvested 26%  equity of HZL  and the management of the company had been transferred on 11th
April, 2002  to the Strategic Partner   (S.P)  namely, M/s  Sterlite opportunities and Ventures Ltd.  with this
disinvestment  the stake of Government in  the company had come down to  49.92%  which was less than 50% and
hence HZL was no longer a Public Sector Undertaking.  Therefore, it may not be advisable to furnish an Action Taken
Note (ATN) on 64th Report. 
 
3.            However,  the argument of the Department of Mines  was found untenable   and therefore was found not
justifiable on the following grounds:-
1.      64th  Report  was presented to the parliament on the 8 th march, 2002 and forwarded to the Department of
Mines for furnishing action taken note prior to disinvestment of Hindustan Zinc Ltd.
2.      Even after disinvestment the Government stake continued to be to the tune of 49.92% which indicated
Government's substantial stake in the company
3.      Recommendations contained in the 64th Report also covered the disinvestment aspect whereupon the
Department of Mines should have given the detailed information for the Members of the Committee.
4.      The Department of Mines should have furnished the details regarding 'share purchase agreements ", details
of understandings reached between the Government and M/s Sterlite Opportunities and Ventures Ltd. , mode
of management etc. in the post divested phase,
5.
      The Government's representatives would be the Members of, Board of Directors' who would participate in
the meeting of the Board and act as a link between the new management of the company in post divested
phase and the Government, therefore, such the representatives of Government would ultimately supervise the
functioning of the company and therefore the company would remain in fact under the overall supervision of
the Government. Therefore, it was reasonable that Government/Departments should continue to furnish
information to Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee whenever it is sought .
 
6.
      The Hindustan Zinc Ltd. even in the past divested era would continue to utilize the national resources and
therefore should continue to be responsible and responsive to the nation/Government and people of the
country in general.
 
7.      The purpose of disinvestment was although to generate revenue, but most importantly to inject operational
efficiency and managerial effectiveness in the company and for the general benefit of the economy.  The
purpose was not doing away of accountability in the system.
 
8.      In order to avoid the repetition of what happened to VSNL and TATA  quagmire over a decision regarding
investment, it is suggested the companies management should continue to be responsible to the Government
to post divested phase and on this count should continue to furnish information to Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee as and when asked for.
 
4.            Therefore, the Department of Mines was requested vide communication No. RS.15/2/2002-Ind. dated 1
st
November, 2002  to furnish the details regarding share purchase agreement, details of understandings reached between
the Government and M/s Sterlite Opportunities and Ventures Ltd., Mode of management etc. in the post divested phase,
the role of the representatives of Government in the Board of Directors of New Management and new initiatives taken
by the new Management of HZL and Performance of Company in the post divested phase and any other incidental and
relevant matter.
 
5.         The Department of Mines vide Communication No. 2(5)/2002-Met.II dated 22 nd November, 2002 furnished a

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
note containing the requisite information about post disinvestment performance of Hindustan Zinc Limited (HZL) in the
background of the Shareholders Agreement. 
 
6.         The Department of Mines further stated   in its notes that the recommendations contained in para 6.6 of 64 th
Report relating to upgrading the status of HZL from “Miniratna” to “Navratna” does not call for action after
disinvestment of the company.   The other recommendations made in the 64 th Report of Standing Committee had been
brought to the notice of the new management of HZL for appropriate consideration and taking action as may be fit in the
best economic interest of the company.
 
7.         The Committee is convinced with the logic of Department of Mines as regards the recommendations contained
in para 6.6 relating to upgrading the status of HZL from “Miniratna” to “Navratna” does not call for action after
disinvestment of the company.   However, the Committee desires that the action taken on  other relevant  
recommendations made in the 64
th Report of the Committee, as contained in Chapter –1 of the present report and
forwarded to the new management of HZL for appropriate consideration and action as well the response of New
Management  as the observations and conclusion of the Committee in the present report  may be obtained and forwarded
to the Committee .
 
 
CHAPTER –I
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  AS CONTAINED IN
64
TH REPORT
 
PRODUCTION CAPACITY OF HINDUSTAN ZINC LTD.
The Committee notes the Ore  production  capacity of    Hindustan Zinc Ltd. Mines  and recommends that HZL
management should make efforts  for  optimisation of production   to the maximum extent    at the  commercial level  
and  operation of each mines  with the minimum of  waste .  The efforts may be made for   reduction in the   cost of 
operating   Mines by employing   latest tools and technology.     The capacity utilisation of Jawar Mines,   Rajpura
Dariba    Sargipalli have been quite low . Steps may be taken to improve the same.
(Para 4.3)
The Committee appreciates the HZL management in general and employees of Debari Zinc Smelter and Vizag 
Electrolytic  Zinc Smelter for  commendable capacity utilisation .  The Committee feels that   while  there is a scope for
improving  capacity  utilisation at Vizag plant , and the at the same time the Committee recommends that efforts should
be made for  maximizing the capacity  utilisation of all   HZL smelter  since the   measures undertaken would reduce the
cost of production.
(Para 4.5)
PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE
The Committee   appreciates the achievement of   actual production
The Committee, while appreciating  the financial performance  of HZL  recommends that  efforts would be made
on the part of  HZL management to continue with commendable    financial performance of the Company. 
(Para 6.5)
The Committee further recommends that   the Department of Mines should approach the  Department of Public
Enterprises for  initiating  necessary action  for promoting HZL  from the present status of    "Mini-Ratna " to  "Nav
Ratna" .   
Para 6.6)
MARKETING STRATEGY OF  HZL AND SALES PERFORMANCE
The Committee   is appreciative   of the  sales performance of HZL  and at the  same time recommends   that  
HZL management should   make further efforts to enhance market share  in domestic as well as international market.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
(Para 7.3)
SWOT ( STRENGTHS, WEAKNESSES, OPPORTUNITIES AND THREATS) ANALYSIS OF HZL .
The Committee recommends that HZL management would rationalise its  economy   of  scale   in HZL  by
giving   due consideration to cost  benefit ratio in  all   its units.  HZL management  should chalk out  suitable plan  on
product portfolio   management  so that diversification in other growth  oriented  related /unrelated portfolio may  be 
taken care of .
(Para 8.2)
 
The CMD HZL informed the Committee the power tariff is eating    into the profitability of the Committee.  
Therefore, something  needs to be down  seriously for uninterrupted  power  supply  at less  tariff .  Steps also  needs  to
be  taken to improve the performance of unviable mines.
(Para 8.3)
MODERNISATION AND EXPANSION PROGRAMME
The Committee notes that   existing  zinc production capacity has    increased by  10,000 tpa at  Debari  Zinc
Smelter  and Zinc  capacity  has also been  increased  by 10,000 tpa at Vizag Smelter   . The Sub-Committee   hopefully
recommends that all out efforts should be made for installed capacity   utilisation.
(Para 9.2)
The Committee  hopes that the Nickel Technology proving plant for  recovery of Nickel from  low grade 
lateritic  chromite should perform  as per expectations   and contribute to  the financial performance of HZL in a
substantial   manner.    The other expansion and diversification schemes being  contemplated may be started as early as
possible.  The department of Mines may give  its approval wherever  necessary.
(Para 9.3)
CAPITAL RESTRUCTURING PROGRAMME
The Committee is happy to  note that the   return on capital employed on  HZL is to the tune of  26.33%.  The
fact that  company is a zero  debt company  gives satisfaction   to the Committee.   The Company  should continue to
maintain  this status.
(Para 10.3)
The Committee  has been given  to understand  that   HZL  is at the  advanced stage of further   divestment   to
the extent of 26% to a strategic partner .  The Committee hopes that  due  care would be   given   for evaluation of 
assets   of HZL  at current  market value and  adequate transparency would be  maintained.   However, the process of
restructuring should not be   procrastinated   .  In case there is  going to be more than 6 months  in restructuring,
necessary steps should be taken to  solve the  all pending issues and problems.  Delay in restructuring    may delay
implementation of  many schemes. 
(Para 10.4)
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
The  Committee is of the  view that  adequate investment on  R&D  generates capability to  innovate   HZL,  
management may consider to  make sufficient investment on Research and Development.
(Para 11.3)
The Committee   hopes that the  investment  made on the Jagpura Gold  project, Bio-leaching   technology for
recovery of  metals from   leach    Ores and pilot  plant for  treating 500 kg/day of poly metallic nodules  to recover  
copper, nickel and cobalt  would prove  helpful in exploring  new vistas and increasing profitability.
(Para 11.4)
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
RATIONALISATION OF MANPOWER
The Committee understands that optimization of   manpower is  of utmost importance in corporate     planning in
the present market   driven economy.  Therefore,  it is   but natural  for HZL management to embark upon the policy of 
rightsizing its  manpower in all  its units, after proper study, for running them  in a  cost effective manner.   However,
the    HZL management should keep the  interest of staff in mind while offering  VRS to them.
(Para 12.4)
 
CHAPTER – II
SHARE HOLDERS AGREEMENT (SHA), ROLE OF REPRESENTATIVE OF GOVERNMENT ON THE
BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF NEW MANAGEMENT OF HZL.
 
 The Committee was informed that Hindustan Zinc Limited (HZL) was disinvested on11.4.2002.  A shareholders
agreement (SHA) has been signed between the Government of India and M/s Sterlite Opportunities and Ventures
Limited (SOVL), who are the Strategic Partners (SP).The SHA  stipulates the terms and conditions for managing the
affairs of disinvested HZL including reconstitution of the Board of Directors. In terms of this Agreement the SP has
the right to nominate six directors who will be called “Purchaser Nominee Director” including “Managing Director”
of the company. The Government shall have the right to nominate five directors and will be called “Government
Nominee Director” and all will be non-executive directors of the company. The Chairperson of the Board of
disinvested HZL would be from the Government Nominee Directors till such time as the SP holds less than 51 per
cent of the share capital.
 
  2.       The Board of the Company is expected to manage the affairs of the company in accordance with the Articles of
Association of the Company and Companies Act 1956. For smooth transaction of the business of the company the
Articles of Association of HZL as PSU requiring amendment were identified and now have been amended in extra-
ordinary general meeting of the company.  Despite this, Schedule 4.5 of SHA identifies the matters for which special
consent is required from the Government for transacting the business envisaged in those items. A few examples
requiring affirmative note from Government are as follows:
 
(i)
            Winding up the Company voluntarily.
(ii)          Winding of the Company by a scheme of arrangement made under Section 517 of the Act.
(iii)         For various other matter pertaining to the winding up of the company under Sections 433(a), 494(1)(b),
507,512(1), 546(1)(b),550(1)(b) of the Act.
(iv)        Any buy-back by the Company of Shares under the provisions of Section 77A of the Act.
(v)          The granting of any security or creation any encumbrances on the assets of the Company or guaranteeing
the debts of any person which in aggregate exceeds 50% of the book value of Company’s net fixed assets
as per the latest audited financial statements of the Company, but excluding those necessary to secure
operating lines of credit/working capital requirements of the Company with institutional investors,
multilateral agencies, scheduled banks and financial institutions.
(vi)
        Any one or a series of transactions, which causes a sale, lease, exchange or disposition of fixed assets of
the Company or its subsidiary having an aggregate value exceeding 10% of the total value of the net fixed
assets of the Company as specified in the latest audited financial statement of the Company. For the
avoidance of doubt it is clarified that for the purposes of this Clause, any sale, lease, exchange or
disposition of fixed assets after the Closing Date shall be included in determining whether the aggregate
value of 10% has been exceeded. Further, nothing in this Clause shall be construed as approval to permit
one or a series of transactions, year to year, that disposes or has the effect of disposing off the fixed assets
of the Company or its subsidiaries upto the rate of 10% of the total value of the net fixed assets of the
Company as specified in the latest audited financial statement of the Company, annually, in an attempt to
dispose off the fixed assets of the Company.
(vii)
       The making, directly or indirectly, of loans or advances, in any one or a series of transactions, in excess of
Rs.200 million to any Person in the course of one calendar year.
(viii)     Any transfer, sale, lease, exchange or disposition of any mining leases of the Company granted to the
company under the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and the rules made there

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
under. 
 
3.   The other significant provisions of SHA are as follows:
 
Recitals
 
                                          (i)      Subject to Clauses 6.1.2 (b) and (c) the Parties envision that all Employees of the Company on the
date hereof will continue in the employment of the Company.
                                        (ii)      The SP recognises that the Government in relation to its employment policies follows certain
principles for the benefit of the members of the Scheduled Caste/ Scheduled Tribes, physically
handicapped persons and other socially disadvantaged   categories of the society. The SP shall use its
best efforts to cause the Company to provide adequate job opportunities for such persons. Further, in
the event of any reduction in the strength of the Employees of the Company, the SP shall use its best
efforts to ensure that the physically handicapped persons, Scheduled Castes / Scheduled Tribes are
retrenched at the end. 
 
Clause 1.1   Definitions
“Employees” shall mean Persons who are, as of the Closing Date, in the employment of the company, and shall include
workmen, managers and supervisors, but shall exclude the directors on the Board. 
“Maximum Benefit” shall mean employee benefits which are the highest of (a) the terms of the voluntary retirement
scheme as provided by the Department of Public Enterprises guidelines dated May 5, 2000, as modified by the Office
Memorandum dated November 6, 2001 bearing reference number 2(32)/97-DPE(WC)/GL-LVI of Department of Public
Enterprises, Ministry  of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, Government of India (b) the terms of the latest
voluntary retirement scheme(s) approved for implementation by the Company dated September 29, 2001 and as detailed
in Schedule 1.2 for all Employees or (c) the benefits available to an Employee under applicable Law.
Clause 4.7 (f) (iii)       Extract of the power and duties of the Managing Director
            Appoint, retrench and/or dismiss Employees, consultants and contract labour of the Company, subject to Clause
6.1.2 and other applicable provisions of this Agreement, the applicable staff regulations, the standing orders of the
Company and applicable Law.
Clause 5.4  Right of First Refusal
(i)            Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Article 5, the Government, shall at any time and at its sole
discretion, have the option of selling Shares from its shareholding in the Company, representing not more than 5% of
the share capital of the Company existing as of date of this Agreement, to the employees of the Company (Employee
Sale Shares”). In the event that the Government exercises its option to sell part of its Shares to the employees, the
employees shall be issued fresh share certificates for the Shares transferred to the employees, without the endorsement
of the legend provided in Sub-Clause 5.3(b). The Shareholders agree that, upon the completion of transfer, the Shares
transferred to the employees pursuant to this sub-clause(i) shall not be subject to any restrictions in this Agreement,
whether by way of a voting arrangement or a right of first refusal.  
 
Clause 6.1.2 The SP covenants with the Government that
 
(a)
    notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, it shall not retrench any of the Employees of the
Company for a period of 1(one) year from the Closing Date other than any dismissal or termination of
Employees of the Company from their employment in accordance with the applicable staff regulations and
standing orders of the Company or applicable Laws;
(b)
   notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, but subject to Sub-Clause(a) above, any
restructuring of the labour force of the Company shall be implemented in the manner recommended by the
Board and in accordance with all applicable Laws;
(c)
    notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, but subject to Sub-Clause (a) above, in the event

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
of any reduction of the strength of the Company’s Employees, the SP shall ensure that the Company offers
its Employees an option to voluntarily retire on terms that are not, in any manner, less favourable than the
Maximum Benefits, if any; 
 
Clause  9.7            Assignment  
          
Except as may be expressly provided in this Agreement, none of the Parties to this Agreement may assign its
rights or obligations under this Agreement without the prior written consent of all of the other Parties.  
 
Clause  9.8 (c)Termination 
 
This Agreement shall terminate upon:
 
Either the Government or the SP, ceasing to hold, directly or indirectly, the legal and beneficial ownership of at
least 15% of the Share Capital. Provided that for the purposes of this Sub-Clause, the shareholding of any Persons(s)
who becomes a Party to this Agreement by virtue of Sub-clauses 3.2 (c) or 5.4(e) shall be included in the shareholding
of the Government or the SP, if the Government or the SP, as the case may be, has renounced its Rights under Sub-
Clause 3.2 (c) or transferred any Shares under Sub-Clause 5.4(e). 
 
CHAPTER – III
PERFORMANCE OF HZL IN THE POST DISINVESTED PHASE
 
            The Committee has been informed  that the Ministry of Disinvestment has evolved norms for evaluating the
performance of disinvested PSUs and asked for a quarterly report from the disinvested PSUs.   The details  furnished by
HZL for the quarter ending July 2002  and for the quarter ending September 2002 to the Ministry of Disinvestment is
annexed are as under:-
 
            Post Disinvestment information for the quarter ending 30
th June, '02
 
H.R. related  
Sr. Particulars Executives Workmen  
1 Employee strength at time to
disinvestment (nos.)
1083
(Incl. 2 Deputationists)
7239  
2. Attrition (separately for retirement,
dismissal, retrenchment, VRS & others)
Resignations - 4 Resignation -1 VRS
-1 Termination  
            -3
Death                       
-4 Total                   
 9
 
3. Fresh recruitment 12
(Secondment from Sterlite Group -
5, Management Trainees/ Graduate
Engineer Trainee- 7)
NIL
 
4. Employee strength on date of reporting. 1091 (Incl 2 Deputationists) 7230+1 *
*Re-instated  
5. Number of employees who attended
training courses post disinvestment
214 157
 
6. Statement on any change in wage
settlements (only for workmen)
 
 
No change  

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
7.
 
Statement on wage levels for non-
workmen
employees-
 
 
 
E-0 (Rs. 7400-200-12200)
E-1 (Ps. 10750-300-16750)
E-2 (Rs. 13000-350-18250)
E-3 (Rs. 1450(^350-18700)
E-4 (Rs. 17500-400-22300)
E-5(Rs. 18000-425-23100)
E-6 (Rs. 18500-450-23900)
E-7 (Rs. 19500-475-25200)
E-8 (Rs. 20500-500-26500)
E-9 (Rs. 23750-600-28550)
 
 
 
8 Statement on change in employee
oenefits (medical coverage, house
rent, others)
 
  
(i) Production Incentive Scheme
has been introduced w.e.f. 1.6.02
with the object of encouraging the
Executives to ' achieve higher
levels of production / productivity
and to share the gains equitably
ysnong all. The minimum '
production achievement for
incentive under the Scheme is 96%
of the Business Plan Target set out
for the month of each operating
unit. The scheme is proving to be
successful, since production at all
units of HZL has increased
considerably.
(iii)Facilities like Leave Travel
Concession and Leave Encashment
which were suspended / deferred
prior to disinvestment have been
restored, involving cash outflow of
about Rs. 2 crore.
Facilities like House Building
Loan, Leave Travel
Concession, Leave
Encashment and Conveyance
Advance, which were
suspended/deferred prior to
disinvestment have been
restored, involving cash
outflow of about Rs 14 crore.
 
9. Statement on new management
initiatives for employee participation.
 
NIL The new management
reiterated its endeavor and
collaborative ways of
working towards sustainable
and profitable growth of the
organisation, to meet the
expectations of
stakeholders, customers,
employees and the society at
large. Towards this, one of
the established ways already
in the organisation is the
Joint Consultative

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
Committee (JCC) consisting
of nominees of workmen
and management. The JCC
deals with for achieving
organisational goals of
productivity, quality, cost
management and above all,
good employee relations. In
addition, there are other bi-
partite forums involving
workers participation,
activities of which have
been augmented.
 
Operations related  
1. Sales in the full year prior to
disinvestment.
Rs.1470.49 Crore  
2. Sales in each of the full
years/quarter since
disinvestment.
Sales turnover during April-June '02 quarter was Rs. 390.48 Crore.
Zinc metal sale during the quarter under report was about 29%
higher than the corresponding period last year.
 
3. PBITDA data for the full
years/quarter since
disinvestment.
April - June '02 : Rs. 50.97 Crore
 
4. PAT data for the full
years/quarter since
disinvestment.
April - June '02 : Rs. 26.77 Crore
 
5. Market price of equity on ,
quarterly basis since
disinvestment.
(Rs.)
             April 02         May 02        June 02
High       37.65            37.65            38.25
Low        36.00            36.50            30.05
 
6. Statement on overdue loans
with details of the lender, debt
outstanding and interest
outstanding.
None
 
Growth related  
1. Net fixed assets since
disinvestment on a full
accounting year basis.
Not applicable
 
2. Description of fresh i
investments in the business.
Nil
 
3. Description of ,fresh
initiatives' in inventory
management, sales, marketing
and finance.
 
  
 
  
 
Inventory Manaaement
(i)             Procurement based on Business Plan targets.
(ii)            Reduction in lead-time for procurement.
(iii)          Development of alternate sources.
(iv)          Monthly review of inventories.
(v)           Disposal of non-performing assets and scrap through auction.
Sales & Marketing
(i)             Price Restructuring.
(ii)            Discount and Rebates to customers.
(iii)          Entering into MoUs with special terms with large customers.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
(iv)          Quality improvement to cater to requirement of specific sector.
Finance
(i)             'JPMG has been appointed as Internal Auditors.
(ii)            New monthly MIS system have been introduced which is
being audited by KPMG.
Civil Society related  
 
1. Statement of Social initiatives in
the area of location (in the area
of education, health, old age care
etc. .
The welfare amenities which were available to nearby population of the
Units prior to disinvestment continue to be availed by them.
 
2 Statement of initiatives for
implementation environmental
awareness and sustainable
develop­ment objectives.
World Environment Day and Van Mahotsav
are celebrated at all the operating units for
creating environment awareness alongwith
ISO certification and Environmental
Management system.
A series of training programmes, seminars
and workshops are organised throughout the
year at all Units and Head Office so as to
increase environmental awareness in the
employees, their families and neighbouring
community.
Optimum utilization of natural resources
along with energy conservation and best
recoveries to the international level are
planned for sustainable development.
 
 
 
Post Disinvestment information for the quarter ending 30
th Sept., '02
 
HR Related
Sr. Particulars July – Sept. 02 April – Sept. 02
1 Employee's strength at time to
disinvestment (nos.)
Executives
Workmen
1083
(includes 2 deputationists)
7239
1083
(includes 2 deputationists)
7239
2 Attrition (Separately for
retirement, dismissal,
retrenchment, VRS & others)
Executives
 
Workmen
 
 
 
Resigned -1
Reversion (Sterlite) - 1
 
Retirement 5 Death 5
Resignation 1
Discharge 1 Total
:          12
 
 
 
Resigned - 5
Reversion (Sterlite) -1
 
Retirement         5
Death                 9
Resignation       2
Discharge         4
VRS                 1
Total :            21
3 Fresh recruitment Executives
 
 
 
 
25
(Secondment from Sterlite
Group-18
 
37
(Secondment from Sterlite
Group - 23

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
 
 
Workmen
Management Trainees/Graduate
Engineer Trainees - 7)
Nil
Management Trainees/Graduate
Engineer Trainees -14)
Nil
4 Employees strength on date of
reporting
Executives
 
 
Workmen
 
 
1114
 
(includes 2 deputationists)
7218+1*
*re-instated
 
 
1114
 
(includes 2 deputationists)
7218+2* *re-
instated
5 Number of employees who
attended training courses post
disinvestment.
Executives
Workmen
 
 
 
401
644
 
 
 
615 801
 
6 Statement on any change in
wage settlements (only for
Workmen)
No change
7 Statement on wage level for
Non-workmen employees
No change
8 Statement on change in
employee benefits (medical
coverage, house rent, others)
 
Executives
 
 
 
Workmen
 
 
 
 
Payment of Rs.6700/- per Excecutive towards Ex-gratia & performance
linked annual  incentive for the year 2001-02, involving cash outflow of
about Rs.72 lakhs.
 
·
             Settled the issue of production incentive arrears from 1.7.99 to
31.12.01 (involving Rs.2.90 crore)
·             Settled enhancement of LTC encashment limit for the blocks
2002-2005.
·             Settled and paid Bonus/Ex-gratia, performance linked annual
incentive for the year 2001-02 (involving Rs.5.58 crore)
 
 
 9 Statement on new management
initiatives for employee
participation.
(Workmen)
The new management reiterated its endeavour and collaborative ways of
working towards sustainable and profitable growth of the organization, to
meet the expectations of stakeholders, customers, employees and the
society at large. Towards this, one of the established ways already in the
organization is the Joint Consultative Committee (JCC) consisting of
nominees of workmen and management. The JCC deals with for
achieving organizational goals of productivity, quality, cost management
and above all, good employee relations. In addition, there are other bi-
partite forums involving workers participation, activities of which have
been augmented.
Operations related
1. Sales in the full year prior to
disinvestment.
Rs. 1470.40 Crore
2. Sales in each of the quarter since  

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
disinvestment
 
July-Sept. 02
 
April-Sept. 02
 
 
Rs. 352.79 Crore
 
Rs.743.27 Crore
3. PBITDA data for the full
years/quarter since
disinvestment.
 
July-Sept. 02
 
April-Sept. 02
 
 
 
 
 
Rs. 74.51 Crore
 
Rs. 125.48 Crore
4. PAT data for the full
years/quarter since
disinvestment.
 
July-Sept. 02
 
April-Sept. 02
 
 
 
 
Rs. 31.10 Crore
 
Rs. 57.87 Crore
5. Market price of equity on
quarterly basis since
disinvestment.
 
April - June 02
 
July - Sept. 02
 
 
 
 
High Rs. 38.25 Low Rs. 30.05
 
High Rs. 33.90 Low Rs. 17.10
6. Statement on overdue loans with
details of the lender, debt
outstanding and interest
outstanding.
None
Growth related
1. Net fixed assets since
disinvestment on a full
accounting year basis.
July-Sept'02      )
April - Sept. 02 )
 
 
 
Advance payment of Rs. 2.90 Crore for 30 MW Captive Power Plant,
which is likely to be commissioned by March, '03
2. Description of fresh investments
in the business.
Nil
3. Description of fresh initiatives in
inventory management, sales,
marketing and finance.
 
InventoryManagement
1.           Procurement based on business plan targets resulting in reduction
in cost of input/maintenance stores.
2.           Reduction in lead time for procurement.
3.           Development of alternate sources
4.           Monthly review of inventories.
5.           VED/XYZ analysis of non-moving items.
6.           Disposal of non-moving assets & scrap through auction.
Sales & Marketing
(i)           Price Restructuring.
(ii)         Discount and Rebates to customers.
(iii)        Entering into MoUs with special terms with large customers.
(iv)       Quality improvement to cater to requirement of specific sector.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
Finance
(i)        KPMG has been appointed as Internal Auditors. New monthly
MIS system have been introduced which is being audited by
KPMG.
Civil Society related
1. Statement of Social initiatives in
the area of location (in the area
of education, health, old age care
etc.
The welfare amenities which were available to nearby population of the
Units prior to disinvestment continue to be availed by them.
2. Statement of initiatives for
implementation environmental
awareness and sustainable
develop­ment objectives.
ISO 14001 Certification regarding Management systems at Debari
Smelter are in the final stages of implementation. In addition, the training
for awareness of Senior Executives and middle level Executives for two
days each was conducted under this programme.
 
Senior Manager (Env.) and Process Manager were sent to two days
programme at IPHC, Kolkata for awareness of latest legislation in the area
of environment.
 
The major waste generated which uses land also is slag at Chanderiya
Lead Zinc Smelter. Cement & Building Research Institute has taken up a
programme for utilizing this slag in nearby cement factory to analyse its
use without polluting environment.
CHAPTER – IV
ISSUES RELATING TO OTHER MATTERS
 
The Committee has been informed  that in accordance with SEBI guidelines, the SP made the public offer and
thereby their stake in the company has gone up from 26% to 46%. The Government has also announced Employees
Share Purchase Scheme. In accordance with this scheme the employees and the executives of company can buy shares
of the company. The total number of shares to be sold under this scheme will be  within 5% of paid up capital.
 
 The new management has not done any major changes in the working of the company. They have not retrenched any
employee. They have, however, done cost cutting which has resulted in better profit
CHAPTER – V
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
1.            Management of Company Affairs
 
            The Committee notes the composition of the Board of  Directors of the Company which is expected to manage
the affairs of the company in accordance with the Articles of Association of the Company and The Companies Act
1956.  the Committee expects that new managements would ensure that no deviation is made in this regard.
 
2.         Special consent required from the Government
 
            The Committee notes the provisions identified in Schedule 4.5 of Shareholders Agreement (SHA) where special
consent is required from the Government for transecting the business pertaining of those items. The Committee
recommends that “Government Nominee Director” would actively participate in the meeting of Board of Director of the
Company and would keep the Government well informed the decision reached in the meeting.   The Governments
Nominee Director need to be vigilant and epitome of ensuring responsive and responsible management of affairs in the
Company.
 
3.            Adequate job opportunities for SC/ST physically handicapped persons
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
            The Committee is happy to note that the strategic partners recognizes that Government in relation to its
employment policies follows certain principles for the benefit of the members of the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes,
physically handicapped persons and other socially disadvantaged categories of the society.  The SP shall use its best
efforts to cause the Company to provide adequate job opportunities for such persons.  Further, in the event of any
reduction in the strength of the Employees of the Company, the SP shall use its best efforts to ensure that the physically
handicapped persons, Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes are retrenched at the end.  The Committee hopes that the new
management would ensure the implementation of the provision inwards and deeds.
 
4.            Efficiency Vs Human Relation Approach
 
            The Committee is of the view that the new management would take every care for optimum utilization of
manpower by adopting the principle of placing a right man at right place in right time in such a way that company
affairs are managed in the efficient and effective manners and keeping in view endowment of human values and ethics.
 
5.            Keeping track with changing economic scenario
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that the new management should keep an eye to the changing economic
scenario at the national and International market and reorient its mission and objectives so as to improve its physical and
financial performance.  In demand driven economy it is essential that adequate attention is being given to market
research and reorient its production plan as per the demand of the market.   New management should keep on analyzing
the strength, weaknesses, opportunities and threats     of the company and chalked out future course of action as per the
requirement. 
 
 
6.         New management initiative for employee participation
 
            The Committee hopes that the joint consultative Committee (JCC) consist of nominees of workmen and
management would be functional in real terms and all efforts would be made for achieving organizational goals of
productivity, quality, cost management and good employee relation.
 
7.            Initiative in Inventory Management, Sales, Marketing and Finance
 
            The Committee notes that the initiative taken by the new management in the field of inventory management,
sales, marketing and finance and hopes that such initiative would lead to quick disposal of inventories, increment in
turnover and  sales and market share of HZL products and attainment of favorable financial ratios.
 
8.         Welfare amenities
 
            The Committee is happy to note that the welfare amenities which were available to nearby population of the
Units prior to disinvestment continue to be availed by them. The Committee hopes that   the new management will   
initiate renewed course of action for peripheral developments.  
 
9.            Environmental awareness and  sustainable development
 
              The Committee, while appreciating the initiative taken by the new management    for implementation of
environmental awareness  and sustainable development objectives recommends that the new management would
continue with  its concerted efforts.
 
10.            Disinvestment proceeds  for  spending  on social sector
 
            The Committee is of the considered view that   the Government should create a special fund to keep the  this
disinvestment proceed of  the company for spending on social sectors scheme with high appeal.
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
 
 
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE MEETING
XIV
 
The Committee  met  at  3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 17th December, 2002 in Committee Room  ‘A’, Ground
Floor Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
Dr. P.C. Alexander         - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
3. Smt. Saroj Dubey
4. Shri Faguni Ram
5. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
6. Shri P.K. Maheshwari
7. Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
8. Shri S. Sivasubramanian
9. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
 
LOK SABHA
 
10. Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
11. Shri Nepal Chandra Das
12. Shri Thomas Hansda
13. Shri A.C. Jose
14. Shri Sunil Khan
15. Shri Majay Lal
16. Shri A. Narendra
17. Shri Ananta Nayak
18. Shri P. Rajendran
19. Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
20. Chowdhary Talib  Hussain
21. Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
2.         At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of agenda for the
meeting of the day
 
3.            Thereafter, the Committee took up following draft reports for consideration:-
 
(i)
                 95th Draft Report on inter PSUs cooperation in engineering and Construction Sectors the Department of
Public Enterprises;
(ii)                100th Draft Report on performance review of National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. (NMDC)
(Ministry of Steel);
(iii)              103rd Draft Report on the action taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 87th Report on

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/105threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:24:57]
the implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-restructuring Package and Revival of Bharat
Refractories Ltd. (Ministry of Steel);
(iv)              104th Draft Report on the action taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 85th Report on
the Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-restructuring package and Revival of Bharat
Refractories ltd. (Ministry of Steel)
(v)               105th Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 64th report on
Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes and Post Disinvestment Performance of
Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (HZL) Ministry of Coal and Mines;
(vi)
              106th Draft Report Globalisation and Capital Goods Industry the Department of Public Enterprises,
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(vii)            107th Draft Report on Liquidated Damages and Related Issues (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises);
(viii)           108th Draft Report on the action taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 91st Report on
Coir Board-A Performance Review pertaining to the Ministry of agro & Rural Industries;
(ix)              109th Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 84th Report on
implementation of Prime Minister’s Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala,
Ministry of Agro & Rural Industries;and
(x)
               110th Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 86th Report on
Performance Review of metal Scrap Trade Corporation Ltd. (MSTC) Ministry of Steel.
 
 
 
3.1       *                                         *                                            *
 
3.2       *                                         *                                            *
 
3.3       *                                         *                                            *
3.4       After a brief discussion all the reports were adopted unanimously without any modification.
 
3.5       The Chairman nominated two Members from Lok Sabha and three Members from Rajya Sabha to present the
reports to both Houses of Parliament.
 
4.         *                                                       *                                           *
The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 p.m.