 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
 TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY -SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
 
 ACTION TAKEN ON THE 274 th  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17) 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
 (DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22 nd  November, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table o f Lok Sabha on  22 nd  November, 2016 ) 
 REPORT NO.  
252 
 
 REPORT NO.  
252 
 
 REPORT NO.  
276 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
 
 ACTION TAKEN ON THE 274 th  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17) 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES  
(DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22 nd  November, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  22 nd  November, 2016 ) 

C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………….. (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………..  (ii) 
 
3. REPORT ………………………………………………………………………………….. (iii) 
 
(i)  CHAPTER – I 
 Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the              
Ministry/Department ………………………………………………………………… 
1-2 
 
(ii)  CHAPTER–II 
  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
  view of the Government's replies……………………………………………………..3 
 
(iii)  CHAPTER–III 
   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has either not                        
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its                
replies…………………………………………………… …………………………..4-5 
 
(iv)  CHAPTER – IV 
  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
  have not been  received…………………………………………………………….6-12 
 
4. * Minutes……………………………………………………………………………..     ……   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
* to be appended at printing stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 1 st  September, 2016)  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
     
1.   Shri Sharad Yadav  _  Chairman  
2. Shri Narendra Budania  
3. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
4. Shri Vivek Gupta  
5. Shri Shwait Malik   
6. Shri K. K. Ragesh 
7. Shri Vivek K. Tankha  
8. Shri Pramod Tiwari    
9.   Shri T. G. Venkatesh  
10. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav 
 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
11. Smt. Ranjanben Bhatt 
12. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary 
13. Shri S. P. Muddahanume Gowda    
14. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque 
15. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
16. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
17. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
18. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
19. Shri. Tapas Paul 
20. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao 
21. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
22. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy 
23. Shri Raj Kumar Saini 
24. Shri B. Senguttuvan  
25. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
26. Shri Y. V. Subbareddy 
27. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
28. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
29. Smt. Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen) 
30. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
31. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena 
 
Secretariat  
 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sasilekha Nair, Director 
3.      Shri J.K. Mallick, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Deputy Director 
5.      Smt. Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer 
6.      Shri Divender Singh Bisht, Committee Officer 
 
 (i) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamen tary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Seventy-Sixth Report on Action Taken Notes furn ished by the Department of Public 
Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Publi c Enterprises) on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hu ndred and Seventy- Fourth 
Report on the Demands For Grants (2016-17) pertaini ng to Department of Public 
Enterprises. 
 
2.  I, thank the Department of Public Enterprises ( Ministry of Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises) for furnishing the Action Taken  Notes on the recommendations 
contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Seventy- Fourth Report. 
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on the 24 
th  October, 2016 considered and 
adopted the report. 
  
 
 
 
 
 Sharad Yadav 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
New Delhi 
October, 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises  (Department of Public Enterprises) 
on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s  Two Hundred and Seventy- 
Fourth Report on the Demands For Grants (2016-17) p ertaining to Department of Public 
Enterprises. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterp rises) in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter I -  The recommendations/observations, which have bee n accepted by the 
Ministry. 
 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter -II -  The recommendations/observations which the Commi ttee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic 
and explanations advanced by the Ministry and there fore do not want to pursue them for 
the present. 
 
Chapter -III -  The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has 
not accepted replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry should furnish 
logical explanations thereof. 
 
Chapter -IV - The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received. 
 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its langua ge in vague terms therefore; the 
Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of 
recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention 
and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
The Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that the Government has come up  with some important 
initiatives in the area of revival / restructure / closure of CPSEs. As the Committee 
gathers, the earlier mechanism involved the adminis trative Ministry / Department, the 
BRPSE, the BIFR and finally the approving authority , the Cabinet. This multiplicity of 
agencies involved delay in granting approval to rev ival plans and most of the revival 
proposals when finally approved would have already become redundant due to escalation 
of costs owing to the time over run. This vexed sit uation contributed to the further 
downfall of the sick / loss incurring and weak CPSEs involved.    
Para No 41 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 Now, as per the new system the administrative Minis tries will oversee the 
performance of its CPSEs based on the guidelines fo r”streamlining the mechanism for 
revival and restructuring of sick / incipient sick and weak Central Public Sector 
Enterprises: General principles and mechanism of re structuring” issued by DPE. Further, 
the Government has done away with the BRPSE and BIF R and AAIFR and they would 
stand abolished once the NCLT is constituted. The NCLT, provided for in the Companies 
Act, 2013, will henceforth be the sole entity to de cide upon the revival / restructure 
proposals of CPSEs. Also, the revival / restructure process has been rendered time bound. 
In this regard, the Committee observes that the ste p taken to put the administrative 
Ministry in charge of the monitoring of the health of their respective CPSEs is an 
appropriate decision as mid-course correction and o ther reformative measures can be 
taken swiftly without any time lapse as no third pa rty is getting involved. The Committee 
expects that all the lacunae which plagued the earl ier system will be eliminated in the 
new mechanism.   
Para No 42 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 The recommendations of erstwhile BRPSE were adviso ry in nature and final 
decision regarding acceptance of such recommendatio ns rested with the administrative 
Ministries/Departments. In order to streamline the multiple mechanism for revival of sick 
CPSEs, the Government approved on 7.10.2015 for win ding up of Board for 
Reconstruction of Public Enterprises (BRPSE). Accor dingly, the BRPSE was wound up 
vide notification dated 9 
th  November, 2015.  
 
 DPE has issued guidelines issued for revival/restr ucturing of CPSEs. The 
administrative Ministries/ Departments are empowere d and made responsible to monitor 
the health of CPSEs functioning under their control  and take timely redressal measures 
for revival/ restructuring/disinvestment of sick/lo ss making CPSEs with the approval of 
the competent authority in a time bound manner .    
1 

 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that the Finance Minister has made couple of important 
policy pronouncements – first, regarding disinvestm ent of Government share in CPSEs 
and second, on the disposal of fixed assets of the CPSEs identified for winding up / 
closure. The Department has submitted that a mechan ism has been structured to look into 
the operationalisation of the said announcements. The multitier structure has CCEA at the 
summit, NITI Aayog would identify the CPSEs and the  critical parameters for 
disinvestments / strategic sale. The CGD is to func tion as supervisory and 
recommendatory body and an EC to valuate the assets  of CPSEs concerned. The 
Committee has taken specific note of the submission  of DPE that this entire subject falls 
under the purview of the Department of Disinvestmen t. However, the Committee 
observes that the subject will have a profound bear ing on the CPSEs in the country and 
DPE should evince keen interest in the way things s hape up on this front. This is even 
more important considering that the very mandate of  DPE has been enhanced on these 
lines and, it being member in all the relevant Comm ittees of disinvestment, the 
Department has to make more holistic interventions on the issues / policies pertaining to 
CPSEs.   
Para No 49 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 DPE has noted the views of the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 

CHAPTER–II 
The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee note that while replying to the query  on Mid Term Review 
(MTR) of schemes during XII Five Year Plan, the Dep artment has restricted themselves 
by just submitting that no review has been undertak en.  The Committee observes that the 
Department while replying to the Committee should keep in mind that answers given to a 
Parliamentary Committee should be holistic and self -contained.   In the absence of a 
substantial reply, the Committee is precluded from comprehending the reason for not 
undertaking the MTR.  This information has to be provided to the Committee. 
 
Para No 15 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
 The observations of the Committee are noted for co mpliance.  The Mid Term 
Review Schemes was earlier being done at the level of Planning Commission and it did 
not take place during XII 
th  Plan Period.  Hence, it was reported to the Commit tee that 
MTR for DPE schemes in XIIth Plan has not been undertaken. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 

CHAPTER–III 
The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted 
the replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its replies 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that DPE claims that the CPSEs in India are performing to 
the best of their abilities in the prevailing econo mic scenario of declining commodity 
prices, reduced capital inflows into their economie s and increasing financial volatility. 
Even while taking the claim of DPE in its face valu e and acknowledging the fact that the 
Committee is not in knowledge of the performance of  all the CPSEs in India, the 
Committee cannot but share its observation that the  current status of all the 31 CPSEs 
under the Department of Heavy Industry (DHI) is sic k / incipient sick and weak as per 
DPEs guidelines for  ”Streamlining the mechanism fo r revival and restructuring of sick / 
incipient sick and weak Central Public Sector Enter prises: General principles and 
mechanism of restructuring”. Accordingly, the Commi ttee observes that the stand taken 
by DPE that CPSEs are performing well under the giv en conditions as status-quoits and 
wants the Department to adopt a new forward looking stance. 
Para No. 13 
Action Taken Replies 
 The performance of CPSEs as per Public Enterprises Survey 2014-15 is given 
below: 
 Total turnover/gross revenue from operations of al l CPSEs during 2014-15 stood 
at Rs.19.96 lakh crore compared to Rs.20.66 lakh cr ore in 2013-14 showing a reduction 
in turnover of 3.40%. Overall net profit of all 235  CPSEs during 2014-15 stood at 
Rs.1.03 lakh crore compared to Rs.1.28 lakh crore i n 2013-14 showing a decrease in 
overall profit of 19.71 %. The net worth of all CPS Es went up from Rs.9.45 lakh crore in 
2013-14 to Rs.9.85 lakh crore in 2014-15 registerin g a growth of 4.12 %. Contribution of 
CPSEs to Central Exchequer decreased from Rs.2.20 l akh crore in 2013-14 to Rs.2.00 
lakh crore in 2014-15 showing a decline of 9.23 %.  
 
 DPE has issued guidelines for revival/restructurin g of CPSEs. As per the 
guidelines, the administrative Ministries/ Departme nts are responsible to monitor the 
health of CPSEs functioning under their control and  take timely redressal measures for 
revival/ restructuring/disinvestment of sick/loss m aking CPSEs with the approval of the 
competent authority. 
 
Further Recommendations  
 
 The Committee finds that the reply of DPE has not a ddressed the concerns 
flagged by the Committee in its recommendation. DPE  should base their opinion on 
the actual individual performance status of CPSEs o n their own guidelines rather 
than echoing the macro performance details of the P ublic Enterprises Survey 2014-
15. Even from the performance figures provided by D PE from the Public 
Enterprises Survey, the Committee does not find jus tification for the sweeping 
opinion of DPE that all CPSEs in the country are pe rforming to the best of their 
abilities under the given circumstances.  
 
4 

 Accordingly, the Committee reiterates its recommen dation that the stand of 
DPE regarding the performance of CPSEs is status-qu oits and expects a more 
coherent response from DPE in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 

CHAPTER – IV 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
have not been  received 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that the mandate of DPE has be en augmented with the 
addition of roles in monitoring of performance of C PSEs and effective management of 
their assets.  This has been done by addition of su bjects to the Allocation of Business of 
DPE.  The Committee is of the considered opinion th at though the Budget allocation of 
DPE is small compared to the major Ministries/ Depa rtments of the Government, the role 
to be essayed by them is critical.  As the nodal De partment of all CPSEs in India, their 
effective evaluation and monitoring is going to be humongous task.  The newly added 
responsibility of CAPEX monitoring, measures to imp rove performance of CPSEs and 
other capacity building initiatives and advice rega rding revival/ restructuring/ closure of 
CPSEs will render the working of DPE pivotal to the way CPSEs perform in the country. 
Para No. 10 
Action Taken Replies 
 Department of Public Enterprises is compiling the C APEX of select CPSEs on 
monthly basis and submitting it in the prescribed format. 
 
 Department of Public Enterprises has issued MoU Gu idelines 2016-17 under 
which (i) “CAPEX” MoU parameter has been prescribed  as one of the mandatory targets 
for CPSEs with weightage of 15-20.  It has been fur ther explained that CAPEX may be 
decided on the basis of viable projects available f or expansion, modernisation or 
diversification, cash and bank balance or parked fu nds, net worth, borrowings etc., and, 
(ii) “CAPEX” under the title “Leveraging Net Worth”  has been prescribed as one of 
mandatory targets for CPSEs with weightage of 5-15. 
 
Further Recommendations/ observations 
 
 
 The Committee takes note of the fact that DPE has started compiling the 
CAPEX data of CPSEs. The Committee waits to be info rmed of the methodology 
adopted for the analysis of the above said data and  how DPE proposes to utilize the 
information so obtained with respect to the extant guidelines of the Department in 
this regard. 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 Accordingly, the Committee observes that DPE shoul d realize and imbibe the 
magnitude and importance of the responsibilities th at have been entrusted to them and 
take more proactive measures to play out this role.  Rather them imagining themselves 
just as a nodal coordinating agency. DPE should rei nvent themselves as an arm of the 
Government which can take decisive steps on its own  or in coordination with other 
Ministries / Departments to create a facilitative m ilieu for CPSEs to perform to their 
potential. The Committee is of the firm view that D PE should not be restricting 
themselves to just issuing guidelines and providing  advice. The new mandate gives them 
ample space to effectively follow up the implementation of the advices rendered by them  
6 

through their guidelines. Accordingly, the Committe e recommends that to be able to do 
this, DPE has to equip themselves better and come o ut with measures implementable on 
ground and also endeavour to create a coordinative platform involving the respective 
administrative Ministry and other relevant Governme nt agencies through which matters 
relating to the working of CPSEs in the country can  be resolved at a single stage availing 
time lag in administrative decisions, the single mo st degenerative factor in case of 
decisions related to CPSEs. 
Para No. 11 
Action Taken Replies 
 
 The observations/ recommendations of the Committee are noted. 
 
Further Recommendations/ observations  
 
 The Committee would wait for the information regar ding the concrete action taken 
by the Department regarding the setting up of a coordinative platform involving the 
respective administrative Ministries and other rele vant Government agencies 
through which matters relating to the working of CP SEs in the country can be 
resolved at a single stage.  
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 Further, from the submission of the DPE, the Commi ttee takes note that of the XII 
Plan outlays for various schemes of DPE, three sche mes have seen roughly around only 
50% of utilisation and one has seen only 20% of exp enditure.  The money allocated for 
Information Technology alone has seen a healthy uti lisation.   Here again, since a review 
of the scheme has not been undertaken the reasons f or the gross underperformance 
observed in the plan schemes are alien to the Commi ttee.  Regardless of this, the 
Committee expresses its dissatisfaction in the way of the plan schemes of DPE have 
underperformed during the XIIth Plan period. DPE sh ould make themselves aware of the 
reasons behind this situation and take necessary st eps to prevent them from recurring and 
report the same to the Committee. 
Para No 16 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 One of the reasons for underutilisation of XII th  Plan outlay of Plan Schemes of 
DPE is the decline in the targets CRR Scheme due to  gradual reduction in the VRS in 
CPSEs during the last few years.  Further, expendit ure under RDC, especially during 
2015-16, declined due to a change in MoU system by which the practice of constituting 
various ‘Task Force’ has been dispensed with.  However, now the RDC Scheme has been 
modified to extend its scope to include more activi ties such as thematic studies on the 
generic issues of general/ sectoral nature, seminar s and workshops to adopt collaborative 
and cooperative learning for experience  sharing, t raining programmes for capacity 
building and skill development, improvement in perf ormance evaluation and 
management processes of CPSEs, incentives best prac tices in focus areas through grant 
of awards/ incentives to CPSEs and SLPEs.  The broa dened arrangement will enhance 
utilisation of funds under the RDC Scheme.  Similar ly, in respect of CRR Scheme also, 
DPE has taken-up with National Skill Development Co rporation (NSDC) to broaden the 
network of training providers and to follow a stand ardized methodology of training 
design and delivery.  Broadening the network of training providers will help in covering  
7 

maximum possible number of VRS/CSS optees in future. 
 
 With the modifications introduced in the RDC Schem e and broadening of various 
areas/fields under its ambit, activities will be spread over the entire financial year to bring 
about effective utilisation of funds during 2016-17 and in the future. 
 
Further Recommendations/ observations 
 
 
 If VRS had reduced, the annual CRR allocation too s hould have been 
reduced accordingly, instead of retaining allocatio n despite under utilization. Also, 
DPE may inform about the alternative mechanism for ‘Task Force’ under MoU 
system. The Committee also recommends that outcome of studies, seminars, etc 
under RDC must be actionable initiatives that should be completed.  
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that departing from the pattern  of previous years, the 
Department has only two plan schemes in Financial Y ear 2016-17-Counselling, 
Retraining and Redeployment of Rationalized Employees of CPSEs (CRR) and Research, 
Development and Consultancy (RDC) on Generic issues  related to Enterprises (CPSEs & 
SLPEs).  A merger of schemes has been undertaken in  the case of RDC making the 
current RDC scheme more expansive containing more c omponents than earlier.  The 
Committee expects this measure to impart more finan cial and operational flexibility DPE 
resulting in better utilisation of allocated funds.  Accordingly, the Committee observes 
that DPE should make the most of the new initiative  brought out by the Ministry of 
Finance and avoid deficient utilisation and curtail ment of funds these schemes were 
prone to earlier. 
Para No 19 
Action Taken Replies 
 As mentioned in Para 16, RDC Scheme has been modif ied in the year 2016-17 
and the broadened arrangement will enhance utilisation of funds.  The observations of the 
Committee have been noted for compliance 
 
Further Recommendations/ observations 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed of the actionable out come of 
studies/seminars under RDC. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee has always been appreciative of the objectives served by the CRR 
scheme which basically offers a social security net  to employees of CPSEs who optees 
for VRS or get retrenched. The Committee takes into  cognizance the fact that NIESBUD 
had undertaken an evaluation of the scheme in 2012- 13 and had recommended a host of 
improvements. One of the major recommendations was the need to stress more on 
follow-ups and redeployment after linking with micr o credit/finance. Handholding 
projects and linkages were also recommended to enha nce redeployment /self-
employment opportunities of the former employees an d their dependents trained under 
the scheme. DPE have submitted that there recommend ations had been circulated to the 
Nodal Agencies for compliance. However, Committee finds that the number of people  
8 

redeployed after being trained under the scheme has  always hovered around 50% or less 
of the total trained personnel. The situation has c ontinued even after the 
recommendations of NIESBUD made in 2012. Accordingl y, the Committee strongly 
recommends that the Department should take appropri ate measures expeditiously to 
improve the number of trainees who get redeployed s ubsequent to the training under the 
scheme. In this regard, the Committee also wants DP E to consider focussed Skill 
Development under current impetus accorded to skill  development by the Government. 
The Nodal Agencies under the Scheme should identify the skill sets that are in demand in 
the local area in terms of employability and provid e training to people under the Scheme. 
To the Committee, this is one of the measures that can be taken to improve the 
redeployment ratio. Further,  this will also contribute towards the efforts of th e 
Government to address the huge skill deficit of the  workforce in the country in different 
spheres. 
Para No 24 
Action Taken Replies 
  The Department has taken a note of the observations of the Committee to improve 
the number of trainees who get redeployed subsequen t to training under CRR Scheme. 
However, it may be appreciated that the target grou p of CRR scheme is very unique and 
quite distinct from other Schemes of the Government . Mostly the VRS/VSS optees 
belong to 45-50 years age group. Therefore, there c ould be constraints in micro 
credit/bank finance affecting the feasibility of hi gher rate of redeployment. The 
provisions regarding inclusion of dependents (in li eu of eligible VRS optee, if the optee 
himself is not coming forward) has given fillip to the scheme and as per recent trend 
coverage of dependents is 40% to 50%. 
 
  However, with a view to broaden the network of Noda l Agencies/Training 
Providers and also to follow standardized methodolo gy of training, design and delivery, 
DPE has taken up with National Skill Development Co rporation (NSDC) seeking their 
support for quality and market oriented skill devel opment training under the CRR 
Scheme through their empanelled Training Providers.  This is likely to facilitate a proper 
matching of individual skills, aptitude of the typi cal target group and help in augmenting 
redeployability under the CRR Scheme. 
 
Further Recommendations/ observations. 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed of the outcome of neg otiation with NSDC 
and also how will the CRR be redesigned.  
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee note that during 2015-16, with only a fortnight left for the 
completion of the Financial Year almost Rs 1 crore out of the total Rs. 2.81 crore 
allocated to the scheme at RE has been left unspent .  The Committee take exception to 
such underutilization under an important initiative  like RDC scheme. However, the 
Committee takes into account the hope expressed by DPE that from 2016-17 onwards the 
performance of the scheme is expected to improve as  it has seen broad basing of its 
objectives and new components have been added as pa rt of subsuming some other 
schemes into it. Further, the umbrella nature of th e scheme is thought to provide more 
financial interoperationability. This will also help the Department to tide over the earlier  
9 

problem of last quarter spending peculiar to the ea rlier RDC scheme for which the 
Ministry of Finance has already granted an exemption from spending limits. 
 Para No 28 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 Under RDC Scheme, the amount of Rs.71.01 lakh was s urrendered in 2015-16 
since MoU negotiation meetings could not be held an d therefore bills were not raised.  
This Department has taken a note of the suggestions  of the Committee to enhance 
utilisation of funds under RDC Scheme.   
 
 CSR Cell, DPE has planned to organize five seminar s/ conferences / workshops 
on Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) during 201 6-17 and would utilize the 
earmarked funds under RDC Scheme of DPE well within time.  
 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted. 
Further Recommendations/ observations. 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed of actionable outcome s of these 
seminars/conferences/workshops under RDC. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee is happy to know that the Department  has already initiated steps 
to act on its recommendation regarding setting up o f a monitoring system to look into 
CSR fund utilisation by CPSEs.  It is also apprecia ted that the matter has also been taken 
up with the MoCA which administers the Companies Ac t, 2013.  The Committee 
observes that DPE should work in synchronisation wi th the MoCA in the matter relating 
to the monitoring of the CSR fund utilisation to en sure efficient internalisation of the 
CSR culture by CPSEs, thereby setting example for the private sector also to emulate. 
 
Para No 31 
Action Taken Replies 
 CSR Cell, DPE has collected sector-wise information  from CSR eligible CPSEs 
on utilization of CSR funds in order to monitor the  CSR spend by these CPSEs. Further, 
on all important issues relating to CSR provisions in the Companies Act, 2013, 
Companies (CSR Policy) Rules, 2014 and Schedule-VII  of the Act, DPE seeks advice of 
M/o Corporate Affairs.  
Further Recommendations/ observations. 
 
 
 DPE may include CSR performance on CPSEs in the Pu blic Enterprises 
Survey as a separate chapter. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 Firstly, the Committee notes with dissatisfaction t he disowning by DPE of the subject 
matter related to the agencies involved in the revival / restructure / closure of CPSEs in India. The 
Committee is critical of the tendency of the Depart ment to compartmentalise the replies by 
contending that the role of NCLT and BIFR would be explained by the respective Ministry /  
10 

Department concerned. As the nodal Department for t he overseeing of all CPSEs in the country, 
DPE is expected to provide a cogent reply to the Co mmittee even if the subject matter falls under 
the domain of other Ministries / Departments / Agen cies. The responsibility of action on the 
subject being with another Ministry / Department / Agency can be justified, but that should not 
preclude the collection of information on the subject. 
Para No 40 
Action Taken Replies 
 Matter relating to dealing with sick CPSEs under C ompanies Act, 2013 which 
includes the role of different agencies in this reg ard was taken up with Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs (MoCA). 
 
 Ministry of Corporate Affairs has replied vide  OM No.17/40/2016CL.V dated 
18.3.2016 that Companies Act, 2013 (“the Act”) vide  Section 407 to 434 (both inclusive), 
provide inter alia  for setting up of (a) the National Company Law Tri bunal (NCLT) and 
(b) the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NC LAT). The Act provides for 
revival and rehabilitation of sick companies which are enumerated in section 253 to 269 
of the Companies Act, 2013. However, since these se ctions are yet to be notified by 
MoCA, NCLT and NCLAT are yet to be operationalized. 
 
 At present, the Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR / 
Appellate Authority for Industrial and Financial Re construction (AAIFR) are authorized 
in the Sick Industrial  Companies (SPECIAL PROVISIO NS) Act, 1965 for approval of 
revival & rehabilitation of Sick Companies including CPSEs.  
 
 Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MoCA) has also info rmed that the NCLT will 
replace (a) the existing Company Law Board (CLB), ( b) the Board of Industrial and 
Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) and (c) Appellate A uthority for Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction (AAIFR) and (a) will also acquire th e jurisdiction of the High Courts in 
the matters where it is vested in the High Courts u nder the Act. Bodies referred at (b) and 
(c) will stand abolished upon notification of the SICA (Repeal) Act, 2003. 
 
 MoCA has further stated that the Insolvency and Ba nkruptcy Code, 2015 has been 
introduced in the Parliament and it proposes to ame nd the Companies Act, 2013 with 
regard to insolvency (revival as well as  winding up) related provisions also. 
 
Further Recommendations/ observations 
 
 
 The Committee expects to be informed about the prog ress made towards the 
operationalisation of National Company Law Tribunal  (NCLT) and the National 
Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) and reasons for the delay in this 
regard. Also, since the Insolvency and Bankruptcy C ode, 2016 has been assented to 
by the President in May, 2016 the Committee also wa nts to know the details of the 
consequential action taken/ to be taken regarding t he matter raised in the 
recommendation. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 Further, it is observed that now with the enhanced mandate, DPE can also have a 
proactive role to play in the process. The NCLT has  been envisaged for all type of 
companies in India, not just CPSEs. In this scenario, the Committee recommends that  
11 

DPE has to take this into account and take appropri ate measures in coordination with the 
MoCA to ensure that the CPSEs, due to their particu lar requirements of meeting socio-
economic obligations, are not put at a disadvantage d position in their efforts to get 
revived / restructured as they would be treated as per the provisions of the Companies 
Act, 2013. 
Para No 43  
Action Taken Replies 
 DPE has noted the concerns of the Committee. The M inistry of Corporate Affairs 
has been informed to take note of the concern of th e Committee while formulating 
policies in this regard. 
 
Further Recommendations/ observations 
 
  
 The Committee wants to be informed of the progress made in this regard by 
DPE by pursuing the matter further with the MoCA. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 Further, the Committee has always taken a firm stan d that the fixed assets, 
particularly land, of would up CPSEs should be reta ined with the Government or its 
agencies.  It is apprehended that the sale of such land to private players might have be 
potential to generate many unethical practices.  Ac cordingly, the Committee is of the 
strong and unanimous opinion that the land belongs to wound up CPSEs shall be retained 
with the Central Government or State Government or other Government agencies.  Since 
Secretary, DPE is the member of CGD it is firmly re commended that this view of the 
Committee should be emphatically placed before the CGD while formulating any policy 
in this area, for the present or in future.  The Secretary has agreed to place the view points 
of this Committee before CGD, when they deliberate on the approaches to be followed 
for disposal or usage of land which is in the hands  of sick PSEs or autonomous bodies.  
The committee sincerely hopes that the view point would be considered in CGD. 
Para No 50  
Action Taken Replies 
 Department of Investment and Public Asset Managemen t, which acts as the 
secretariat to the CGD, has been requested to inclu de the views of the Committee in the 
agenda of the next CGD meeting for its consideration vide DPE O.M. dated 06.06.2016. 
 
 DPE has conveyed the views/concerns of the Committ ee to the Secretary, 
Department of Investment and Public Asset Managemen t (erstwhile Department of 
Disinvestment) which act as a secretariat of the CG D vide O.M. dated 24.5.2016 with the 
approval of Secretary, DPE for placing the views of  the Committee before CGD for its 
consideration. 
 
Further Recommendations/ observations 
 
 
 The Committee wants to be updated of the progress m ade in this regard by 
the Core Group of Secretaries on Disinvestment  (CGD) and the final decision by the 
Government.  
12 

 