PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
                                                              
                    
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY THIRD REPORT
 
ON
 
INTER-SECTORAL STRATEGIC  CO-OPERATION TO PROMOTE SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
PERTAINING TO
MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON12.05.2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 12.05.2005)
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
2005 --- / VAISAKHA, 1927  (SAKA)
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY THIRD REPORT
 
ON
 
INTER-SECTORAL STRATEGIC  CO-OPERATION TO PROMOTE SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
PERTAINING TO
MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON ----,  2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON  ----,  2005)
 
 
         
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
2005 ----- / VAISAKHA, 1927 (SAKA)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                              C O N T E N T S
 
 
                                                                                                                                    
PAGES

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                   (i)-(ii)
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                 (iii-v)
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                           1-65    
4.         OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS  AND                                                                        66-87   
                OF THE  COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE      
               
5.         MINUTES                                                                                                                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE
 
 
Shri Santosh Bagrodia        -     Chairman
                       RAJYA SABHA
2.      Prof. M.M. Agarwal  

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
3.      Shri Surendra Lath     
4.      Shri Suresh Bhardwaj 
5.      Dr. K. Malaisamy      
6.      Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan       
7.      Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
8.      Dr. Vijay Mallya
9.      Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy      
10.  Smt. Vanga Geetha
LOK SABHA
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri Kailash Baitha                 
13.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty                 
14.  Shri Subhash  Deshmukh        
15.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan         
16.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria                     
17.  Shri Sunil Khan                                  
18.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato       
19.  Shri Prakash Paranjpe            
20.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel         
21.  Shri Rajnarayan                                  
22.  Shri Bagida  Ramakrishna       
23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana   
24.  Smt. Rubab Sayeda   
 
(i)
 
25.  Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana
26.  Shri Manvendra Singh            
27.  Shri Ganesh Singh                  
28.  Shri Suraj Singh                     
29.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi      
30.  Shri Girdhari Yadav   
31.Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Shri  A.K. Singh,  Deputy  Secretary
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I N T R O D U C T I ON
 
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having  
been authorised  by the Committee, hereby present this 173rd  Report on Inter-Sectoral Strategic  Co-
Operation to Promote Small Scale Industries pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
 
2.         The Standing Committee on Industry undertook the issue of Inter-Sectoral Strategic  Co-Operation to
Promote Small Scale Industries because while the Small Scale and Medium Enterprises are on the move
world wide as this sector of economy has tremendous potential for employment generation, which augur in
turn the consolidation of the national economy.  The Small Scale Industries remain a vibrant segment of the
Indian economy contributing over 39% of the manufacturing sector output, 34% of the nation's exports and
providing employment to over 270 lakh persons through about 114 lakh units, which are spread both in rural
and urban areas across the country.  The Committee takes note of the fact that in recognition of
employment generation potential, the SSI sector has been assigned a target of 12% of annual growth rate
and creation 44 lakh employment opportunities in the Tenth Five Year Plan.
 
3.         The Committee interacted with the representative of the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries on 12
th
August, 2004, 15th February, 2005 to  Consider further the potential for growth in the SSI sector in terms of
output, employment and export, and the Committee came to the conclusion that the Government should
strengthen and facilitate the SSI sector to enable it  to remain competitive in market-led global economy and
generate additional employment. In this context, the Committee decided to examine the Problems being
faced by Small Scale Industries in detail and delineate   the "Areas of  Mutual Co-operation and Assistance
which could be sought from various sectors of economy viz. Coal, Railways, Food and Public Distribution,
Finance, Food Processing sector and Textile in order to protect, promote and proliferate Small Scale
Industries and give SSI sector adequate space to grow into   Medium Enterprises - a designated and  key
objective of the Budget 2004-05 and 2005-06. The concern of the Committee is to enable the Small Scale
Industries in India to catch up the global trend.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
4.         It is a widely accepted fact that the SSI in India grossly suffer from under mentioned limitations:-
 
(i)                  Inadequate credit flow for working capital as well as required for modernization and up-gradation of technology;
(ii)                Problems in transportation of raw materials and finished products, the role of railways wanted in this regard;
(iii)               Inadequate and timely supply of coal to SSI units;
(iv)              Definition of SSI units acting as barrier for the growth and furtherance of SMEs;
 
 
 
 
(iii)
 
 
(v)
                Non utilization of the opportunities in sun rise areas i.e. bio-technology, IT enabled services, pharmaceutical sector;
(vi)              Under capacity utilization due to power shortage and high power rates, lack of demand, non-availability of raw
material, labour and marketing problems;
(vii)             Lack of co-ordination and collaboration among various sectors of economy viz. steel, garment, ceramic, leather,
engineering, mining, food processing causing a serious set back to the growth and promotion of SMEs; and
(viii)           Lack of institutional and legal frame work matching to global standard to inject and imbibe resilient
competitiveness in Indian SMEs to face the global challenges in view of globalization and liberalization process etc.
 
5.         The Committee in its earlier reports examined the SSI and suggested measures in those reports.  In the process of 
examination  of  problems of SSI, the Committee realized that there are various reasons for the downfall and remedies thereto
fall under Ministries other than Ministry of SSI.  Such areas of co-operation should cover as under:-
 
(i)
                  Textile sector like sericulture, handlooms, carpets, wool processing, handy crafts and jute industry;
(ii)                Food processing;
(iii)               Coal sector;
(iv)              Indian railways;
(v)                Adequate and timely credit flow to SMEs; and
(vi)              Supportive institutional and legal framework in post WTO regime.
 
 
6.         This Report of Committee deals with above concerns.  The Committee is however aware that this is not the exhaustive
list and hopes that in its forthcoming reports those concerns would be dealt with.
 
7.         In this background,  the Committee interacted with the representative of Banks and financial Institutions on 1
st
September, 2004, 10th January and 2 nd March, 2005 and highlighted the concern of the Committee over the declining trend of 
net bank credit from Public Sector Banks has declined from 17.5%  (March, 1998) to 14.2% (March, 2001) and further to 10.4%
(March, 2004).  Not only this, number of SSI accounts has also declined from 29.64 lakh in 1998 to 16.63 lakh in 2004 i.e. by
about 50%.
 
8.         The Committee interacted with the representative of the Ministry of Coal 25
th October, 2004 and 11th January, 2005 on
the issue of adequate and timely supply of coal to SSI.  On this issue, the Committee interacted also with the representative of
SSI Associations, Entrepreneurs and Coal India Limited on 1
st October, 2004 during the Committee's study visit to Ranchi. As
per the extant policy, the supply of coal to the SSI
units falls under the non-core sector.  As a result, there has been huge mismatch between
the demand and supply of coal to SSI sector.  As many of the SSI units require timely and adequate supply of coal for running
the units, non-availability of coal has adversely affected to growth of SSI sector.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)
 
9.         The Committee   interacted with the representative of Railway Board on 26 th October, 2004, 10 th and 28 th January,
2005  in the presence of Secretary, Ministry of  SSI and ARI  in order to have the across the table discussion on the issue of
constraints in transportation of raw material and finished SSI products.  It was found that Railways remains the cheaper mode of
transport and Small Scale units have always been dependent on Railways for transportation of raw material and finished
products. However, the Railways have done very little to encourage the SSIs to choose railways as their preferred mode of
transport.   
 
10.        The Committee   interacted also with the representative of Department of Food and Public Distribution, Ministry of
Textiles and the Ministry of Food Processing Industries  on 26
th October, 2004 in order to understand the modus operandi as to
how the co-operation from this sector could be sought to promote Small Scale Industries.
 
11.        The issues brought before the Committee in various memoranda and raised in the deliberations of the meetings referred
to in forgoing information / clarifications provided by the concerned Ministry / Department have been dealt with in succeeding
chapters.  The Committee's recommendations / observations are incorporated at appropriate places.
 
12.          Keeping in view the potential of Small Scale Industries in India, the Committee is of the view that the Government
should make adequate arrangement for  providing full credit, technological and marketing support, infrastructure upgradation in
the major industrial clusters and to free the sector from Inspector Raj.  Now the time has come, when the Government should
keep its promises of consolidating the Small Scale Industries in the country by implementing    the Action Plan to enable the
sector to achieve the stipulated 12% growth rate and accordingly provide employment generation opportunities to millions of
youths in the urban as well as rural areas. 
 
 
13.        The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry in its meeting held on  ... April, 2005
considered and adopted the report.
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                  SANTOSH BAGRODIA
 --------, 2005
                                                                                                               Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary
                                                                                    Standing Committee on Industry
 
 
(v)
CHAPTER - I
 
SMEs ON MOVE 
 
             In most developed and many developing countries of the world, Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) are
treated as a composite sector with appropriate policy interventions and legal framework. In India, however, for various
socio-economic and historical reasons small scale industries, khadi, village industries, handicrafts, etc., have been dealt
with separately. Medium industries or medium enterprises are yet to be formally defined. The small scale industry is
currently defined as an industrial undertaking in which the investment in fixed assets plant & machinery (excluding land
and building), whether the plant/ machinery are held on ownership terms or on lease, or by hire-purchase] does not
exceed rupees one crore. It, inter alia, includes Small Scale Service & Business (industry related) Enterprises (SSSBE)
with investment in fixed assets, excluding land & building, upto rupees 10 lakhs.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
1.1       Small industry has been subjected to various controls and regulations in terms of the IDR Act, 1951 and other
relevant statutes. The definition of SSI is thus linked to the question of ownership. The restriction on ownership is
unique in the Indian context and has been introduced primarily to prevent large companies from obtaining fiscal and
other concessions by setting up SSI units as "fronts". This also prevented the misuse of incentives by entrepreneurs to
discourage the practice of establishing more than one SSI unit, in the same line of production. SSI units cannot be
controlled or owned or be a subsidiary of any other industrial undertaking. This implies that in proprietary/partnership
firms, the combined investment of all the units set up by the same proprietor/partners should not exceed the total
investment limit fixed for a SSI. As regards the formation of a SSI as a limited company, the equity investment by other
companies in SSIs should not exceed 24% of the total equity.
1.1.1    Industrial undertakings, in which the investment in fixed assets in plant and machinery excluding land and
building, whether held on ownership terms or on lease or on hire purchase, does not exceed Rs 1 crore (one crore), are
categorised as Small Scale Industrial Units.  It therefore includes industries:-
 
(i)
                  Ancillary industrial undertaking :   An industrial undertaking which is engaged or is proposed to be engaged
in the manufacture or production of parts, components, sub-assemblies, tooling or intermediates, or the
rendering of services and undertaking supplies or proposes to supply or renders not more than fifty percent of
its production or services, as the case may be, to one or more other industrial undertakings and whose
investment in fixed assets in plant and machinery, whether held on ownership terms or on lease or on hire
purchase does not exceed rupees one crore.
(ii)
                Tiny Industries :-     All small Scale units wherein investment on plant and machinery (excluding land and
building ) upto Rs 25 lakhs are classiefied as tiny industries.
(iii)                 Export oriented units :-     All small scale units, which exports more than 50% of their output, are
classified as Export Oriented units.
(iv)       Small Scale Service And Business (Industry Related) Enterprises with investment in                        
       fixed assets , excluding land & building, upto rupees 10 lakhs .
           
1.1.2    There are however, certain types of industries/activities wherein investment on plant and machinery upto Rs 5
crores can also be registered under SSI category and such list of industries are available in Info-help.
1.1.3    SSI Registration :-        There are two types of Small Scale industries for whom Registration certificates are
issued by the Director of Industries of the concerned State Government as per guidelines issued by Development
Commissioner (Small Scale Industries), New Delhi, Government of India, as mentioned below:
(i)
                  Provisional Small Scale Industries Registration Certificate to the proposed units.
(ii)                Permanent Small Scale Industries Registration Certificate to the established SSI Units after commencement
of  production.
 
1.2       Other models of SSI sectors in the world
 
1.2.1    The small industries / enterprises have been defined in the following manner in some other countries :
 
Country Size of Industries Investment Ceiling
Turnover
No. of Employees
China: SME 30 million
Yuan(US$ 8
million)
< 100 employees 1
 
 
Sweden Medium
 
< 50m euro
 
 
< 250 employees

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
 Small < 10m euro <50 employees
 Micro < 2m euro <10 employees
Korea Manufacturing
Capital
< 8bn Won < 300 employees
 Others  < 30 employees
Germany SME  < 500 employees
 
 
1.2.2    Even though the model of SSI sector in India has satisfactorily served the purpose of development / planning and
promotion so far, there is a view being taken increasingly that the definition of the SSI sector should be widened in
India as well. SP Gupta study group has recommended a three-tier approach thereby including Tiny Units, SSI units and
Medium Units. This is also in conformity with global practice of defining  SME sector. Recognising the importance of
the concept of SME , the Ministry of SSI is formulating a draft Small and Medium Enterprises Development Bill 2005.
 
Almost all over the world, the trend is to treat small and medium enterprises as a composite sector. In the context
of globalisation, there has been a growing recognition in India that it should also adopt the SME concept. In its study
report (2000) on development of the Small Scale Sector, the Expert Group headed by Dr. S.P.Gupta has also
recommended adopting a three-tier structure of tiny, small and medium enterprises. On 9
th January 2004, the then
Finance Minister announced the establishment of a Fund of Rs.10,000 crore for the SME sector. The Finance Minister
while presenting the budget for 2004-05, has observed that there is need to provide some space for SSIs to grow into
medium enterprises. In his Budget speech for 2005-06, he has reiterated, “In recent years , our approach to small scale
industry has evolved , and now we are inclined to treat the sector as the small and medium enterprises sector”.
           
1.2.3    In India, while SSIs have been statutorily defined, the definition of medium enterprises is yet to be formalized
generally. Logically, the upper limit of the defined investment limit of the SSI sector will be the demarcation line
delineating the small from the medium enterprises. The mechanisms of institutional arrangements, and incentives in
respect of small enterprises already exist. The Government is in the process of formulating a legislation for development
of small and medium Enterprises, which will inter alia, incorporate definitions and related aspects.
 
1.3       Defining   SME Sector
1.3.1    The Working Group headed by S.S. Ganguly recommended the adoption of turn over as a measure for defining
the SME Sector.  Based on turn over, Tiny, Small and Medium enterprises has been redefined by Working Group as
under:
Tiny :      Turn over upto the financial limit of Rs.2 crore,
Small :  Turn over upto the financial limit of above Rs.2 crore and upto Rs.10  crore.
Medium : Turn over above the financial limit Rs.10 crore and upto Rs.50 crore.
1.3.2    The Committee observes that World over, policies are being  devised to meet the requirement of small and
medium enterprises (SME).  In India too, adequate steps are required to initiate policies for Medium Enterprises
in order to give the SSI units to grow into Medium Enterprises. The Committee is of the view that Government
should, at the earliest, delineate and draw the demarcation line between SEs and MEs by providing suitable
definition and the mechanism for institutional arrangement, along with the classification of incentive and the
exemption required for units of  the Small scale Industries and the medium enterprises for their growth and
development.
 
1.4. SWOT analysis of Small Scale Industries is as follows:
 
Strengths Weaknesses Opportunities Threats
1. Small investment 1. Low Technology 1. Opportunity to gain 1. Delayed payments

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
base new export market
due to demolition
of QRs and falling
trade barrier.
from big units
2. Flexible rules and
regulations
2. Poor supply of
credit
2. Sunrise areas like
Bio-technology, IT
enabled services,
software etc. can be
tapped by SSI
entrepreneurs.
2. Competition With
large scale
industries
3. Less Infrastructural
requirements
3. Poor R& D facility 3. Utilization of
increasingly
popular concept of
Public-private
partnerships to
bridge critical gaps.
                  
                            
                           
gaps.
3. Low technologies
resulting into low
productivity.
4. Far greater
employment
potential as
compared to large
Sector
4. Not able to avail
benefits of
economies of scale
  4. Vulnerability to fast
changes in
Technologies from
Multinationals
5. More innovative
ideas are applied in
respect of products
and processes
5. Can be easily
harassed by the
inspectors because
of lack of time and
one man
management of
both indoor and
outdoor jobs
    
6. Because of single
handed
management of the
enterprise, there is
better
control.
 
6. Poor in marketing
and brand building.
    
7. Ancillarisation       
 
 
 1.4.1   The Committee is of the view that for streamlining and strengthening the SSI sector in the national
economy, the focus should be on the following:-
 
(i)
                 Providing full credit, technology upgradation, modernization and marketing
support to the SSI sector;
 
(ii)               Infrastructure upgradation in general particularly in the major SSI industrial
clusters;
(iii)             Freedom from the plethora of rules and regulations existing in the SSI sector,which is known as

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
Inspector Raj;
 
(iv)             Full support to the service industry to fulfill its true growth and employment. generation
potential; and
 
(v)               Training of existing and potential entrepreneurs and workers on a massive scale.
 
(vi)             Modern management practices and skill upgradation through advanced training facilities for
capacity building in the SSI sector.
 
1.5     Re-orienting the role of DC (SSI)
 
1.5.1    The  Office of the Development Commissioner   (Small Scale Industries) [DC (SSI)] is an attached office of the
Ministry of Small Scale Industries and performs a dual role.  On the one hand, it advised the Government on
formulation of appropriate policies, schemes, projects and programmes and, on the other, implements these policies,
schemes, etc., for the overall development of the small enterprises.
 
1.5.2    The Committee, in the changing scenario of liberalization and globalisation, feels that  the role of the
Office of DC(SSI) should be reoriented, broadly on the following lines:-
    
 (a)    The DC (SSI) would need to be re-designated as the Central Development Commissioner for Small and
Medium Enterprises, [CDC (SME)] and he and his organization  (Small Industries Development Organization -
SIDO) equipped and   strengthened to view the sector as a composite whole, without losing focus on the need for
generation of employment as well  as the specific developmental/promotional requirements and inter-linkages of
each distinct component of the composite sector, e.g., tiny enterprises, small enterprises, etc., and the products
and services produced by them.
    
(b)  The Office of CDC (SME) would need to widen and continuously up-date its knowledge base regarding the
global trends in policies and Government interventions concerning the SME sector and recommend and
design/implement appropriate measures for continuously enhancing the competitiveness of the sector in India.  It
would also need to continually ascertain the “ best practices” in this field, within the country and abroad,  and
appropriately adopt them,  through schemes, projects and programmes, to suit the Indian conditions.
 
(c)        The Office of the DC (SSI) further  needs to be strengthened its linkages with the State Governments, on the one
hand, and with the field offices and specialized institutions of its own and those of other Central Ministries/Departments,
on the other, so that the activities of its field offices and specialized institutions are better attuned to the local needs of the
SME sector  in each State and region, with an eye on the future opportunities and challenges.  It would also need to
interact more regularly  and closely with the associations of SMEs so that the efficacy of various policies and measures
adopted and implemented by the Central Government are tested regularly on the ground and refined/modified to
achieve the objectives more efficiently.
 
(d)        The Office of DC ( SSI) must forge stronger links with the relevant international institutions and bilateral
organizations so that more effective cooperation between India and other countries as well as India and multi-lateral
institutions can be achieved, to derive full advantage of the comparative strengths of the Indian SME sector and to
address its areas of weaknesses and concerns, in the light of international experience.
 
1.6       Key Areas of Massive Action  For Revitalization of SEs
 
(i)         Cluster Approach : A step  ahead towards synchronization  of SEs
 
1.6.1    The present approach of Ministry of SSI for cluster developments is a holistic one, focusing on interventions in
various areas like technology, marketing, skill upgradation etc. selected on the basis of assessment of felt needs of the
Cluster.  The Programme is implemented with active involvement of various Cluster Actors such as Small Scale
Industrial Units, Industry Associations, Business Development Services Providers, Policy Makers etc. The process of

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
cluster development usually consists of the Selection of the Cluster, Selection of a Cluster Development Agent,
Diagnostic Study, Preparation of Action Plan for intervention, Approval of the project and release of funds through
leveraging, Implementation of Trust Building between Cluster Actors and Cluster Development Agent, and also among
Cluster Actors, Monitoring and Evaluation, Self Management Phase.
 
1.6.2    The Ministry of Small Scale Industries, through its successful collaborative efforts with UNIDO, and also
independently on its own, has initiated and completed a series of Cluster Development initiatives spread all over the
country.  Till date, 78 clusters have been selected for interventions in this manner. Cluster Development Programme
aims at selection of suitable clusters for development under a holistic approach.  The criteria for selection of Clusters are
based on its significance in terms of nature of products and its contribution to production, export and employment.  
Existence of critical gaps in respect of technology, quality, marketing support, common facility etc. are also taken into
account. Cluster Development is being implemented by SIDO as its own programme either through its own field
network of SISIs or in collaboration with reputed national and international agencies like Entrepreneurship
Development Institute at Ahmedabad and UNIDO.
 
1.6.3    To generate awareness amongst small enterprises on IPR related issues, one-day sensitization programmes are
being organized since 2001-02. During 2004-05, 25 such programmes have been conducted by the SISIs all over the
country. In the office of DC (SSI), work has been initiated for getting collective Trade Marks, especially for clusters of
industries starting with potteries and leather handicrafts industries at  Khurja  and Indore respectively.  On the basis of
success of these two assignments, other clusters will also be taken up in the  near future. Also,  efforts are on in assisting
a group of industries at Bikaner  and Kulu  to register under Geographical Indications,   viz., Bikaneri Bhujia & Kulu
Shawls.
 
1.6.4    As per the estimates given in the report of the Working Group constituted by the Planning Commission on
Cluster Development, the amount required for Cluster Development during the Tenth and Eleventh Five Year Plans is
as under: -
  
Rupees in Crore
e of
nisation
10th  10th
Five year
plan
Tenth 10th five year plan
(2002-07)
EleveEleventh five year
plan(22007-12)  
No of
Clusters
Amount No of Clusters Amount  
try of SSI  
33.00 90 100.00 220 200.00  
** 60 23.48 140 68.57  
 otal 33.00 150 123.48 360 268.57  
try of Textiles  
e
mittee
1.00 14 180.97 14 122.97  
icrafts)
17.05 300 88.23 500 174.82  
 otal 18.05 314 269.20 514 297.79  
try of Food Processing Industry  
 Food
ssing
ries
N.A. 57 172.71 25 100.00
 
 Financial Institutions  
7.70 9 1.80 15 3.00  
 Governments  
 Govt of 0 23 27.60 17 20.40  
 Govt of
a
N.A. 23 33.00 25 50.00  
 otal  46 60.60 42 70.40  
 Total 58.75 576 627.29 956 739.76

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
** Cluster development activities are being undertaken in 25 odd clusters, but expenditure for cluster development is not
booked separately.
 
1.6.5    The Committee strongly believes that the Small Enterprises can be developed in cluster through the Small
Industry Cluster Development Programme. The common facilities like testing, infrastructure such as power and
roads, assured supply chain and credit should be provided within the clusters so that these enterprises can grow
without any hindrance. The small enterprises must be provided marketing assistance by organizing Vendor
Development Programme (VDP) to bring small and medium enterprises on a common platform to decide their
marketing strategy and to resolve their problems mutually.
 
(ii)        Technology management for SMEs
 
1.6.6    The Committee has been apprised that the most serious problem of SSI units is the use of outdated and obsolete
technology by a large number of units; inability or even the unwillingness of the owners and managers to upgrade to
modern and appropriate technologies which would enable them to improve the quality of their products to international
standards, reduce production costs and improve the profitability of their units.  The most important barriers in adoption
of improved technology are the financial aspects, basically the inadequacy of financial capacity of the units.  The costs
of technology make it difficult to adopt as the same is not economically viable.  Lack of awareness or lack of knowledge
and information about the availability of requisite technology and desire to avoid risk in adoption of improved
technology adds the problem in technology up-gradation.  Although India has large Infrastructural network to develop
technology for use of industry and the small sector, yet only a handful of indigenous technologies could be developed,
therefore, small-scale sector has to depend largely on imported technologies.   Dependence on imported technology is
very costly making it the privilege of a few richer entrepreneurs in this sector.  Inadequate management skills and non-
availability of technically qualified persons to operate the new technology adds the hurdle to smooth operational aspects
of the technology.
 
1.6.7    The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that schemes for technology up-gradation for SMEs
should be made more functional and accessible to the existing entrepreneurs as well as the first generation
entrepreneurs.  Due budgetary provisions should be made for R & D so that outcome of the research work
should assist the entrepreneurs in cutting the cost of production as well as enhancing the value engineering of
SMEs product through product development and product diversification.  The Committee recommends that
public private partnership approach may be focused by the Government for infusion of latest technology in the
SMEs sector.
 
(iii)       Broad basing of the ownership of SSI enterprises
 
1.6.8    The Committee observes that majority of SSI units are primarily proprietary concerns.  The required 
investment has been provided by the property owners themselves.  Such type of ownership pattern suffers from
severe limitations.  The main limitation that such units face is in their access to institutional finance and
development of the units is restricted by non-availability of finance at the time of need. In order to encourage
broad basing of the ownership of SSI enterprises, provision of some additional facilities for units going in for
company formation could be considered.  The SSI units going in for company formation should be provided
some additional facilities like incentives to form cooperatives, concession to create infrastructure, increase in
investment limit etc.
 
(iv)       Closer cooperation between large and small scale sector
 
1.6.9    The Committee is of the view that a closer cooperation between large and small scale sector is highly
desirable to foster the growth of small units as ancillary to large units.  Industries associations of both large or
smaller units should play a vital role in creation of such tie-ups and the members of such association may set-up
the sub-committees in collaboration with small industry. The Service Institutes should chalk out the  programme
for encouraging ancillary relationship.  The smaller units must be given quality raw material by the larger units
for converting the same into quality finished goods.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
1.6.10  The Committee is of the further view that  Small units performing ancillary role to large industrial units
should be ensured prompt and effective payments by large units for supplies made by the SSI units as per
purchase order and quality standard.  The Committee recommends that the Government should come out with
Policy framework and sustainable guidelines  to encourage ancillary relationships and to safeguard the interests
of the SMEs.  The Government should  set up the mechanisms for ensuring that capacities of SMEs as ancillaries
are fully utilized while ensuring adherence to quality standards. 
 
(v)        Optimum Capacity-utilization
 
1.6.11  The Committee has been given an understanding that a large number of SSI units are not able to utilize
their full capacity due to lack of finance and power shortage including high power rates, lack of demand, non-
availability of raw materials, labour and marketing problems.  Therefore, the Committee is of the view that
availability of assured power supply at reasonable rates, assisting the units in obtaining quality raw materials,
assisting them in publishing their products and adivisng them about new and emerging markets would promote
and proliferate SMEs in India.
 
(vi)       Human Resource Development for SMEs
 
1.6.12  The Committee observes that  there are absence of technical persons and trained workers in the SSI
sector due to lack of institutional arrangement  for preparing trained manpower for the sector, therefore, the
Committee recommends that vocational training institutes may be established in each district of the country to
impart training and skill for the person engaged in the SMEs sector.  The Committee feels that there is urgent
need for increasing capitalization of SSIs  to enable them to procure better technical equipment, training inputs,
marketing management etc. in order to increase the efficiency of the units and their workers.  SSI units should be
provided facilities for upgrading their technology and also skill of their workers which would result in increasing
productivity. 
 
(vii)  Sunrise Industries in the SMEs sector
 
1.6.13  The Ministry of SSI has conducted various information/training programmes in respect of sunrise industries in
the SSI sector. These programmes have been conducted in areas like IPRs, IT & Bio-Technology. Various
Entrepreneurial Development Programmes in these areas are being conducted in SIDO’s field offices, national Institutes
of Entrepreneurship Development, etc. Technical officers of SIDO have recently been deputed for training programme
organized by SIDO in collaboration with Bio Technology Consortium of India so as to engage them in Bio Technology
training programmes.  Nano technology is another area which is sought to  be promoted by the Government.
 
1.6.14  The promotion of IT is very important as most of the sunrise industries have a strong IT component built into
them.  Training for IT and IT enabled services has been taken up in a big way. IPR protection and management of rapid
up-scaling through infusion of technology is important for development of the small enterprises in these areas. The
Office of DC (SSI) has been conducting IPR training programmes all over the country for the last few years. The small
scale entrepreneurs are being sensitized to the need for protection and methodology to be adopted for IPR management
through not only diffusion and upgradation of technology but also employing existing IPR resources for the purpose.
           
1.6.15  For the development of Biotechnology related industry in SSI sector, a Biotechnology Cell was created in the
office of DC(SSI) on 16.08.2002. The main aim of this cell is to promote awareness amongst the small entrepreneurs of
the  benefits of Biotechnology and to disseminate techno-economic information on various biotech products feasible in
the sector. To strengthen further our field offices in promotion of Biotechnology in the small enterprises sector, a group
of 23 officers from SISIs all over the country were trained in July, 2004 by Biotech Consortium India Limited (BCIL) at
Chennai. During 2004-05, 13 one-day sensitization programmes on Biotechnoloy  were held by the SISIs.  On
23.03.2005, a sensitisation programme on the impact of new IPR regime on Biotechnology industry is scheduled to be
held at Bangalore.  In close coordination with BCIL and Department of Biotechnology, Government of India, efforts are
being made to identify new biotech products commercially viable in the small sector and also formulate new policy
initiatives.  For the guidance of the prospective biotech entrepreneurs, a compilation of project profiles has been brought
out.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
           
                       
1.6.16  The Ministry of Small Scale Industry (Office of DC(SSI) proposes to launch a financial assistance scheme for
registered small scale / tiny units for adoption of patents in India and abroad. As per the proposed scheme, Small/ Tiny
Sector Units shall be reimbursed the actual expenditure incurred or subject to a maximum of Rs. 25,000/-  for grant of
a   patent in the country and Rs. 75,000/- for the grant of a patent  outside the country. The latter would be a single grant
irrespective of the number of countries from where the patent is granted.  The proposals received for availing financial
assistance under this scheme will be subjected to the evaluation by the Screening Committee constituted by the office of
DC(SSI).
 
1.6.17  The Committee is of the considered view that the Sunrise industries in the SMEs sector e.g. Information
Technology (IT), Biotechnology (BT) Pharmaceuticals and Nano-technologies along with IT enabled services
have a strong component in- built. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of SSI should make Action
Plan for promotion and proliferation SMEs in these Select Sector.
 
1.6.18  The Committee impresses upon the Government should give approval to the proposal of DC (SSI) for the
Financial Assistance Scheme for registered small scale / tiny units for adoption of patents in India and abroad to
generate confidence amongst small scale / tiny units and enable them to convert an original idea/invention /
know-how into working prototype/processes.
 
(viii)     STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT FOR INTER-SECTROL CORPORATION
 
1.6.19  The Committee is of the view that the Ministry  of SSI should take initiative for lodging inter- Sectoral co-
operation of Select sectors of economy for promoting SMEs in Steel; garments, Electronics, Food products;
leather products; chemical and Chemical products, Railways and Finance.  The status of these segments is
enumerated as under:-
 
 
 
(A)       Steel Sector
 
(i)
                 The Ministry of Steel should ensure adequate supply of iron and steel to the small enterprises
through the State Small Industries Corporations (SSICs ) and the National Small Industries
Corporation (NSIC);
(ii)               The Ministry of Steel   should introduce a mechanism for keeping the prices stable so as to provide
iron and steel to the small enterprises at reasonable prices;
The meetings of the Coordination Committee should be held regularly to review            the availability and
supply of iron and steel to the SSICs/NSIC and small enterprises.
 
(B)       GARMENT INDUSTRY
 
1.6.20  The Committee has been given an understanding that the  garment  exports from India started with low-cost and
low-quality products whose market is now drying up. The growing demand now even in the domestic market is for high
quality garments. This requires up gradation of technology at all levels, pre-sewing, sewing and post-sewing. Computer
Aided Design (CAD) packages for development of weaves and prints are essential. In house tailoring with high quality
power driven machinery is needed to ensure quality and timely delivery of the products. The basic raw material required
for this sector is textile fabrics, threads, buttons and other items. Cost of these items is high and their supply is erratic.
 
1.6.21  The Committee observes that the supply channel/chain pertaining to raw- materials of Garment Industry
must be quick and reliable. In order to reduce the cost of raw material, Government must reduce the excise duty,
the Committee reiterates.  The small-scale garment units must be assisted in updating to bring them at par with
their international counterparts. This could be achieved by assisting such units with high quality testing facilities.
Different agencies in charge of developing SSIs  must also help these units to improve their organizational
methods such as total quality management system and ISO-9000 certification, which is essential for the SSI units

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
to ensure the supply of quality goods in time.
 
1.6.22  The Committee is of the view that information technology is the backbone of apparel industry, therefore,
the Committee desires that the information about latest trends and fashions should be collected central
organizations  or other agency and pass  on expeditiously to the manufacturers . Since the Garment Sector
exporting garments to U.S.A., Latin America and Europe is facing tough competition from China, Pakistan and
Sri Lanka, therefore, it is desirable for the sector to keep on improving the quality of goods and innovate in new
designs and products. Requisite competitive resilience should be injected in garment manufacturing units to
enable them to face the challenges created by the WTO regime in transacting the global business. The
Committee  further recommends that the  greater R&D support for the sector should be provided under the
guidance of CSIR and SIDBI.
 
(C)       CERAMIC INDUSTRY
1.6.23  The Indian ceramic industry contribute to Rs.1000 crores to the exchequer and is a source of indirect employment
to over five lakh workers across the country. chiefly concentrated in Gujarat, it mainly represents mainly the
unorganised sector. The largest chunk of this industry is housed in Morbi, 64 kilometers from Rajkot . The market is
witness to new alliances bein formed by various manufacturers to join hands with bigger players. The representative of
the industry wants certain benefits/ concenssion from the government  which is as under :-
 
(i)
                  CENVAT credit to be allowed to manufacturers of ceramic tiles who pay bexcise duty at the rate of 8
per cent ;
(ii)                imposition of safegaurd duty on ceramic glazed tiles imported from china ;
(iii)               transferring ceramic tiles to group ii of bangkok agreement ;
(iv)              reduction in duty on raw materials and intermediaries ;
(v)                abatement on mrp to be increased to 50 percent ;
(vi)              BIS standards to be imposed on imported tiles; 
 
1.6.24  The domestic industry is  fighting a dual battle one of stiff competition from China and the second of eroding
margins.  Although the vitrified segment has been growing faster than the wall and floor segment, net margins in the
former have dropped as a result of cheap vitrified imports.  The Indian Government levied an antidumping duty on
Chinese goods, a few years ago, but has restricted the duty to vitrified titles and not ceramic glazed wall and floor titles. 
The antidumping duty has not helped as the titles now come routed via countries like Malaysia, Thailand and Sri Lanka.
 
1.6.25  Another demand of title manufacturers is the abatement on MRP for the purpose of calculating excise duty, to
the tune of 50 per cent from the current rate of 45 per cent.   "Increasing middle class population in rural and semi-urban
areas has increased transportation requirements.   Ceramic titles because of their weight and bulk are costlier to
transport," says Pethapara.  Abatement must deal with increasing transportation costs, dealer profits, exercise duty and
end sales tax and octroi.
 
(D)       Processed foods
1.6.26  Having observed the vast potential and prospects of Processed food in SSI sector, the Committee has
made its detailed deliberation in a separate chapter in this report, however, the Committee wishes to pin-point
that milk-related items, dried and frozen fruits and vegetable have a vast market but the common complaint is
the inadequate infrastructure of transport, cold storage and marketing. The committee is of the view that these
inadequacies have to be rectified and strict quality controls must be adhered to tap the vast potential of overseas
markets.
 
(E)       LEATHER PRODUCTS
1.6.27  The Committee is of the view that the Indian leather industry has not been able to make its presence felt
in the international market mainly because of technological obsolescence and is losing to China in cost
leadership. Major leather goods manufacturers are also shifting their production centres to south Asian
countries posing stiff competition to Indian goods. Another problem for Indian manufacturers is that almost the
entire range of machines for making quality leather goods are imported making them costly for small
entrepreneurs. The availability of chemical inputs used in leather processing is also limited. Therefore, the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
Committee feels that leather sector should be made aware of new technologies and excise duty on chemical inputs
used for leather processing units be reduced. the committee is of the considered that the ancillary tie-ups of SSI
units with large manufacturing houses in the leather sector should be encouraged.
 
(F)       Electrical Machinery And Apparatus
1.6.28  The Committee is of the view that the Electronic industry is one of the most important segments of the
small-scale industrial fraternity. Observing the potential of the sector, and associated demands of the products,
this sector is required to get into mechanized and automated production with high quality testing instruments.
The Committee is of the further view that the government should encourage the Electronic sector to develop sales
and marketing strategies to dispose off the variety of goods produced by its manufacturing units.  The
Committee is also of the view that the Electronic sector must develop ancillary relationships with the larger
industries. Adequate assistance and guidelines must be extended the sector for encouraging the units to adopt
organizational improvements such as total quality management system (ISO 9000) and ancillary tie-ups of SSI
units with main manufacturers.
 
(G)       CHEMICALS AND CHEMICAL PRODUCTS
 
1.6.29  The Committee is aware of the fact that a large number of Chemicals and Chemical products are produced in the
small sector. Most of the sector establishments are concentrated in Maharashtra. The Committee has been given an
understand that the drugs constitute the most important segment for the SSI sector. There are about 24,000 SSI units in
the country producing mainly drug formulations. They have contributed through import substitution in making the
pharmaceutical sector more self-reliant. The sector is also getting into herbal drugs.
 
1.6.30  The Committee observes that pharmaceutical sector is now having serious problems due to obligations
under the Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights  (TRIPS). The manufacturing processes of bulk drugs and
drug intermediates are continuously changing with a view to reduce the cost of production and improve the
quality of the product. The Committee therefore, recommends that the improved technology can be obtained
through continued R&D efforts, technical collaborations and purchase of know-how.  the committee understands
that small scale units have little capacity for such efforts, therefore,   therefore there is the need for the assistance
of the Government and national and regional research institutions for providing viable technologies at
reasonable cost and training their personnel.
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - II

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
 
PROSPECTS OF SMEs IN TEXTILE SECTOR
 
            Small Scale Industrial Units are engaged in the production of reeled yarn, silk fabrics, silk garment, degummed
silk waste, silk tops, blended yarn, spun silk yarn, noil yarn and synthetic fibres blended with silk and cotton etc .  A few
Spun Silk Units also come in Small Scale Industries Sector in the country producing silk tops, silk yarn and noils.  The
major part of the production by these mills is for making carpets, silk fabrics etc., which are high value added items for
exports. In some States like Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu etc., it is compulsory for the Units to register with
Directorate of Sericulture and it is possible that they may not have a registration as Small Scale Industry with
Department of Industries.  many units do not register as a Small Scale Industry as registration as Small Scale Unit is
optional. Also Banks by and large are reluctant to extend loans to small reeling and twisting units. Hence, many of these
units may not even apply for Small Scale Industry status.
           
2.1       Government had declared the National Textile Policy (NTxP) -2000 with a view to developing a strong and
vibrant textile industry that can produce good quality cloth at acceptable prices, increasingly contribute to the
sustainable employment & economic growth of the nation and facilitate textile industry to attain and sustain a pre-
eminent position in the manufacture and export of clothing.
 
2.1.1    National Textile Policy 2000 envisages that all textile Sector would be out of SSI.  Immediately after the
announcement of the Textile Policy the garment sector was de-reserved from the SSI.  The proposal was also to de-
reserve the hosiery and knitwear sector but the same could not materialize. 
 
2.1.2    The units in the unorganized sector particularly processing and powerloom units find it difficult to access
institutional finance since such units generally do not maintain financial statements like balance-sheet, profit and loss
account etc.  Further, most of such units do not have ownership documents / lease agreements which are sin-quo-non for
obtaining bank finance.  The norms of banks/FIs for such units should be liberalized.   
 
 2.1.3  The power cost as a component of cost of production is reported to be one of the highest in India, which is
adversely affecting the export competitiveness of the products.  There is need to reduce the power cost to the textile
industry. The interest reimbursement incentive under TUFS should be enhanced to 8% (from the existing 5%) for the
processing and technical textiles sector considering the capital intensive nature of the industry.     There should be a
pragmatic and rational exit policy for non-viable mills with adequate protection of the workers interests.    Such non-
viable mills should be closed down with provision for an adequate safety net for the workers and employees. Labour
policy should be liberalized so as to facilitate setting up of large sized export oriented units.     
           
2.1.4    National Textile Policy 2000 has been enunciated with a view to position Indian textile industry with a global
presence and to promote employment opportunities in the agricultural, industrial, organised and decentralised sectors &
rural and urban areas, particularly for women and the disadvantaged. The Policy has been prepared in the wake of the
new challenges and opportunities presented by the changing global environment, particularly the initiation of the
process of gradual phasing out of quantitative restrictions on imports and the lowering of tariff levels for an integration
of the world textile and clothing markets. 
 
 
2.1.5    The Committee observes that the National Textile Policy aiming at  specific initiatives promoting  Small
Scale and Agro- Rural units in the field of organized e.g.  Industry, Power looms, Handlooms, Hand-Knotted
Carpets, Silk and Handicrafts.  What is required  hereat is that the concept of SEs  has to be re-oriented into a
broad -based notion , the first and the foremost  step in this regard is to liberate SEs from conventional 
definition of SSIs . There is  no need for SSI unit to remain confined to SSI units just to avail
exemption/concession. An awareness programme is to be launched to educate the existing and first generation
entrepreneur. 
 
2.2       In accordance with the Agenda set by the Policy, the Ministry has taken up the following initiatives:-
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
(i)         Modernisation Schemes For SSI in Textile sector
 
2.2.1    The Ministry of Textiles has introduced in 1999 a Technology Up gradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) for the
modernization of textile and jute industry. This Scheme, inter-alia, provides for interest reimbursement @ 5% on loans
availed for from banks/FIs on TUFS compatible projects. This scheme also covers modernization of Small Scale textile
and jute industries keeping in view their contribution in terms of fabric production, employment and export potential.  
Under the scope of the scheme, the  various segments of the textile and jute industry are covered viz. Cotton ginning
and pressing ; Textile industry (covering Silk reeling and twisting ,Wool scouring and combing , Synthetic filament
yarn texturising, crimping and twisting ,Spinning 4Viscose Filament Yarn (VFY),Weaving, knitting including
non-wovens, fabric embroidery & technical textiles,Garment/made-up manufacturing, Processing of fibres, yarns,
fabrics, garments and made-ups) and Jute industry.
 
2.2.2    Since the small scale textile and jute industries have not been included in the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy
Scheme of the Ministry of Small Scale Industry, since April 2001, this Ministry has also provided within the TUFS an
option to the small scale textile and jute industry either to avail of 5% interest reimbursement benefits or a one time
capital incentive @ 12%.
 
2.2.3    As on August 31, 2004, under the SSI sector, a total of 2224 applications have been received under the TUFS
with a project cost of Rs. 2337.80 crore.  2110 applications with a project cost of Rs. 2090.60 crore have been
sanctioned a loan amount of Rs. 1143.29 crore. Rs.728.32 crore has been disbursed in respect of 1817 applications
having project costs of Rs.1684.58 crore. Under the 12 per cent credit linked schemes as on 22.9.2004 subsidy to the
extent of Rs. 16.74 crore has been released in respect of eligible investment of Rs. 139.47 crore.
 
2.2.4    For decentralised powerloom sector the TUFS has been enlarged, w.e.f. 6.11.2003, with an additional option of a
credit linked incentive of 20% of the cost of modern weaving machinery including weaving preparatory machinery upto
Rs. 60 lakhs with the facility to obtain the credit from a larger network.  Under this scheme, as on 15.9.2004, 102 cases
have been sanctioned by Banks/ NBFCs with total investment in machinery of Rs. 19.87 crore.  The subsidy for
approved cases works out to Rs.3.97 crore.   Out of the above 102 cases a subsidy amount of Rs. 2.13 crore has been
disbursed in respect of 55 cases.
 
(ii)        Schemes Under The SSI Re-Generation Programme – Fund For Modernization Of Traditional Industries
of Woollen Sector
 
2.2.5    During Mid Term Review of the Wool Sector held under the Chairmanship of the Secretary (Textiles) with all
State Secretaries and Directors dealing with wool in June, 2004, it was the consensus that procurement and marketing of
raw wool needs to be organized in such a manner that the sheep breeders get remunerative prices for their wool and get
encouraged to improve the quantity and quality of wool fibre. This could be done through the existing Wool
Boards/Corporations/Federations.  However, it was felt that these bodies are not well equipped to undertake these
activities effectively and would need support and strengthening.   It is also felt that in the rural and predominantly wool
producing areas there are several problems, which need immediate support viz. sheep management techniques, common
facilities for weavers and spinners and training of woolgrowers, spinners and weavers, supply of equipments and up-
gradation of technology and marketing support.   The Ministry of Textiles proposes the following two schemes in the
remaining years of the 10
th Five Year Plan period :-
 
(iii)       Assistance under the SSI  Re-generation Package for Creation of an EffectiveRaw Wool Trading System
 
2.2.6    Ministry of Textiles has formulated a draft scheme for “Assistance under the SSI Re-generation Package for
Creation of an Effective Raw Wool Trading System” for the 10
th Five Year Plan with an outlay of Rs.24.52 crore.  The
main objective of the Scheme is to save the sheep breeders/wool growers from the exploitation of the middlemen/traders
and to ensure them remunerative prices for their raw wool.
 
2.3       Setting up of Integrated Wool Processing Centres
2.3.1    Under this scheme, the facilities would be provided right from sheep rearing to raw wool scouring, spinning,

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
dyeing and weaving to the beneficiaries, marketing assistance and revolving funds.   A non-recurring expenditure of
Rs.1.50 crore would be incurred on each centre.   To begin with, there would be five such centres  one each in Himachal
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttaranchal , Gujarat and Rajasthan with a total outlay of Rs.7.50 crore.          The
expenditure on the two schemes is expected to be met from the special fund for the National Common Minimum
Programme administered by Ministry of Agro & Rural Industries.
 
2.3.2    The woollen industry is a rural export oriental industry.   The industry consists of about 700 units in organized
sector and a large number of units in the small-scale / unorganized sector.  The units in the orgranised sector  are mainly
concentrated in Mumbai and the units in the unorganized sector is by and large concentrated in Punjab State , i.e., in the
areas like Ludhiana, Amritsar etc.  
 
2.3.3
    The Committee feels that measures required to be taken for improving the woolen industry are  
Promotion of  private sector linkages for marketing of wool; establishing   per-loom and post loom-processing
facilities; Taking  up an integrated development programmes for angora wool;, working   on design and process
development in a mission mode; systematization of  grading and marketing of wool ; Increasing the production of
specialty wool , viz., pashmina goat, angora rabbit etc and   increasing the quality and productivity of wool in the
country.
 
2.4       Sericulture Sector
 
2.4.1    “Sericulture is an unorganized labour intensive Agro-based Rural Industry (ARI) consisting of activities like
mulberry cultivation, silkworm rearing and silk reeling. The Central Silk Board (CSB) is looking after the development
and growth of sericulture by providing extension and R&D inputs to sericulture industry in the country and through
implementation of plan schemes and programmes. X Plan outlay of Rs.450 crores earmarked for development of
sericulture sector. During X Plan (2002-07), production target of 26450 M.T and employment generation target of  60
lakh persons. Under the centrally sponsored plan schemes i.e. Catalytic Development Programme implemented by CSB
in collaboration with the State Govts., an outlay of Rs.180.98 crores is provided during the X Plan period for
development of the sector.
 
2.4.2    Sericulture and silk reeling, weaving and other activities are mainly in the unorganized and cottage sector mostly
with investment limit below Rs.1.00 crores.  However, silk is not in the list of reserved items for exclusive manufacture
in SSI. In view of the increasing competition in the global market  Govt. desires that all units related with silk
production should grow in size and technologies in order that they can harness economies of size, attain higher
productivities and enhance their capabilities to be able to compete at international level. 
 
2.4.3    Central Silk Board is extending support/concessions to the silk/sericulture units through the implementation of
following plan schemes financial support in the form of subsidy forreeling  units; Subsidy for installation of Common
Facility Centres in major silk handloom enclaves Interest subsidy on working capital loan sanctioned by Banks to silk
reeling units; Incentive for production of bivoltine  silk on multi end reeling units; Subsidy for up gradation and
popularization of improved reeling and spinning units; Currently payment of excise tax on raw silk and silk items are
not mandatory.
 
2.4.4    Several programmes and schemes to increase the production and productivity and quality of domestic silk  for
improving the  competitiveness of the textile industry have been instituted. The major ones are:
 
(i)
                  Research and Development efforts of Central Silk Board have been stepped up to improve quantity and
productivity of sericulture, by evolution of more productive and stress tolerant breeds and hybrids of
mulberry and non-mulberry food plants and silkworms; and development of low cost reeling and
processing technologies in silk;
(ii)
                Seed Support & Technical Assistance is being given by the Central Silk Board to State Governments,
farmers & reelers  by maintenance of parent races and basic seed, supply of commercial seed, and
augmentation of grainage  facilities for production of disease free high yielding and drought resistant
seeds;
(iii)               Central assistance is being extended to states through Centrally Sponsored & Central sector schemes to

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
strengthen farm infrastructure, increase area under sericulture, upgrade reeling facilities, improve
finishing processes, strengthen seed supply, cocoon & silk testing systems;
(iv)              Low cost and productivity enhancing technologies developed by the Central Silk Board are being
popularized through central assistance to beneficiaries, training to the States’ extension machinery and
beneficiaries, organizing of various awareness programmes, etc;
(v)                For technology upgradation of the indigenous silk industry loan at 5% point less than applicable bank
rate, under the Technological Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) for the textiles sector is available inter
alia to silk sector;
(vi)              Under the Swarnjayanti  Gram Swarojgar Yojana (SGSY) of the Ministry of Rural Development
financial assistance is being provided to various States for implementation of sericulture projects of all
varieties of silk with the technical assistance of CSB;
(vii)
             Supply chain issues between the farmers, raw silk producers and the weavers are being addressed by
advocating contract farming models, price linked grading, etc.;
(viii)           Establishing quality certification systems for silkworm seeds, cocoons, yarn and fabric;  
 
 2.4.5   KEY AREAS FOR MASSIVE ACTION IN SERICTURE
 
2.4.6    The Committee feels that For further improving the sericulture sector Central Sericulture Board (CSB)
should focus on  the following areas:
 
(i)
                        Improving Research & Development and the effective transfer of technology at all stages;
(ii)                      Considerably improving the production of non-mulberry varieties of silk
(iii)                    Augmenting efforts for the spread of bivoltine sericulture;
(iv)                    Encouraging technology upgradation in activities of reeling, weaving  and finishing.  Strengthening
linkages between the producers and industry and deregulating  markets.
(v)                      Periodically reviewing the import policy for raw silk taking into account the balanced interests of
the sericulturists as well as export manufacturers.
 
 
2.5  Segments of industries under the Ministry of Textiles
           
        2.5.1       Among the industries under Ministry of Textiles, only knitting and knitwear sector has been reserved for
the exclusive development in the small- scale sector.  The maximum investment limit for such units are Rs. 5.00
crore in plant and machinery. Prior to the budget 2004-2005, the textile products falling under chapter 51 to 63 and
manufactured by small-scale units were eligible for excise duty exemption under SSI duty exemption scheme.   
However, in the budget 2004-2005, SSI duty exemption has been withdrawn.  It may please be noted that in the
above budget, the mandatory excise duty scheme has been withdrawn for the entire cotton textile value chain, i.e.,
from yarn to RMG and the CENVAT scheme has been made optional.    Mandatory excise duty is applicable only
to man-made fibre / filament yarn sector.
 
2.5.2    Organized Industry :- Three specific Schemes have been formulated to give fillip to SSI / ARI sector:
 
(i)
                  Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) with specific provisions for SSI sector
(ii)               Textile Cluster Infrastructure Development Scheme (TCIDS) for resolving the infrastructure
bottlenecks in the traditional textile clusters and to boost their export performance
 
(iii)             Technology Mission on Cotton (TMC) for providing support to small –scale Ginning Industries as a part
of the larger initiative under Mini Mission II and IV. 
 
2.5.3    The Committee acknowledges that the Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS); Textile Cluster
Infrastructure Development Scheme (TCIDS) ; Technology Mission on Cotton (TMC) would go a long way in
opening avenues for promoting SMEs in the Textile sector.
 
(A)       Powerloom sector

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
 
2.5.4    This sector, critical to the survival of the Indian textile industry and its export thrust, will be rapidly modernised.
Clustering of production facilities in the decentralised  sector will be encouraged to achieve optimum size and adopt
appropriate technology.
 
(i)                  Technology upgradation;
(ii)                Modernisation of Powerloom Service Centres and testing facilities;
(iii)               Clustering of facilities to achieve optimum levels of production;
(iv)              Welfare schemes for ensuring a healthy and safe working environment for the workers.
 
2.5.5    The Committee feels that Government needs to give impetus to harmonious development of all the
segments of the fabric-manufacturing sector.  The balanced growth of these sectors should be achieved basing on
their intrinsic strengths and capacity to meet the demands and requirements of the domestic as well as
international markets.
 
(B)       Handloom Sector
 
2.5.6    The Office of the Development Commissioner (Handlooms) has under the guidance of the Working Group of
the Planning Commission, consolidated the Handloom Sector Scheme into the eight  Schemes for implementations in
the X Plan period viz.Deen Dayal Hathkargha Protsahan Yojana Handloom Export Scheme, Design Development and
Training Programme, Integrated Handloom Training Project Package Scheme, Mill Gate Price Scheme, Weavers
Welfare Scheme, Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme, Implementation of Handloom (Reservation for Articles) Act, 1985.
In 2003-04, the three more Schemes were  introduced:-
 
(i)
                  Integrated Handloom Training Projects which provides for skill upgradation  of handloom weavers and
workers in technical and as well as managerial skills.
(ii)                Bunkar Bima Yojana which provides enhanced insurance cover to weaver, in collaboration with LIC.
(iii)               Special Rebate on sale of handloom products which provides for one time assistance of 10% rebate on sale
of accumulated stock.
 
2.5.7    The thrust of the Handloom Sector Central Schemes has utilized the State Governments and State Handloom
Cooperatives as the delivery channel and implementing agencies for the Schemes. The benefit of the Schemes remained
restricted to the weavers within the cooperative fold. The master weavers usually purchase yarn and provide it to
weavers attached to them, pay conversion charges to the weavers and take back the fabric for onward processing and
marketing.
 
           
2.5.8    The Committee observes that  large  number of handloom weavers remain outside the fold of the
cooperative, and the cooperatives structures are being increasingly weakened due to financial and other mis-
management. Therefore, the Committee feels that the  Office of the Development Commissioner for Handlooms
should give impetus to  cluster based approach to the development of the handloom sector.   The cluster scheme
would provide and promote  small and medium enterprises in the handloom sector in the ambit of developmental
initiatives of the Central Government.
 
 2.5.9   The Central Handloom Sector Schemes are being implemented through the State Governments and the
handloom cooperatives.   In view of the limited reach of the handloom cooperatives, it is being considered to introduce a
cluster based approach for improving the developmental intervention in the handloom sector.   Initial discussions with
State Directors of Handlooms and agencies that have experience in cluster based development models have been held
and the Scheme is being formulated.
 
2.5.10  The Committee feels that Government must continue to accord priority to Handlooms sector. Following
Steps should be taken to promote and develop its exclusiveness for the global market:-
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
(i)                 training modules may be developed for weavers engaged in the production of low value added items, with
the objective of upgrading their skills to enable them to find alternate employment in the textile or other
allied sector;
 
(ii)
               Comprehensive welfare measures will continue to be implemented in close cooperation with the State
Governments, for better working environment and the social security of the weavers;
 
(iii)
             Effective support systems in research and development, design inputs, skill upgradation and market
linkages will be provided;
 
 
(iv)
              Revamping of Weavers Service Centres will be revamped in consonance with the contemporary trends,
and, using Information Technology for efficacy, their activities suitably dovetailed with activities of
centres of design excellence like NIFT and NID;
 
(v)
               Production of value added fabrics may be streamlined; innovative market-oriented schemes should be
introduced; and joint ventures be  encouraged both at the domestic and international levels. Brand equity
of handlooms must be commercially exploited to the extent possible.
 
(C)   CARPETS
 
2.5.11  The policy for hand knotted carpet sector should focus on sustained growth of exports and welfare of weavers
and their children. Encouragement will be given to the manufacture of products that conform to and bear the 'KALEEN'
mark of standards, with insistence on compliance with the provisions of the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation)
Act, 1986.
 
2.5.12  The Committee recommends that Government should undertake measures for technology upgradation
including indigenisation of machines; development of testing facilities; and use of natural dyes. Adaptation of
traditional motifs and promotion of brand image would constitute thrust areas.
 
 
(D)       HANDICRAFTS
 
 2.5.13 Continued and focused attention would  enable Handicrafts sector to increase both its contribution to exports and
its productive employment. Initiatives will include upgradation  of skills, creation of better work environment, design
and technology intervention, development of clusters for specific crafts with common service facilities, improvement in
infrastructure, and market development.
 
2.5.14  The EPCH and CEPC have stated that registration with or without the SSI Department is a non issue in the
handicrafts sector since the facilities under the Exim  Policy have now been extended both to the manufacturing
exporters as well as to merchandizing exporters.
 
2.5.15  The Committee visualizes that  to improve the handicrafts sector in the country with more emphasis
should be given  on creating employment generation opportunities in rural areas  by modifying the existing
schemes as under:-
 
(i)
                 Extension of Credit Guarantee Scheme to rest of India.
(ii)               Setting up of local Haat/Mini Urban Haat/Eco Haat as new component of existing Marketing and
Marketing Support Scheme.
 
(iii)
             Entrepreneurship Development Programme as new component of existing Marketing and Marketing
Support Scheme.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
 
(iv)              Setting up electronic Kiosk in CFCs being set up in potential clusters to facilitate e-enabled micro
credit delivery system, e-supervision and trade through e-commerce as new component of existing
Marketing and Marketing Support Scheme.
 
(v)                Extension of  Workshed Scheme to rest of India.
 
2.5.16  The Committee was apprised that under the regeneration of traditional industries including handicrafts, two
schemes of  Raw Material Bank and Technology Upgradation Centre for Export Clusters have been formulated and
submitted to Ministry of SSI for sanction under funds approved by Ministry of Finance. Under the New Generation
Development-cum-Business Model in the handicrafts sector, emphasis will be on a market driven approach – based and
focused product basis.  The strategy evolved around the following system concept.
 
2.5.17  Market Promotion
 
(i)                  Retail Chain (300 existing retain centers of Khadi and Village Industries commission (KVIC) to be
refurbished).
(ii)                Ambassadorial Shops to promote and create premium market image on environmental and social arguments
in major towns of Europe and USA.
(iii)               To set up 5 environmental parks to tap the emergent trends in environmental and green building technology
and to cater to emerging non-traditional markets like home décor, office décor etc.
(iv)              Setting up of warehouse facilities (domestic and international).
 
2.5.18        Technology
2.5.19  Technology intervention would use the following modalities for achieving international competitiveness
Research & Development; Tooling and Production Engineering IT, Information & Knowledge. It is proposed to link the
50 districts and 100 Common Facility Centres (CFC) and 600 micro CFC’s using available technology for information
gain, real time monitoring, call/ problem resolution centre, training modules, micro-credit delivery mechanisms through
ATM’s, Inventory & Project management through institutional networking base.
 
(E)        Cluster Production Method
2.5.20  The bulk supply and quality production will be based on Identification of focused districts and clusters (50
districts and 600 clusters) Production based on networking of organized sector (entrepreneurs/exporters) and informal
sector (SHGs, Federations, Associations, NGOs); Scaling up quality production Setting up state of the art production
facilities (100 clusters) connected with different levels of investment (village/block/districts) ensuring setting up of a
supply chain mechanism and processed raw material depot.
 
2.5.21  Design Intervention
 
2.5.22  To cater to the needs of the micro and mother CFCs, it is proposed to build capacity of select polytechnics /
secondary design institutes through continuous training, research and development, product innovation etc and
development of appropriate skill based training module (PRAVEEN, NIPUN, HAST & SIDHHAST).          Establish
new design institutes with international collaboration in public, private mode.
 
2.5.23  The Committee feels that to improve the competitiveness of handicrafts in the International Market, the
steps required to be taken include providing commercially useful information and assistance to expoters in
developing and increasing exports; offering professional advice and services in areas of technology upgradation,
quality and design improvement, standards and specifications, product development, innovation etc.; organizing

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
visits of exporters/Export Promotion Councils etc. abroad to explore market opportunities in new and existing
markets in Europe, America and other potential markets in Latin America, Africa, ASEAN and CIS countries;
participating in specialized International Trade Fairs; create an awareness through Workshops on “Export
Marketing, Procedures and Documentation”, Packaging, Design Development, Buyer Seller Meet, Open House
etc. amongst exporters and manufacturers, enabling them to enter into export trade with confidence; setting up
of Common Facility Centres equipped with state of art technology in important export clusters;  and setting up
of Indian Exposition Mart at Greater Noida.
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - III
 
PROLIFERATION OF SEs THROUGH ANCILIARIZATION OF JUTE INDUSTRY
 
 
The Jute  industry for over a century has been the industrial main stay of the eastern region of the country.  During
seventies  and onwards with the inroad of synthetic packaging as well as containerization in the packaging system, the
use of jute bags for the commodities decline, thus eroding the export market. The industry at present suffer from
instability in supply of quality fibre, technological obsolescence, lack of investment by industry on R&D, innovative and
product design, High labour cost, thus having very adverse impact on the proliferation and anciliarisation  of Agro-and
Rural industries and Small Scale and Medium enterprises.
 
3.1       The Committee desires that adequate  steps may be taken in regard to improvement of quality of Jute fibre
by genetic method and improved retting practice by Biotechnological and other methods.  Such measures would
give fillip to the promotion of Medium Enterprises in the country.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
3.2       SWOT –analysis of Jute Industry
 
            Strength
 
(i)                  India is the world’s largest producer of jute fibre as also the world leader in manufacturing jute goods and
fetches over 9000 million worth of foreign exchange every year.  Jute Industry enjoys a growing domestic
market.
(ii)
                In view of global consciousness on environmental protection, jute being a natural biodegradable, renewable
and non-toxic cash crop is getting worldwide acceptance day by day.
(iii)               For dimensional stability and rigidity, jute has tremendous potential in the field of Technical Textiles.
(iv)              Jute is one of the most important industries along with Cotton Textiles and plays a dominant role in the
industrial economy of Eastern India supporting 40 lakhs farmers, 2.5 lakh industrial workers and 5 lakhs
workers in ancillary activities.
 
            Weakness
(i)
                  Jute industry is mainly catering to the need for packaging food grains and other edible items only.
(ii)                Jute Industry is burdened with high cost of raw material, labour, power and uneconomical working.
(iii)               Jute industry’s adopting of modern technology is slow.
(iv)              Jute products suffer from lack of adoption of modern and alternative marketing strategies mainly due to an
assured domestic market base in packaging due to the JPM Act.
           
Opportunity
 
(i)
                  Jute has vast untapped potential market as is envisaged by the growing domestic yarn market.
(ii)                Jute enjoys preference as an eco-friendly material among the environmental conscious.
(iii)                Consumers at large are now preferring jute over plastic,  thanks to new innovation in jute design and
material development.
(iv)              Jute diversified product offer a wide range of choice to the consumers in terms of varieties.
(v)                Jute has tremendous opportunities of growth in the form of geo-textiles, technical textiles, composites etc.
 
      Threats
 
(i)
                    Price competitiveness from synthetic  and other alternative packaging materials
(ii)                  Complacency of the jute industry to innovate and change
(iii)                 Continued dependence on  government protection and regulation
 
3.2.1    The Committee is  of the view that a conscious efforts may be made for assessing the SWOT analysis of
Jute Industry in India and  harvesting, marketing and diversification of Jute and Jute Products should be carried
out with the mission as per details given below:-
 
(i)
           Creation of strong marketing network for better market linkage of raw jute.
(ii)         Providing market information to jute growers in order to enable them to take a decision
regarding sale of their produce at market driven price.
(iii)       Implementation of Technology Transfer Programmes for better and quicker retting of raw jute
for ensuring improvement in fibre quality.
(iv)       Development of cost effective community retting facilities.
 
(v)         Transfer of Technology as discovered after R&D efforts by IJIRA to jute industry and growers.
 
3.2.2    The Committee feels further that  sincere efforts should be made  in the field of research and development
so that new design and technology can be developed for new jute products.  Efforts should also be made for 
exploring  the international market by conducting market research and development.  The JMDC may also be
geared up to collaborate with technical institutions in Europe and USA for standardizing the jute  geo-textiles,
jute agro-textile and jute based compositions. 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
           
3.3       Jute Entrepreneur [Capital Subsidy] Assistance Scheme
 
            3.3.1    Jute Entrepreneur Assistance Scheme was introduced by the National Jute Development Programme to
transfer the benefits of various R&D and test-marketing efforts put in by a number of institutions under the
Programme over the last few years to a number of entrepreneurs in different parts of the country. By providing
assistance to a large number of entrepreneurs to promote value added biodegradable jute diversified products
under the scheme there has been increasing demand for jute fibre and yarn of different grades.  The scheme has
helped to promote the traditional jute industry as well as the new class of entrepreneurs to find new end uses and
markets for eco-friendly renewable agricultural resource-Jute.  
 
           
            3.3.2    The scope of assistance under the JEAS will be in the form of capital subsidy at a rate of 15% and 10%
of the cost of plant & machinery for projects respectively, of jute diversified products [JDP] for setting up new
units / expansion of existing units. The subsidy will be routed through Bank/FI after the unit has installed the
machinery at its declared premises and is found to be working satisfactorily on inspection by DIC/Directorate of
Industries / DRDA or any other notified agency.
 
3.4       Rehabilitation of sick Jute Mills in India
 
            3.4.1    There are 78 jute mills in the country out of which 37 mills are sick out of which 31 are referred to BIFR.
The main reasons for sickness of jute mills are inefficient production processes; high number of labour
deployment and high cost of production; instability in supply of quality raw jute; inefficient Management
practices.
 
3.4.2    In order to improve the jute industry as a whole, the Govt. has formulated a policy of comprehensive of
modernization of jute industry through the proposed Jute Technology Mission (JTM) .  There are several other
developmental schemes for modernization jute industry like External Market Assistance Scheme (EMA) of JMDC and a
host of Schemes by the National Centre for Jute Diversification (NCJD) for the welfare of the small and marginal players
in the jute industry, specially the manufacturers of diversified jute products.
 
            
3.4.3    Responding to the various activities undertaken by NCJD, innumerable small & micro level
entrepreneurs and production units in the decentralised sector, amongst NGOs and rural area women groups
have taken to production of decoratives, handicrafts, and woven products. These products need to be improvised,
redesigned and made trendy from time to time by altering the shape, colour and dimensions of use in order to
make it acceptable to the ever-changing market. Similarly efforts are also directed to improvise on the local
ethnic products of remote regions to make them useful and attractive without in any way infringing on its
ethnicity.
 
            3.4.4    Based on survey reports of NCJD’s service centres and response of respective regions design
development is carried out either through design workshops or by way of holding hands-on design training
programmes. These activities are organised by engaging specialist designers for training entrepreneurs. These
are held at locations convenient to the beneficiaries. This enables generation of newer ideas for creativity and
value addition. Design development is also organised by engaging freelance designers and attaching each to one
production unit for a specified period when the designer is assigned to evolve a given number of desired designs.
 
            3.4.5    The scheme envisaging the dissemination of designs, cataloguing are organizing design workshops. In
this effort NCJD collaborates with organizations like NIFT, NID, other specialized agencies and skilled
designers for training and information of the small entrepreneurs and the NGOs sector. Also included are
prototype development & design catalogue for all time reference. It is also contemplated to explore designs and
designers of foreign countries, which could be sensibly utilised to improve domestic product sale as well as open
opportunities for exports.
 
3.4.6    With the propagation and promotion of jute diversification immense jute activity has been witnessed in various

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
corners, thus,  the scheme has enabled not only to make available the much-needed designs but also created an
information base of skills that are available at various places.
 
3.4.7    The Committee is of the view that for  increasing production of value added JDP’s extension of Jute
Service Centre and Raw Material Schemes to more areas, development of Standards of quality for JDPs and
certification of quality jute products to facilitate the growth of the market for jute diversified products
;strengthen the design and Development Cell of NCJD; Extension of incentives to the manufacturer on  
production of value added jute products; implementation of a scheme providing higher rate of incentives on
export of value added jute diversified products without any ceiling; Government is considering proposal to
increase the number of Jute Service Centers and Jute Raw Material Banks operating under NCJD.
 
3.4.8    The Committee is of the view that the Government should come out        with formulation of separate
“Jute Policy” on the line of Textiles Policy for        giving impetus to Jute Industry in India and giving due
consideration to the   emerging market - scenario and SMEs . The Jute Policy may incorporate the     detailed
provisions on the  introduction of modern technology machines for           higher productivity and quality
improvement, implementation of       productivity linked wages; removal of Tariff and non Tariff barriers;
development of modern technology machines;  encourage R&D Institutions       in developing value added
Jute/jute blended diversified products and   machinery required thereof.
                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV
 
PROSPECTS OF SMEs IN FOOD PROCESSING
 
            Food processing industry covers products of dairy, meat, poultry, fishery, consumer food, non-molasses based

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
alcoholic drinks, aerated water and soft drink.  Food  processing involves any type of value addition to agricultural or
horticultural produce and also includes processes such as grading, sorting, packaging which enhance shelf life of food
products.  The industry provides vital linkages and synergies between industry and agriculture.
 
4.1       India is the third largest producer of food items in the world producing150 million tonnes of Fruits and
Vegetables, 91 million tonnes of Milk Largest in the world, 483 million (population) of Livestock and   Largest in the
world (57% of the World’s buffalo and 23% of sheep). (Second highest in goat, third highest sheep and 7
th highest in
poultry population) Egg production 43 billion – 5 th largest in the world 6.2 million tonnes of Fisheries – 7 th largest in
the world
 
4.2       Status of food processing industries
           
4.2.1    The total size of the food processing industries is estimated at Rs.1,50,000 crore.  The processed food sector has
attracted total investment of Rs.38,351 crores during the 9
th Plan period .  The investment during the 10 th Plan is
estimated at Rs.62,105 crores for a GDP growth of 6%.  The industry growth rate during the 10 th  Plan period is
estimated at 7.3% for a GDP growth of 6%.  The sector witnessed a growth of 7.1 as against 3.7% growth in agriculture
and livestock sector.
 
 
4.3       Plan Schemes as approved by Planning Commission for development of food processing industries
           
4.3.1    During 8
th and 9th Plan period, the Ministry operated several plan schemes for promotion and development of
food processing industries.  Taking into consideration the review undertaken by the Planning Commission of the 9 th
Plan Scheme, the need for reducing the number of schemes by merging/dropping the existing schemes as also the advice
of the Planning Commission to avoid a thin spread of resources and the need for a revamp of the schematic structure of
the Plan Schemes, the Ministry decided to operate six schemes during the Tenth Plan  for development of the processed
food sector.  Against Rs.235 crores for the IXth Plan the total outlay approved for during the Tenth Plan is Rs.650
crores.
 
4.3.2    The Plan Schemes of MFPI are project specific not State, area, community or sector specific.   Financial
assistance is provided to small scale, medium and also to large food processing industries if they submit their claim in
the prescribed Performa along with the documents/information prescribed in the scheme.
 
           
 
 
 
4.3.3    Details of the Tenth Plan outlay are given below:-
 
 Name of the Scheme Tenth Plan outlay (inclusive
of provision for N.E.)
Scheme for infrastructure Development 250.00
Scheme for Technology
Upgradation/Establishment/Modernization of
Food processing industries.
98.00
Scheme for Backward and Forward Integration
and other Promotional Activities
85.00
Scheme for Quality Assurance, Codex
Standards and R &D
90
Scheme for Human Resource Development 65.00
Scheme for Strengthening of Institutions 62.00
*Provision for North Eastern Region including -

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
Sikkim
Total 650.00
 
           
4.3.4    The Committee was informed by the ministry of Food Processing industries that the infrastructure development
scheme has got six components as per given under: -
 
(i)
                  Food Parks: -         The small and medium enterprises find it difficult to invest in capital-intensive
activities.  As a part of the strategy to create a hub of food processing infrastructure, the Ministry has been
proactively pursuing the task of setting up of food parks in different parts of the country.  Common facilities
expected to be provided in food parks are uninterrupted power supply, water supply, cold storage/ice plant,
warehousing facilities, affluent treatment plant, quality control and analytical laboratories , 
training/conference facilities etc.  These facilities ensure better market orientation and make food-processing
units most cost-competitive. 
 
(ii)
                Establishment of packaging centre: - The Scheme aims to provide new technologies of packaging, which
may help in enhancement of shelf life of food products and make them internationally acceptable .Assistance
@ 25% of the project cost in general areas and 33.33% in difficult areas subject to a maximum of Rs.2.00
crore is provided for establishment of packaging center.   Assistance is available to all implementing
agencies.
 
(iii)
               Modernization of Abattoirs:-  The Scheme aims at Scientific and hygienic slaughter, causing least pain the
cattle and ensuring better byproduct utilization. Assistance @ 25% of the project cost in general areas and
33.33% in difficult areas subject to a maximum of Rs.4.00 crore is provided to local bodies for
modernization of abattoirs.
 
(iv)
              Colds chain facilities :- The Scheme is intended to improve violability of existing cold storages and enhance
cold storage capacity.  Assistance @25% of the project cost in general areas and 33.33% in difficult areas
subject to a maximum of Rs.75.00 lakh is provided for establishment of cold chain facilities.
 
(v)                Value added center: -         The Scheme is intended to make value addition leading to enhanced shelf life,
higher total realization and value addition at each level of handling and also to facilitate traceability.
Assistance @ 25% of the project cost in general areas and 33.33% in difficult areas subject to a maximum
Rs.75.00 lakh is provided for establishment and modernization of value added center.
 
(vi)
              Irradiation facilities :-           The scheme aims at enhancing shelf life of the food product through irradiation
techniques by preventing infestation, spouting and change in chemical composition of the product.  Financial
Assistance @ 25% of the project cost in general areas and 33.33% in difficult areas subject to a maximum of
Rs. 5.00 crore is provided for establishment of irradiation facilities.
 
4.4       Establishment/Modernization of FPI Units
 
4.4.1    The MFPI is operating a plan Scheme for technology upgradation, establishment and modernization of food
processing industries.  The scheme covers fruits and vegetables, milk products, meat, poultry, fishery, oilseeds and other
horticultural sectors leading to value addition and shelf life.   The scheme provides for grant of financial assistance @
25% of the project cost in general areas and 33.33% in difficult areas subject a maximum of Rs.50 lakh and Rs.75 lakh
respectively. 
 
4.5       FOOD PROCESSING TRAINING CENTRE SCHEME
 
 4.5.1   For development of rural entrepreneurship and for providing hands on experience, a grant of Rs.2.00 lakh with
Rs.1.00 lakh as revolving seed capital is provided for a single product line cnetre which is expected to function as
production cum training center for rural    entrepreneurs with focus on SC/ST/OBC and women.  For multiproduct line

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
grant is Rs.7.50 lakh with revolving seed capital of Rs.2.00 lakh.  The implementing agency is required to deploy
qualified trainer, provide accommodation / infrastructure and utilize locally grown raw material.
 
4.6       Entrepreneurial Development Programmes
 
4.6.1   Assistance of Rs.1.00 lakh is provided for launching four weeks training programme to enable potential
entrepreneur to set up food processing industries.  Minimum number of participants required per programme is 20
persons.  So far, 456 EDPs have been assisted under the scheme.
 
4.7       Backward Linkages Scheme
           
4.7.1    The objective of backward linkage scheme is to ensure regular supply of processable variety of farm produce,
minimize wastage, make value addition, avoid distress sale and provide remunerative income to the farmers.  Under the
scheme, the processor is eligible for reimbursement from MFPI @ 10% of total purchase made by him from the farmers
in a year subject to a maximum of Rs.10 lakh.
 
 4.8      Quality Assurance And R & D
 
4.8.1    In order to motivate food processing industries for adoption of ISO, HACCP and GMP standards and to maintain
and upgrade quality / hygiene of food products up to global level, the Ministry has introduced several schemes for
quality assurance, codex standards and R&D etc.   Financial assistance is provided to units to enable them to adopt
HACCP / ISO standards.  Emphasis is laid on total quality management. 
 
4.9       Prerequisites For Development Of  Food Processing Industries And Support Provided By MFPI
 
4.9.1    The food-processing sector requires efficient supply chain.   At present, the processors cannot get the raw
material directly from the farmers but they have to obtain through mandis or middlemen etc. 
 
4.9.2    Development FPI sector depends on favourable market of processed food.  For this purpose, generic
advertisements are launched periodically to build awareness among consumers about advantages of processed food. 
Assistance is provided for organizing seminar /workshop/ studies etc., to focus attention and attract investment on food
processing industries.  Assistance is also provided for participation in national / international fairs / exhibitions for
development of market and popularization of processed food.
 
4.9.3    The Committee understands that the prospects  of Food Processing Industry is tremendous in India
keeping in view the availability of raw material for various segments of Food Industry.   The growth rate to the
tune of 7 to 8 per cent in the food processing sector has to be maintained.  Therefore, the Committee feels that the
Government should undertake following strategic decision / actions for promoting small, medium and large food
processing units for promotion and proliferation of food industries in India:-
 
(i)
                 Greater impetus to basic development for facilitating food processing industry and paying attention
to decentralization of Infrastructural development i.e. food parks, packages centres, optimum
utilization of by - products, cold chain facilities, value added centres, irradiation facilities so that
balanced regional development of food processing industry may take place in the country; 
(ii)
               Awareness programme for technology up-gradation, establishment of modernization of food
processing industries covering fruits, vegetable, milk products, meat, poultry, fishery, oil seeds and
horticultural sector for adequate and optimum value addition;
(iii)             Special impetus to rural entrepreneurship through Mass Entrepreneurial developmental programmes
throughout the country by imparting necessary training and skill;
(iv)             Managing sustainable backward and forward linkages system and linking to ARI sector for ensuring
a regular supply of raw material and to workable commercial and marketable system for providing
remunerative income to the farmers;
(v)                For injecting competitiveness to face the global challenges from MNCs engaged in Food Processing
Industry, there is the need for maintaining global quality and hygiene standard;

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
(vi)             Promotion and adoption of ISO, HACP and Good Manufacturing Practices( GMP)  standards by the
Ministry of Food Processing Industry;
(vii)           Populariziation of processed food through participation in Seminars, Workshops, national,
international fairs and generic advertisement for customer awareness;
(viii)         Focused impetus to the growth and development of SMEs in Food Processing Industries throughout
the country by providing institutional and commercial support; and
(ix)             Food processing sector needs to take advantage of backward linkages scheme of MFPI so that there
are no middlemen / players in between the processors and farmers.
                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - V
 
SUPPLY OF COAL TO SSI SECTOR
 
During the year 2003-04 against a target of 299.50 Million Tonnes, Coal India Limited (CIL) and its subsidiaries
produced 306.38 Million Tonnes of coal and Singareni  Colleries Company Limited (SCCL) produced 33.85 Million
Tonnes of coal against a target of 33.50 Million Toones.  Of this combined production of CIL and SCCL, about 74%
was supplied to Power Sector, 5% to Steel Plants and Cokeries, 4% to Cement Plants, 1% to Fertilizer Plants and 16%
to other including Small Scale Industries units and other non-core sector consumers.  The coal is supplied to non-core
sector consumers including SSI units under sponsorship and linkage based on the Maximum Permissible Quantity
(MPQ), which is arrived at the average lifting of coal for the past three years, by the units, Coal companies are
supplying coal to SSI units on the basis of availability of coal after meeting the requirements of core sector consumers
like Power, Cement, Steel etc.
 
5.1       During the last one year with many power stations working under supercritical and critical coal stock, a
Contingency Plan by the Cabinet Secretariat has been drawn to augment and monitor the coal supply to such power
stations.  To raise the stock at power-house end, coal companies have been forced to supply beyond the targets and
linkage.  This resulted in short supply to not only other core consumers and but also to non-core consumers including
SSI units as against their requirements.
 
5.2       Maximum Permissible Quantity (MPQ)
           
5.2.1    The Committee was informed that the Coal Companies were not maintaining separate statistics regarding SSIs. 
Consumers whose investment towards plant and machinery does not exceed Rs. 1 crore, currently fall under the
category of SSIs.  Most of the industrial units in the non-core sector drawing coal and linked with coal companies,
except Special Smokeless Fuel (SSF) Units and Cokery-cum-Washery Units, whose investments towards plant and
machinery normally exceed the limit of Rs. 1 crore, have been considered in the category of SSI units.  The SSI units, so
categorized, have been drawing coal on month-to-month basis to the extent of Maximum Permissible Quantity (MPQ)
both by rail as well as road.  The MPQ for a particular consumer is decided on the basis of orders actually booked by the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
linked companies during the best of last three years.  The system of MPQ was introduced by CIL to encourage the
actual users who have been regularly taking coal against their linkage quantity and discourage others who have not been
lifting quantities commensurate with their linkages.  In certain coal companies, where availability of coal for non-core
sector consumers after meeting the requirement of core sector consumers does not permit the booking up to MPQ,
uniform pro-rata cuts are imposed to match the availability of coal on month to month basis.
 
5.2.2    The Department of Coal stated that the release of coal is currently being restricted to the units whose working
status has been physically got verified  by the appropriate authorities and found to be positive except in case of Bharat
Coking Coal Limited (BCCL) where twenty-five units are yet to be verified and are getting coal nonetheless.   A team
for verification of their status has since been constituted and will be completing the job shortly.  There is no
discrimination in releasing coal to linked SSI units between the States of the Union.  Release of coal is uniform for a
particular group of industries irrespective of the State in which they are located.   Break-up of state-wise dispatches to
SSIs is not readily available. 
 
5.3       Procedure for booking the orders
 
5.3.1    The Committee was apprised that  orders are  booked by road on month to month basis on 100% advance
payment to the extent of MPQ against the monthly availability notified by the coal companies.   The validity for the
purpose of lifting against these orders is normally to be extent of 45 days from the date of issuance of sale orders or till
the last date of the quarter plus one month of grace period whichever is earlier.  In case the orders are not fully executed,
such validity is extended maximum to the extent up to the quarter  against  which the orders are issued plus one month
of grace period.  However, most of the orders are executed within the average period of 45 days of issuance of order.
 
5.3.2    The Committee was further informed that by rail the rake programs to the extent of MPQ against the monthly
availability notified by the coal companies are submitted by the consumers directly or through their handling Agents. 
After ascertaining the financial coverage for loading in the form of either Bank Guarantee or 100% cash, the programs
are consented to by the coal companies for he purpose of loading and sent to Railways for their sanction.   Once
sanctioned by the Railways, the rakes are picked up[ for allotment against daily indents submitted by the Coal
Companies.  All consented programs for non-core rakes (both open sales schemes (OSS) and Brick Kiln
(BRK)/Industry), submitted by coal companies are to remain valid for allotment up to end of the 2
nd month succeeding
the month in which these programs are received by Railways.  The rakes allotted against sanctioned program are to
remain valid for loading up to end of the 2 nd moth succeeding the month in which allotment is made.   However, the
average period of loading varies from company to company and could be between 15 to 30 days from the date of
allotment.
 
5.4       Brick Kiln (BRK) Sector
 
5.4.1    The Department of  Coal stated the coal is being released to Brick Kiln (BRK) Sector both by rail and road based
on the sponsorship received from respective State Sponsoring Authority subject to availability.  To avoid hardship to the
brick burning units and also to ensure uninterrupted supply of coal, CIL decided to continue supply of coal to BRK
sector as per sponsorship received from the state authorities, though CIL specifically did not insist for the same but
would take cognizance once such sponsorship was issued.  CIL also decided to enhance coal supply under OSS to
enable BRK sector not getting sponsorship or having less sponsorship to get more coal. 
 
5.5       Open Sales Schemes (OSS)
 
5.5.1    The Department of Coal further stated that to cater to the small scale industries and other unlinked consumers, an
Open Sales Scheme (OSS) is being operated where slow moving stock of the identified sources after meeting the
requirement of linked consumers of core and non-core sectors, is earmarked for sale under OSS.  For this purpose,
notifications are issued in the Press for wide coverage and offers are invited for sale on "first-come-first-served" basis. 
In case the applications received on the very first day exceed the availability on a particular source already notified, the
quantity is distributed on pro-rata basis.  This practice is prevalent in most of the coal companies to avoid law and order
problems.  The validity for booking is 30 days from the date of commencement of the scheme.   The validity of lifting

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
varies from company to company and does not exceed 60 days from the date of sale order.  The orders, remaining
unexecuted even after expiry of the validity, are treated as lapsed and money value refunded.  This scheme is open to
any kind of consumer. The bulk of coal releases under this scheme is known to be utilized by the BRK sector.
 
5.6       Proposed E-Auction Scheme
 
5.6.1    The Department of Coal pleaded that since the Open Sales Scheme (OSS) being operated presently in Coal India
Limited on 'first-come-first-served' has not helped the needy small scale industries, a rational mechanism of E-auction
(electronic auction) system based on Internet based bidding is being considered in the Department of Coal.  This system
has already been approved, in principle, by the Government to be run on a trial basis in BCCL.  Based on the success of
this trial scheme, the same system is likely to be expanded to cover all the coal companies in respect of all non-core
consumers including SSI units.  This system will allow only genuine non-core consumers to participate in the bidding
and eliminate the middlemen and traders.  However there are some legal hurdles in implementation of the scheme. 
Once they are overcome, the scheme will be implemented in the right earnest.
 
 
5.7       Adequate and timely supply of coal to Small Scale Industries
5.7.1    The Committee takes note of the fact that Indian Small Scale Industries suffer from inadequate  supply of
coal to the SSI units. As per the extant policy, the supply of coal to the SSI units falls under the non-core sector. 
As a result, there has been huge mismatch between the demand and supply of coal to SSI sector.  As many of the
SSI units require timely and adequate supply of coal for running the units, non-availability of coal has adversely
affected to growth of SSI sector.
5.7.2    The Committee is anguished to note that Coal Companies are not maintaining separate statistics
regarding the supply of coal to SSI units.  The 16% of coal is supplied to non-core sector consumers including
SSI units under sponsorship and linkage based on the Maximum Permissible quantity (MPQ).   The Committee
feels that the requisite quantity of coal is not supplied under the sponsorship and  linkage based on MPQ which is
arrived at the average lifting of coal for the past three years, by the units.  Coal companies are supplying coal to
SSI units on the basis of availability of coal after meeting the requirements of core sector consumers like Power,
Cement, Steel etc. and often pro rata cuts are imposed in certain coal companies where availability of coal for
non core sector after meeting the requirement of core consumers do not permit the booking under MPQ.
5.7.3    In the process of examination, the Committee   interacted   with the representative of SSI Associations/
Entrepreneurs and Coal India Limited and the  Department of Coal  during the its study visit to Ranchi,  on the
issue of adequate and timely supply of coal to SSI. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Secretary, Department
of Coal and Chairman, Coal India Limited in the matter.  Having taken into consideration the mater placed
before the Committee and the evidence tendered by the witnesses, the Committee feels that following strategic
steps may be undertaken for adequate supply of coal to the SSI units:-
 
 
(i)
                 SE sector should be brought at par with the 'core sector' consumers;
(ii)               The Coal Companies should establish Depots in each district/State for distribution/marketing of
Coal, either by themselves or through outsourcing with adequate accountability on the outsourced
entities.
(iii)             Direct linkages should be given to the SSI units in all such districts which produce Coal.
(iv)             Ministry of Coal may constitute a Standing Advisory Committee and the representative of SSI
Associations should also be the member of the Standing Advisory Committee. 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
(v)               To the extent possible, all the coal consuming SSI should be given coal mines for direct mining in
private sector as a matter of reserved mines for SSI sector and it should be made mandatory to any
big private mine owner whoever gets coal mine from Government of India to ensure that priority
must  be fixed for SSI units.
(vi)             Government should consolidate the Small Scale Industries in the country by       implementing   
the Action Plan to enable the sector to provide employment          generation opportunities to millions of
youths in the urban as well as rural areas. It is hoped that the suggested  solutions would bring some relief
to           the SSI entrepreneurs in procuring coal.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - VI
TRANSPORTATION OF RAW MATERIAL AND FINISHED
PRODUCTS THROUGH RAILWAYS
 
Rail transport occupies a very important place in the economy and industrial life of a nation.   Efficiency of Rail
Transport System is therefore of vital national importance.  The most important aspect is how to render the Railway
System capable of carrying an ever   increasing volume of traffic with minimum increase of capital expedition. The
locomotives   carrying less than the economical load results in loss of carrying capacity on  Railway and consequently a
loss of output. The Indian Railways with the change of scenario in regard to transportation of freight items are mainly
catering to the transportation of sensitive bulk items like coal for thermal plant, iron ore or steel plants, food grain for
public distribution system etc.
 
6.1       The committee was informed that with the passage of time the transportation by rail has changed from piecemeal
wagon system to rake load system in the overall interest of the nation.  The railways have to transport in bulk coal for
thermal plants for production of electricity, which is a basic necessity not only for towns, villages large industries but
also for small scale industries.  The loading and transportation of food grain for PDS, which has to be provided to the
poor people below Poverty Line in remote villages, is of utmost national priority. The running of freight trains in rake
load has increased Railways performance from all angles.  Not only revenue loading has increased but also wagon
utilization, and net tonne kilometer per wagon day have also increased as can be seen from the table given below:-
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
6.1.1    FREIGHT PERFORMANCE
 
 Revenue
Loading
NTKM Average
Lead
NTKM/Wagon
Day
Wagon
Km/Wagon
Day
Wagon
Turn Round
 (Million
Tonnes)
(In Billion) (In Km) (BG) (BG) (In Days)
1950-51 73.2 37.6 513 710 62.3 11.0
160-61 119.8 72.3 603 998 76.9 11.2
1970-71 167.9 110.7 659 908 73.4 13.3
1980-81 195.9 147.7 754 986 73.4 15.2
1990-91 318.4 235.8 741 1407 110.5 11.5
2000-01 473.5 312.4 660 2042 179.0 7.5
2001-02 492.5 333.2 677 2223 191.5 7.2
2002-03 518.7 353.2 681 2468 203.9 7.0
 
 
6.1.2    The Committee has been apprised that in order to help the SSIs and ARIs, Multi-party Rakes have been
permitted in which different units can club their demand to form a full rake.  Further, a Freight Forwarder Scheme was
introduced for Goods traffic to provide door-to-door service for the transportation of traffic between specific pairs of
points.  The freight forwarders are required to have their own machinery for collection of piecemeal traffic from the
market to book the consolidated cargo as a full train load for a specific destination at lump sum rates and other terms
and conditions notified from time to time.  Further, clubbing of consignments has been permitted.  Up to t twelve parties
can combine to share the commodity loaded in BG eight-wheeler wagons as against six party clubbing permitted earlier.
 
6.1.3    Railways cater to the demand of transportation of SSIs to some extent by moving their goods through parcels. 
Out of around 6800 railway stations on the Indian Railways, parcel traffic is handled at around 3500 stations.  However,
only around 10% of the stations, which are open for parcel handling, generate revenue of more than RS. One  lakh per
month. 
 
6.1.4    Over the years, Railways have been incurring huge losses in carriage of parcel traffic under the conventional
methods of transportation by passenger carrying trains and were subjected to several criticism , both by the public as
well as the Standing Committee on Railways.  The loss in parcel business is not being maintained separately.   However,
the details of combined loss in Parcels, Luggage and Postal traffic are as under:-
 
 
Year Expenses
(Rs.  Cr)
Earning
(Rs.   Cr.)
Loss
(Rs.    Cr.)
1994-95 821.41 391.74 -429.67
1995-96 891.31 460.95 -430.36
1996-97 959.03 459.08 -499.95
1997-98 1209.35 468.70 -740.65
1998-99 1261.62 548.16 -713.46
1999-2000 1470.35 615.94 -854.42
2000-01 1475.78 573.64 -902.13
2001-02 1544.88 656.12 -888.76
2002-03 1532.52 750.33 -782.19
 
6.1.5    With  a view to maximise  the utilisation  of the brakevans and thereby increase the earnings, Railways had
launched the scheme for leasing out parcel space in the front SLRs in the year 1991.  Under this scheme, parcel space in
the front SLRs of the passanger carrying trains is leased out to the private operators by inviting bids through open
tenders  Further, the railways  save on their cost on loading, unloading, running staff viz. assistant guard,

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
documentation, marketing and storage of parcels in case of leased SLRs.
 
6.1.6    With a view to run parcel express trains, the policy on "Millennium Parcel Express" service was introduced in
March 2001.  Under this scheme, a parcel train consisting of a minimum of 10 VPHs can be leased out to private service
providers by inviting bids through open tenders on the lines of "Millennium Parcel Express" service, Railways later
introduced its own departmental weekly time-tabled Parcel Express trains between important pairs of points.
 
6.1.7    With a view to run parcel express trains, the policy on "Millennium Parcel Express" service was introduced in
March, 2001.  Under this scheme, a parcel train consisting of a minimum of 10 VPHs  can be leased out to private
service providers by inviting bids through open tenders on the lines of "Millennium Parcel Express" service, Railways
later introduced its own departmental weekly time-tabled parcel express  trains between important pairs of points. A
total of 519 parcel vans have been manufactured during the last five years period from 1999-2000 to 2003-2004. 
However, the total holding of parcel vans, as on 31.03.2003 was 932. The present holding of Refrigerated Parcel Vans
(VPRs) on the Indian Railways is 10 VPRs.  These VPRs have been especially designed and manufactured for the
transportation of perishable traffic.
 
6.1.8    The Committee has been informed that the services of Refrigerated Parcel Vans (VPRs) are not being fully
utilized for want of sufficient demand from the market.   Railways have been asked to give wide publicity to capture
perishable traffic at presently moving by road.  The Railways has also set up a PSU called CONCOR under its control
for looking after the needs of SSIs through multi modal transportation.   The CONCOR through their domestic division
are also providing containers for piecemeal booking as well as for transportation of less than container cargo.  Though
they have 52 prime terminal but containers are provided at the doorstep of SSIs by road bridging.  The different door
step location can be upto even a distance of 500 kms. from the container terminal which makes the reach of these
terminals to each and every knock and corner of the country.  CONCOR is ready to increase its scope for providing
containers to even SSIs which are ar from their terminals by bridging the doorstep of industry by roads.  The trafic
carried by CONCOR during the last seven years is as under:-
 
YEAR TEUs Handles % Increase
1997-98 230238  
1998-99 225156 -2.2
1999-2000 238661 5.9
2000-01 291360 22.0
2001-02 326775 12.1
2002-03 351238 7.5
2003-04 350501 -0.21
 
6.1.9    The Committee was apprised that  the concept of Road Railer is being developed to facilitate multi- modal
transportation which would  help the SSI.
6.1.10  Realizing the  fact  that the Small Scale Industries (SSI) Sector faces problems in transportation of raw material
and finished products. The Committee interacted with the representative of Railway Board in the presence of Secretary,
Ministry of  SSI and ARI  in order to have the across the table discussion on the issue of constraints in transportation of
raw material and finished SSI products.  the committee noted that Railways remained   the cheaper mode of transport
and Small Scale units have always been dependent on Railways for transportation of raw material and finished
products.  The SSI units are spread throughout the country, including the remote areas.  The Railways with its wide
network provides one of the cheapest modes of transportation of raw material and finished products for the SSI sector.
6.1.11  The Committee is  however, constrained to observed  that  the Railways have done very little to encourage
the SSIs to choose railways as their preferred mode of transport.  As the rake load (2200-2300 tonnes) is the basic
transport unit of the Railways, the SSI units are not able to utilize the Railways for transportation of either the
raw material or the finished products due to smaller quantum. The introduction of movement of goods in rake-
load/train-load and running of point-to-point trains since 1982 created problems in transportation of raw
material/finished product of Small Scale units.  Moreover,  the closure of 79 marshalling yards between 1985 and

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
2000 due to rake-load/train-load movement restricted the collection/delivery of smaller loads originating from
adjoining sections.  Besides bulk volume of delivery are not accommodated at rural stations.  The container
services of the Railways, which can carry up to 24 tonnes, has also not served the cause of SSI sector due to
limited terminals in the country (52 locations throughout the country).  Due to these constraints, most of the SSI
units have to depend on roads for transporting raw material and finished products. 
6.1.12  The Committee welcomes the concept of Road Railer intended to facilitate multi- modal transportation
and hopes that the said measure would help the SMEs in transportation.
6.1.13  The Committee therefore, recommends that           the Ministry of Railways should take immediate
measures for providing the needed facilities to the SSI sector for transportation of raw material and finished
products throughout the country:-
(i)
                 Railways should restore the facility of booking small quantities (wagon loads) to help the
transportation of SE raw materials and products.
(ii)               Bookings at smaller stations should be accepted.
(iii)             Adoption of cluster-based approach for better collection and delivery of raw material/finished
goods of SEs.
(iv)             Railway Board to constitute a Standing Advisory Committee under Chairmanship of Member
(Traffic) with representation from Ministry of SSI and Ministry of ARI and select Associations of
SEs to devise new schemes for addressing all concerns of SEs.  
6.1.14  The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Railways should enable the SSI sector by
providing all possible assistance  for the transportation of SE raw materials and products to strengthen and
facilitate to remain competitive in market-led global economy.  Keeping in view the potential of Small Scale
Industries in India, the Railway Board must  reconsider  the case of Small Scale Industries and  provide 
infrastructure upgradation in the major industrial clusters for transportation of raw material and finished SSI
products.  The Committee desires  that Railways should play a pro-active role and reach out to the major
industrial clusters for providing transportation services to its customers.
CHAPTER - VII
 
CREDIT FLOW TO SSI SECTOR
           
            The Committee has been apprised  that the Small Scale Industries (SSI) Sector is vibrant segment of the Indian
economy as this sector  contributes   over 39% of the manufacturing sector output, 34% of the nation's exports and
providing employment to over 270 lakh persons through about 114 lakh units, which are spread both in rural and urban
areas across the country. The Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) are on the move world wide as this sector of
economy has tremendous potential for employment generation, which augur in turn the consolidation of the national
economy. The Committee has been apprised by the Ministry of SSI, and duly endorsed by the Banking Division and the
representatives of Nationalisied banks during the series of meetings held with the  Standing Committee on Industry  and
the Sub-committees (of Standing Committee on Industry ) for the Ministry of SSI that Indian Small Scale Industries
grossly suffer from inadequate   credit flow.
7.1       The Committee has been apprised that SSI and Tiny Sectors are provided credit through various direct, indirect
schemes, specialized schemes and soft loan schemes:-
(
i) Direct Finance include Direct Assistance for setting up of new units; Direct Assistance for expansion,
technological ,Direct Discounting of Bills of equipments and components; ,Working Capital Term Loan; Pre-
shipment/Post- Shipment Credit in Rupee/Foreign Currency; Marketing Finance; Foreign Currency Term Loan for
acquisition of ISO-9000 Series Certification.
(ii) Indirect Finance include Refinancing to Prime Lending Institutions and source support to Institutions/Agencies

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
engaged in financing SSIs.
 
7.1.1    Specialized Schemes are Composite Loan Scheme (CLS), Single Window Scheme (SWS), Scheme for SC/ST
and Physically Handicapped Persons; Refinance Scheme for Technology Development (RTDM); Refinance Scheme for
Acquisition of ISO-9000 Series Certification by SSI Units; Scheme for Small Road Transport Operators; Refinance
Scheme for Textile   Industry under Technology Upgradation Fund (RTUF); ;Refinance Scheme for Rehabilitation of
Sick Industrial Units; Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme; ;Soft Loan Under National Equity Fund Scheme (NEF);
;Tannery Modernization Schemes ; Mahila Udyam Nidhi Scheme; Prime Minister’s Rozgar    Yojana ; Credit Guarantee
Fund Trust for Small Industries (CGTSI)
 
7.1.2    The Committee wanted to know the net percentage of credit to Small Scale Industries vis-a-vis the large Scale
Industries and details of NPAs of SSI sector in comparison to large Scale Industries. The loan outstanding to SSI sector
as a percentage of net bank credit in respect of the public sector banks has declined from 12.53% as at the end of March,
2002 to 10.43% as at the end of March, 2004. However, the quantum of credit to SSI sector by the public sector banks
has gone up in absolute terms from Rs.49,743 crore to Rs. 58,278 crore during the same period.
 
 
 
 
 
7.1.3    The details of percentage net bank credit in respect of the public sector banks are as under:-
 
(Rs. in Crore)
 As at the end of March  
 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Net Bank
Credit
(NBC)
218219 246203 292943 340887 396954 4,77,899 5,58,849
Credit to SSI 38109 42674 45788 48445 49743 52988 58,278
Percentage to
NBC
17.5% 17.3% 15.6% 14.2% 12.5% 11.1% 10.4%
No. of SSI
accounts (in
lakhs)
29.64 26.24 22.72 22.80 22.23 16.95 16.33
 
7.1.4    The Committee expresses its deep concern that credit rate to Small Scale sector as percentage of net bank
credit from Public Sector Banks has declined from 17.5%  (March, 1998) to 14.2% (March, 2001) and further to
10.4% (March, 2004).  Not only this, number of SSI accounts has also declined from 29.64 lakh in 1998 to 16.33
lakh in 2004 i.e. by about 50%.
 
7.1.5    The Committee was apprised of reasons for decline in lending to SSI Sector which are as under:-
(i)
                  High incidence of NPAs on Loans to SSIs discourages further investment/inhibits   further lending.
(ii)                Prudential write off and compromise settlement of large number of bad accounts pertaining to SSI Sector.
(iii)               Funding from own sources in case of profitable units may show up in Low Credit growth.  
7.2       Kapur Committee Report
 
7.2.1   Out of 126 recommendations of S.L. Kapur Committee, 88 have already been accepted and implemented by
banks/other agencies which, inter-alia, includes the following:
(i)                  Delegation of more powers to branch managers to grant ad-hoc limits

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
(ii)                Simplification of application forms
(iii)               Freedom to banks to decide their own norms for assessment of credit requirements
(iv)              Opening of more Specialized SSI branches
(v)                Enhancement in the limit for composite loans
(vi)              Strengthening the recovery mechanism,
(vii)             Banks to pay more attention to the backward states
(viii)           Special programmes for training branch managers for appraising small projects
(ix)              Banks to make customers grievance machinery more transparent and simplify the procedures for
handling complaints and monitoring thereof etc.
 
7.3 S.P. Gupta Committee Report
7.3.1    Out of 64 major recommendations of S.P. Gupta Committee, all except 6 recommendations, which have not
found favour with Ministry of SSI, have been accepted.   Some of the important recommendations pertaining to RBI are
as under:
(i)                  Fixing of time frame for disposal of loan application forms;
(ii)                Softer interest rate for SSI entrepreneurs;
(iii)               Regular meeting of Standing Advisory Committee;
(iv)              Enhancement in the quantum of composite loan and collateral free loans; and
(v)                Fixing of self-set target to SSI Sector by banks etc.
 
7.4       Measures taken by Government to increase credit flow to SSI sector
           
7.4.1    The Committee was apprised of Measures taken by Government to increase credit flow to SSI sector which are
as under: -
 
(i)
                  Creation of a Rs.10,000 crore SME Fund to give an impetus to credit to SSI Sector to be operationalised by
SIDBI.
(ii)                It has now been decided, in consultation with IBA, that the public sector banks will increase the credit limit
of Laghu Udhyami Credit Cards (LUCC), for borrowers who have a satisfactory track record, from Rs.2 lakh
to Rs.10 lakhs. Banks have been advised to make the modified scheme operational from March 1, 2004.
(iii)
               Enhancement of working capital loan (computed on the basis of minimum of 20% of annual projected
turnover) to Rs.5 crores.
(iv)              Banks have been advised to open at least one Specialized SSI Branch in each district. Further Banks have
also been permitted to categorize their general branches having 60% or more of their advances to SSI Sector
as specialized SSI Branches.
(v)                Banks were advised to enhance the composite loan limit from Rs.25 lakh to Rs.50 lakh.
(vi)              Increase in the exemption limit for all SSI borrowal accounts for obtention  of collateral security for loans
from the existing Rs.15 lakhs to Rs.25 lakhs based on good track record and financial position of SSI Units.
(vii)             Banks have been advised to dispose of applications for loans up to Rs.25, 000/- within 2 weeks and for
higher amount, within 4 weeks provided the loan applications are complete in all respect and accompanied

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
by a checklist.
(viii)           To address the incidence of sickness in SSI Sector, RBI has issued a complete set of revised guidelines in
January, 2002.
(ix)              Banks have been instructed to impart necessary training programmes for the branch level officials to
sensitize them and to bring about attitudinal change towards the needs of SSI Sector.
(x)                Banks have been advised to examine having at least 3 slabs for rate of interest for loans upto Rs.50,000/-,
between Rs.50,000 & Rs.2 lakhs and above Rs.2 lakhs.
(xi)              In order to pass on the benefits of lower rates of interest on SSI Sector, Banks have been advised to adopt an
interest rate band of 2 per cent above and below its PLR for secured advances.
(xii)             Recently, RBI in the Credit Policy for 2004-05 has decided to develop a mechanism for debt restructuring
for the SSI Sector on the lines of CDR
 
7.5       Mechanism for effective monitoring of credit availability  to SSI Units
7.5.1    Pertaining to the mechanism for effective monitoring of credit availability  to SSI Units, the Committee has
been  informed that   there are various forums such as District Consultative Committee/District Level Review
Committee/State Level Bankers Committee for reviewing the performance of Banks in credit flow to different sectors
including SSI Sector at quarterly intervals where, besides the representatives of RBI, Banks, officials of the State
Government departments participate in the discussions.  At apex level, RBI also convenes meetings under the
Chairmanship of Dy. Governor at half yearly intervals for a critical review of credit flow to SSI Sector.  Apart from
these forums, credit flow to SSI Sector is being reviewed at Government level in different meetings convened by
Planning Commission, Ministry of SSI and Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry from time to time. 
 
7.6       RBI guidelines on collateral free loan to SSI Sector
 
7.6.1    Regarding the RBI guidelines on collateral free loan to SSI Sector, the Committee was apprised that  RBI has
issued guidelines to scheduled commercial Banks from time to time for collateral free loans to SSI sector.  If any
complaint is brought to the notice of RBI, it advises the concerned Banks to take corrective steps.  The Banks have also
been advised to display in their branch premises the limit upto which collaterals are not required for ensuring
transparency in adherence to the RBI guidelines.  It has been decided to cover all loans to SSI, tiny, small services and
business enterprises upto Rs 25 lakh sanctioned by the member lending institution under Credit Guarantee Scheme
(CGTSI).  However, Banks find premium charged by CGTSI on the higher side. The information given below is (as
provided by Ministry of SSI) fact that to what extent RBI guidelines is adhered to: -
 
7.6.2    Non-adherence to RBI Guidelines
 
Guidelines Status
60% of SSI lending to be earmarked for tiny
units (RBI - January, 1998).
March, 2000-54.0%
March, 2001-53.7%
March, 2002-54.3%
March, 2003-50.8%
March, 2004-52.9%
Efforts to operationalize  at least one specialized
SSI branch in every District and locations of
clusters of SSI units (RBI- March, 2000).
Till March, 2004, 497 specialized SSI branches
have been opened by all public sector banks
taken together.  Moreover, this covers only 175
out of 598 Districts in the country.
Loan limit of borrowing accounts for dispensing Year     Total amount     of this       % of

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
with collateral securities raised to Rs. 5 lakh
(RBI-January, 2002). ending    of loans up to    collateral   collateral
               Rs. 5 lakh       free loans      free loans
                  (Rs. crore)       (Rs. crore)  to total
March,2003   13829              3778         27.3%
March, 2004   14749            3763        25.5%
Commercial banks to adopt an interest rate band
of 2%% above and below their prime lending rate
(PLR) (RBA- March, 2003).
This is not being adhered to strictly, as reported
by SEs.  Non-SSI units are financed at a rate of
interest even below 2% of PLR.
Public Sector Banks advised to fix self-set targets
for growth in advances to SSI sector over the last
year's achievement (RBI-June 2003).
Self-set targets fixed by banks (2003-04)
Range    No. of Banks   No. of banks achieving
   (%)                                        targets
0-10           8                                0
10-20          14                            6
20-30           3                           1
Above 30       2                           1
Total               27                        8  
Only 8 public sector banks achieved their self-set
targets during 2003-04. 
 
 
7.7       Interest rates on loans given to SSI Sector
7.7.1    As regards the Interest rates on loans given to SSI Sector, it was stated that The lending rates have come down
after the deregulation of interest rates regime. As per extant guidelines the banks are required to fix their own prime
lending rates (PLRs) and the maximum band over the PLR. The interest rates on loans upto Rs.2 lakh should not exceed
the PLR.  Interest rates on loans beyond Rs.2 lakh is left to the discretion of the banks subject to PLR and the maximum
bands. The banks have been advised by RBI to accord SSI Units with good track record, the benefit of lower spreads
over PLR. 
7.8       High Cost of Credit to SE sector: Comparison
 
Sectors Rate of Interest
SE sector Existing guideline for banks is plus / minus 2% on PLR.  This
translates into a range of 8.25% to 13%.
Large Scale Industries Interest rates are negotiable and are generally at sub-PLR.
Housing For a tenure of 5 years (fixed), the interest rates of some select
banks are: State Bank of India-8%, Bank of Baroda-9%, Bank

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
of India-8.5%, Canara bank-8%.
 
 
 
 
7.9       Fixation of Sub-targets to SSI Sector within priority sector
 
 7.9.1   Regarding the Committee's query as to the fixation of Sub-targets to SSI Sector within priority sector, the
banking Division stated that the the issue of fixing of a separate Sub-target to SSI within the overall target of Priority
Sector was discussed in the last (2nd & 3rd) Standing Advisory Committee Meetings of the RBI.
 
Self-set Targets: Top Performers
 
Bank Target (%) Achievement (%)
Corporation Bank 30.10 53.43
Allahabad bank 22.34 45.40
Canara Bank 16.12 27.99
State Bank of Patiala 15.00 23.95
Indian overseas Bank 12.05 20.97
Punjab National Bank 13.00 18.49
Union Bank of India 16.00 17.31
UCO Bank 14.00 14.94
 
Self-set Targets: Poor Performance
 
Bank Target (%) Achievement (%)
Bank of Baroda 7.26 -6.87
Punjab and Sink Bank 6.64 -5.57
Andhra bank 12.00 -4.48
Dena Bank 3.85 -4.35
State Bank of Mysore 17.80 -2.63
Indian Bank 2.74 -2.49
United Bank of India 0.75 -1.32
 
 
 
 7.9.2   It was observed that if sub-target for both agriculture and SSI are prescribed at 18% and (say) 16% of Net Bank
Credit (NBC) very little would be left for other deserving areas under priority sector such as education, rural housing,
small business, retail trade, micro finance etc. and it may result in crowding out effect. 
 
7.9.3    However, in order to achieve the desired objective of increased credit flow to SSI Sector, in the 3
rd Meeting of
Standing Advisory Committee (SAC), it was agreed that banks shall consider budgeting their growth in advance to SSI
Sector keeping in view the trends in growth of net bank credit less food credit. They would consider fixing self-set
targets for growth in advances to SSI Sector over the previous year’s achievement and overall trends in growth of net
bank credit. Almost all the public sector banks have fixed self set target for growth to SSI Sector for the year 2003-04. 
7.9.4    As regards the steps being taken to avoid delay in sanction of loans to SSI  Units, it was stated that   RBI has
issued instructions to Banks to observe a time schedule of a fortnight for disposal of loan applications upto Rs.25,000/-
and four weeks for disposal of loan applications upto Rs.5 lakhs. Banks have also been advised to communicate the
decisions, sanction or otherwise, promptly. Branch Managers should be empowered adequately so as to avoid delay in
sanctioning of loan proposals.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
7.10     Role of SIDBI in development of SSI
           
7.10.1  In response to long outstanding demands of the SSI Sector, SIDBI was set up in April, 1990 under an Act of
Parliament as Principal Financial Institution for promotion financing and development of industry in the Small-Scale
Sector and to coordinate the function of agencies engaged in the similar activities.   SIDBI’s operations are divided into
three principal area viz. (i) indirect assistance, (ii) direct assistance, (iii) development and support services.
 
PERFORMANCE OF SIDBI OVER THE YEARS
 
FOR THE YEAR
 1999-2000 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04
Sanctions 10,264.7 10,820.6 9,025.5 10,903.6 8,246.3
Disbursements 6,963.5 6441.4 5,919.3 6,789.4 4.414.2
AS ON MARCH 31
 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Outstanding
Portfolio
15,194.3 14,570.6 13,160.0 12,728.2 10,063.9
Total Income 1,597.9 1,619.4 1,559.6 1,405.5 1,151.4
Net Profit 459.4 477.4 281.7@ 207.2@ 243.1@
 
           
 7.10.2                        Some of the important Schemes of SIDBI are Composite Loan Scheme, National Equity Fund
Scheme, Refinance Scheme for Technology   Development and Modernization, Refinance Scheme for Textile Industry
under Technology Upgradation Fund, Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for Technology Upgradation SSI, Project
Finance Scheme, Scheme of Integrated Infrastructural Development, Micro Credit Scheme, Scheme of Direct
Assistance under TUFS, Direct Discounting Scheme
 
7.11    Recent initiatives taken by SIDBI
 
7.11.1  The strategic business interventions during 2003-04 were aimed at improving the flow of credit to the SSI Sector
by broad basing certain schemes in tune with the changing requirements of the sector.  Steps were taken to enhance the
scale of operations under direct finance schemes, besides endeavoring to strengthen and improve the functioning of
State Financial Corporations to make them more vibrant in meeting the emerging needs of the sector. New initiatives
include Small and Medium Enterprises Fund ,Venture Capital Assistance – SIDBI Growth Fund ,Portfolio Risk Fund
,Portfolio Purchase Scheme.          
 
7.11.2  The GOI recently announced the creation of a small and medium enterprises (SME) Fund for making available
credit to SMEs.    SIDBI is the Nodal Agency.  The fund has been structured by SIDBI for providing impetus to the
growth of SME Sector in India.  Initially the fund is envisaged to have a corpus of Rs.10,000 crore spread over 2 years,
i.e. FY 2005 and FY 2006.  The interest rate on assistance out of the fund has been kept concessional and competitive. 
The interest rate would be ‘SIDBI’s Prime Lending Rate (PLR) – 2 percent.  Amount disbursed under this Fund till 30
th
June 2004 comes to Rs.535 crores.  SME Fund aims at making available timely and adequate resources to SMEs at
competitive rates and to benefit in particular the lower end of SME segment.SIDBI will operate the Fund through its
own 44 branches, 18 SFCs and other primary lending institutions.The assistance would be provided to the units in the
SME sector for variety of purposes at a rate 2 percent below PLR. SIDBI would provide funds to PLIs/SFCs at interest
rates of 7.5-8% p.a.The broad areas of assistance would include technology development, venture funding, cluster
development, micro credit, credit rating facilitation and other promotional and developmental activities.The credit from
the fund would be in the form of term loan, investment in equity, bills discounting, working capital finance etc.The total
corpus of Rs 10,000 crore is to be mobilized within a period of two years from SIDBI’s own contribution and other
domestic borrowings. In addition to this the deposits received from foreign banks against their shortfall in priority sector
lending have been earmarked towards the corpus of the Fund.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
7.12     Working of SME Development Fund
7.12.1  The SIDBI has launched an “SME Growth Fund” (SGF), a new national level venture capital fund focused at the
SME sector, on 25th October 2004, with an initial corpus Rs.100 crore  fully committed by SIDBI.  The fund is being
managed by SIDBI Venture Capital Ltd. (SVCL) and enhancement of committed corpus to Rs.500 crore is expected
shortly with aggregate commitments having already reached Rs.450 crore.  The fund has been established with an
objective to meet the long-term risk capital requirement of innovative and technology oriented units and shall make
primarily equity/equity-related capital investments in units operating in growth sectors such as life sciences, retailing,
light engineering, food processing, information technology, infrastructure related to services such as health care,
logistics and distributions etc.  The life of the fund is 8 years. The fund has commenced the investment activity and has
sanctioned investment to two companies.
7.12.2  In line with the announcement made by the then Hon’ble Finance Minister in the interim budget submitted to the
Lok Sabha on February 3, 2004, regarding setting up of a Growth fund with an initial corpus of Rs.100 crore and to be
subsequently enhance to Rs.500 crore, Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) has set up “SME Growth
Fund” (SGF), a national level venture capital fund focused at the SME sector.  This is a unique initiative sponsored by
SIDBI jointly with major public sector banks such as State Bank of India, Punjab National Bank, Bank of Baroda and
several other major nationalized banks.  Enhancement of committed corpus to Rs.500 crore is expected shortly with
aggregate commitments having already reached Rs.450 crore. The life of fund is 8 years.
7.12.3  SGF was conceptualized in early 2004 and was formally launched in October 2004.  It has started the operations
by making investment commitments and has sanctioned investment in two companies.   It expects to commit major
portion in next 3 to 4 years.  The fund is being managed by SIDBI venture Capital Ltd. (SVCL), a wholly owned
subsidiary of SIBI, SVCL has an extensive expertise in early stage venture investments and familiarization with local as
well as international practices in venture capital industry.  It is already managing a fund of Rs.100 crore for the IT/ITES
sectors viz, National Venture Fund for Software and IT Industry (NFSIT).  The skills and experience of the investment
team, the emphasis on value creation and its linkages place SVCL in a unique position to partner with an enterprise in
its growth.
 
7.12.4  SGF has been established with an objective to meet the long term risk capital of SME units, to enable them to
achieve rapid growth rates and maintain their competitive edge in domestic and international markets.   SGF is a general
fund and shall make primarily equity/equity-related capital investments in accordance with SEBI guidelines in units
operating in various sectors such as life sciences, biotechnology, retailing, pharmaceuticals, light engineering and
information technology.  These projects should be backed by a management team with proven track record and should
have a sustainable competitive intellectual property, technology or a well differentiated market positioning with
potential of achieving and sustaining a leading market position.
 
7.12.5  In order to further consolidation of the fund, a LIBOR linked World Bank Pilot Project on financing of SMEs in
India to be guaranteed by the GOI is being finalized in consultation with World Bank and other donor agencies like
GTZ of Germany, KfW, and DFID. The purpose of assistance from WB and KfW is to pool the resources for SME
Fund, which in turn aims to give impetus to the growth of SME Sector and to make available timely and adequate
financial resources for the sector at competitive rates. The Line of Credit from World Bank would be of US $ 120 mio
and an additional LOC of EURO 43.5 -Mio(equivalent to USD 50 Mio) is also been negotiated with  KFW. 
 
7.13     Working Group on Flow of Credit to SSI Section (Ganguly Committee Report)
7.13.1  The Ganguly Committee Report has been presented and is under examination of RBI. The Ganguly Committee
Report is the latest in the series for providing adequate and timely credit to SSI Sector. There are three principle
elements of the proposed strategy for extending credit to SMEs :-
(i)
                  The first leg of strategy  is directed at those units, which have linkages with large corporate undertakings as
vendors or suppliers. To these units, provision and flow of credit could be tied up with the large
undertakings, which would facilitate recovery.
                

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
(ii)  The second leg of the strategy is aimed at developing a set of standard products for units belonging to the
same cluster of industries.
(iii)                The third leg of the strategy is to develop local financial intermediaries specifically aimed at financing
units in the tiny and small sectors and more particularly to the former. These would be in the nature of the
NBFCs but without any permission to accept deposits from the public. They would draw their resources from
the banking system, by originating the loans and selling the same to the banks as a portfolio with appropriate
arrangements for risk sharing.
7.13.2  The Ganguly Committee Report emphasizes the need for new vehicles and instruments, viz., bank promoted
(non-deposit taking) NBFCs, micro credit intermediaries dedicated to SME financing, etc. Such micro credit
intermediaries (funded by individual or a group of banks) would be able to credit-rate and risk assess and serve as
instruments for extending quick credit to SME clusters, accredited to them.
7.13.3  The Ganguly Committee Report reinforces the importance of SIDBI’s Technology Bank for SME upgradation in
order to facilitate technology transfer, provide services such as project evaluation, risk assessment and risk mitigation
measures for the SMEs exploring and adopting new technologies. Such a service would significantly improve the credit
accessibility of the SMEs as well.
7.13.4  A dedicated, National level SME Development Fund, promoted by SIDBI /banks, to fund export oriented, high
technology SMEs and accredited clusters can play catalytic role in the advancement of the SME sector. The role of
SME rating agencies and CGTSI needs to be proactive in order to protect the bank advances and publicized widely.
Special plea for novel funding for SMEs, especially in North East and other backward regions/areas, in order to remove
regional imbalances by promoting and developing SMEs, needs to be pursued actively.
7.13.5  Highly successful micro finance models working in southern states should be actively publicized and replicated,
as best practices in other parts of the country. Given the potential opportunities, banks may consider adopting Micro
Finance Intermediaries (MFIs) to extend their business. Since many SFCs have good infrastructure, trained personnel,
etc., revival of some of the more active SFCs as state level NBFCs needs to be explored.
           
7.13.6  The Committee is of the view that RBI should examine the recommendations contained in the Ganguly
Committee Report and issue guidelines to all banks for immediate implementation and thus enhancing the credit
to SMEs on reasonable rate of interest so that Indian Small Enterprises may grow and thrive into Medium
Enterprises.
 
7.14     Restructuring of State Financial Corporations (SFCs)
 
7.14.1  As a proactive measure to strengthen the SFCs, and in line with the announcement made by the Government of
India, SIDBI offered a restructuring package to SFCs and to enter into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with
them.  The package, inter alia, covers reduction in the rate of interest on the existing refinance outstanding by 2 per cent,
a rebate of 2 percent on future disbursements on prompt payment of dues, and moratorium on repayment of principal
dues by one year.  The MoU envisages suitable support from the State Governments, besides achievement of laid down
performance parameters by SFCs.  So far, nine SFCs in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana, Himachal
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka, Rajasthan and West Bengal  have entered into the MoU with SIDBI. The
SFCs have expressed that the concessions given by SIDBI under MoU has not only helped them to reduce their financial
cost of borrowing but have also made them competitive under the SME dispensation.
 
7.14.2  The Committee is of the view that restructuring of the States Financial Corporations (SFCs) would go a
long way in enhancing the credit to SMEs as per the requirement .  The Committee would like to be apprised of
the outcome of efforts made by SIDBI through restructuring package to SFCs under MoU.
7.15     Enabling Credit to SMEs
7.15.1  “Creating space for small scale industries to thrive and grow”, is one of the thrusts of Finance Minister’s Budget
Speech.  Small Scale Industries should be regarded as, an engine of growth and given the space to grow into medium
enterprises.  Keeping in mind these objectives, the following announcements have been made:

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
(i)                  The Ministry of SSI has identified 85 items in the budget 2004-05 and 108 items in general budget 2005-06
that can be safely taken out of the reserved list.
(ii)                The ceiling for loans under the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) has been increased from
Rs.40 lakhs to Rs.1 crore and the rate of subsidy will also be raised from 12% to 15%.  Adding more sub-
sectors and technologies eligible for assistance will enlarge the scope of the scheme.
(iii)               SSI Units will be encouraged to obtain credit rating.
(iv)              A provision of Rs.135.24 crore has been made for promotion of SSI Schemes.
(v)                Public Sector Banks – Performance of Lending Data as on March 2003.
           
7.16     Technology Bank for SME for upgradation to facilitate technology transfer project evaluation, risks
management etc.
 
7.16.1  SIDBI engaged the services of a consultant for suggesting a framework to establish a Technology Bank for
SMEs. The consultant has, in the report, outlined a need for a technology intervention agency for the sector.
Accordingly, SIDBI has initiated necessary steps for institutionalizing the Technology Bureau for Small Enterprises as a
full-fledged Technology Bank. SIDBI has approached some public sector banks soliciting equity participation and their
response has been positive. Suitable steps are being initiated for incorporation of the entity and operationalising  the
same at the earliest.
 
7.17     Modalities of re-orienting the role of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) for extending credit flow to rural
Small Scale Industries;
 
7.17.1  Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) have been prescribed priority sector target of 60% (as against 40% for scheduled
commercial banks).  This higher priority sector target includes credit to SSI also.
The Annual monetary & credit policy for 2005-06 states:-
 
7.17.2  "The Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) are conceived as institutions that combine the local feel and familiarity with
rural problems, which the co-opperatives  possess, and the degree of business organisation  as well as the ability to
mobilise deposits, which the commercial banks possess.  In view of their importance as purveyors of rural credit it, the
Union Budget 2004-05 emphasized that the sponsor banks would be accountable for the performance of their RRBs.As
indicated in the mid-term review of October, 2004 sponsor banks are being encouraged to merge the RRBs sponsored
by them state-wise.  A few proposals in this regard are at various stages of consideration.  While the sponsor banks were
advised that the appointment of Chairmen of their RRBs should be approved by the management Committees of their
Boards, the Government was requested to ensure that independent and professionally qualified persons are nominated
the Boards of RRBs to make them more vibrant and proactive.
 
 
 
The  Annual Monetary Credit Policy 2005 -06 states further
 
7.17.3  "In order to reposition RRBs as an effective instrument of credit delivery in the Indian financial system, RBI is
in the process of reviewing the performance of RRBs exploring restructuring of RRBs through merger / consolidation,
changing of sponsor banks, reviewing minimum capital requirement and suggesting suitable measures for regulation,
supervision and governance of RRBs."
 
 
7.18     Progress made in the programme for introducing and encouraging Laghu Udyog Credit Cards during the
year 2004-05 ; and
 
 
7.18.1  Under the Laghu Udhyami Credit Card (LUCC) Scheme, the Public Sector Banks have issued Laghu Udhyami
st

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
Credit Cards to 67,399 accounts and the limits sanctioned was Rs.1004.38 crore as on 31  December, 2002. On the
advice from the Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) regarding enhancement in the credit limit of LUCC from Rs.2
lakh to Rs.10 lakh for borrowers who have a satisfactory track record, the Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) has written
to all the Public Sector Member Banks for its implementation.
 
7.19     Performance and Credit Rating of Small Scale Industries’
 
 
7.19.1   The announcements made by the Union Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2004-05 would have a positive impact
on the SSI sector, particularly enhancing the ceiling for loans under the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) from
Rs.40 lakh to Rs.1 crore and raising the rate of subsidy from 12 per cent to 15 per cent. Further, as per the announcement, the
scope of the scheme has been enlarged by adding more sub-sectors and technologies eligible for assistance, which will help
large number of units in these sectors to avail the benefit under the Scheme. A new scheme on ‘Performance and Credit Rating
of Small Scale Industries’ has also been launched through National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC), with a one-time grant
to SSI units availing of the benefit of the scheme. The credit rating scheme will help in enhancing the credit flow to the small
enterprises sector.
 
7.20     Status and financial assistance extended to Self Help Groups  and Initiative for the promotion of Micro -
Finance
 
7.21.    Under its  Micro Credit Scheme (MCS), SIDBI extends loan support to accredited Micro Finance Institutions
(MFIs) to onlend to their   client beneficiaries.   SIDBI also extends capacity building support by way of grant under
DFID, UK Collaboration for capacity building of the MFIs to dispense micro credit in a sustainable manner.
 
           
7.21.2  The amount of financial assistance sanctioned under MCS as also capacity building grant assistance to MFIs
during last three years along with number of Self Help Groups (SHGs) and beneficiaries is given below:-
 
S.No. Particulars FY 2002 FY 2003 FY 2004
1. Amount Sanctioned under
MCS (Rs. in Crore)*
37.21 38.48 70.84
2. Grant sanctioned to MFIs for
Capacity Building (Rs. in
Crore)
6.07 6.18 15.02
3. No. of SHGs 38,663 16,161 15,765
4. No. of beneficiaries 2,84,815 1,34,823 1,78,091
 *Including capacity building grant.
           
7.21.3  The Committee recommends the following further measures for enhancing credit to SMEs  in India :-
 
(i)
                  Improving the functional aspects of Technology Bank for SME for facilitating   technology transfer 
and upgradation and  project evaluation, risks management etc ;
(ii)                Re-orienting the role of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) for extending credit flow to rural Small Scale
Industries ;
(iii)               encouraging Laghu Udyog Credit Cards ; and
(iv)              Popularization  of credit rating in SMEs .
 
7.21.4  Considering the higher potential for growth in the SSI sector in terms of output,  employment and export,
the committee is of the considered that  the Government should strengthen and facilitate the SSI sector to enable
it to remain competitive in market-led global economy and generate additional employment.  In recognition of
employment generation potential, the SSI sector has been assigned a target of 12% of annual growth rate and
creation 44 lakh employment opportunities in the Tenth Five Year Plan.  Keeping in view the potential of Small
Scale Industries in India, the National Common Minimum Programme as announced by the Government on 27
th

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
May, 2004 stressed on providing full credit, technological and marketing support, infrastructure upgradation in
the major industrial clusters and to free the sector from Inspector Raj. But mere announcement would not
work.  Now the time has come, when the Government should keep its promises of consolidating the Small Scale
Industries in the country by implementing   the Action Plan to enable the sector to achieve the stipulated 12%
growth rate and accordingly provide employment generation opportunities to millions of youths in the urban as
well as rural areas. 
7.21.5  The Committee is astonished to find the pathetic condition of the SSIs and the erratic and inadequate flow
of credit to SSI sector which  has been the key reason  for continuous languishing of this sector.  Although the
credit to SSI has increased from Rs.38,109 crore  for financial 1997-98 to Rs. 58,278 for financial year 2003-04 - a
growth of 53% but what concern the Committee the most is  the declining  share of SSI in Net Bank Credit over
the same period has from 17.5% to 10.4%.  No efforts seem to have been taken in the last seven years to arrest
the declining trend.  It was primarily result of lack of policy initiative by the Government and apathy of banks in
particular towards SSI lending. Various factors like high risk perception, higher transaction cost in processing
SSI loan applications, lack of credit rating facilities for SSI units contributed further to the woes of Small Scale
Industries.  Moreover, the non-adherence to RBI guidelines on SSI lending by the banks (e.g. inadequate/
delayed sanction of credit despite guidelines on computation of working capital requirements of SSI units/
prescribed time schedule for disposal of loan applications, insistence on collateral despite instructions from RBI
about no collateral for loans upto Rs.5 lakh and upto Rs.25 lakh for units having good track record, etc.) is
continuing till date.
7.21.6  The Committee express its concern that it is because of the inadequate credit flow to SSI sector, the
mortality rate is increasing year after year and sickness of SSI units is posing a matter of great concern.
Moreover, After the deregulation of interest rates regime from 18-20% in 1997-98, the lending rates have come
down to around   9-12% at present.  As per extant guidelines the banks are required to fix their own prime
lending rates (PLRs) and the maximum band over the PLR.  The existing guidelines for banks for lending SSI is
plus/minus 2% on PLR which translates into a range of 8.25% to 12%.  While interest rates for Large Scale
Industries are negotiable and are generally at sub-PLR.  Limiting to the plus / minus two per cent of PLR de-
motivated the banks  in general to lower the interest beyond PLR minus two per cent.
7.21.7  The Committee observes that the extant course of action and programme as adopted by the banking
division and the financial institutions failed to arrest the declining net bank credit flow to the SSI at the
reasonable rate of interests.  Although, lot of schemes and programmes are being said to be launched for
promoting and proliferating the prospects of SSI sector but the declining number of SSI units and increasing
number of sick units is a testimony to the fact that Government efforts at present is failing miserably to
ameliorate the SSI sector, therefore, need of the hour is to have a focused approach/schemes for enhancing the
credit and reverse the trend.
7.21.8  The Committee, therefore, feels that  the foremost requirement is to extend timely and adequate credit  to
the  SMEs at reasonable rate of interests.  The following Course of Action may be adopted by the Government: -
(i)
                        Treating the Small Scale sector on the priority basis,  banks should fix self-set targets of
minimum 15% per annum for growth in advances to the SSI sector over the previous year's
achievements and in relation to the overall target set by them for growth in their Net Bank
Credit for the year.  Shortfall in achieving this target should be deposited with SIDBI by the
banks at rate of interest linked to "bank rate".
(ii)
                      RBI should issue guidelines to banks to the adopt differential rates of interest under three
slabs of loans to Small Scale units as per the following rationalised pattern:-
Upto Rs.1 lakh                       Not exceeding bank rate plus 1.5%
Rs.1 to 2 lakh                         Not exceeding bank rate plus 2.25%
Rs.2 to 5 lakh                         Not exceeding bank rate plus 3%
Rs.5 lakh and above              Not exceeding bank rate plus 4%

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
(iii)                    RBI should issue effective guidelines to be followed by the banks strictly for speedy revival
of potentially viable sick SSI units.  Test of viability of sick SSI units should be conducted
with attitude to improve the SSI units.  Viable sick SSI units should be given an opportunity
for debt restructuring whereby the outstanding debt of sick SSI units could be restructured
through various forms such as moratorium, rescheduling of debts, infusion of fresh capital,
etc.
(iv)
                    Each public and private sector bank to set up at least a "SSI Desk" at each branch under a
trained bank official as the Nodal Officer with three years beginning 2005-2006.
(iii)             Lead banks to set up Institutes for training of SE entrepreneurs in such districts where major SE
clusters are located.
 
(iv)             Government to expand the existing portfolio risk fund to Rs.150 crore  in the next five years to
enable SIDBI to cover 29 lakh SEs by the end of that period. This would benefit mostly women in
setting up micro enterprises through Self-Help Groups.
(v)
                      Since SIDBI is meant solely for promoting SSI, there is the need to re-orient its role viz
strengthening of State Financial Corporation (SFCs) in a time bound manner with
Central/State Government assistance; expanding coverage under industrialization
programmes; setting up of a Technology Bank; launching direct finance and Micro- Finance
Programmes and  setting up of a dedicated credit rating agency for Small and Medium
Enterprises (SMEs).
(vi)
                    While extending credit facilities Bank should be advised to observe the credit history of the
entrepreneurs and accordingly fix the volume of credit,  rate of interest and  mode of
repayment.
(vii)      RBI, banks and other financial institutions should change the mindset in order to really promote
and proliferate SMEs so that Indian SMEs should not lag behind the global trend.
 
7.22     Credit Flow to SMEs under Annual Monetary and Credit Policy for 2005-06
 
7.22.1  RBI on 28
th April, 2005 has come out with annual monetary and credit policy for 2005-06, where special
provisions have been made for giving adequate credit to small scale industries and medium enterprises.  It has been
reiterated:-
 
7.22.2  "The small scale industries (SSI) sector plays a very important role in the development of the economy.   While
large industries have access to various sources of finance, the SSI sector has to primarily depend on finance from banks
and other financial institutions.   With a view to further smoothening  the flow of credit, the following measures have
been initiated:-
 
(i)
                  The Credit Information Bureau of India Ltd. (CIBIL) is working out a solution that would provide
comprehensive credit reports on SSIs.
 
 
(ii)
                The Reserve bank is reviewing  all its existing guidelines on financing small scale sector, debt restructuring,
nursing of sick units, etc., with a view to rationalizing, consolidating and liberalizing them.  Banks are urged
to take the revised guidelines as indicative minimum requirement and the Boards of the banks are expected
to formulate more liberal schemes as appropriate.
 
 
(iii)
        Under a scheme to be drawn up by the RBI, banks will be encouraged to establish mechanisms for better co-

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
ordination between their branches and branches of SIDBI which are located in 50 clusters that have been
identified by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries, Government of India.  Under the scheme of strategic
alliance; the existing branches of SIDBI redesignated  as "Small Enterprises Financial Centres" (SEFC) will
take up co-financing of term loan requirements of SSI units along with the bank branches and the working
capital requirements of these units will be met by the banks; the expertise of the SIDBI in appraisal of credit
requirements of SSI units will be leveraged by the branches of commercial banks, by payment of a nominal
fee; SIDBI will provide other expert services to help the banks in simplifying the application forms,
documentation and disbursement procedures, etc; and the working of the scheme may be monitored and
modified to suit the local conditions by the State level Bankers Committee (SLBC) and depending on the
experience, the coverage of the scheme may be extended to more clusters.  The services of SEFCs will be
avilable for tiny industrial units also.
 
 
7.23     Credit Flow to Medium Enterprises
 
7.23.1  In view of the fast changing market conditions and increasing competitiveness, there is an urget need to up-grade
the technology of small scale industries and their graduation to medium enterprise sector.  The Reserve Bank will
explore modalities to meet their growing financial needs.  A simplified debt restructuring and rehabilitation mechanism
is also being considered for the sector.
 
7.23.2  The Committee hopes that the Annual Monetary  & Credit Policy 2005-06  would go a long way in
providing credit to Indian SMEs as per the requirement of SEs and MEs sectors and RBI's this year's
announcement for credit policy would not prove mere annual rituals. The Committee firmly believes that   RBI
would issue suitable guidelines and adopt and adhere resilient monitoring - mechanism for implementation of
stated objectives in the credit policy 2005-06, otherwise, policy would  remain mere window-dressing or arm-
chair- intellectual exercise. The Committee recommends that the policy must go beyond the formulation stage so
that it may be implemented  in practice.
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-VIII
 
 INSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK AFFECTING THE SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
 
8.0       Legal framework affecting the Small Scale Industries is satisfactory
 
8.1       At present Small Scale Industries are governed by the Industries (Development & Regulation) Act, 1951.
However, various authorities in the Central and State Governments as well as the local authorities formulate the
Acts/rules and regulations. These legal regulations can be classified into labour-related issues ; tax-related issues ;
finance-related issues ;location-related issues;  product-related issues ; environment-related issues and safety, security,
hygiene, health and welfare-related issues, etc
8.1.1    The regulatory frame work, particularly pertaining to labour-related Laws, is cumbersome. The laws, rules and
regulations that have accumulated over the last several years are many and their compliance is cumbersome. The burden
of inspections under various laws has proved to be too onerous for the SSI units to bear. They have adverse bearing on
the promotion and development of small scale industries.
 
8.1.2    The Committee understands that the plethora of laws, rules and regulations and the burden of inspections
under these, have affected the SSI sector adversely. Therefore, with a view to simplifying and streamlining the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
system of inspections under these laws, and also reducing the burden of statutory returns/ registers prescribed
hereunder, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Bill, 2005 (earlier referred to as the Small Enterprises
Development Bill) must be enacted without further delay. Following measures are therefore required to be taken
in order to give fillip to the promotion and development of Small Scale Industries: -
 
(a)
               A single Unified Act governing the rules pertaining to retrenchment and layoffs and social benefits for
employees.
 
(b)
               Enactment of Single Comprehensive Small Enterprises Development Act for SSEs similar to the
Industrial Development and Regulation (IDR) Act.
 
(c)
                Comprehensive Social Security Scheme for widening the social safety nets as proposed in SED Bill.
 
(d)
               Since the Inspector Raj is causing severe harassment to Small Scale Units, therefore, the provision made
in the proposed legislation for giving good bye to Inspector Raj to wipe out the tyranny  of Inspector Raj.
 
8.2       Awareness among SSI entrepreneurs about India's obligation under WTO regime
 
8.2.1    Government is constantly assessing and monitoring the impact of the removal of Quantitative Restrictions (QRs)
and Globalisation on the growth and development of Small Scale Industries (SSIs) in the country.  Though removal of
QRs have exposed the SSIs to a greater competition, yet the SSI sector has continued to grow. However, even after the
removal of QRs, protection to the industries is available in the form of raising custom duties upto the bound levels,
imposing anti-dumping duties, taking safeguards measures in case of surge in imports, etc.
 
8.2.2    Some of the incentives & measures provided by the Government to enable the SSI to compete in the globalized
and liberalized regime include raising the central excise duty exemption limit from Rs.50 lakh to Rs.1 crore, a scheme
of capital subsidy of 12% for investment in technology upgradation in select sectors, raising the eligibility limit for
coverage under the Credit Guarantee Scheme from Rs.10 lakh to Rs.25 lakh, continuation of financial support (up to
Rs.75,000/-) for obtaining ISO 9000 & ISO 14001 certification up to the end of 10
th Plan.
 
8.2.3    Removal of QRs does not automatically remove all the protection available to the domestic producers.  India can
regulate imports through adjustments in tariff within the bound rates.  Apart from tariff, action under anti-dumping and
safeguard measures can be taken to provide protection to the domestic producers.  For initiating anti-dumping action
and imposition of safeguard duty separate Directorates are already working under the Ministry of Commerce and
Industry  and the Ministry of Finance respectively. 
 
8.2.4    The Government has put in place several measures to help small enterprises become globally competitive. 
These include special focus on areas such as technology upgradation , infrastructure assistance through the cluster
approach, timely availability of credit, adoption of modern management practices, use of electronic infrastructure and
other IT applications, marketing and timely information dissemination, including sensitization of small industries to the
emerging challenges of trade liberalization.   Government is fully aware of the WTO environment and is taking
appropriate measures for preparing the Small Scale Sector to meet the challenges of liberalization/globalization.  Taking
a view of the whole situation, a new SSI policy including certain new schemes/incentives were announced during the
National Conference on SSI held at New Delhi 30-31 August 2000.
 
8.2.5    The WTO Agreement contains a number of provisions and annexes that have an impact on the industry.  It has
not been found feasible to monitor the detailed impact of these agreements sector specific and cluster-specific.  
However, industry units are encouraged to bring to the notice of Office of DC(SSI) either of their-own or through the
Associations so that the aspects of the WTO agreement that are not found suitable to them are brought to the notice of
Ministry of Commerce and Industry to take appropriate action in the matter.
 
8.2.6    The Committee was apprised that  following programmes have been conducted to create awareness among SSI
entrepreneurs about India’s obligations under the WTO agreements and their impact on various sectors of small scale

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
industries:
 
(i)                  28 WTO Awareness Programmes/Seminars were organized during 2000. Four product-specific WTO
Seminars were organized during 2002-03. One more product-specific and one Sensitization  Programme on
WTO was also organized  during   2003-04.
(ii)                14 Workshops on IPRs were organized during 2001-2002. Eight such programmes were also conducted
during 2002-03.  During 2003-04, nine such  programmes  were conducted. Fourteen programmes have been
organized during 2004-05 so far. 
(iii)               A one-day sensitization workshop on Geographical Indications was organised at Chennai during 2003-04.
Two such programmes were organized during 2004-05 at Kullu and Bikaner.
(iv)              16 Information Dissemination Seminars on Anti-Dumping Investigations were held during 2001-02.   One
such  seminar  was also held  during 2002-03.
 
8.2.7         Some of these awareness programmes are being continued during the year, as per demand received from
various regions.
 
8.3             Competitiveness in domestic SSI products vis-à-vis foreign products consequent upon removal of
quantitative restrictions in the wake of WTO guidelines.
 
8.3.1    The value of SSI exports from India has been growing consistently and SSI contributes as   much as 34% to the
nation’s exports.  Thus the Indian SSI products are competitive in the global market for quite a number of products.  In
order to further improve competitive advantage for domestic products in the international market, the following steps
have been initiated:
 
(i)
                  Assisting Industry Association to establish Product Testing Centre under  SIDO’s Scheme of financial
support for the same.
(ii)                Financial assistance to units to obtain ISO : 9000 and ISO : 14001 Certification and Registration for Bar
Coding.
(iii)               Opening Mini Tool Rooms under the SIDO Scheme of financial support to the State Governments for the
same.
(iv)              Scheme for National Awards for Quality Products, R&D etc.
(v)                Various Schemes for marketing support and export being implemented by SIDO and NSIC.
 
8.4       Role of SIDO in the promotion and development of SMEs.
 
8.4.1     Keeping in view the fast changing scenario, SIDO, which is an apex body in the Ministry of Small Scale Industries to
formulate policies and programmes for SSI Sector, has taken lead in computerized information networking  so as to be able to
be the main information provider in the Country and has consequently launched its independent web site with a net work of 30
locations in the field.  Accordingly there is change in the role of its field institutions, which apart from providing general
assistance by way of techno-economic counseling and consultancy, conducting of surveys, providing project profiles, are
stressing more on training and dissemination of information in different fields which include information on availability of new
technology, existing Central/State statutory and non-statutory requirements, existing policies and programmes and the source of
assistance etc.   Emphasis is also on sensitization programmes, which include sensitization programmes on WTO, Intellectual
Property Rights (IPR), information and encouragement of sunrise industries, cluster development and modernization and
technical up-gradation.
 
 
 
 
 
8.5   Public- Private Partnership in regard technology up gradation for  the SMEs
 
8.5.1    Several of the Schemes being implemented by SIDO at present do have provisions for creating facilities under
the Public-Private Partnership mode for technology upgradation and other purposes.  Some of these are: -

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
 
(i)                  Financial assistance for establishment of Sub-contracting Exchanges by Industry Associations
(ii)                Assistance to Industry Associations for creation of Testing Centres
(iii)               Small Industry Cluster Development Programme, under which assistance is available for creation of
common facility centers in Public-Private Partnership mode
(iv)              Industrial Infrastructure Development Scheme, etc.
 
8.5.2    The Committee is of the view that in order to promote Public-Private Partnership for technology
upgradation under the Schemes monitored by SIDO, awareness of the provisions of the schemes among the
Industry Associations would have to be increased.  Further, Associations need to be guided for identifying the
felt-needs of SSIs and chalking out the operational modalities of such common facilities so as to enable them to
prepare project proposals, which are technically sound and financially viable.
 
8.6       International Co-operation between Indian Enterprises and SME abroad: "Key Areas for Mutual Co-
operation". 
 
8.6.1    Under the International Cooperation Scheme financial assistance is provided to the Industry Associations to take
trade delegations abroad to participate in exhibition/fairs to showcase their products and services; to seek enterprise to
enterprise cooperation; to source technology between indian SSIs and SMEs abroad in order to make them competitive
in the global market. Under the scheme, a large number of SSIs have got good exposure to global markets, technology
& marketing techniques used abroad. Business delegations were taken to Ukraine, Thailand, Australia, Italy, China,
Kyrgyzstan & South Africa in this financial year. Delegation to Brazil , Czech Republic and Taiwan are also being
organized during this financial year. Technical and business alliances between small enterprises of India and other
countries (Taiwan, South Korea, Japan, Israel, Italy etc.) have emerged in the field of precision mould making, for
plastics and light metals, metal cutting machines, cardiovascular drug development, hi-tech printing ink, auto aluminum
extrusion parts, cold forged auto parts, asphalt mixing plant, printed labels for garments, welding machines, facsimile
machines, jelly filled cables, auto gas conversion kit, laboratory and scientific instruments, solar products, filters for
liquids and gases, packaging especially corrugated boxes etc.  
 
6.6.2     The key areas for international cooperation are  (i) Promotion of Joint Ventures (ii) Establishment of Institutional
arrangements for Technology Transfer between indian  and foreign enterprises   (iii) Exports and Imports of products and
machinery, and (iv) Exchange of Information / knowledge / ideas. The Ministry has signed MoUs with some countries for the
promotion and development of the  Small  Scale Sector, under which Joint Working Groups are constituted to explore further
avenues of mutual cooperation.
 
8.6.3    Under the International Cooperation scheme, entrepreneurs, participate in exhibitions, fairs, seminars and buyer-
seller meets, both in India and abroad. Business delegations are exchanged to explore new areas of technology
upgradation, joint ventures and foreign collaborations to improve marketability of SSI products from India.
 
8.6.4    Partner institutions in different countries for facilitating international cooperation have been identified, some of
which are Small Business Corporation, South Korea,Taipei World Trade Centre (TWTC), Taiwan, Bundesverb and
Mitteistandische Wirtschaft (BVMW), Germany, Confederation of Small Industries (CONFAPI), Italy , Israel SMEs
Authority, Israel ,Social Fund for Development, Egypt, Agency for Promotion of Small and Medium Enterprises,
Senegal.
 
8.6.5    The Committee is of the view that the Institutional support can be utilized further, in promotion of SMEs
through assistance in:-
 
(i)
                 Developing and implementing a technology transfer strategy, in addition to financial, marketing
and operational strategies. 
(ii)               Conducting of technology audits for and benchmarking and assessment of technology needs.
(iii)             Technology sourcing and acquisition and applications of new techniques
(iv)              Identification of new export markets by encouraging their participation in sector specific
exhibitions.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
 
8.7       Institutional support for  rehabilitation of Sick SSI units
 
8.7.1    The State Level Inter-Institutional Committee (SLIIC) has been set up in each State under the convenorship of
the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) with the Industry Secretary/Commissioner of the State concerned as the Chairman, to
deal with the problems of co-ordination for rehabilitation of sick SSI units at the State level. The meetings of SLIIC are
generally held at quarterly intervals.  A Sub-Committee of SLIIC has also been set up under the convenorship of SLBC
convenor bank (depending on the number of individual rehabilitation cases to be discussed) wherein borrowers and
bankers concerned are invited to discuss the issue on one-to-one basis.
           
8.7.2    The Regional Offices of RBI should ensure that meetings of SLIICs are convened at regular periodical intervals
(i.e., at least once in a quarter) and the senior officials of banks/financial institutions so as to serve the desired objective
attend the meetings. The representatives of the local SSI Associations should also be invited to the meetings of SLIIC,
which should play a major role in rehabilitation of sick units. SLIICs should discuss issues regarding delay in carrying
out viability studies and initiating nursing programmes of viable units as also progress in revival of units, which have
been placed under the nursing programme. In case of sick units where assistance is needed from other agencies, such
cases may be discussed in the SLIIC meetings. Further, the issues relating to the progress made in implementation of the
revised guidelines issued by the RBI based on the recommendations of Kohli Working Group should be discussed to
ensure that the banks strictly follow these guidelines for detection of sickness at an early stage and take remedial
measures for speedy rehabilitation of sick SSI units identified as potentially viable.
 
 
 
 
8.8       Raising equity participation from the existing 24% to 49%  (FDI) in SSI sector
 
8.8.1    The administrative Ministry to raise the FDI limit in equity participation is Department of Industry Policy and
Promotion (IPP), Ministry of Commerce & Industry, who do not have any such proposal at present.   However, the
Steering Committee on FDI in various Sectors, set up by the Planning Commission in August 2002, recommended
enhancement of equity participation to 49% in SSI Sector, which was discussed with the stakeholders.  Based on the
discussions with the Stakeholders and others concerned, the following views were communicated to the Department of
IPP:
 
8.8.2    “ The  Ministry has no objection to the enhancement of equity participation / FDI limit from 24% to 49% in the
case of SSI items where investment limit has been enhanced to Rs.5 crore.  FDI in this respect could perhaps be routed
through the FIPB Type agency with representation from stakeholders.  Details in this respect could be worked out in due
course.”
 
8.8.3    The Committee is of the considered view that the Department of Industry Policy and Promotion (IPP),
Ministry of Commerce & Industry may explore the possibility of  raising equity participation in the SSI sector
from the existing 24% to 49%  (FDI) for better technology transfer in SSI sector in which FDI can be encouraged
for sizeable investments towards larger returns. 
 
8.9       Trade related Entrepreneurship Assistance Development Programme for women
 
8.9.1    The Trade Related Entrepreneurship Assistance & Development (TREAD) Programme scheme, originally
operated by the Ministry was transferred to Office of the DC(SSI) in Feb.2003 when the scheme  was modified to make
it more practical and result oriented.   Wide publicity on the scheme has been given amidst industries Associations and
leading NGOs in the field. An MOU was to be signed with SIDBI by Office of DC(SSI).  Apparently owing to
Administrative difficulties, the same could not materialize. The office of the DC(SSI) has finally signed an MOU with
Canara Bank, Bangalore on 13.1.05.  Presently, the scheme is taking off.  Office of the DC(SSI) will take all efforts to
implement the scheme effectively on a priority basis for maximizing the women participation in trade related
entrepreneurship by starting with the proposals, already available with the Office of the DC(SSI) numbering to 30.  The
field offices of Office of DC(SSI) i.e. SISIs and their branches will be effectively utilized to popularize the scheme

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
among NGOs for women in their area through  motivation campaigns, Entrepreneurship Development Programmes,
Workshops, Seminars etc. and maximize the number of beneficiaries for this scheme.
 
8.10     Enactment of Limited Partnership Act
 
8.10.1  The Ministry of Company Affairs is slated to enact a law on Limited Liability Partnership.  The issue is under
their active consideration.   The Limited Liability Partnership will provide higher flow of capital in to the Sector,
especially to the upcoming sections like IT, Bio-technology, Pharma, etc.  It will also encourage venture capital. 
 
8.10.2  The Committee in in agreement with the opinion of the Ministry of SSI that the Limited Liability
Partnership will provide higher flow of capital in to the Sector, especially to the upcoming sections like IT, Bio-
technology, Pharma, etc and would  also encourage venture capital, therefore, the committee recommends that
the Ministry of SSI should take up the matter of Enactment of Limited Partnership Act with the Ministry of
Company Affairs.
 
8.11     Anti-dumping mechanism
 
8.11.1  The Anti-Dumping mechanism comes under the purview of the Directorate General of Anti-Dumping and Allied
Duties under the Ministry of Commerce and Industry and the Ministry of Commerce and Industry  is monitoring the
progress of anti-dumping cases.  However, this Ministry has formulated a Market Development Assistance (MDA-SSI)
Scheme to enhance the exports by the SSIs.  Under the Scheme, financial assistance for participation in international
exhibitions, overseas study, tours, assistance towards the production of publicity material, market studies etc. is given. 
Under this Scheme, financial assistance upto Rs.1 lakh can also be given to SSI Associations who have initiated anti-
dumping investigations.  This scheme was approved during August, 2001.
 
8.12     Working of renewed provision in Indo-Nepal Treaty in Trade Transit w.e.f. 6
th March, 2002, in checking
influx of chinese goods en-route Nepal during the last three years;
 
8.12.1  The Department of Commerce has revised the Indo-Nepal Treaty of Trade and the revised protocol with effect
from 6.3.2002 for a period of 5 years.  To protect the industry the following steps which have been taken are Rules for
granting Certificate of Origin have been changed. In addition to certain special provisions with respect to import of
vegetable fats (vanasparti), acrylic yarn, cooper products and zinc oxide will be allowed in India subject to a fixed quota
per year as prescribed and no preferential facility will be available for import of items like alcoholic liquors, beverages
and their by-product except industrial spirits perfumes and cosmetics with non-Nepalese/non-Indian brand name and
cigarettes and tobacco.
 
8.13     Conversion of Quantitative restriction (QRs) into rationalised tariff regime for providing protection to the
domestic SSIs;
 
8.13.1   Under the WTO regime all Quantitative Restrictions have been abolished except 430 QRs maintained on account of
public morality, safety & health etc.   The current average applied tariff on SSI products is 20%.  These  tariffs are among the
higher tariffs applied by the various Member States in the WTO regime.   The Ministry of Commerce while monitoring trade
including that falling under the SSI sector keeps a watch on the tariff being applied on the various products.
 
8.14     Rationalisation of countervailing duties and safeguard duties to protect domestic producers in
consonance  with WTO provision; and
 
8.14.1   The Director General of Safeguards has taken up action in respect of 18 products for investigations.   So far, safeguard
duties in respect of 10 cases have been imposed.  The Government are in the process of amending the provisions of Foreign
Trade (Development and Regulation) Act 1992 so that safeguard action in the form of QRs could be applied if there are sudden
and massive imports.  There is also the provision for imposition of countervailing duty, if required.
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
8.15     Expeditious disposal of dumping cases are anti-dumping actions thereto, in view of almost all SSI
products under open general license (OGL) list.
 
8.15.1  Anti-dumping actions initiated by the Director General of Anti-dumping & Allied Duties have been imposed on
certain products of SSI concern like Dry-Cell Batteries with effect from 2.8.2001 and on imports of sports shoes on
25.9.2001.  The anti-dumping Authority in the Ministry of Commerce and Industry is responsible for the anti-dumping
actions when complaints are made by the SSI sector.  The time taken by the Indian authority to dispose off anti-dumping
cases compare favourably with other major users of anti-dumping measures in the world.
 
8.15.2  The Committee is of the considered that emerging SMEs in india should be protected from the on-slaught
of Frankstein MNCs who are launching its monstrous head -way to Indian market due to opening of economy
under WTO-regime in order to fulfill the commandants of liberalization and globalization by undertaking
following strategic decision and action:  -
 
(i)
                        Strengthening of Anti-dumping mechanism ;
(ii)                      Conversion of Quantitative restriction (QRs) into rationalised tariff regime;
(iii)                    Rationalisation of countervailing duties and safeguard duties to protect domestic;
(iv)                    Awareness among SSI entrepreneurs about India's obligation under WTO regime; and
(v)                      Expeditious disposal of dumping cases are anti-dumping actions thereto.
 
8.15.3  The Committee is of the view that the government should take initiatives like strengthening the
institutional framework with decentralized set-up throughout the country  , formulation , coordination  and
ensuring the  implementation of policies and programmes for Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) Sector,
providing  sensitization programmes in respect of the needs of the fast changing economic scenario and ensuring 
dissemination of information, cluster oriented Infrastructural development, trade specific measures, market
assistance and simplification of rules and regulations  for promotion and development of the SME Sector. Service
enterprises, fast growing trades like IT, Pharma, biotechnology etc. needs special attention. 
 
8.15.4  The Government should bring forth a policy package to boost the SME Sector, which inter-alia must
contain the provision of enhancing the investment limit of small enterprise providing the policy, credit,
technological and market support, infrastructure development to pave a way for small enterprises to graduate to
medium and to boot the SME Sector. Moreover, the Small and Medium Enterprises Development (SMED) Bill,
2005 must see the light of the day at the earliest.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS  AND CONCLUSION OF THE  COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 
 
 
 
Defining   SME Sector

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
       The Committee observes that World over, policies are being  devised to meet the requirement of small and
medium enterprises (SME).  In India too, adequate steps are required to initiate policies for Medium Enterprises
in order to give the SSI units to grow into Medium Enterprises. The Committee is of the view that Government
should, at the earliest, delineate and draw the demarcation line between SEs and MEs by providing suitable
definition and the mechanism for institutional arrangement, along with the classification of incentive and the
exemption required for units of  the Small scale Industries and the medium enterprises for their growth and
development.
(Para 1.3.2)
 
SWOT analysis of Small Scale Industries is as follows:
 
 
 
            The Committee is of the view that for streamlining and strengthening the SSI sector in the national
economy, the focus should be on the following:-
 
(i)
                 Providing full credit, technology upgradation, modernization and marketing
support to the SSI sector;
 
(ii)               Infrastructure upgradation in general particularly in the major SSI industrial
clusters;
(iii)             Freedom from the plethora of rules and regulations existing in the SSI sector,which is known as
Inspector Raj;
 
(iv)             Full support to the service industry to fulfill its true growth and employment. generation
potential; and
 
(v)               Training of existing and potential entrepreneurs and workers on a massive scale.
 
(vi)             Modern management practices and skill upgradation through advanced training facilities for
capacity building in the SSI sector.
 
(Para  1.4.1)
 
 
 
Re-orienting the role of DC (SSI)
 
 
            The Committee, in the changing scenario of liberalization and globalisation, feels that  the role of the
Office of DC(SSI) should be reoriented, broadly on the following lines:-
    
 (a)    The DC (SSI) would need to be re-designated as the Central Development Commissioner for Small and
Medium Enterprises, [CDC (SME)] and he and his organization  (Small Industries Development Organization -
SIDO) equipped and   strengthened to view the sector as a composite whole, without losing focus on the need for
generation of employment as well  as the specific developmental/promotional requirements and inter-linkages of
each distinct component of the composite sector, e.g., tiny enterprises, small enterprises, etc., and the products
and services produced by them.
    
(b)  The Office of CDC (SME) would need to widen and continuously up-date its knowledge base regarding the
global trends in policies and Government interventions concerning the SME sector and recommend and
design/implement appropriate measures for continuously enhancing the competitiveness of the sector in India.  It
would also need to continually ascertain the “ best practices” in this field, within the country and abroad,  and

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
appropriately adopt them,  through schemes, projects and programmes, to suit the Indian conditions.
 
(c)        The Office of the DC (SSI) further  needs to be strengthened its linkages with the State Governments, on the one
hand, and with the field offices and specialized institutions of its own and those of other Central Ministries/Departments,
on the other, so that the activities of its field offices and specialized institutions are better attuned to the local needs of the
SME sector  in each State and region, with an eye on the future opportunities and challenges.  It would also need to
interact more regularly  and closely with the associations of SMEs so that the efficacy of various policies and measures
adopted and implemented by the Central Government are tested regularly on the ground and refined/modified to
achieve the objectives more efficiently.
 
(d)        The Office of DC ( SSI) must forge stronger links with the relevant international institutions and bilateral
organizations so that more effective cooperation between India and other countries as well as India and multi-lateral
institutions can be achieved, to derive full advantage of the comparative strengths of the Indian SME sector and to
address its areas of weaknesses and concerns, in the light of international experience.
(Para 1.5.2)
 
Key Areas of Massive Action  For Revitalization of SEs
 
Cluster Approach : A step  ahead towards synchronization  of SEs
 
 
            The Committee strongly believes that the Small Enterprises can be developed in cluster through the Small
Industry Cluster Development Programme. The common facilities like testing, infrastructure such as power and
roads, assured supply chain and credit should be provided within the clusters so that these enterprises can grow
without any hindrance. The small enterprises must be provided marketing assistance by organizing Vendor
Development Programme (VDP) to bring small and medium enterprises on a common platform to decide their
marketing strategy and to resolve their problems mutually.
(Para 1.6.5)
 
Technology management for SMEs
 
 
            The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that schemes for technology up-gradation for SMEs
should be made more functional and accessible to the existing entrepreneurs as well as the first generation
entrepreneurs.  Due budgetary provisions should be made for R & D so that outcome of the research work
should assist the entrepreneurs in cutting the cost of production as well as enhancing the value engineering of
SMEs product through product development and product diversification.  The Committee recommends that
public private partnership approach may be focused by the Government for infusion of latest technology in the
SMEs sector.
(Para 1.6.7)
 
Broad basing of the ownership of SSI enterprises
 
            The Committee observes that majority of SSI units are primarily proprietary concerns.  The required 
investment has been provided by the property owners themselves.  Such type of ownership pattern suffers from
severe limitations.  The main limitation that such units face is in their access to institutional finance and
development of the units is restricted by non-availability of finance at the time of need. In order to encourage
broad basing of the ownership of SSI enterprises, provision of some additional facilities for units going in for
company formation could be considered.  The SSI units going in for company formation should be provided
some additional facilities like incentives to form cooperatives, concession to create infrastructure, increase in
investment limit etc.
(Para 1.6.8)
 
Closer cooperation between large and small scale sector

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
 
            The Committee is of the view that a closer cooperation between large and small scale sector is highly
desirable to foster the growth of small units as ancillary to large units.  Industries associations of both large or
smaller units should play a vital role in creation of such tie-ups and the members of such association may set-up
the sub-committees in collaboration with small industry. The Service Institutes should chalk out the  programme
for encouraging ancillary relationship.  The smaller units must be given quality raw material by the larger units
for converting the same into quality finished goods.
(Para 1.6.9)
 
            The Committee is of the further view that  Small units performing ancillary role to large industrial units
should be ensured prompt and effective payments by large units for supplies made by the SSI units as per
purchase order and quality standard.  The Committee recommends that the Government should come out with
Policy framework and sustainable guidelines  to encourage ancillary relationships and to safeguard the interests
of the SMEs.  The Government should  set up the mechanisms for ensuring that capacities of SMEs as ancillaries
are fully utilized while ensuring adherence to quality standards. 
(Para 1.6.10)
 
Optimum Capacity-utilization
 
            The Committee has been given an understanding that a large number of SSI units are not able to utilize
their full capacity due to lack of finance and power shortage including high power rates, lack of demand, non-
availability of raw materials, labour and marketing problems.  Therefore, the Committee is of the view that
availability of assured power supply at reasonable rates, assisting the units in obtaining quality raw materials,
assisting them in publishing their products and adivisng them about new and emerging markets would promote
and proliferate SMEs in India.
(Para 1.6.11)
 
Human Resource Development for SMEs
 
            The Committee observes that  there are absence of technical persons and trained workers in the SSI
sector due to lack of institutional arrangement  for preparing trained manpower for the sector, therefore, the
Committee recommends that vocational training institutes may be established in each district of the country to
impart training and skill for the person engaged in the SMEs sector.  The Committee feels that there is urgent
need for increasing capitalization of SSIs  to enable them to procure better technical equipment, training inputs,
marketing management etc. in order to increase the efficiency of the units and their workers.  SSI units should be
provided facilities for upgrading their technology and also skill of their workers which would result in increasing
productivity. 
(Para 1.6.12)
 
Sunrise Industries in the SMEs sector
 
 
            The Committee is of the considered view that the Sunrise industries in the SMEs sector e.g. Information
Technology (IT), Biotechnology (BT) Pharmaceuticals and Nano-technologies along with IT enabled services
have a strong component in- built. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of SSI should make Action
Plan for promotion and proliferation SMEs in these Select Sector.
(Para 1.6.17)
 
            The Committee impresses upon the Government should give approval to the proposal of DC (SSI) for the
Financial Assistance Scheme for registered small scale / tiny units for adoption of patents in India and abroad to
generate confidence amongst small scale / tiny units and enable them to convert an original idea/invention /
know-how into working prototype/processes.
(Para 11.6.18)
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
 
 
 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT FOR INTER-SECTROL CORPORATION
 
            The Committee is of the view that the Ministry  of SSI should take initiative for lodging inter- Sectoral co-
operation of Select sectors of economy for promoting SMEs in Steel; garments, Electronics, Food products;
leather products; chemical and Chemical products, Railways and Finance.  The status of these segments is
enumerated as under:-
 
 
 
Steel Sector
 
(i)
                 The Ministry of Steel should ensure adequate supply of iron and steel to the small enterprises through
the State Small Industries Corporations (SSICs ) and the National Small Industries Corporation
(NSIC);
(ii)               The Ministry of Steel   should introduce a mechanism for keeping the prices stable so as to provide
iron and steel to the small enterprises at reasonable prices;
The meetings of the Coordination Committee should be held regularly to review      the availability and
supply of iron and steel to the SSICs/NSIC and small enterprises.
 
(Para 1.6.19)
 
GARMENT INDUSTRY
 
 
            The Committee observes that the supply channel/chain pertaining to raw- materials of Garment Industry
must be quick and reliable. In order to reduce the cost of raw material, Government must reduce the excise duty,
the Committee reiterates.  The small-scale garment units must be assisted in updating to bring them at par with
their international counterparts. This could be achieved by assisting such units with high quality testing facilities.
Different agencies in charge of developing SSIs  must also help these units to improve their organizational
methods such as total quality management system and ISO-9000 certification, which is essential for the SSI units
to ensure the supply of quality goods in time.
(Para 1.6.21)
 
            The Committee is of the view that information technology is the backbone of apparel industry, therefore,
the Committee desires that the information about latest trends and fashions should be collected central
organizations  or other agency and pass  on expeditiously to the manufacturers . Since the Garment Sector
exporting garments to U.S.A., Latin America and Europe is facing tough competition from China, Pakistan and
Sri Lanka, therefore, it is desirable for the sector to keep on improving the quality of goods and innovate in new
designs and products. Requisite competitive resilience should be injected in garment manufacturing units to
enable them to face the challenges created by the WTO regime in transacting the global business. The
Committee  further recommends that the  greater R&D support for the sector should be provided under the
guidance of CSIR and SIDBI.
(Para 1.6.22)
 
 
 
Processed foods
            Having observed the vast potential and prospects of Processed food in SSI sector, the Committee has
made its detailed deliberation in a separate chapter in this report, however, the Committee wishes to pin-point
that milk-related items, dried and frozen fruits and vegetable have a vast market but the common complaint is
the inadequate infrastructure of transport, cold storage and marketing. The committee is of the view that these

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
inadequacies have to be rectified and strict quality controls must be adhered to tap the vast potential of overseas
markets.
(Para 1.6.26)
 
LEATHER PRODUCTS
            The Committee is of the view that the Indian leather industry has not been able to make its presence felt
in the international market mainly because of technological obsolescence and is losing to China in cost
leadership. Major leather goods manufacturers are also shifting their production centres to south Asian
countries posing stiff competition to Indian goods. Another problem for Indian manufacturers is that almost the
entire range of machines for making quality leather goods are imported making them costly for small
entrepreneurs. The availability of chemical inputs used in leather processing is also limited. Therefore, the
Committee feels that leather sector should be made aware of new technologies and excise duty on chemical inputs
used for leather processing units be reduced. the committee is of the considered that the ancillary tie-ups of SSI
units with large manufacturing houses in the leather sector should be encouraged.
(Para 1.6.27)
 
Electrical Machinery And Apparatus
            The Committee is of the view that the Electronic industry is one of the most important segments of the
small-scale industrial fraternity. Observing the potential of the sector, and associated demands of the products,
this sector is required to get into mechanized and automated production with high quality testing instruments.
The Committee is of the further view that the government should encourage the Electronic sector to develop sales
and marketing strategies to dispose off the variety of goods produced by its manufacturing units.  The
Committee is also of the view that the Electronic sector must develop ancillary relationships with the larger
industries. Adequate assistance and guidelines must be extended the sector for encouraging the units to adopt
organizational improvements such as total quality management system (ISO 9000) and ancillary tie-ups of SSI
units with main manufacturers.
(Para 1.6.28)
 
CHEMICALS AND CHEMICAL PRODUCTS
 
            The Committee observes that pharmaceutical sector is now having serious problems due to obligations
under the Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights  (TRIPS). The manufacturing processes of bulk drugs and
drug intermediates are continuously changing with a view to reduce the cost of production and improve the
quality of the product. The Committee therefore, recommends that the improved technology can be obtained
through continued R&D efforts, technical collaborations and purchase of know-how.  the committee understands
that small scale units have little capacity for such efforts, therefore,   therefore there is the need for the assistance
of the Government and national and regional research institutions for providing viable technologies at
reasonable cost and training their personnel.
 
(Para 1.6.30)
           
 
National Textile Policy
 
            The Committee observes that the National Textile Policy aiming at  specific initiatives promoting  Small
Scale and Agro- Rural units in the field of organized e.g.  Industry, Power looms, Handlooms, Hand-Knotted
Carpets, Silk and Handicrafts.  What is required  hereat is that the concept of SEs  has to be re-oriented into a
broad -based notion , the first and the foremost  step in this regard is to liberate SEs from conventional 
definition of SSIs . There is  no need for SSI unit to remain confined to SSI units just to avail
exemption/concession. An awareness programme is to be launched to educate the existing and first generation
entrepreneur. 
 
(Para 2.1.5)
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
Modernisation Schemes For SSI in Textile sector
 
            The Committee feels that measures required to be taken for improving the woolen industry are  
Promotion of  private sector linkages for marketing of wool; establishing   per-loom and post loom-processing
facilities; Taking  up an integrated development programmes for angora wool;, working   on design and process
development in a mission mode; systematization of  grading and marketing of wool ; Increasing the production of
specialty wool , viz., pashmina goat, angora rabbit etc and   increasing the quality and productivity of wool in the
country.
 
 
(Para 2.3.3)
 
 
KEY AREAS FOR MASSIVE ACTION IN SERICTURE
 
            The Committee feels that For further improving the sericulture sector Central Sericulture Board (CSB)
should focus on  the following areas:
 
(i)
                        Improving Research & Development and the effective transfer of technology at all stages;
(ii)                      Considerably improving the production of non-mulberry varieties of silk
(iii)                    Augmenting efforts for the spread of bivoltine sericulture;
(iv)                    Encouraging technology upgradation in activities of reeling, weaving  and finishing.  Strengthening
linkages between the producers and industry and deregulating  markets.
(v)                      Periodically reviewing the import policy for raw silk taking into account the balanced interests of
the sericulturists as well as export manufacturers.
 
 
(Para 2.4.6)
 
 
            The Committee acknowledges that the Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS); Textile Cluster
Infrastructure Development Scheme (TCIDS) ; Technology Mission on Cotton (TMC) would go a long way in
opening avenues for promoting SMEs in the Textile sector.
(2.5.3)
Powerloom sector
 
 
            The Committee feels that Government needs to give impetus to harmonious development of all the
segments of the fabric-manufacturing sector.  The balanced growth of these sectors should be achieved basing on
their intrinsic strengths and capacity to meet the demands and requirements of the domestic as well as
international markets.
 (Para 2.5.5)
 
Handloom Sector
 
 
           
            The Committee observes that  large  number of handloom weavers remain outside the fold of the
cooperative, and the cooperatives structures are being increasingly weakened due to financial and other mis-
management. Therefore, the Committee feels that the  Office of the Development Commissioner for Handlooms
should give impetus to  cluster based approach to the development of the handloom sector.   The cluster scheme
would provide and promote  small and medium enterprises in the handloom sector in the ambit of developmental
initiatives of the Central Government.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
 
(Para 2.5.8)
 
            The Committee feels that Government must continue to accord priority to Handlooms sector. Following
Steps should be taken to promote and develop its exclusiveness for the global market:-
 
(i)
                        training modules may be developed for weavers engaged in the production of low value added items,
with the objective of upgrading their skills to enable them to find alternate employment in the textile or
other allied sector;
 
(ii)
                      Comprehensive welfare measures will continue to be implemented in close cooperation with the State
Governments, for better working environment and the social security of the weavers;
 
(iii)
                    Effective support systems in research and development, design inputs, skill upgradation and market
linkages will be provided;
 
 
(iv)
                     Revamping of Weavers Service Centres will be revamped in consonance with the contemporary
trends, and, using Information Technology for efficacy, their activities suitably dovetailed with activities
of centres of design excellence like NIFT and NID;
 
(v)
                      Production of value added fabrics may be streamlined; innovative market-oriented schemes should be
introduced; and joint ventures be  encouraged both at the domestic and international levels. Brand
equity of handlooms must be commercially exploited to the extent possible.
(Para 2.5.10)
 
CARPETS
 
 
            The Committee recommends that Government should undertake measures for technology upgradation
including indigenisation of machines; development of testing facilities; and use of natural dyes. Adaptation of
traditional motifs and promotion of brand image would constitute thrust areas.
(Para 2.5.12)
 
 
 
 
HANDICRAFTS
 
 
            The Committee visualizes that  to improve the handicrafts sector in the country with more emphasis
should be given  on creating employment generation opportunities in rural areas  by modifying the existing
schemes as under:-
 
(vi)
             Extension of Credit Guarantee Scheme to rest of India.
(vii)           Setting up of local Haat/Mini Urban Haat/Eco Haat as new component of existing Marketing and
Marketing Support Scheme.
 
(viii)
         Entrepreneurship Development Programme as new component of existing Marketing and Marketing
Support Scheme.
 
(ix)              Setting up electronic Kiosk in CFCs being set up in potential clusters to facilitate e-enabled micro

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
credit delivery system, e-supervision and trade through e-commerce as new component of existing
Marketing and Marketing Support Scheme.
 
(x)                Extension of  Workshed Scheme to rest of India.
 
(Para 2.5.15)
 
Cluster Production Method
 
            The Committee feels that to improve the competitiveness of handicrafts in the International Market, the
steps required to be taken include providing commercially useful information and assistance to expoters in
developing and increasing exports; offering professional advice and services in areas of technology upgradation,
quality and design improvement, standards and specifications, product development, innovation etc.; organizing
visits of exporters/Export Promotion Councils etc. abroad to explore market opportunities in new and existing
markets in Europe, America and other potential markets in Latin America, Africa, ASEAN and CIS countries;
participating in specialized International Trade Fairs; create an awareness through Workshops on “Export
Marketing, Procedures and Documentation”, Packaging, Design Development, Buyer Seller Meet, Open House
etc. amongst exporters and manufacturers, enabling them to enter into export trade with confidence; setting up
of Common Facility Centres equipped with state of art technology in important export clusters;  and setting up
of Indian Exposition Mart at Greater Noida.
 
(Para 2.5.23)
 
 
           
 
 
 
PROLIFERATION OF SEs THROUGH ANCILIARIZATION OF JUTE INDUSTRY
 
 
 
            The Committee desires that adequate  steps may be taken in regard to improvement of quality of Jute fibre
by genetic method and improved retting practice by Biotechnological and other methods.  Such measures would
give fillip to the promotion of Medium Enterprises in the country.
(Para 3.1)
 
SWOT –analysis of Jute Industry
 
 
            The Committee is  of the view that a conscious efforts may be made for assessing the SWOT analysis of
Jute Industry in India and  harvesting, marketing and diversification of Jute and Jute Products should be carried
out with the mission as per details given below:-
 
(i)
                        Creation of strong marketing network for better market linkage of raw jute.
(ii)                      Providing market information to jute growers in order to enable them to take a decision regarding sale
of their produce at market driven price.
(iii)                    Implementation of Technology Transfer Programmes for better and quicker retting of raw jute for
ensuring improvement in fibre quality.
(iv)                    Development of cost effective community retting facilities.
 
                      

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
(v) Transfer of Technology as discovered after R&D efforts by IJIRA to jute industry and growers.
(Para 3.2.1)
 
             The Committee feels further that  sincere efforts should be made  in the field of research and
development so that new design and technology can be developed for new jute products.  Efforts should also be
made for  exploring  the international market by conducting market research and development.  The JMDC may
also be geared up to collaborate with technical institutions in Europe and USA for standardizing the jute  geo-
textiles, jute agro-textile and jute based compositions. 
           
(Para 3.2.2)
Rehabilitation of sick Jute Mills in India
 
 
            The Committee is of the view that for  increasing production of value added JDP’s extension of Jute
Service Centre and Raw Material Schemes to more areas, development of Standards of quality for JDPs and
certification of quality jute products to facilitate the growth of the market for jute diversified products
;strengthen the design and Development Cell of NCJD; Extension of incentives to the manufacturer on  
production of value added jute products; implementation of a scheme providing higher rate of incentives on
export of value added jute diversified products without any ceiling; Government is considering proposal to
increase the number of Jute Service Centers and Jute Raw Material Banks operating under NCJD.
(Para 3.4.7)
 
            The Committee is of the view that the Government should come out        with formulation of separate
“Jute Policy” on the line of Textiles Policy for        giving impetus to Jute Industry in India and giving due
consideration to the   emerging market - scenario and SMEs . The Jute Policy may incorporate the     detailed
provisions on the  introduction of modern technology machines for           higher productivity and quality
improvement, implementation of       productivity linked wages; removal of Tariff and non Tariff barriers;
development of modern technology machines;  encourage R&D Institutions       in developing value added
Jute/jute blended diversified products and   machinery required thereof.
       (Para 3.4.8)
                                   
 
 
Prerequisites For Development Of  Food Processing Industries And Support Provided By MFPI
 
            The Committee understands that the prospects  of Food Processing Industry is tremendous in India
keeping in view the availability of raw material for various segments of Food Industry.   The growth rate to the
tune of 7 to 8 per cent in the food processing sector has to be maintained.  Therefore, the Committee feels that the
Government should undertake following strategic decision / actions for promoting small, medium and large food
processing units for promotion and proliferation of food industries in India:-
 
(i)
                        Greater impetus to basic development for facilitating food processing industry and paying attention to
decentralization of Infrastructural development i.e. food parks, packages centres, optimum utilization
of by - products, cold chain facilities, value added centres, irradiation facilities so that balanced regional
development of food processing industry may take place in the country; 
(ii)
                      Awareness programme for technology up-gradation, establishment of modernization of food
processing industries covering fruits, vegetable, milk products, meat, poultry, fishery, oil seeds and
horticultural sector for adequate and optimum value addition;
(iii)
                    Special impetus to rural entrepreneurship through Mass Entrepreneurial developmental programmes
throughout the country by imparting necessary training and skill;
(iv)                    Managing sustainable backward and forward linkages system and linking to ARI sector for ensuring a
regular supply of raw material and to workable commercial and marketable system for providing
remunerative income to the farmers;
(v)                       For injecting competitiveness to face the global challenges from MNCs engaged in Food Processing

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
Industry, there is the need for maintaining global quality and hygiene standard;
(vi)                    Promotion and adoption of ISO, HACP and Good Manufacturing Practices( GMP)  standards by the
Ministry of Food Processing Industry;
(vii)                  Populariziation of processed food through participation in Seminars, Workshops, national,
international fairs and generic advertisement for customer awareness;
(viii)                Focused impetus to the growth and development of SMEs in Food Processing Industries throughout
the country by providing institutional and commercial support; and
(ix)                    Food processing sector needs to take advantage of backward linkages scheme of MFPI so that there are
no middlemen / players in between the processors and farmers.
       (Para 4.9.3)
           
 
Adequate and timely supply of coal to Small Scale Industries
            The Committee takes note of the fact that Indian Small Scale Industries suffer from inadequate  supply of
coal to the SSI units. As per the extant policy, the supply of coal to the SSI units falls under the non-core sector. 
As a result, there has been huge mismatch between the demand and supply of coal to SSI sector.  As many of the
SSI units require timely and adequate supply of coal for running the units, non-availability of coal has adversely
affected to growth of SSI sector.
(Para 5.7.1)
 
            The Committee is anguished to note that Coal Companies are not maintaining separate statistics
regarding the supply of coal to SSI units.  The 16% of coal is supplied to non-core sector consumers including
SSI units under sponsorship and linkage based on the Maximum Permissible quantity (MPQ).   The Committee
feels that the requisite quantity of coal is not supplied under the sponsorship and  linkage based on MPQ which is
arrived at the average lifting of coal for the past three years, by the units.  Coal companies are supplying coal to
SSI units on the basis of availability of coal after meeting the requirements of core sector consumers like Power,
Cement, Steel etc. and often pro rata cuts are imposed in certain coal companies where availability of coal for
non core sector after meeting the requirement of core consumers do not permit the booking under MPQ.
(Para 5.7.2)
 
            In the process of examination, the Committee   interacted   with the representative of SSI Associations/
Entrepreneurs and Coal India Limited and the  Department of Coal  during the its study visit to Ranchi,  on the
issue of adequate and timely supply of coal to SSI. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Secretary, Department
of Coal and Chairman, Coal India Limited in the matter.  Having taken into consideration the mater placed
before the Committee and the evidence tendered by the witnesses, the Committee feels that following strategic
steps may be undertaken for adequate supply of coal to the SSI units:-
 
(i)
                        SE sector should be brought at par with the 'core sector' consumers;
(ii)                      The Coal Companies should establish Depots in each district/State for distribution/marketing of
Coal, either by themselves or through outsourcing with adequate accountability on the
outsourced entities.
(iii)                    Direct linkages should be given to the SSI units in all such districts which produce Coal.
(iv)                    Ministry of Coal may constitute a Standing Advisory Committee and the representative of SSI

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
Associations should also be the member of the Standing Advisory Committee. 
(v)                      To the extent possible, all the coal consuming SSI should be given coal mines for direct mining
in private sector as a matter of reserved mines for SSI sector and it should be made mandatory
to any big private mine owner whoever gets coal mine from Government of India to ensure that
priority must  be fixed for SSI units.
(vi)
                    Government should consolidate the Small Scale Industries in the country by   implementing   
the Action Plan to enable the sector to provide employment       generation opportunities to
millions of youths in the urban as well as rural     areas. It is hoped that the suggested  solutions
would bring some relief to the SSI entrepreneurs in procuring coal.   
 
(Para 5.7.3)
 
 
Concept of Road Railer
 
            The Committee was apprised that  the concept of Road Railer is being developed to facilitate multi- modal
transportation which would  help the SSI.
(Para 6.1.9)
 
 
 
Railway as Preferred Mode of Transport
            The Committee is  however, constrained to observed  that  the Railways have done very little to encourage
the SSIs to choose railways as their preferred mode of transport.  As the rake load (2200-2300 tonnes) is the basic
transport unit of the Railways, the SSI units are not able to utilize the Railways for transportation of either the
raw material or the finished products due to smaller quantum. The introduction of movement of goods in rake-
load/train-load and running of point-to-point trains since 1982 created problems in transportation of raw
material/finished product of Small Scale units.  Moreover,  the closure of 79 marshalling yards between 1985 and
2000 due to rake-load/train-load movement restricted the collection/delivery of smaller loads originating from
adjoining sections.  Besides bulk volume of delivery are not accommodated at rural stations.  The container
services of the Railways, which can carry up to 24 tonnes, has also not served the cause of SSI sector due to
limited terminals in the country (52 locations throughout the country).  Due to these constraints, most of the SSI
units have to depend on roads for transporting raw material and finished products. 
(Para 6.1.11)
 
            The Committee welcomes the concept of Road Railer intended to facilitate multi- modal transportation
and hopes that the said measure would help the SMEs in transportation.
(Para 6.1.12)
 
            The Committee therefore, recommends that           the Ministry of Railways should take immediate
measures for providing the needed facilities to the SSI sector for transportation of raw material and finished
products throughout the country:-
(i)
                        Railways should restore the facility of booking small quantities (wagon loads) to help the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
transportation of SE raw materials and products.
(ii)                      Bookings at smaller stations should be accepted.
(iii)                    Adoption of cluster-based approach for better collection and delivery of raw material/finished
goods of SEs.
(iv)                    Railway Board to constitute a Standing Advisory Committee under Chairmanship of Member
(Traffic) with representation from Ministry of SSI and Ministry of ARI and select Associations
of SEs to devise new schemes for addressing all concerns of SEs.  
(Para 6.1.13)
 
            The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Railways should enable the SSI sector by
providing all possible assistance  for the transportation of SE raw materials and products to strengthen and
facilitate to remain competitive in market-led global economy.  Keeping in view the potential of Small Scale
Industries in India, the Railway Board must  reconsider the case of Small Scale Industries and  provide 
infrastructure upgradation in the major industrial clusters for transportation of raw material and finished SSI
products.  The Committee desires  that Railways should play a pro-active role and reach out to the major
industrial clusters for providing transportation services to its customers.
(Para 6.1.14)
 
CREDIT FLOW TO SSI SECTOR
               
            The Committee expresses its deep concern that credit rate to Small Scale sector as percentage of net bank
credit from Public Sector Banks has declined from 17.5%  (March, 1998) to 14.2% (March, 2001) and further to
10.4% (March, 2004).  Not only this, number of SSI accounts has also declined from 29.64 lakh in 1998 to 16.33
lakh in 2004 i.e. by about 50%.
(Para 7.1.4)
 
           
            The Committee is of the view that RBI should examine the recommendations contained in the Ganguly
Committee Report and issue guidelines to all banks for immediate implementation and thus enhancing the credit
to SMEs on reasonable rate of interest so that Indian Small Enterprises may grow and thrive into Medium
Enterprises.
(Para 7.13.6)
 
Restructuring of State Financial Corporations (SFCs)
 
 
            The Committee is of the view that restructuring of the States Financial Corporations (SFCs) would go a
long way in enhancing the credit to SMEs as per the requirement .  The Committee would like to be apprised of
the outcome of efforts made by SIDBI through restructuring package to SFCs under MoU.
(Para 7.14.2)
Enabling Credit to SMEs
           
            The Committee recommends the following further measures for enhancing credit to SMEs  in India :-
 
(i)
                        Improving the functional aspects of Technology Bank for SME for facilitating   technology
transfer  and upgradation and  project evaluation, risks management etc ;
(ii)                       Re-orienting the role of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) for extending credit flow to rural Small
Scale Industries ;

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
(iii)                      encouraging Laghu Udyog Credit Cards ; and
(iv)                    Popularization  of credit rating in SMEs .
(Para 7.21.3)
 
            Global Economy and Generation of Additional Employment
Considering the higher potential for growth in the SSI sector in terms of output,  employment and export,
the committee is of the considered that  the Government should strengthen and facilitate the SSI sector to enable
it to remain competitive in market-led global economy and generate additional employment.  In recognition of
employment generation potential, the SSI sector has been assigned a target of 12% of annual growth rate and
creation 44 lakh employment opportunities in the Tenth Five Year Plan.  Keeping in view the potential of Small
Scale Industries in India, the National Common Minimum Programme as announced by the Government on 27
th
May, 2004 stressed on providing full credit, technological and marketing support, infrastructure upgradation in
the major industrial clusters and to free the sector from Inspector Raj. But mere announcement would not
work.  Now the time has come, when the Government should keep its promises of consolidating the Small Scale
Industries in the country by implementing   the Action Plan to enable the sector to achieve the stipulated 12%
growth rate and accordingly provide employment generation opportunities to millions of youths in the urban as
well as rural areas. 
(Para 7.21.4)
            Erratic And Inadequate Flow Of Credit To Ssi Sector
The Committee is astonished to find the pathetic condition of the SSIs and the erratic and inadequate flow
of credit to SSI sector which  has been the key reason  for continuous languishing of this sector.  Although the
credit to SSI has increased from Rs.38,109 crore  for financial 1997-98 to Rs. 58,278 for financial year 2003-04 - a
growth of 53% but what concern the Committee the most is  the declining  share of SSI in Net Bank Credit over
the same period has from 17.5% to 10.4%.  No efforts seem to have been taken in the last seven years to arrest
the declining trend.  It was primarily result of lack of policy initiative by the Government and apathy of banks in
particular towards SSI lending. Various factors like high risk perception, higher transaction cost in processing
SSI loan applications, lack of credit rating facilities for SSI units contributed further to the woes of Small Scale
Industries.  Moreover, the non-adherence to RBI guidelines on SSI lending by the banks (e.g. inadequate/
delayed sanction of credit despite guidelines on computation of working capital requirements of SSI units/
prescribed time schedule for disposal of loan applications, insistence on collateral despite instructions from RBI
about no collateral for loans upto Rs.5 lakh and upto Rs.25 lakh for units having good track record, etc.) is
continuing till date.
(Para 7.21.5)
             Mortality Rate
The Committee express its concern that it is because of the inadequate credit flow to SSI sector, the
mortality rate is increasing year after year and sickness of SSI units is posing a matter of great concern.
Moreover, After the deregulation of interest rates regime from 18-20% in 1997-98, the lending rates have come
down to around   9-12% at present.  As per extant guidelines the banks are required to fix their own prime
lending rates (PLRs) and the maximum band over the PLR.  The existing guidelines for banks for lending SSI is
plus/minus 2% on PLR which translates into a range of 8.25% to 12%.  While interest rates for Large Scale
Industries are negotiable and are generally at sub-PLR.  Limiting to the plus / minus two per cent of PLR de-
motivated the banks  in general to lower the interest beyond PLR minus two per cent.
(Para 7.21.6)
Declining Net Bank Credit Flow To The Ssi

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
            The Committee observes that the extant course of action and programme as adopted by the banking
division and the financial institutions failed to arrest the declining net bank credit flow to the SSI at the
reasonable rate of interests.  Although, lot of schemes and programmes are being said to be launched for
promoting and proliferating the prospects of SSI sector but the declining number of SSI units and increasing
number of sick units is a testimony to the fact that Government efforts at present is failing miserably to
ameliorate the SSI sector, therefore, need of the hour is to have a focused approach/schemes for enhancing the
credit and reverse the trend.
(Para 7.21.7)
Strategy to ensure time
            The Committee, therefore, feels that  the foremost requirement is to extend timely and adequate credit  to
the  SMEs at reasonable rate of interests.  The following Course of Action may be adopted by the Government: -
(i)
                 Treating the Small Scale sector on the priority basis,  banks should fix self-set targets of
minimum 15% per annum for growth in advances to the SSI sector over the previous year's
achievements and in relation to the overall target set by them for growth in their Net Bank
Credit for the year.  Shortfall in achieving this target should be deposited with SIDBI by the
banks at rate of interest linked to "bank rate".
(ii)
               RBI should issue guidelines to banks to the adopt differential rates of interest under three
slabs of loans to Small Scale units as per the following rationalised pattern:-
Upto Rs.1 lakh                       Not exceeding bank rate plus 1.5%
Rs.1 to 2 lakh                         Not exceeding bank rate plus 2.25%
Rs.2 to 5 lakh                         Not exceeding bank rate plus 3%
Rs.5 lakh and above              Not exceeding bank rate plus 4%
(iii)
             RBI should issue effective guidelines to be followed by the banks strictly for speedy revival of
potentially viable sick SSI units.  Test of viability of sick SSI units should be conducted with
attitude to improve the SSI units.  Viable sick SSI units should be given an opportunity for
debt restructuring whereby the outstanding debt of sick SSI units could be restructured
through various forms such as moratorium, rescheduling of debts, infusion of fresh capital,
etc.
(iv)
             Each public and private sector bank to set up at least a "SSI Desk" at each branch under a
trained bank official as the Nodal Officer with three years beginning 2005-2006.
(v)               Lead banks to set up Institutes for training of SE entrepreneurs in such districts where major SE
clusters are located.
 
(vi)             Government to expand the existing portfolio risk fund to Rs.150 crore  in the next five years to
enable SIDBI to cover 29 lakh SEs by the end of that period. This would benefit mostly women in
setting up micro enterprises through Self-Help Groups.
(vii)
           Since SIDBI is meant solely for promoting SSI, there is the need to re-orient its role viz
strengthening of State Financial Corporation (SFCs) in a time bound manner with Central/State
Government assistance; expanding coverage under industrialization programmes; setting up of a
Technology Bank; launching direct finance and Micro- Finance Programmes and  setting up of a
dedicated credit rating agency for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs).
(viii)
         While extending credit facilities Bank should be advised to observe the credit history of the
entrepreneurs and accordingly fix the volume of credit,  rate of interest and  mode of repayment.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
(ix)             RBI, banks and other financial institutions should change the mindset in order to really
promote and proliferate SMEs so that Indian SMEs should not lag behind the global trend.
 
(Para 7.21.8)
 
 
Credit Flow to Medium Enterprises
 
 
            The Committee hopes that the Annual Monetary  & Credit Policy 2005-06  would go a long way in
providing credit to Indian SMEs as per the requirement of SEs and MEs sectors and RBI's this year's
announcement for credit policy would not prove mere annual rituals. The Committee firmly believes that   RBI
would issue suitable guidelines and adopt and adhere resilient monitoring - mechanism for implementation of
stated objectives in the credit policy 2005-06, otherwise, policy would  remain mere window-dressing or arm-
chair- intellectual exercise. The Committee recommends that the policy must go beyond the formulation stage so
that it may be implemented  in practice.
 
       (Para 7.23.2)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Legal framework affecting the Small Scale Industries is satisfactory
 
 
            The Committee understands that the plethora of laws, rules and regulations and the burden of inspections
under these, have affected the SSI sector adversely. Therefore, with a view to simplifying and streamlining the
system of inspections under these laws, and also reducing the burden of statutory returns/ registers prescribed
hereunder, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Bill, 2005 (earlier referred to as the Small Enterprises
Development Bill) must be enacted without further delay. Following measures are therefore required to be taken
in order to give fillip to the promotion and development of Small Scale Industries: -
 
(a)
   A single Unified Act governing the rules pertaining to retrenchment and layoffs and social benefits for
employees.
 
(b)         Enactment of Single Comprehensive Small Enterprises Development Act for SSEs similar to the
Industrial Development and Regulation (IDR) Act.
 
(c)    Comprehensive Social Security Scheme for widening the social safety nets as proposed in SED Bill.
 
(d)   Since the Inspector Raj is causing severe harassment to Small Scale Units, therefore, the provision made
in the proposed legislation for giving good bye to Inspector Raj to wipe out the tyranny  of Inspector
Raj.
 
 
(Para 8.1.2)
 
 
  Public- Private Partnership in regard technology up gradation for  the SMEs

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
 
             The Committee is of the view that in order to promote Public-Private Partnership for technology
upgradation under the Schemes monitored by SIDO, awareness of the provisions of the schemes among the
Industry Associations would have to be increased.  Further, Associations need to be guided for identifying the
felt-needs of SSIs and chalking out the operational modalities of such common facilities so as to enable them to
prepare project proposals, which are technically sound and financially viable.
 
 
(Para 8.5.2)
 
International Co-operation between Indian Enterprises and SME abroad: "Key Areas for Mutual Co-
operation". 
 
 
       The Committee is of the view that the Institutional support can be utilized further, in promotion of SMEs
through assistance in:-
 
(i)                 Developing and implementing a technology transfer strategy, in addition to financial, marketing
and operational strategies. 
(ii)               Conducting of technology audits for and benchmarking and assessment of technology needs.
(iii)             Technology sourcing and acquisition and applications of new techniques
(iv)              Identification of new export markets by encouraging their participation in sector specific
exhibitions.
 
 
(Para 8.6.5)
 
Raising equity participation from the existing 24% to 49%  (FDI) in SSI sector
 
 
            The Committee is of the considered view that the Department of Industry Policy and Promotion (IPP),
Ministry of Commerce & Industry may explore the possibility of  raising equity participation in the SSI sector
from the existing 24% to 49%  (FDI) for better technology transfer in SSI sector in which FDI can be encouraged
for sizeable investments towards larger returns. 
 
(Para 8.8.3)
 
Enactment of Limited Partnership Act
 
 
             The Committee in in agreement with the opinion of the Ministry of SSI that the Limited Liability
Partnership will provide higher flow of capital in to the Sector, especially to the upcoming sections like IT, Bio-
technology, Pharma, etc and would  also encourage venture capital, therefore, the committee recommends that
the Ministry of SSI should take up the matter of Enactment of Limited Partnership Act with the Ministry of
Company Affairs.
 
(Para 8.10.2)
Protection Of Smes Under Wto Regime
 
            The Committee is of the considered that emerging SMEs in india should be protected from the on-slaught
of Frankstein MNCs who are launching its monstrous head -way to Indian market due to opening of economy
under WTO-regime in order to fulfill the commandants of liberalization and globalization by undertaking
following strategic decision and action:  -
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/173rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:41]
(i)                        Strengthening of Anti-dumping mechanism ;
(ii)                      Conversion of Quantitative restriction (QRs) into rationalised tariff regime;
(iii)                    Rationalisation of countervailing duties and safeguard duties to protect domestic;
(iv)                    Awareness among SSI entrepreneurs about India's obligation under WTO regime; and
(v)                      Expeditious disposal of dumping cases are anti-dumping actions thereto.
(Para 8.15.2)
 
 
Strengthening The Institutional Framework
 
            The Committee is of the view that the government should take initiatives like strengthening the
institutional framework with decentralized set-up throughout the country  , formulation , coordination  and
ensuring the  implementation of policies and programmes for Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) Sector,
providing  sensitization programmes in respect of the needs of the fast changing economic scenario and ensuring 
dissemination of information, cluster oriented Infrastructural development, trade specific measures, market
assistance and simplification of rules and regulations  for promotion and development of the SME Sector. Service
enterprises, fast growing trades like IT, Pharma, biotechnology etc. needs special attention. 
 
(Para 8.15.3)
Policy Package To Boost The Sme Sector
 
            The Government should bring forth a policy package to boost the SME Sector, which inter-alia must
contain the provision of enhancing the investment limit of small enterprise providing the policy, credit,
technological and market support, infrastructure development to pave a way for small enterprises to graduate to
medium and to boot the SME Sector. Moreover, the Small and Medium Enterprises Development (SMED) Bill,
2005 must see the light of the day at the earliest.
 
(Para 8.15.4)
 
 
 
 
 
 