162nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/162ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SECOND REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
COMMITTEE'S 146TH REPORT ON
CREDIT FLOW TO SSI SECTOR
IN MAHARASHTRA
(MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 5TH MAY, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 5TH MAY, 2005)
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
MAY,  2005/VAISAKHA, 1927 (SAKA)
CONTENTS
                                                                                                            
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTION
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
5. MINUTES
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
   1.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia         –---       Chairman
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Prof M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Surendra Lath
   4.  Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
   6.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   7.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   8.  Dr. Vijay Mallya
   9.  Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
10.  Shrimati Vanga Geetha
        LOK  SABHA
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri Kailash Baitha

162nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/162ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
13.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
14.  Shri Subhash Deshmukh
15.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
17.  Shri Sunil Khan
18.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
19.  Shri Prakash Paranjpe
20.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
21.  Shri Rajnarayan
22.  Shri Bagida Ramakrishna
23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
24.  Shrimati Rubab Sayeda
25.  Shri Gurjeet Singh Rana
26.  Shri Manvendra Singh
27.  Shri Ganesh Singh
28.  Shri Suraj Singh
29.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi
30.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
31.  Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
        I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised
by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred Sixty secondReport on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Committee’s 146
th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Maharashtra (Ministry of
Small Scale Industries).
2.     The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken Notes supplied by the Government (Ministry of Small
Scale Industries) on the recommendations contained in its 146 th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in in Maharashtra
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
3.     The Committee in its meeting held on 3rd May, 2005 considered and adopted the Report.
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
NEW DELHI ;                                                                                                                                                 Chairman,
3rd May, 2005                                                                                                           Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry.
REPORT
         The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries
on the recommendations contained in the 146 th Report (of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Industry) on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Maharashtra pertaining to the Ministry of Small Scale Industries. The
Report was presented/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on the 26th August, 2003.
2.      Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Small Scale Industries in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:----
Chapter-I - The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry :- 51 and 52.
         The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as mentioned in Chapter-
I of the Report.
Chapter-II - The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the

162nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/162ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
Government’s replies:- 56.
         In respect of these recommendations, the Committee is convinced with the logic and explanation advocated by the
Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue further.
Chapter-III - The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the
Ministry:- 53, 54, 55, 57 and 59.
         The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementations of recommendations contained in Chapter-III
and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanation in respect of these recommendations.
Chapter-IV - The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been
received:- 58 and 60.
         In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished the interim replies or
couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desires that the
Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to
the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
3.      The details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
1.0    Technology up gradation and modernization
1.1    The Committee is of the view that to face the challenges emanating from the WTO agreement, SSI units
irrespective of their size need technology up gradation and modernisation. An awareness about the implications of WTO
agreement has to be created and SSI entrepreneurs needs to be educated in this regard. Technology is the key element
contributing to productivity quality, competitiveness and market acceptability of products. The preparation for
competitiveness needs to be done by the Government as well as entrepreneurs and the corporate sector.(Para 51)
Action Taken
1.1.2The Ministry of Small Scale Industries (SSI) has conducted various programmes to create awareness among SSI
entrepreneurs about the WTO agreements and their impact on small scale industries. These include 29 WTO Awareness
Programmes/Seminars, 5 product specific WTO Seminars and 29 Workshops on Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs),
besides a one-day sensitization workshop on Geographical Indications and 17 Information Dissemination Seminars on
Anti-Dumping Investigations. Some of these awareness programmes are being continued during 2004-05.
1.1.3In order to enable the SSI units to upgrade their technology so as to improve the productivity, quality,
competitiveness and market acceptability of their products, the Office of Development Commissioner (DC) (SSI) has
launched the following schemes/programmes:-
(i)    Small Industry Cluster Development Programme (SICDP): This takes a holistic approach to development of
clusters in respect of technology upgradation, marketing, exports, skill upgradation, etc. So far, 59 clusters
have been taken up for development, which include 5 National Programmes, in collaboration with the United
Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO) for development of Toy, Machine Tools, Locks,
Stone and Hand Tools Industry in the country.
(ii)    Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for Technology Upgradation of the SSIs (CLCSS): This provides
12% capital subsidy for induction of well ­established and improved technology in the specified
products/sub-sectors (39 products/sub-sectors covered currently). As announced in the Union Budget for
2004-05, the subsidy is proposed to be enhanced to 15% and maximum ceiling of loan eligible for support
from Rs. 40 lakh to Rs. 1 crore.
(iii)   Reimbursement of 75% of the cost of obtaining ISO-9001/ISO-14001 Certification subject to a ceiling of Rs.
75,000/- per SSI unit.
(iv)   Scheme for one-time Central grant-in-aid to the extent of 50% of the cost (maximum of Rs.50 lakh per

162nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/162ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
testing centre) to the Industry Associations for setting up Testing Centres for providing testing facilities to SSI
units. Modernisation/expansion of Quality Marking Centres under the aegis of the State Governments is also
covered under this Scheme.
1.1.4.   In addition, Process-cum-Product Development Centres (PPDCs) for various products have been set up to
provide consultancy services to SSI units in process modification, design development, new products and process
development, etc. Tool Rooms set up at various places in the country provide better tooling facilities to the SSI units.
Regional Testing Centres and Field Testing Stations have been established to cater to the needs of testing the products
of SSI units.
Recommendation
1.2    Compatibility with WTO Provisions
1.2.1The Committee recommends that to achieve compatibility with WTO provisions, there is need for the sector to
develop and cement sub-contracting/outsourcing arrangements. The Sector-specific association can play an active role
in creating          mechanisms for studying the impact of WTO developments and to keep pace with the challenges of
change. Collaborative efforts on the part of different partners of the SSI sector are expected to yield better results than
isolated endeavors. A product-wise market research on the implications of WTO and other related aspects should be
done. The outcome of such studies could be made available to Industry Associations/Entrepreneurs for wider market
understanding and use by the members and SSIs at large.(Para 52)
Action Taken
1.2.2 The process of economic liberalization and globalization and adherence to WTO norms have led to intensifying
competition for the Indian industry, particularly the Small Scale Industries (SSI) sector.
1.2.3As the principal financial institution for the SSI sector, SIDBI undertook detailed policy supportive research
studies on select sub-sectors of importance to the SSI sector, which were aimed at assessing the impact of WTO, support
requirements of the SSI sector and the necessary policy interventions. In the first phase, WTO-related studies in respect
of 6 industrial sectors were undertaken and the salient findings and major observations and recommendations circulated
to the various agencies concerned, major industry associations, etc. Seminars to disseminate the findings and the
emerging issues among the SSIs and the Industry Associations were also organized. Second phase of the WTO Impact
Assessment studies, covering 3 more industrial sectors, have also been completed and similar action is proposed with
regard to these studies as well.
1.2.4The Ministry of SSI is supporting the Industry Associations financially to develop monitoring mechanisms on the
performance of four selected product clusters in terms of growth, implications of removal of Quantitative Restrictions
(QRs), surge in imports, etc. These Associations/clusters are Confederation of Indian Industry-Food Processing and
Machine Tools, Federation of Indian Micro and Small and Medium Enterprises-Shaneel and Kishangarh Marble
Association-­Marble cluster located at Pune, Bangalore, Panipat and Kishangarh respectively. The study reports on
Shaneel cluster at Panipat and Marble cluster at Kishangarh have been finalized. Other reports are in various stages of
finalization.
1.2.5The Ministry of SSI has got five sectoral studies conducted in areas which have a strong SSI presence, so as to
formulate a pro-active strategy and fine tune the existing policies and programmes. These studies have been undertaken
with the assistance of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The sectors selected for the studies are
Hand Tools, Medicinal Biotechnology, Glass and Ceramics, Bicycle Parts and Flavour and Fragrance. Five product-
specific workshops on the impact of WTO Agreements on these sectors have already been organized. The industry and
their Associations have participated in these workshops and the study reports have been discussed with them during the
Seminars. The views/suggestions of the industry and their Associations have also been obtained and duly considered in
finalizing the reports. The report on Glass and Ceramics has been finalized. Other reports are in various stages of
finalization.
CHAPTER - II
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation

162nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/162ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
2.2    Supervisory Powers and Authority over all the Nationalized Banks
1.2.1 The Committee endorses the demand of SSI Associations to make sincere efforts in making Lead Banks Scheme
more efficient. As suggested this has to be result-oriented. The Committee therefore feels that existing system should be
reviewed and if possible the supervisory powers and authority over all the nationalized banks be given to the concerned
Lead Bank of that area/State.(Para 56 )
Action Taken
2.2.2The RBI has informed that Block Level Bankers’ Committee (BLBC)/District Consultative Committee
(DCC)/District Level Review Committee (DLRC)/State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC) are different fora under the
Lead Bank Scheme to review and monitor the performance of different banks in flow of credit to various sectors.
Supervisory powers for branches operating in a particular area are vested with the controlling offices of respective
banks.
CHAPTER - III
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
3.0    Fiscal/Financial Incentives for New Technologies/Modernization
3.1 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry to make the SSIs to meet the global standards,
however, the Committee is of the view that to tackle the paradoxical situation of upgradation of technology and at the
same time fund constraints in the SSI sector the Government must consider subsidizing the cost of upgradation by way
of fiscal/financial incentives to help SSI for the adoption of new technologies/ modernization. Further the Ministry
should initiate the opening of technology exchanges for providing necessary information on technology and bench
marking the international quality standards, so as to integrate domestic markets with the international markets.
Knowledge networking through linkage of research institutes with the SSI sector would be effective too for integration
of the sector with the broader markets.          (Para 53)
Action Taken
3.1.1The Ministry of SSI has launched the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for Technology Upgradation of the
SSIs (CLCSS). The scheme provides 12 per cent capital subsidy on institutional finance with the eligible loan ceiling of
Rs. 40 lakh, for induction of well-established and improved technology in the specified products/sub-sectors. It is now
proposed to enhance the subsidy to 15 per cent and the ceiling of the loan eligible for support to Rs. 1 crore, as
announced in the Union Budget for 2004-05.
3.1.2Technology Resource Centres (TRCs) have been set up in all Small Industries Service Institutes having facilities of
networking with leading organizations engaged in technology upgradation so that SSI units can access the appropriate
technologies and attain international standards. The TRCs have collection of technical books, catalogues, brochures,
etc., in addition to providing information on “How to seek technology”, technology transfer mode, leading technology
transfer agencies, international exhibitions, etc. Web links have been given from SIDO Portal (www.laghu-udyog.com)
to SIDBI, dedicated branches of commercial banks, all State Government Industries Departments, etc. On-line
networking has also been provided to technology database hosted on www.techsmall.com by Technology Bureau for
Small Enterprises (TBSE).
Further Recommendation
3.1.3The Committee is of the considered view that with the opening up of national economy, there is the need for
consolidation of domestic SSI sector to enable the SSI units to face the stiff competition with the global SSI products. In
this regard, reduction in the cost of production through introduction of latest technology and knowledge networking
through linkages of research institute with the SSI sector becomes all the more necessary. The Committee welcomes the
setting up of Technology Resource Centres (TRCs) and hopes that its promotional role would prove significant for
integration of the SSI sector with the global market. The Committee however be informed of the impact of these
incentives in SSI sector and the monitoring mechanism for implementation.
Recommendation

162nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/162ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
3.2    Impact of Globalization and Liberalization on Small Scale Sector and Role of Banks
3.2.1The Committee takes note of the information provided by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries regarding impact
of Globalization and Liberalization on Small Scale Sector and role of banks. The Committee appreciates that
considering the funds constraints with SSI sector, the Government has introduced the credit linked capital subsidy
scheme for Technology upgradation of Small Scale Industries under which 12% back ended capital subsidy would be
admissible on the loans advanced to the SSIs by the scheduled commercial banks/designated State Financial
Corporations for technology upgradation in certain select sectors. The Committee understands that a Study Group on
development of Small Scale Enterprises made a number of recommendations like setting up of a Technology Bank,
providing of finance to units for entering into collaboration for technical know-how and technology upgradation etc.
The Committee therefore recommends that these recommendations of the study group should be implemented in true
spirit to support SSI Sector. Having taken note of the fact that only a small number of entrepreneurs took the advantage
of the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme. The Committee feels that many more entrepreneurs could be benefited if
a wide publicity is given to Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme. The Committee therefore, calls upon the
Government to accord due publicity to this scheme and be handed over to the State Governments for
implementation.                                                                                                                (Para 54)
Action Taken
3.2.2SIDBI had set up the Technology Bureau for Small Enterprises (TBSE) in 1995 to help SMEs tap opportunities at
the global level for acquisition of technology and establish business collaborations. TBSE has taken several initiatives
and put in place an effective mechanism to address the technology and collaboration related needs of the sector. TBSE
has set up a technology site for small industries at www.techsmall.com. Its endeavor is to provide information on
technology at the doorstep of user enterprises. Recognizing the contribution of TBSE, it was indicated in the
Comprehensive Policy Package for SSI that TBSE will be strengthened so that it functions effectively as a Technology
Bank. SIDBI has initiated necessary steps for institutionalizing TBSE as a full-fledged Technology Bank.
3.2.3SIDBI has also taken several steps for popularizing the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for Technology
Upgradation of the SSIs (CLCSS).
3.2.4The operation of CLCSS is being reviewed at the meetings of the State Level Bankers Committee. All Primary
Lending Institutions (PLIs) have been advised to conduct workshops, seminars and conferences to popularize the
Scheme. They have also been advised to circulate the details of the Scheme at meetings and seminars organized by
Industry Associations, State Governments, etc. Some Industry Associations have covered the Scheme in their periodic
bulletin for disseminating information among their members. The Scheme has also been covered in the Journal of the
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India. All District Industries Centres/ various Industry Associations have been
provided details of the Scheme, requesting them to circulate it among the industries. Staff Training Centres of banks
have been forwarded copy of the Scheme. Awareness sessions on CLCSS are also being conducted in Bankers Training
Colleges. Interactive sessions inviting bankers and entrepreneurs have been held in various potential Centres/clusters.
3.2.5The Scheme is being publicised by SIDBI and the Office of the DC (SSI) among SSI units, by organizing
awareness programmes. The guidelines of the Scheme have been posted on SIDO’s website. Revised guidelines have
been printed and circulated to all SISIs, PLIs, SIDBI, NABARD, Industry Associations, State Secretaries/Directors of
Industries, etc.
3.2.6CLCSS is a specialized scheme under which subsidy is provided for well-­established and improved technologies
for the select products/sub-sectors. For identification of improved technologies, expert institutions in the respective
fields are consulted and technologies are approved by a Technical Sub-Committee under the chairmanship of the DC
(SSI). The Scheme is being implemented at the national level through two nodal agencies, viz., SIDBI and NABARD
through Primary Lending Institutions (i.e., Banks, SFCs, Cooperative lending institutions). SIDBI and NABARD are,
however, national agencies. It would thus be difficult for them to deal with individual State Governments to run the
Scheme. Therefore, it is not administratively feasible to hand over the operation of the Scheme to State Governments.
Further Recommendation
3.2.7Although SIDBI had set up the Technology Bureau for Small Enterprises (TBSE) in 1995 to help SMEs tap
opportunities at the global level for acquisition of technology and establish business collaborations, however, nothing
substantial has come out in regard to fulfilment of technology and collaboration related needs of the sector. The
Committee therefore, recommends that SIDBI should make action plan for popularization of the function aspects of
Technology Bureau for Small Enterprises (TBSE). Besides there is the need for further popularization of Credit Linked

162nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/162ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
Capital Subsidy Scheme and development mechanism for appropriate addressing the technological requirement for SSI
sector.
Recommendation
3.3    Corpus for Credit Guarantee Fund Trust Scheme for Small Industries (CGTSI)
3.3.1There has been demand to increase the corpus for Credit Guarantee Fund Trust Scheme for Small Industries
(CGTSI). The Committee is of the view that the demand for raising the existing corpus for CGTSI should be
sympathetically considered by the Government. The Committee feels that coverage under the scheme needs to be
extended. The Committee further impress upon the Government to pursue with RBI to ensure that all the private sector
Banks and foreign Banks are involved in lending to SSI units. In addition, the banks may open more branches specially
for lending to SSIs.(Para 55)
Action Taken
3.3.2The Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Small Industries was launched in August, 2000 to mitigate the problems of
collateral security and third party guarantee faced by the SSI/tiny units in accessing credit facilities of the banking
system. The Government of India (GoI) and SIDBI contribute to the Corpus Fund of the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust
for Small Industries (CGTSI), operating the Credit Guarantee Scheme, in the ratio of 4:1. In order to increase the
comfort level of the Member Banks/Lending Institutions (MLIs) and encourage them to extend more collateral-free
credit facilities to the SSIs/SSSBEs under the Credit Guarantee Scheme, it is necessary to build the Corpus Fund of the
Trust. Taking into account the progress under the Scheme, the initial corpus of the Trust of Rs. 125 crore has been
gradually enhanced with contribution by the GoI and SIDBI. As at the end of September, 2004, the corpus fund under
the Scheme was Rs. 767.44 crore, with contribution of Rs. 613.95 crore from the GoI (including Rs. 65 crore released
from the budget provision for the Scheme during FY 2004-05) and Rs. 153.49 crore from SIDBI. During FY 2004-05, a
provision of Rs. 196.29 crore was made in the Budget Estimates, which is proposed to be enhanced at the Revised
Estimate stage. The proposed enhancement of the Corpus Fund is intended to achieve higher coverage of SSI/tiny units
under the Scheme.
3.3.3The scope of the Credit Guarantee Scheme has been widened. Effective from 1
st September, 2003, credit facilities
upto Rs. 25 lakh, sanctioned without collateral security and/or third party guarantee by the MLIs to the new and existing
Small Scale Service and Business (Industry Related) Enterprises (SSSBEs) have also been made eligible for coverage
under the Scheme. On account of the continuous efforts made by CGTSI to create greater awareness about the Credit
Guarantee Scheme, there has been a distinct improvement in the awareness levels among the MLIs and the SSI
entrepreneurs, which is reflected in the increased coverage by MLIs under the Scheme. As on 30
th September, 2004,
18,720 proposals involving credit of Rs. 333.87 crore have been approved under Credit Guarantee Scheme. So far, 50
banks/lending institutions (27 Public Sector Banks, 12 Private Sector Banks, 8 Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) and 3
Institutions, viz., NSIC, NEDFI and SIDBI) have registered as MLIs of CGTSI. CGTSI has been making efforts to enlist
the remaining private sector banks, foreign banks, as also eligible RRBs as MLIs to participate in the Credit Guarantee
Scheme.
3.3.4Lending to Small Scale Industries is included under priority sector lending obligations by banks under the target of
40 per cent of Net Bank Credit laid down in this regard. The RBI guidelines on flow of credit to the SSI sector are
issued to all Scheduled Commercial Banks (which include public, private and foreign banks). For foreign banks within
the overall target of 32% of priority sector lending to be achieved, the advances to the SSI sector should not be less than
10% of the Net Bank Credit. Foreign banks failing to achieve lending target to priority sector or sub-target (within the
priority sector) are required to deposit the shortfall amount with SIDBI. SIDBI utilizes these deposits for extending
refinance to banks/ FIs, which have extended finance to the SSI sector.
3.3.5Banks have also been advised to open at least one Specialized SSI branch in each District. Funther, banks have
been permitted to categories their general banking branches having 60% or more of their advances to the SSI sector as
Specialized SSI branches, in order to provide better service to this sector as a whole. As on 3lst March, 2004, the public
sector banks have 497 Specialized SSI branches all over the country.
Further Recommendation
3.3.6 The Committee is of the considered view that the enhancement of the corpus for Credit Guarantee Fund Trust
Scheme for Small Industries (CGTSI) would lead to larger coverage of collateral free and without third party guarantee

162nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/162ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
credit to the SSI units. Although, the Committee knows that the corpus of the trust originally to the tune of Rs. 125 crore
has gradually been enhanced to Rs. 767.44 crore in September, 2004 but the quantum of corpus is not adequate yet,
therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that the Government should suitable enhance the corpus fund to increase
the comfort level of the Member Banks/Lending Institutions (MLIs) and encourage them to extend more collateral-free
credit facilities to the SSIs/SSSBEs under the Credit Guarantee Scheme. The Committee desires that CGTSI should
continue to make efforts to encourage private sector banks, foreign banks and regional rural banks as members lending
institutes to participate in the Credit Guarantee Scheme.
Recommendation
3.4    Delay in Implementation of Nayak Committee recommendations
3.4.1The Committee was informed of the delay in implementation of Nayak Committee recommendations especially
with regard to the working capital as 20% of the projected turnover and strengthening of State Level Inter-Institutional
Committees (SLIICs) on the lines of the erstwhile BIFR for SSI units. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Government should come forward to help the SSI sector in acquiring working capital at the rate of 20% of their projects
turnover. As regards setting up of the SLIICs, the Committee is of the view that the Government should speed up the
action on the recommendation so as to revive the sick and sinking SSI units in the country.                                              
(Para 57)
Action Taken
3.4.2Based on Nayak Committee recommendations, banks have been advised by the RBI to compute the working
capital requirement of SSI units, on the basis of the simplified method of minimum 20% of the projected annual
turnover of the borrowing unit for limits up to Rs.5 crore. Instructions in this regard have been reiterated from time to
time.
3.4.3To address the issue of sickness of SSI units and their rehabilitation, State Level Inter-Institutional Committee
(SLIIC) has been set up in each State under the chairmanship of the Secretary, Industries Department of the State
concerned. The SLIIC deals with the problems of co-ordination in rehabilitation of sick SSI units. The meetings are
generally held quarterly. A Sub-Committee of SLIIC has also been set up in every State to discuss rehabilitation of
individual units in the presence of the borrower and the bank concerned.
Further Recommendation
3.4.4 The Committee reiterates the implementation of Nayak Committee’s recommendation in competition of working
capital requirement of SSI units on the basis of the simplified method of minimum of 20 % of projected annual turn over
of the borrowing units. The Committee desires that State Level Inter Institutional Committee (SLIIC) should improve
upon its functional aspects and come out with sustainable strategy for re-habilitation of sick SSI units.
Recommendation
3.5    Insistence of collateral securities by various banks
3.5.1The Committee takes a serious view on the issue of insistence of collateral securities by various banks and also to
the non-displaying of the details in their branches that the collateral free loans are available to the SSI units. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should direct all the banks not to insist for collateral securities
and to display the details of availability of collateral free loans.                                                                       (Para 59)
Action Taken
3.5.2To improve the flow of credit to the SSI sector, the RBI advised the banks in January, 2002 to dispense with the
collateral security requirement for loans upto Rs. 5 lakh to all SSI units. Further, in April, 2002 the RBI advised the
banks that they may, on the basis of good track record and financial position of the units, increase the limit of loan, for
dispensing with the collateral security requirement, from the existing Rs. 5 lakh to Rs. 15 lakh (enhanced to Rs.25 lakh
as per announcement made in the Mid-Term Review of the Monetary and Credit Policy 2003-04). For loans covered
under the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Small Industries, collateral securities are not required upto the borrowing
limit of Rs.25 lakh. The RBI has informed that on receipt of specific complaints against any bank, the matter is
investigated and necessary remedial action initiated accordingly.
3.5.3The RBI has advised the banks to initiate necessary steps to give adequate publicity to their schemes/facilities, like
availability of collateral-free /composite loan and schemes under TUFs/NEFlKVIC/CGTSI, etc. As informed by the
RBI, almost all the public sector banks have initiated steps to implement these instructions. Further, to increase

162nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/162ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
awareness of the schemes/facilities to the SSI sector, the State Bank of India came out with a “Charter for SSI” which
was advertised in all leading newspapers. Indian Banks Association (IBA) has issued a circular to all member banks to
come out with similar charter for SSI sector. All 27 public sector banks have issued Charter for SSI . CGTSI has also
been taking necessary steps to publicize the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Small Industries.
Further Recommendation
3.5.4The Committee desires to communicate the resentment and anguish of SSI Associations that despite the repeated
guidelines of Reserve Bank of India to the Public Sector Banks for lending collateral free and without third party
guarantee a loan up to a limit of Rs. 25 lakh, the Public Sector Banks do not abide by the guidelines of Reserve Bank of
India. The general experience is that banks insist on collateral securities and mortgages for lending credit even for lower
amount of money. It is further stated that banks are not providing SSI friendly working atmosphere as the bankers point
out larger incidence of sickness in the SSI sector. In the meeting of Sub-Committee-II for the Ministry of Small Scale
Industries (of Standing Committee on Industry) held on 11
th April, 2005, the SSI Associations raised issues even against
SIDBI which is not providing desirable services to the SSI units. The Committee therefore, recommends that bankers
have to change their mind set and assist the SSI units in extending credit as per their requirement as SSI sector has the
potential for employment generation and consolidation of national economy.
CHAPTER - IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
MINISTRY OF AGRO AND RURAL INDUSTRIES HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
Recommendation
4.0    Limit of 120 days for payment to SSI units be brought down to 30 days
4.1    The Committee takes note of the demand of SSI Associations that the limit of 120 days for payment to SSI units
be brought down to 30 days and recommends that the Government should speed up the necessary action to complete the
mandatory requirement to amend the relevant Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Associations Industrial
Undertakings Act, 1998.                                                                                                                               (Para 58)
Action Taken
4.1.1Amendment to the Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act, 1993
to bring down the existing time limit of 120 days is under active consideration of the Ministry of SSI.
Recommendation
4.2    Demand for re-defining of Factories Act, 1948
4.2.1The Committee was apprised by the SSI Associations and Ministry of SSI on the demand for re-defining of
Factories Act, 1948 and SSIs in terms of employment. The Committee understands that the National Commission of
Labour also recommended for enactment of the Bills on the Small Enterprises Employment which is under the
consideration of the Ministry of Labour. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the enactment of the Act should be
expedited.   (Para 60)
Action Taken
4.2.2The recommendations of Second National Commission on Labour in paragraphs 6.28 and 6.106 pertained to
enactment of a separate law, namely, the “Small Enterprises (Employment Relations) Act”. The Ministry of Labour and
Employment has informed that the matter has been examined. In view of the facts that (i) the Ministry of SSI is
contemplating to bring the “Small Enterprises Development Bill” which, inter alia, deals with labour matters, and (ii)
the Ministry of Labour and Employment is also proposing amendment to the “Labour Laws (Exemption from
Furnishing Returns and Maintaining Registers by Certain Establishments) Act, 1988” by expanding its scope and
coverage, there is no need to have a separate Small Enterprises (Employment Relations) Act.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE ---- AT A GLANCE
FISCAL/FINANCIAL INCENTIVES FOR NEW TECHNOLOGIES/ MODERNIZATION
         The Committee is of the considered view that with the opening up of national economy, there is the need for

162nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/162ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
consolidation of domestic SSI sector to enable the SSI units to face the stiff competition with the global SSI products. In
this regard, reduction in the cost of production through introduction of latest technology and knowledge networking
through linkages of research institute with the SSI sector becomes all the more necessary. The Committee welcomes the
setting up of Technology Resource Centres (TRCs) and hopes that its promotional role would prove significant for
integration of the SSI sector with the global market. The Committee however be informed of the impact of these
incentives in SSI sector and the monitoring mechanism for
implementation.                                                                                             (3.1.3)
IMPACT OF GLOBALIZATION AND LIBERALIZATION ON SMALL SCALE SECTOR AND ROLE OF
BANKS
Further Recommendation
         Although SIDBI had set up the Technology Bureau for Small Enterprises (TBSE) in 1995 to help SMEs tap
opportunities at the global level for acquisition of technology and establish business collaborations, however, nothing
substantial has come out in regard to fulfillment of technology and collaboration related needs of the sector. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that SIDBI should make action plan for popularization of the function aspects of
Technology Bureau for Small Enterprises (TBSE). Besides there is the need for further popularization of Credit Linked
Capital Subsidy Scheme and development mechanism for appropriate addressing the technological requirement for SSI
sector.            (3.2.7)
CORPUS FOR CREDIT GUARANTEE FUND TRUST SCHEME FOR SMALL INDUSTRIES (CGTSI)
         The Committee is of the considered view that the enhancement of the corpus for Credit Guarantee Fund Trust
Scheme for Small Industries (CGTSI) would lead to larger coverage of collateral free and without third party guarantee
credit to the SSI units. Although, the Committee knows that the corpus of the trust originally to the tune of Rs. 125 crore
has gradually been enhanced to Rs. 767.44 crore in September, 2004 but the quantum of corpus is not adequate yet,
therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that the Government should suitable enhance the corpus fund to increase
the comfort level of the Member Banks/ Lending Institutions (MLIs) and encourage them to extend more collateral-free
credit facilities to the SSIs/SSSBEs under the Credit Guarantee Scheme. The Committee desires that CGTSI should
continue to make efforts to encourage private sector banks, foreign banks and regional rural banks as members lending
institutes to participate in the Credit Guarantee
Scheme.                                                                                                                      (3.3.6)
DELAY IN IMPLEMENTATION OF NAYAK COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS
         The Committee reiterates the implementation of Nayak Committee’s recommendation in competition of working
capital requirement of SSI units on the basis of the simplified method of minimum of 20 % of projected annual turn over
of the borrowing units. The Committee desires that State Level Inter Institutional Committee (SLIIC) should improve
upon its functional aspects and come out with sustainable strategy for re-habilitation of sick SSI units.                   (3.4.4)
INSISTENCE OF COLLATERAL SECURITIES BY VARIOUS BANKS
Further Recommendation
         The Committee desires to communicate the resentment and anguish of SSI Associations that despite the repeated
guidelines of Reserve Bank of India to the Public Sector Banks for lending collateral free and without third party
guarantee . loan up to a limit of Rs. 25 lakh, the Public Sector Banks do not abide by the guidelines of Reserve Bank of
India. The general experience is that banks insist on collateral securities and mortgages for lending credit even for lower
amount of money. It is further stated that banks are not providing SSI friendly working atmosphere as the bankers point
out larger incidence of sickness in the SSI sector. In the meeting of Sub-Committee-II for the Ministry of Small Scale
Industries (of Standing Committee on Industry) held on 11
th April, 2005, the SSI Associations raised issues even against
SIDBI which is not providing desirable services to the SSI units. The Committee, therefore, recommends that bankers
have to change their mind set and assist the SSI units in extending credit as per their requirement as SSI sector has the
potential for employment generation and consolidation of national
economy.                                                                                   (3.5.4)
MINUTES
XIV

162nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/162ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
FOURTEENTH  MEETING
         The Committee met at 5.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 3 rd May, 2005 in Committee Room 'E', Basement, PHA, New
Delhi.
         PRESENT
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia   —   Chairman
         RAJYA  SABHA
   2.   Prof M.M. Agarwal
   3.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
   4.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   5.   Dr. Vijay Mallya
   6.   Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
         LOK  SABHA
   7.   Shri Guharam Ajgalle
   8.   Shri Kailash Baitha
   9.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
10.   Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
11.   Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
12.   Shri Rajnarayan
13.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee.
3.      The Committee then took up the following Reports for its consideration:-
(i)    161
st Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 132 nd
Report on MoU Performance in respect of Select Public Sector Undertakings.
(ii)    162nd Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 146 th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Maharashtra.
(iii)   163rd Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 147 th
Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Region of Bulandshahr.
(iv)   164th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 150 th
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises).
(v)   165th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 151 st
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises).
(vi)   166
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 152nd
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries.
(vii)  167th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 153 rd
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
(viii)168th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).

162nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/162ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:28]
(ix)   169 th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
(x)   170th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries.
(xi)   171st Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
4.      The Committee decided to present these reports in the current session. After a brief discussion the Report were
adopted.
5.      The Committee authorized Prof. M.M. Agarwal and in his absence Dr. K. Malaisamy to present the Reports to the
Rajya Sabha. Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel and in his absence Shri Rajnarayan to lay the copies of the Reports in the
Lok Sabha.
4.      The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 P.M.