 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2015/Pausha, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY NINTH REPORT 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN ON THE 266 th  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16) 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
 (DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES) 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th December, 2015) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7 th  December, 2015)  
 
 REPORT NO.  
269  

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2015/
 Pausha, 1937 (Saka)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY NINTH REPORT 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN ON THE 266 th  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16) 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
 (DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES) 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th  December, 2015) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th  December, 2015 ) 

C O N T E N T S 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………………………..      (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………        (ii) 
 
3. REPORT …………………………………………………………………………………..        1 
 
(i)  CHAPTER – I 
  Recommendations/observations, which have been acc epted by the 
Ministry………………………………………………………………………………2 - 3
 
 
(ii)  CHAPTER–II 
   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's 
replies………………………………………………………….. …………………….4
 - 5 
 
(iii)  CHAPTER–III 
     Recommendations/Observations in respect of whi ch the Committee has not                        
accepted the replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its                
replies…………………………………………………… …………………………6- 11 
 
(iv)  CHAPTER – IV 
   Recommendations/observations in respect of which  final replies of the Ministry 
have not been 
received………………………………………………………………….................12-14 
 
 
4. *Minutes………………………………………………………………………………………….      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
* to be appended at printing stage. 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Date of Constitution 1st  September, 2015) 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
1. Shri  K.C. Tyagi  _       Chairman  
2. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
3. Shri Narendra Budania  
4. Shri Vivek Gupta  
5. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas  
6. Shri T. K. Rangarajan 
7. Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
8. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
9.   Shri Bhupender Yadav  
10.  Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11. Shri Deepak  (Dev) Adhikari  
12. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
13. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary 
14. Shri S. P. Muddahanume Gowda    
15. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque 
16. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
17. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena 
18. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
19. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
20. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
21. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao 
22. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
23. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy 
24. Shri Raj Kumar Saini 
25. Shri B. Senguttuvan  
26. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
27. Shri Y. V. Subbareddy 
28. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
29. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
30. Smt. Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen) 
31. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
 
       
SECRETARIAT  
Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
Shri Jayanta Kumar Mallick, Joint Director  
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Deputy Director 
(i) 
 
 

 INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamen tary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, to hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Sixty-ninth Report on Action Taken Notes furnis hed Department of Public 
Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Publi c Enterprises) on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hu ndred and Sixty-sixth Report on 
the Demands For Grants (2015-16) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises. 
 
2.  I, thank the Department of Public Enterprises ( Ministry of Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises) for furnishing the Action Taken  Notes on the recommendations 
contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Sixty-sixth Report. 
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on the  30 th  November, 2015                                
considered and adopted the report.  
 
 
 
 
 
K.C Tyagi        
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
New Delhi 
November, 2015  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises  (Department of Public Enterprises) 
on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s  Two hundred and Sixty- Sixth 
Report on the Demands For Grants (2015-16) pertaini ng to Department of Public 
Enterprises. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterp rises) in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter I -  The recommendations/observations which have been  accepted by the 
Ministry. 
 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
 
Chapter -II -  The recommendations/observations which the Commi ttee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic 
and explanations advanced by the Ministry and there fore do not want to pursue them for 
the present. 
 
 
Chapter -III -  The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has 
not accepted replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry should furnish 
logical explanations thereof. 
 
 
Chapter -IV - The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received. 
 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its langua ge in vague terms therefore; the 
Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of 
recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention 
and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 

CHAPTER – I 
 
The Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry 
 
 
Recommendation/observation 
 It has also been observed from the table at para 13  that the Total Net Profit made 
by CPSEs and Foreign Exchange Earnings has been sho wn separately. In this regard, the 
Committee needs clarifications to whether the forei gn exchange earning of CPSEs is not 
taken into account for the purposes of calculating the net profit. 
                Para No.16 
Action Taken Reply 
 The amount in respect of Foreign Exchange Earnings shown in the table of para 
13 is a part of the total revenue generated by the CPSEs. Total expenditure is deducted 
from total revenue to arrive at net profit.  
 
 
Recommendation/observation 
 The Committee notes that only 14 nodal agencies ar e imparting training to VRS 
optees under CRR. The Committee seeks to know wheth er cost of boarding/lodging and 
other subsistence for the duration of training is a lso included in the scheme. The 
Committee is of the opinion that the possibility ma y be explored to impart training near 
the place of the work of the VRS optees. 
       Para No.34 
Action Taken Reply 
 As explained above, due to reduced VRS in CPSEs in  recent years, physical and 
financial targets have been reduced and therefore, number of nodal agencies responsible 
for implementation of CRR scheme has also come down . Under CRR non-residential 
training programmes are conducted and hence, cost o f boarding/lodging is not included. 
Nodal agencies set up Employees Assistance Centres (EACs) where VRS/VSS optees or 
dependents reside. For this purpose, nodal agencies  conduct surveys for identifying VRS 
optees/dependents in the vicinity of the unit(s) of  CPSEs. After identifying sizable VRS 
optees/dependents at a particular location, an EAC is set up for initiating the process of 
counselling, retraining and redeployment. 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that as submitted by DPE, India ’s annual contribution to 
ICPE amounts to, approximately, Rs. 93, 34,500 as p er the prevailing exchange rate. 
Further, the tuition fee for the MBA programme per participant amounting to, 
approximately, Rs. 7,73,950, as per the current exc hange rate, is either paid by the 
individual CPSE, Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT) or the Ministry of Finance 
through National Institute of Financial Management (NIFM). The course fee is designed 
accordingly to the duration of the course faculty, facilities and logistical expenses, etc. 
Para No.41 
 
 
2 
 

Action Taken Reply 
 As far as Govt. of India’s Annual Membership contr ibution to International 
Centre for Promotion of Enterprises (ICPE), Sloveni a is concerned the payment is made 
in US Dollars and the amount is US $ 1,50,000 per a nnum. The equivalent amount in 
Indian Rupee depends on the prevailing exchange rate. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 

CHAPTER–II 
 
The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies 
  
Recommendation/ observation 
 
 The Committee notes that as per the Allocation of B usiness Rules, the function of 
DPE includes inter-alia Coordination of matters of general policy of non-financial nature 
affecting all public sector industrial and commerci al undertakings’. However, as per the 
submission made before the Committee during the ora l evidence relating to the 
examination of Demands for Grants (DFG) (2015-`16),  the functions of DPE includes 
laying some of policy guidelines on autonomy and fi nancial delegation. Similar 
dichotomous position regarding the mandate of DPE o n financial matter is also reflected 
in the outcome Budget of the Ministry of Heavy Indu stries & Public Enterprise. This 
incongruence was pointed out during the oral eviden ce of DPE and a clarification was 
sought. But DPE did not provide the requisite infor mation either at the meeting or in 
their subsequent written replies the queries raised during the meeting. 
Para No.7 
Recommendation/ observation 
 
 In this context, the Committee recommends that the  ambiguity regarding the 
functions of DPE relating to whether the Department  is tasked to frame policies/ 
guidelines relating to financial matters need to be  addressed immediately. Accordingly, 
the action taken in this direction should be intimated to the Committee.  
Para No.8 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 DPE is mandated to frame Policies/ guidelines and co-ordinate general policy of 
non-financial nature relating to CPSEs. However, so me policies/guidelines have also 
been issued by DPE at the behest/advice of Ministry  of Finance applicable to all CPSEs.  
The Department of Public Enterprises does not formu late policies of financial nature on 
its own. 
  
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that CRR, launched in 2001, ha s seen considerable 
reduction in the physical target during the first t hree years of the 12 
th  Five Year Plan. 
Consequently, during these three years BE was consi stently reduced at RE and the AE 
during the first two years of the Plan period has b een lesser than the RE. The Committee 
infers from the above that the scheme is gradually witnessing an evident waning of the 
effectiveness of original objectives set for it. Ac cordingly, the Committee recommends 
that a repositioning of the scheme by the restructu ring of the core objectives of the 
scheme is due. At the same time, the Committee is o f the opinion that the role of the 
scheme, as a social security tool, is commendable a nd should be continued to be offered 
to the rationalized employees of CPSEs. While obser ving so, the Committee has in mind 
the employees of five CPSEs of DHI which have been decided to be wound up. 
Para No.33 
4 

Action Taken Reply 
 
 A CRR Scheme was introduced by DPE in 2001-02 for CPSEs. During 2001-02 
to 2006-07 2.21 lakh people were released under VRS  while 1.27 lakh VRS optees were 
trained under CRR. VRS in CPSEs has declined since 2007-08. During 2007-08 to 2013-
14, 22,845 people have been released under VRS whil e 58,936 were trained under CRR 
which includes backlog of previous years. Due to no n-availability of sizable VRS optees, 
physical and financial targets have been on lower s ide in recent years.  As per record the 
5 CPSEs being wound up by DHI has only 2944 regular  staff who may opt for VRS 
and/or training and it may be accommodated in the annual provision 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 

CHAPTER–III 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not                        
accepted the replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its                
replies 
Recommendation/ observation 
 
 The Committee observes that during 2013-14, the No n Plan allocation exceeded 
only at the RE stage. Whereas in 2014-15 and 2015-1 6, the Non Plan allocation can be 
seen to exceed Plan allocation at the BE stage, its elf. During 2014-15, the Plan figures at 
BE which were already less than Non Plan figures, w ere drastically slashed at RE. The 
Committee views this trend of Plan allocation being  kept lower than Non Plan allocation 
as highly undesirable. Especially when those Non Pl an expenses of DPE almost entirely 
consist of the expenses to run the Department. Furt her, it is also not encouraging to find 
that the Plan allocations of DPE have remained stag nant over the years. From this, the 
Committee infers that DPE has not been able to come  up with enough new Plan schemes, 
which would have had a facilitating impact in the realm of CPSEs in India. 
Para No.12 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 During 2014-15, total plan allocation of Rs. 7.50 crore was sought at RE stage 
against BE of Rs.9.00 crore. Deficit of Rs. 1.50 cr ore at RE stage is attributed mainly to 
lesser demand of plan fund under the Counselling Re training and Redeployment Scheme 
in which short duration training is imparted to VRS /VSS optees/dependents of VRS/VSS 
optees for their redeployment (Self employment/wage  employment). For past few years, 
VRS/VSS in CPSEs has declined resulting in reduced physical and financial targets. 
However, it may be mentioned that during 2014-15, D PE had sought plan funds of Rs. 
7.50 crore at RE stage against which plan fund of R s. 5.00 crore was approved by 
Ministry of Finance. Thus, drastic cut was made by Ministry of Finance at RE stage 
during 2014-15. 
  
Further Recommendation/ observation  
 
 In their reply, the Department has only mentioned a bout the curtailment of 
Plan funds by the Ministry of Finance during 2014-1 5. It has not touched upon the 
observations of the Committee that the Department h as not been able to come up 
with enough new Plan Schemes which would have playe d a facilitative role in the 
realm of CPSEs in India. The Committee wonders as t o how does Ministry of 
Finance consider reducing the Planned allocations a nd leave Non-Plan untouched.  
It is a commentary over Departments performance in respect of its Planned scheme 
or its demand has been inflated  The Committee is o f the considered opinion that 
this aspect is one of the reasons why Department of  Public Enterprises witnesses a 
trend of steady decrease in Plan Fund allocations. Accordingly, the Committee 
wants a specific reply in this regard.   
 
 
6 
 
 

Recommendation/ observation 
 
 The effective reduction of number of employees was 50,213. In this regard the 
Committee wants to know how the total number of emp loyees has come down by more 
than 50,000 in just a year. Also, whether new recru itments were made to replace these 
employees or were these employee only VRS optees or  retrenched employees as part of 
restructuring/ revival of CPSEs. The Committee may be informed if any Policy has been 
framed regarding grade-wise rationalization of empl oyees. Also provide grade-wise 
details of above 50,000 rationalized employees. The  Committee also wants to be 
appraised about how many of these employees have ma de use of the Counselling, 
Retraining & Redeployment (CRR) scheme of DPE and w hat was the percentage of 
employability.  
 Para No.15 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 Out of 290 CPSEs as on 31.3.2014, 141 CPSEs has re ported a reduction in the 
number of employees, 83 CPSEs has shown no change i n number of employees and in 
case of remaining 66 CPSEs the number of employees has increased. In addition there is 
reduction of 2210 employees in 3 CPSEs after their restructuring. 
 
 The reasons for variation in increase/ decrease in  number of employees vary from 
CPSE to CPSE. In general the number of employees in  loss making CPSEs is not 
expected to increase and in profit making CPSEs the re is scope for increase in 
employment directly or indirectly when work is outsourced. 
 
 During 2013-14, 1886 employees have opted for VRS in CPSEs and 3340 VRS 
optees/dependents were trained during 2013-14 under  the CRR scheme. Out of 3340 
VRS optees, 1624 (48%) VRS optees/dependents got re deployed which is market driven. 
As per VRS policy, no recruitments can be made against vacancies arising due to VRS.  
  
Further Recommendation/ observation  
 
 The Committee in their recommendation had pointed o ut a reduction of 
50,000 CPSE employees between 2012-13 & 2013-14 and wanted to know details 
related to those employees.  However, the reply of the Department does not mention 
anything about this large reduction in the number o f employees. The reply only 
mentions details of the VRS optees for the  year 2013-14 and other outcomes of the 
Scheme of Counselling, Retraining & Redeployment (C RR) of separated employees 
of CPSEs  for the year. Accordingly, the Committee wants to k now the total reduction of 
the number of employees of CPSE  between 2012-13 & 2013-14 , their designation and the 
specific reasons for them leaving the companies. 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 
 The Committee is given to understand that the pecu liarities of the activities under 
the scheme can be concluded only at the end of a fi nancial year and as such the 
expenditure pattern cannot be made to conform to th e expenditure guidelines prescribed 
by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee notes that DPE has sought exemption from 
7 

 Ministry of Finance to iron out this problem. The Committee observes that utilisation of 
funds would improve once this streamlining of expen diture as per the nature of activities 
undertaken has been carried out. However, the Committee is not convinced with the stand 
of DPE that it has first three years of the 12 th  Five Year Plan solely due to the above 
mentioned discrepancy. Accordingly, it is recommend ed that along with securing the 
requisite exemption from the Ministry of Finance for the expenditure under the scheme, it 
is also imperative that the Department takes urgent  measures to improve the utilisation of 
the allocated money. In this context, the Committee  expects that Rs.3.58 crore provided 
for 2015-16 will be efficiently utilised, and the D epartment to report to the Committee, 
the specific steps taken in this direction. 
Para No.23 
 
 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 Most of the activities under RDC are of such a nat ure that they could not be 
restricted/confined only upto 3 
rd  quarter and bulk of committed / likely to be incur red 
expenditure needed to be met in last quarter of the financial year 2014-15. In view of this, 
issue was taken up with Department of Expenditure w ith regard to grant of relaxation 
from operation of 33% ceiling on expenditure in las t quarter and 15% ceiling of 
expenditure during the last month of the financial year 2014-15.  
 
 The activities planned under RDC during 2015-16 in clude ‘Studies  on 
Benchmarking’, payment of Task Force Members sittin g fees and travel expenses, hiring 
of professionals for aggregation and analysis of da ta for fixing MoU Targets, conducting 
workshops and seminars on generic issues of CPSEs, printing of Public Enterprises 
Survey etc. Besides, committed expenditure on vario us initiatives incurred during 2014-
15 have been paid against allocated funds of Rs.3.5 8 crore during 2015-16. It is expected 
that the earmarked funds under RDC would be fully u tilized during the current financial 
year. 
  
Further Recommendation/ observation  
 
 While replying, the Department has only mentioned t hat the matter 
regarding exemption to the Research, Development & Consultancies (RDC) on 
Generic issues of Public Sector Enterprises Scheme due to the peculiarities of its 
components has been taken up with the Ministry of F inance.  It is silent about the 
response of the Ministry of Finance in this regard.  Further, the Committee also 
recommended that along with securing the exemption for RDC Scheme from 
Ministry of Finance, measures should also be taken to improve the utilization of 
funds allocated to the scheme. The reply fails to p rovide answers to these aspects 
raised by the Committee.  Accordingly, the Committe e wants to be apprised of the 
outcome of the request for exemption made to the Mi nistry of Finance and the 
specific measures taken by the Department of Public  Enterprises to improve the 
utilization of funds allocated to the RDC Scheme.  
 
 
 
8 

Recommendation/observation 
 
 The Committee observes that as stated by DPE, the annual contribution to ICPE is  
Rs. 0.72 crore. However, as per the BE for the last  three years from 2012-13 to 2014-15 
and for the current year, the amount allocated for ICPE was Rs. 0.87 crore. As such the 
Committee wants clarification as to why Rs. 0.87 cr ore is allocated year after year, when 
the annual contribution is Rs 0.72 crore. Further, the Committee also observes that the 
commitment of the Government to continue the member ship of ICPE and the tangible 
benefits in doing so have not been well defined. Ac cordingly, it is recommended that an 
objective assessment of the benefits accruing to th e country through the Membership of 
ICPE may be undertaken expeditiously and a Status R eport should be furnished to the 
Committee. 
       Para No.42 
Action Taken Reply 
 The provision of Rs. 0.87 crore in BE for the year s 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-
15 and for the current year consists of Govt. of In dia’s annual membership contribution 
to ICPE of Rs. 0.72 crore and for Rs. 0.15 crore to wards payment for awards to public 
sector enterprises for ‘Excellence’ in performance according to Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU).  
 DPE as founder member of ICPE has been taking inte rest in the activities and 
finalization of its work programme and also, attend ing its Council & Assembly Sessions 
regularly. Indian public sector enterprises have be en benefited by attending short-term 
and long-term programmes at ICPE. One Year MBA Prog ramme at ICPE for the 
executives from Indian Public Sector Enterprises, e xecutives of public enterprises in 
other member States, officers from Govt. Department s in India is organized by ICPE in 
association with Faculty of Economics, University o f Ljubljana. These programmes 
provide participants an opportunity to interact wit h international faculty and get exposure 
to the latest techniques in management taking place  in developed countries, visits to 
Industrial establishments in European countries and  industries in Slovenia. Participants 
apply such tools & techniques and upgraded skills a nd knowledge acquired in their 
domestic situation in the PSEs. 
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 The reply from the Department does not mention any tangible benefits with 
regard to the One Year MBA Programme organized by I CPE in association with 
Faculty of Economics, University of Ljubljana.   Also, it does not mention whether 
any assessment has been made by the Department abou t similar studies being 
available in India and other countries and its feasibility.    
 
 Further, the Committee fails to understand the log ic behind the award of 
‘Excellence’ in performance under Memorandum of Und erstanding (MoU) being 
given out from the BE allocation of ICPE.    
 
 
 
 
9 

Recommendation/observation 
 Further, the Committee would also like to be appri sed of the precise details of the 
courses being attended by executives of India CPSEs  in ICPE and a justification of the 
amount being spent by the relevant agency for the t raining, specifying whether such 
training can be provided at a lesser cost domestica lly or in some other international 
institution. 
       Para No.43 
Action Taken Reply 
 ICPE finalizes its work programme on annual basis f or activities/ programmes to 
be organized for participants from Member States in cluding India in various fields with 
the approval of the ICPE Council. Administrative St aff College of India (ASCI), 
Hyderabad organized a course on International Certi fication in Business management 
with ICPE and the Faculty of Economics, University of Ljubljana exclusively for women 
executives from Indian CPSEs. Two months classroom sessions along with industrial 
visits to key industrial establishments in Slovenia were organized at Ljubljana, keeping in 
view the course curriculum and the exposure required for these women executives.  
 MBA Programme at ICPE is an International resident ial programme and is 
organized for the full term of one year at ICPE, Lj ubljana, Slovenia. This programme is 
being offered year after year in association with U niversity of Ljubljana, a well reputed 
University in Europe. As far as training in Indian institutions is concerned, CPSEs decide 
to sponsor their executives to these institutions a ccording to their policy, needs, 
convenience, expenditure involved and requirements of their executives. Further, the cost 
of the programme depends on the type of institution , duration of the course, faculty 
(National/ International), logistical expenses and the travel cost involved. Since the 
decision to sponsor executives for training courses  is taken by the management of 
respective CPSEs, the cost is also considered by th e respective CPSEs keeping in view 
their importance and utility of the course for their executives. 
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 The Departments reply does not give specific infor mations sought in 
Committee’s observation. The general reply convince s the Committee that the 
expenditure towards ICPE’s membership is entirely a voidable in view of equivalent 
alternatives available domestically.  This expenditure must be saved in view of fiscal 
constrains faced by the economy.  
 
Recommendation/observation 
 Overall the Committee is apprehensive of the impact  of such expensive course at 
ICPE. The Committee seeks to know if it is Departme nt’s considered position that such 
specialized courses are not available in the countr y at a much reasonable cost. The 
Committee also notes that while States PSU executives are being trained at IIM and other 
national institutions, the executives of CPSEs are being sent to much costlier ICPE. The 
Committee may be informed of such distinctions in t raining of executives of CPSEs and 
States PSEs is at all desirable. The Committee is o f the firm view that Department must 
discontinue its subscriptions of ICPE unless there is a very pressing necessity. 
       Para No.44 
10 

Action Taken Reply 
 
 The Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) desi gn their own human resource 
development programmes to upgrade skills and knowle dge of middle and senior level 
executives by giving them training in various field s of management development through 
their own management institutes or outsourcing the services of premier management 
training institutions in India. It is a fact that v arious training courses are available in 
Indian institutions which are outsourced by the man agement of CPSEs for upgradation of 
skills and enhancement of knowledge of their execut ives. Selection of courses and the 
institutions in Central PSEs or the States PSEs is done by the management of PSEs as per 
their requirements. Facilities available with IIMs or other Indian institutions for various 
courses are being utilized by States PSEs as well a s Central PSEs. Further, curriculum of 
courses also differs from institution to institutio n, whether Indian or International.  It is 
reiterated again that India is a founder member of ICPE and would like to continue its 
membership of ICPE. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 The Committee wants to know if CPSEs can design th eir own human 
resource development programmes then why the Govt. Budget should get to bear 
the cost of subscription.  This may be used for domestic institutions instead of ICPE.   
The Committee believes that being founder member is  no ground for continuing the 
subscription.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 

CHAPTER – IV 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
have not been  received 
 
Recommendation/observation 
 
 The Committee notes that during the first year of its operationalisation in 2012-
13, the scheme saw almost 'Nil' utilization. During  the next year, the utilization was 
slightly above 50% and in 2014-15, the Committee is happy to note the entire RE amount 
has been fully utilized. The Committee, therefore, recommends that DPE should continue 
their good performance under the scheme and also en sure further augmentation of the 
activities under it. The Committee is of the view t hat capacity building of the existing 
employees of the PSEs under the scheme is an import ant parameter contributing towards 
the over all performance of a company and needs to be given continued impetus through 
the Scheme. An effective feed-back mechanism should  be put in place for continuous 
evolution based on beneficiary needs. 
       Para No.27 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 Capacity building of the existing employees is a c rucial ingredient to improve the 
overall performance of a company. Feedback is colle cted from the participants which is 
taken into account while designing the training courses.  
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed of the feed-back mechanism put in place by 
the Department and the changes brought in on the sc heme of Skill 
Development/Training programmes of Executives of St ate Level Public Sector 
Enterprises (SLPEs) on the basis of the feedback collected from the participants  
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 
 In this regard, the Committee notes with concern t hat the persistent problem of 
vacant post of Non-official Directors on the Boards  of CPSEs continues to exist despite 
the assurance form DPE that laxity in the regard wi ll be suitably reflected in the MoU of 
the CPSEs. Accordingly, the Committee reiterates it s view that DPE, being the nodal 
Department in charge of all CPSEs in India should h ave more say in enforcing the filling 
up these vacancies, through its policy directives, including a penal provision during the 
assessment of MoU performance of a CPSE. 
 
 DPE should take up this matter at the appropriate forum. 
Para No.38 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 The Department of Public Enterprises takes note of  the concerns of the 
Committee regarding the vacant positions of non-off icial Directors on the Boards of 
Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs). As per extant guidelines, the proposals for  
12 

appointment of non-official Directors on the Boards  of CPSEs emanate from the 
concerned administrative Ministry. It may also be p ointed out that concerned 
administrative Ministries are responsible for appoi ntment of Directors on the Boards of 
CPSEs under their respective administrative jurisdiction. 
 
 Independent directors are mandated for constitutio n of various Committees in 
CPSEs such as Audit Committee and Remuneration Comm ittee which is also one of the 
sub-parameter of Corporate Governance. Non-formatio n of such Committees, due to 
vacancy of non-official Directors leads to lower sc ore and rating in corporate governance 
compliance and consequently attracts negative marki ng at the time of computation of 
MOU composite score of CPSEs as per para 3.22 of MO U guidelines 2015-16 issued 
vide DPE O.M. No.M-05/0012/2014-DPE (MoU) dated 7 
th  November, 2014, which 
states that non-compliance of Corporate Governance will lead to negative marking and 
MoU score can be affected up to one mark. 
 
The concern of DRPSC regarding vacant positions of non-official Directors on 
the Boards of CPSEs has been communicated to all ad ministrative 
Ministries/Departments requesting them once again t o furnish the proposals for filling up 
vacant positions of non-official Directors on the B oards of CPSEs under their respective 
administrative jurisdiction. 
            
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 The Committee appreciates that DPE has been taking up the issue of vacant 
post of non-official Directors on the Boards of CPS Es with the respective 
administrative Ministries, who are responsible for filling up theses vacancies. 
Further, DPE should also consider adopting measures  like placing the issue before 
the Cabinet for a binding decision that will produc e a resolution to this long existing 
chink in the operation of CPSEs in India. The Commi ttee may be apprised of the 
CPSEs who have attracted negative marking in corporate governance under MoU. 
 
  
Recommendation/ observation 
 
 The Committee understands that the BIFR and BRPSE,  two pivotal organizations 
engaged in the process of revival / restructuring o f CPSEs in India are reported to be 
replaced in the near future. The Committee views th ese proposed changes as a potential 
watershed in the area of revival /restructuring of CPSEs. The Committee recalls that 
during their co-existence till now, owing to certai n overlaps and conflicts in the roles 
essayed by BIFR and BRPSE in approaching the reviva l /restructuring proposals of 
CPSEs, the cases of revival/restructuring suffered avoidable delays. Accordingly, in the 
backdrop of the proposed replacement of BRPSE and BIFR, the Committee would like to 
further reiterate its earlier stand and recommend t hat the every care should be taken to 
avoid conflicts and overlaps in the role assigned t o the new entity of BRPSE and the 
NCLT which has been conceived to replacing BIFR. Fu rther, the new agencies should be 
conceived in such a manner that the revival /restructuring of CPSEs shall be completed in 
a prescribed timeframe without lingering for years . 
Para No.48 
13 

Action Taken Reply 
 
 National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) is set up and administered by the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs. Hence, the observati ons and recommendations of the 
Committee on NCLT have been brought to the notice o f the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs for consideration. 
  
 
Further Recommendation/ observation  
 
 The reply of the Department that the recommendation  of the Committee 
have been brought to the notice of Ministry of Corp orate Affairs can only be taken 
as an interim reply. Effective and prompt restructu ring of CPSEs is an issue of 
critical importance and every step contemplated to achieve this objective should be 
closely pursued and monitored by DPE.  Since it is expected that NCLT will have 
considerable bearing on the revival/ restructuring of CPSEs after it replaces BIFR/ 
BRPSE, the Committee wants DPE to collect the actio n taken in this regard by 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs and submit the same to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
**************** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 