176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY SIXTH REPORT
ON
THE SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
DEVELOPMENT BILL, 2005
 
(MINISTRYOF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON AUGUST----, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON AUGUST----, 2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2005 /SRAVANA, 1926  (SAKA)
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-C O N T E N T S
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                  
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                     
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                           
4.OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS  AND OF THE  COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
5.MINUTES                                                                                                                                                               
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution – 5th August 2004)
 
Shri Santosh Bagrodia        -     Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. M.M. Agarwal    
Shri Surendra Lath       
Shri Suresh Bhardwaj  
Dr. K. Malaisamy        
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan        
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
Dr. Vijay Mallya
Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy        
Smt. Vanga Geetha
LOK SABHA
Shri Guharam Ajgalle
Shri Kailash Baitha                  
Shri Swadesh Chakraborty                  
Shri Subhash  Deshmukh         
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan           -
Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria                      
Shri Sunil Khan                        
Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato         

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
Shri Prakash Paranjpe             
Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel           
Shri Rajnarayan                                   
Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna        
Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana     
Smt. Rubab Sayeda     
Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana
Shri Manvendra Singh              
Shri Ganesh Singh                    
Shri Suraj Singh                       
Shri Chandramani Tripathi        
Shri Girdhari Yadav     
31.Shri Bapu Hari Chaure        
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Shri  A.K. Singh,  Deputy  Secretary
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTRODUCTION
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry having been
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and Seventy Sixth
Report of the Committee on the Small and Medium Enterprises Development Bill, 2005.  
2.The Small and Medium Enterprises Development Bill 2005 was introduced  in  the Lok Sabha on the 12
th May 2005 
and was referred ( Annexure I) to the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry by the Hon’ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 27
th May 2005 under Rule 270 (b) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the
Council of States for  examination and report thereon.
3.The Committee held eight  sittings in all spreading over twenty hours on the Bill. A Press Communique dated the 15
th
June 2005, inviting the views/suggestions of the individuals, organisations, experts, institutions, etc. interested in the
subject matter of the Bill, was issued.   In its meeting held on the 21
st  June 2005 , the Committee heard the presentation
of the Secretary, Ministry of SSI, Government of India on the Bill and held preliminary discussion thereon. The
Committee decided to hear the views of all State governments and major industry associations, on the provisions of the
Bill.
4.       In response to the Press Communique, sixty four written memoranda were received, out of which thirty six
memoranda  were found to be relevant to the subject matter of the Bill. (List at Annexure-II) 
5.       In its sittings held on 30 June, 22, 25, 26,27, 28 July 2005, the Committee heard witnesses on the various
provisions of the Bill. (Annexure-III)
6.     The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill on 29
th July, 2005.
7.     The observations and recommendations of the Committee have been incorporated at appropriate places in the
Report.                                                                       
8.         I would like to acknowledge with thanks the valuable contributions made by the witnesses who deposed before it
and the senior officers of the Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Ministry of Law and Justice which facilitated the
Committee in formulating its views on the various provisions of the Bill.
9.    The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report in its sitting held on  3
rd August, 2005.
 
New Delhi;
August 3, 2005
Santosh Bagrodia
 Chairman,
Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry
            ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Report
1.0       Background

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
1.1       At present the small scale industry is defined by notification under Section 11 B of the Industries (Development
and Regulation) Act, 1951. Section 29 B of the Act provides for the list of items reserved for SSI sector.  There was a
long standing demand from the small scale industries (SSI) sector for a single legislation for the sector, instead of
multiple laws, rules, regulations and administrative directives so far applicable to it and to minimize the visits
ofinspectors enforcing these multiple laws etc.
1.2       The Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI), Hyderabad was entrusted a study by the Government in
March, 2000.  The ASCI submitted its report in March 2002.   The draft Bill suggested by the ASCI was circulated in
April 2002 for wide dissemination of its contents and  was  also placed for consideration of  the Small Scale Industries
Board at its 47th   meeting held on 04
th  July 2002 at New Delhi under the Chairmanship of Minister of State for SSI. 
The feed-back received from the members of the SSI Board was examined and based on these the ASCI submitted a
final draft Bill in February 2003.  This draft Bill was again circulated to the members of the SSI Board on 25
th  June
2003 for their comments. 
1.3       A Cabinet Note on the draft Small Enterprises Development (SED) Bill was circulated among the
Ministries/Departments concerned for their comments twice, first in December 2003 and later in July 2004.  After
detailed examination of the comments of all concerned, the SED Bill, 2004 was submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat on
17
th  November 2004.  At the behest of the Cabinet Secretariat, a meeting of the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) was
held on 23rd  November 2004.  In light of the recommendations of the CoS, the draft Bill and the Cabinet Note was
modified and again circulated among the Ministries/Departments concerned on 07th  December 2004.
1.4       Based on the comments received from different Ministries/Departments,  on this draft (SED) Bill, the matter was
further examined and the Small and Medium Enterprises Development (SMED), Bill 2005 was circulated amongst the 
Ministries/Departments concerned on 14th  March 2005. After taking into account their views to the extent possible, the
SMED Bill, 2005 was submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat on 27th  April 2005 and approved by the Cabinet on 4th  May
2005.  The Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 12th  May 2005.
1.5       The Bill aims at facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of small and
medium enterprises and seeks to-
provide for statutory definitions of “small enterprise” and “medium enterprise”;
provided for the establishment of a National Small and Medium Enterprises Board, a high-level forum consisting of
stakeholders for participative review of and making recommendations on the policies and programmes for the
development of small and medium enterprises;
provide for classification of small and medium enterprises on the basis of investment in plant and machinery, or
equipment and establishment of an Advisory Committee to recommend on the related matter;
empower the Central Government to notify programmes, guidelines or instructions for facilitating the promotion and
development and enhancing the competitiveness of small and medium enterprises;
empower the State Governments to specify, by notification, that provisions of the labour laws specified in Clause9(2)
will not apply to small and medium enterprises employing up to fifty employees with a view to facilitating the
graduation of small enterprises to medium enterprises;
make provisions for ensuring timely and smooth flow of credit to small and medium enterprises to minimize the
incidence of sickness among and enhancing the competitiveness of such enterprises, in accordance with the guidelines
or instructions of the Reserve Bank of India;
empower the Central and State Governments to notify preference policies in respect of procurement of goods and
services, produced and provided by small enterprises, by the Ministries, departments and public sector enterprises;
empowering the Central Government to create a Fund or Funds for facilitating promotion and development and
enhancing the competitiveness of  small enterprises and medium enterprises;
empower to prescribe harmonized, simpler and streamlined procedures for inspection of small and medium enterprises
under the labour laws enumerated in Clause 15, having regard to the need to promote self-regulation or self-certification
by such enterprises;
prescribe for maintenance of records and filing of returns by small and medium enterprises with a view to reduce the
multiplicity of often-overlapping types of returns to be filed;
make further improvements in the Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings
Act, 1993 and making that enactment a part of the proposed legislation and to repeal that enactment.
Chapter-wise  Provisions of the Bill
2.0       The Bill consists of 33 Clauses spreading over seven Chapters. A brief description of the provisions of the Bill,

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
chapter-wise is given in the succeeding paras.
            Chapter 1
2.1      Preliminary
2.1.1    It contains Clauses 1and 2 dealing with Short title and commencement and Definitions.
2.1.2    The Bill explicitly focuses on facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing competitiveness of
small and medium enterprises.
Chapter II
2.2       National Small and Medium Enterprises Board
2.2.1    It contains Clauses 3-6 pertaining to National Small and Medium Enterprises Board, its composition, functions
and related provisions.
2.2.2    As a high-level forum consisting of all sections of stakeholders for participative review of and making
recommendations on the policies and programmes for the development of small and medium enterprises and issues
related thereto, constitution of the National Small and Medium Enterprises Board (in lieu of the currently existing non-
statutory body, known as the SSI Board), its functions and related matters have been provided for.  The size of the
Board has been limited to 30 members with due representation of State Governments, Union Territory (UT)
Administrations, Central Ministries, RBI, SIDBI, NABARD, IBA, associations of small and medium enterprises
(including associations of women entrepreneurs) and eminent persons from the field of economics and industry. 
The Clause 5 suggests functions of the Board aim at making it effective in its advisory and recommendatory role
Chapter III
2.3       Classification of Enterprises, Advisory Committee and Memorandum of Small and Medium Enterprises
Definition of Small Enterprise and Medium Enterprise
2.3.1    In the Clause relating to definitions in the draft Bill, the “small enterprise” (SE) and “medium enterprise”(ME)
have been defined.  Detailed criteria for defining such enterprises have been spelt out in Clause 7 and 8 of this Chapter. 
Different investment limits for the manufacturing and service-providing small and medium enterprises have also been
specified in Clause 7(1) in recognition of the fact that the investments in plant, machinery and equipment for these two
segments of SEs and MEs differ and are generally less for the services segment .
2.3.2    Advisory Committee
2.3.3    The Clauses 7 (2) to 7 (6) of Chapter III provide for constitution and functions of an Advisory Committee by the
Central Government to fine tune and recommend the classification of SME Sector. The factors to be kept in view by the
Advisory Committee in making recommendations on this subject have been enumerated in Clause 7(5). In order to
provide for flexibility in tune with the global and domestic changes in this dynamic sector, it has also been provided in
Clause 7(6) that the Central Government may, from time to time, vary the criterion of investment, consider
criteria/standards in respect of employment or turnover of the enterprises and include in such classification micro or tiny
enterprises or village enterprises, as part of small enterprises so that the interests and specific problems of micro (tiny)
and village/rural enterprises are taken into account.
2.3.4    Memorandum of Small and Medium Enterprises
2.3.5    The Clause 8 provides for the mechanism of signing Memorandum of Small and Medium Enterprises. The
Committee was informed that the  Third All India Census of Small Scale Industries (2001-02) shows that a very large
proportion of SSI units are either unaware of the existing  provisions of registration or unwilling to bear the transaction
cost involved in obtaining registration; as a result, a vast majority of SSI units are currently operating as unregistered
ones.  Gradual relaxation of State control over economic activities in the private sector has further reduced the need for
registration.
 2.3.6   As per the suggestions from SSI associations it has been provided in Clause 8 of this Bill that any person, who
intends to establish a small enterprise, may, at his discretion file a memorandum of small enterprises with the authority
prescribed by the State government. However any person, who intends to establish a medium enterprise, shall
mandatorily file a memorandum of medium enterprises with such an authority as notified by the Central government. 
2.3.7    This Clause also provides that any person who, having established a small enterprise before the commencement
of this Act, had or had not obtained a registration certificate may, at his discretion, file the memorandum. Even now, all
non-SSI units, except for those governed by licensing provisions under the I(D&R) Act, have to file the Industrial
Entrepreneur’s Memorandum (IEM) prescribed under Press Note No. 4 of 1998 dated 15.6.1998. Therefore, this Clause
further provides that any person who, having established a small enterprise before the commencement of this Act, had
or had not filed the IEM, shall, within ninety days from the commencement of this Act, file the memorandum.
Committee was informed that filing of such a memorandum has not been prescribed as a necessary condition in the
SMED Bill for availing of the benefits of promotional schemes of the Government for the sector.

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
Chapter IV
2.4       Measures for Promotion, Development and Enhancement of Competitiveness of Small and Medium Enterprises
2.4.1    The Clause 9(1) is an enabling provision for the Central Government to facilitate the promotion and
development and enhancing competitiveness of small and medium enterprises, particularly of the former, by way of
skill development, marketing assistance, infrastructure and cluster development with a view to strengthening backward
and forward linkages.  For such purposes, this Clause empowers the Government to specify, by notification, such
programmes, guidelines or instructions, as it may deem fit.
2.4.2    With a view to making the operation of these enterprises hassle-free to some extent and also facilitating
graduation of small enterprises to medium enterprises, Clause 9(2) provides that a State Government may, by
notification, provide that the provisions of the Employees’ Liability Act, the Weekly Holidays’ Act, Employment
Exchange (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act and the Apprentices Act shall not apply to small and medium
enterprises employing upto fifty employees in that State. The States currently administer these Acts and hence the
proposed empowerment is procedurally required .
2.4.3    Credit Facilities to Small and Medium Enterprises
2.4.4    It has been proposed in Clause 10 that the credit facilities for small and medium enterprises shall be progressive
and such as may be specified in the guidelines or instructions issued by the Reserve Bank of India from time to time, to
ensure timely and smooth flow of credit to such enterprises, minimise the incidence of sickness among and enhancing
the competitiveness of such enterprises. 
 2.4.5   The Committee was informed that the Government was considering to enhance the credit flow to SSI sector on
the lines with agriculture and that the RBI was in process of reviewing, consolidating and liberalizing its guideline on
credit for SME Sector.
2.4.6    Procurement Preference Policies
2.4.7    Clause 11 provides that Central/State Governments and UT Administrations may notify preference policies in
respect of procurements of goods and services, produced and provided by small enterprises by their respective
Ministries, Departments, aided institutions and public sector enterprises.
2.4.8    Funds for Promotion and Development  of Small and Medium Enterprises Development :
2.4.9    It has been provided in Clauses 12 to 14 that the Central Government may constitute one or more Funds for
promotion and development and enhancement of competitiveness of the Small and Medium Enterprises and there shall
be credited thereto any grants made by the Central Government, after due appropriation by Parliament by law in this
behalf.  The Fund shall be utilized exclusively for the measures specified in sub-Clause (1) of Clause 9.  Administration
of the Fund, coordination and ensuring timely utilization and release of sums, by the Central Government, will be done
through rules to be prescribed under the provisions of Clause 14. The National Small and Medium Enterprises Board
can advise the Central government over the use of such Fund.
Chapter V
2.5       Inspection of SMEs and Related Matters
 2.5.1   The Committee was informed of the study conducted by the Administrative Staff College of India,  that SSIs are
required to comply with 50 laws and deal with 64 inspectors.  A recent study (2004) conducted by FICCI has revealed
that the number of inspectors under the laws listed in the study report is 43 under labour laws, 24 under laws governing
manufacturing, 18 under environmental laws and 6 under Central Excise Act and State Sales Tax Acts.  Moreover, the
number of inspectors with powers of imprisonment, sealing the units and stopping operation are 20, 12 and 21
respectively.
2.5.2    In order to reduce the adverse effects of “Inspector Raj”, the Bill provides that inspections under the 7 labour
laws listed in Clause 15 shall be carried out in such manner and by such authority as may be prescribed.  The idea here
is to prescribe harmonized, simpler and streamlined procedures for inspection with due regard for the need to promote
self-regulation or self-certification by small and medium enterprises.
2.5.3    Further, in order to reduce the multiplicity of often-overlapping types of returns to be filed, Clause 16 provides
for maintenance of such records and filing of such returns, as may be prescribed, by small and medium enterprises .
Chapter VI
2.6       Delayed Payment to Small Enterprises
2.6.1    The Clauses 17 to 24 deal with the issue of delayed payment to the SSI units by the buyers.  Delayed payments
to small scale industries supplying goods or providing services to buyers have been a major cause of sickness in the SSI
sector.  The Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act, 1993 was enacted
to tackle this problem.  This Act was further amended in 1998 to provide for constitution of Industry Facilitation
Councils as a forum for resolution of disputes between the buyers and suppliers covered by the Act.  It was felt later that

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
further amendments were necessary to make the Act more effective.  Therefore, the provisions of the above-mentioned
Act have been modified accordingly and incorporated fully in Chapter VI of this Bill.  As a result, the said Act will
stand repealed as soon as SMED Act comes into force.
Chapter VII
2.7       Miscellaneous Provisions
2.7.1    In view of the latest observations of some Ministries/Departments questioning the need to designate specific
officers of the Central and State Governments as authorities under the proposed legislation and of specifying their ranks
in the erstwhile Clauses nos. 7 and 8 have been deleted and a general provision included in the new Clause 27.
2.7.2    The penalties are proposed to be provided (Clause 28) for violation of some of the Clauses of the proposed law.
Sufficient care has been exercised to ensure that the penalties are restricted to serious violations and the prescribed
punishment is not too harsh. Every order notified under sub-sections (1) of section 9 and every rule made by the Central
Government under the proposed legislation are proposed to be placed for consideration of both Houses of Parliament, as
provided in Clause 30 of the Bill.
Summary of the views  expressed by the  stakeholders before the Committee
Chapter I
3.0       There were suggestions regarding need to expand the definition of suppliers under Clause 2 (m) to include other
similar entities at State level who procure the items from SSI units like Handloom Associations, to further supply to
larger units.
Chapter II
3.2       There were suggestions that there should be equitable representation of industrial associations in the Board.
Further, the present provision in the Act should not restrict the Chairman of the Board from calling the non-members in
the Board’s meetings.
3.2.1    There was also a proposal that if the Ministers of certain States are represented on the Board, the SSI
associations from the remaining other States should fill the ten vacancies for SSI associations. Another proposal called
for convening Zonal Boards that may eventually feed into National Board. The representatives of NE region suggested
that the membership of the Board under Clause 3 (3)(c  ) should be expanded to six to include one Minister from NE
States.
3.2.2    There were suggestions by the State Governments that the Board should act as BIFR to consider the revival and
rehabilitation of the sick SSI units. There were further suggestions that the Board should annually report to the
Parliament thestate of SME sector in the country. 
Chapter III
3.3       There was strong demand for defining the Tiny sector that constitutes a larger segment of SME sector. Further, it
was agreed that there was also a need for an intra-sector mechanism to encourage the Tiny sector within the SME
Sector. It was suggested that the units with an investment upto Rs. 1crores should be given preferential treatment.
3.3.1    However, the States from Eastern zone suggested to remove any investment limit for the purposes of defining
the medium and small industries so as to avoid any need for amendment in the Act at a later stage. 
3.3.2    Another suggestion was to exclude the cost of pollution-control equipments installed within the production
process, while calculating the investment in plant and machinery for the purposes of classification as small or medium
industry.
3.3.3    Regarding the proposed Advisory Committee it was suggested that the industry associations too should be
represented in the Advisory Committee.
3.3.4    Regarding the provision relating to Memorandum to be signed by the Medium  Enterprises there were
suggestions from State Governments that Medium enterprises too should sign memorandum with State authority.
Chapter IV
3.4       Regarding the provisions of Clause 9 (1) it was suggested that in view of the constraints faced by the SSI units in
availability of infrastructure like power and rail transport or other inputs and raw material at reasonable prices, it was
expected if a Clause could be inserted specifying that definite  percentage of coal, steel should be mandatorily reserved
for SME sector by the producers/manufacturers as may be notified from time to time. Similarly the Railways too must
reserve definite   percentage of its capacity for the SME sector as may be notified periodically.
3.4.1    Further, in order to encourage women entrepreneurs, it was suggested that  women entrepreneurs should be
specifically indicated under a separate category of enterprise in Clause 9(1).
3.4.2    Regarding the Clause 10 on the credit availability to SME sector States and associations complained against
non-compliance of RBI guidelines by Banks in lending the credit to SSI sector at reasonable interest rates. It was
suggested that provision should be made for appointing the Financial Advisor for the SSI Sector and a Banking

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
Ombudsmen to monitor the credit delivery to this Sector.
3.4.3    Regarding the Clause 11 on procurement preference policy the representative of SSI Associations sought that
the preferential treatment should be available only to the SSI manufacturers of the goods and services and not to the
provider/suppliers, so as to discount the possibility of large industries availing benefits through dummy suppliers of
goods and services. 
3.4.4    Regarding the Clauses 12 and13 pertaining to setting of Fund or Funds, it was suggested by the State
Governments  that such a Fund should be created at State level too with a contribution from the Central Government
and the State. Also, such Fund should be under State’s disposal.
Chapter V
3.5       Regarding the Clauses 15 and 16 on the inspection of SME enterprises, Single Inspector system in place of
multiple inspectors was suggested. Also it was suggested that a system of Single Annual Return to be filed by the SSI
unit should be evolved. Representatives of State Governments suggested that inspection should be an exception rather
than a rule and  should be done against specific complaints.
3.5.1    SSI Associations suggested a system of check-list for SSI, against which they should file their annual
returns/statements.
Chapter VI
3.6       Regarding the provisions relating to delayed payments to small enterprises it was suggested to reduce the time
limit for delayed payment to total 60 days of delivery irrespective of objections raised by the buyer within 30 days.
3.6.1    It was also suggested that there was a need to incorporate  provisions to enable effective redressal of inter-state
disputes on delayed payments.
3.6.2    To ensure effective compliance of the award by Industry Facilitation Council it was suggested that it should be
headed by a Retired High Court Judge. Another suggestion was that time limit should be set to decide a case. Also the
IFCs should be endowed with powers to execute their award without going through the time consuming process of suit.
4.0       While considering the Bill, the Committee observed that the Bill does not refer to the Tiny sector, which
constitutes a large segment of the small-scale sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the tiny sector should
be duly incorporated in the Bill.  Accordingly, the Committee felt that appropriate Clauses may be incorporated in the
Bill to define the Tiny Sector  and also the consequential changes may be made in the  relevant Clauses of the Bill.  
5.0       Clauses by Clause consideration
Clause 2
5.1       The Clause seeks to define the various expressions used in the Bill.
5.2.1    The Committee is of the view that the definition of “Appointed day” in Clause 2(b) and “the day of acceptance”
and deemed acceptance” in explanation thereto does not provide the desired relief to the small supplier from the vice of
delayed payments.  The period of ‘30 days’ as provided in the Bill needs to be reduced.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that it should be reduced to 15 days.
5.2.2    The Committee considers the phrase “ in relation thereto” in Clause 2 (e) as superfluous and accordingly
recommends its deletion. 
5.2.3    The Committee recommends that the term `industrial’ in Clause 2 (g) and 2 (l) may be replaced with “
enterprises” so as to include both manufacturing and service enterprises both in small and medium  sector.
5.2.4    In Clause 2 (m) the Committee recommends for inclusion of ‘Tiny enterprises’ to  so as avail the benefits of the
provisions the Bill as referred to in Clause 8(1).
5.2.5    In addition to existing categories of suppliers as indicated in Clause 2 (m) the Committee recommends for the
inclusion of  `any commission, company, cooperative society, society or trust registered as such under the relevant Act
and engaged in selling of goods or services produced or rendered  by such enterprises’.
5.2.6 The Committee recommends that the Tiny Sector may be suitably defined in this Clause.
5.2.7    Subject to such changes, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 3
5.3       The Clause seeks to provide for the establishment of the National Small and Medium Enterprises Board with its
head office in Delhi. If further lays down that the Minister in charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central
Government having administrative control of the small and medium enterprises shall be the ex-office Chairperson.  In
addition, it lays down the composition of the Board consisting of the Vice-Chairperson, member-Secretary, and 27
members representing various stakeholders.  This Clause, inter alia, also contains provisions regarding the term of office
of the members of the Board, the manner of filling vacancies, frequency of meetings of the Board, association of other
persons with the Board and invitation to Ministers of the State Governments to attend its meetings.
5.3.1    The Committee was of the considered view that the National Small and Medium Enterprises Board (NSMEB)

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
should have widest possible representation from all the States.  While constituting the Board the Government should
ensure that all the States are represented and more than one representation from a State may be avoided.  The
Committee recommends as under:
(i)         Number of Ministers of State Governments as provided in the Clause 3(3) (c) may be increased from five to six
and out of them one representation be provided to one of the North Eastern States.  Principle of rotation may be
followed while nominating the State Governments in the Board.
(ii)        In order to ensure greater representation of the industry associations in the Board, the Committee recommends
that membership under Clause 3(3) (k) be increased from ten to twenty representing associations of tiny, small and
medium enterprises.
(iii)       In order to give Board the benefit of expertise on technological issues which is vital for the development of
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), the Committee further recommends to increase membership under Clause 3 (3)
(i) from two to three so as to include eminent experts from the field of science and technology along with those  from
the fields of economics and industry.  However, the Committee underlines that such experts should be truly independent
of government.
(iv)       In order to give Board the benefit of parliamentary input, the Committee recommends that the Chairman of the
Department related Parliamentary Committee dealing with Small and Medium Enterprises may also be nominated to the
Board,  ex-officio.
5.3.2    The Committee welcomes the provision in the Clause 3(8) empowering the chairperson of the Board to invite at
his discretion the Ministers / Administrators of State/U.T. Governments and representatives of Associations of tiny,
small and medium enterprises in the meeting of the Boards.  The Committee, however, is not in favour of restricting the
number of such meetings to two.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the present limit of ‘not more than two 
meetings’ for inviting non-members to the Board should be replaced with  ‘at least two’ meetings with a view to
facilitate consultation with wider spectrum of stake holders in the Board.
5.3.3    Subject to such changes, the Clause was adopted.
lause 4
 5.4      The Clause seeks to enumerates the grounds for removal of a member of the Board from it and also specifies the
procedures to be followed in such cases.
5.4.1    The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 5
5.5       The Clause seeks to specify the functions of the Board.
5.5.1    The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 6
5.6       The Clause seeks to empower the Central Government to prescribe the powers and functions of Member-
Secretary of the Board.
5.6.1    The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 7
5.7       The Clause seeks to classify “small enterprises” and “medium enterprises”, based on investment in plant and
machinery, equipment.  It also provides in detail for constitution of an Advisory Committee, its composition, role and
matters to be considered by it while communicating its recommendations to the Central Government.  It also empowers
the Central Government, while classify any class or classes of enterprises as small enterprise or medium enterprise, to
vary the criterion of investment and to consider other criteria or standards specified in this Clause and include in such
classification the micro or tiny enterprises or the village enterprises, as part of small enterprises.
5.7.1    The Committee noted that tiny enterprises have not been classified along with small and medium enterprises. 
The Committee strongly felt that tiny enterprises may also be classified under this Clause.  The Committee, accordingly,
suggests that (i) the enterprises engaged in the manufacture or production of goods where the investment in plant and
machinery does not exceed twenty five lakh rupees and;  (ii) the enterprises engaged in providing or rendering of
services where the investment in plant and machinery does not exceed the 10 lakh rupees be classified as tiny enterprise
under this Clause.
5.7.2    The Committee felt  that the tiny, small and medium enterprises should be adequately represented as individual
sectors in the Advisory Committee.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the strength of Advisory Committee
be increased from five to nine so as to include three representatives of the State Governments instead of two as provided
in the Bill and one representative each from association of tiny, small and medium enterprises.
5.7.3    The Committee was also of the view that the scope of functions of Advisory Committee may be enlarged.  It
should also examine the matters referred to it by the National Small and medium Enterprises Board in connection with

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
discharge of the latter’s functions under the Act and submit its report to the latter.  The central Government may seek
the advice of the Advisory Committee on the matters falling under the purview of the relevant Clauses of the Act.
5.7.4    The Committee is of the opinion that as the tiny, small and medium enterprises are being defined in accordance
with a standard parameters of investments in plant and machinery, only inclusion of  other parameters would be
superfluous.  Hence, the Committee recommends deletion of ‘ land and building’ in the Clause.   
5.7.5    Subject to such changes,  the Clause was adopted.
Clause 8
5.8       The Clause seeks to lay down the requirement for filing of memorandum of small enterprise or medium
enterprise with the authority specified by the State Government or the Central Government under the provisions of this
Clause.  It also empowers the Central Government, to notify, the procedure of filing of the memorandum and the
authority with which the memorandum shall be filed by a medium enterprise.  This Clause also confers powers on the
State Government to notify the authority with which a small enterprise may file the memorandum.  It also enables the
Central Government to notify the procedure to be followed by the above-mentioned authorities for the purposes of this
Clause.
5.8.1    The Committee feels that in order to have clearer scenario in the tiny, small and medium Enterprises sector in
the country, it is necessary that such units must be registered. It will enable the Government to discern the trends in the
sector and take appropriate policy initiatives. The Committee, therefore, recommends for filing of Memorandum by the
tiny, small and medium enterprises mandatory. It will enable the units to avail the benefits of Government’s schemes.
5.8.2    The Committee however, emphasizes that the filing of Memorandum should be simple and after a given period
if no objection is raised by the relevant authority, the unit should be deemed as registered. As regards the industry
referred to in proviso to clause 8 (i)   such Memorandum may be filed with in one hundred and eighty days instead of
ninety days as provided in the Bill from the commencement of this Act.
5.8.3    Subject to such changes,  the Clause was adopted.
Clause 9
5.9       The Clause seeks to enable the Central Government to notify programmes, guidelines or instructions for
facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of small enterprises and medium
enterprises.  It also empowers a State Government to provide, by notification, that the provisions of the Employers’
Liability Act, 1938, the Weekly Holidays Act, 1942, the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of
Vacancies) Act, 1959 and the Apprentices Act, 1961 shall not apply to small and medium enterprises employing up to
fifty employees in that State.
5.9.1    The Committee observes that as the Clause 9 (1) provides for the measures for the promotion and development
of small and medium sector and recommends that this Clause should also specifically include the ` tiny sector’ under the
coverage of such measures.
5.9.2    Further, the Committee is of the view that there is a need to encourage the women entrepreneurs in tiny, small
and medium enterprises. Therefore, the Clause 9(1) should have specific mention of women enterprises to underscore
the need for special incentives for women entrepreneurs.
5.9.3    The Committee acknowledges that competitiveness of Small and Medium Enterprises sector is severely
constrained by the outdated, inefficient technologies. Upgraded technologies are an imperative for these enterprises to
withstand the competition. Therefore, the Committee recommends that technology up-gradation as a vital input must be
reflected in Clause 9 (1) for the promotional measures.
5.9.4    The Committee is also of the view that the growth of tiny and small sector is stunted by the insufficient
infrastructural support and availability of critical inputs at reasonable prices. Therefore,  there should be specific
mention of such measures to overcome these constraints in the Bill.  Accordingly, the Committee recommends that
Clause 9 should provide for the railways  to earmark a definite percentage of its freight capacity for the transportation of
raw material meant for tiny, small and medium  enterprises as well as for the transportation of the products of such
units.  Similar mention may be made in the Clause 9 seeking the steel manufacturers and coal producers to reserve
definite percentage of their production for the tiny and Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) sector.
5.9.5    Subject to above changes,  the Clause was adopted.
Clause 10
5.10     The Clause seeks to provide for the credit facilities to the small and medium enterprises as may be specified in
the guidelines or instructions issued by the Reserve Bank of India.
5.10.1  The Committee was of the view that credit facilities under RBI guidelines have existed for several years without
much of avail. The Committee also took cognizance of the views expressed by the State Governments and industry
associations on the inadequacy of bank credit at concessional rates to the tiny, small and medium enterprises despite

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
repeated RBI guidelines in this regard.  Implementation of RBI guidelines by banks has been major concern of the
Committee. While appreciating that this  Clause  of the Bill recognizes the need to clear such bottlenecks, the
Committee recommends to give greater force of law to the provisions of this Clause. The Committee accordingly
suggests that term ‘ credit facilities’ may be replaced with the phrase ‘ The policies and practices in respect of credit to
the tiny’  
5.10.2  Subject to such change, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 11
5.11     The Clause seeks to empower the Central Government or the State Government  to notify preference policies in
respect of procurement of goods and services, produced and provided by small enterprises, by its Ministries,
departments or its aided institutions and public sector enterprises.
5.11.1  The Committee recommends that Tiny enterprises may be included along with the small and medium enterprises
5.11.2  Subject to such change, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 12
5.12     The Clause seeks to enable the Central Government to constitute, by notification, one or more Funds and credit
thereto any grants made to the Central Government under the provisions of Clause 13.
5.12.1  The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 13
5.13     The Clause seeks to empower the Central Government to credit to the Fund or Funds, such sums of money as the
Government may provide after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf.
5.13.1  The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 14
5.14     The Clause seeks to empower the Central Government to administer the Fund or Funds in such manner, and also
entrusts that government with the responsibility for the coordination and ensuring timely utilization and release of sums
with such criteria, as may be prescribed.
5.14.1  The Committee was of the view that in order to facilitate that such Funds are utilized by the tiny, small and
medium enterprises all over the country, it was necessary that States too should establish similar funds with matching
contribution by Center and State governments. The Committee suggested that such provision should be made while
formulating Rules for this Clause under this Act.
5.14.2  Furthermore, the States should use these funds to finance R&D for the SME and Tiny enterprises.
5.14.3  The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 15
5.15     The Clause seeks to provide that notwithstanding anything in relation to inspection contained in the Payment of
Wages Act, 1936, the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948, the Factories Act, 1948, the Employee’s Provident Fund
and Miscellaneous Provision Act, 1952, the Maternity benefit Act, 1961, the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 and the
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, the Inspection of a small and medium enterprises shall be carried out in such manner,
with regard to the promotion of self-regulation or self-certification by the small and the medium enterprises, and by such
authority, as may be prescribed.
5.15.1  The Committee recommends for inclusion of Tiny sector at appropriate places in the Clause.
5.15.2  Subject to the  change,  the Clause was adopted.
Clause 16
5.16     The Clause seeks to provide that every small and medium enterprise responsible for maintenance or such
records, filing of such returns with such authority and in such forms, as may be prescribed.
5.16.1  The Clause was  adopted without any change.
Clause 17
5.17     The Clause seeks to specify the liability of buyer of goods and services from a supplier to make payment
therefore on or before the dated agree upon between the two parties in writing or, where there is no agreement in this
behalf, before the appointed day.  The proviso to this Clause seeks to limit the period agreed upon between the supplier
and the buyer in writing to seventy-five days from the day of acceptance or the day of deemed acceptance. 
5.17.1  The Committee felt that there was a need to expedite the payment due to tiny and small enterprises to enable
them to timely settle their liabilities with Banks without affecting their credit ratings. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the small and tiny suppliers should get their payment within Forty –Five days instead of Seventy-five
days from the day of acceptance or deemed acceptance as mentioned in proviso to this Clause.
5.17.2  Subject to such change, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 18

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
5.18     The Clause seeks to specify the date from which and the rate at which interests will be payable by the buyer to
the supplier in case of the former failing to make payments of the amount to the supplier, as required under section 17.
5.18.1  The Committee was of the view that the rate of interest payable by the buyer on delayed payment should be high
enough to prevent delays in payment to tiny and small suppliers. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such
interest rate should be three times the bank rate instead of nine percent plus bank rate as prescribed in this Clause.
5.18.2  Subject to such change, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 19
5.19     The Clause seeks to make the amount due from a buyer, together with the amountof interest calculated in
accordance with the provisions of section 18, recoverable by way or a suit or other proceeding under law.
5.19.1  The Committee was of the view that the recourse to recovery of  amount by way of suit is  against the interest of
the supplier as it takes long time and involve other procedural complexities.  Perhaps,  this was the reason that Industrial
Facilitation Council (IFCs) have to be constituted to settle the dispute amongst the parties.  Industrial Facilitation
Council (IFCs) being set up under this Bill without having power to execute its award does not provide any relief to the
supplier.  The Committee, therefore, is the view that recovery through civil suit has to be avoided instead Industrial
Facilitation Council (IFC) be empowered with the powers to execute the awards.
5.19.2  The Committee, therefore, recommends  that this Clause could be deleted and the subsequent Clauses be
sufficiently strengthened by conferring upon the Industry Facilitation Councils the similar powers as vested with the
Consumer Forum,  to execute its award.
5.19.3  The Clause  was found redundant,  hence may be deleted.
Clause 20
5.20     The Clause seeks to provide for the jurisdiction of the Industry Facilitation Council for acting as an arbitrator or
conciliator in respect of  making  the amount due from a buyer, together with the amount of interest calculated in
accordance with the provisions of section 18, recoverable.
5.20.1  The Bill provides for setting up of one or more Industry Facilitation Council by State Governments under Clause
22 specifying its jurisdiction. The Committee then considered the situation of inter-state disputes and recommended that
the Industrial Facilitation Council of the State where the supplier is located, shall have the jurisdiction over such inter-
state cases. Such provision should be reflected specifically in this Clause.
5.20.3  The Committee was also of the view that  this Clause should fix a time limit for the Industrial Facilitation
Council to decide on the references made to it.   The Committee suggests that reference made to Industrial Facilitation
Council (IFCs) be decided within ninety days.
5.20.4  Subject to such changes, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 21
5.21     The Clause seeks to debar any court or other authority from entertaining an appeal against any decree, award or
any other order unless the appellant (not being a supplier) has deposited with it seventy-five per cent of the amount in
terms of the decree, award or other order.
5.21.1  The Committee felt that filing appeal against any award made by an arbitrator like Industrial Facilitation
Council   was a right of the buyer that can not be infringed by such provisions as given in the Clause.  Further, the
condition imposed on buyer to deposit seventy five per cent of the amount due would critically affect the buyer without
providing any relief to supplier.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that such a condition may be removed from
this Clause. The Committee also noted that the Bill does not specify the Forum where such an appeal against the award
could be filed.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that such appeal against the award of Industrial Facilitation
Council may be made in the High Court  of that State and the clause may be amended accordingly.
5.21.2  Subject to such changes, the Clause adopted.
Clause 22
5.22     The Clause seeks to make it mandatory upon each State Government to establish one or more Industry
Facilitation Councils for the purposes of this Bill.
5.22.1  The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 23
5.23     The Clause seeks to lay down in detail the structure of the Industry Facilitation Council consisting of now less
than three but not more than five members.  Further, it empowers the State Government to prescribe the composition of
the Industry Facilitation Council, the manner of filling vacancies of its members and the procedure to be followed in the
discharge of their functions.
5.23.1  The Committee suggests while constituting the IFCs the Tiny Sector should represented along with Small and
Medium Enterprises. Subject to change the Clause was adopted.

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
Clause 24
5.24     The Clause seeks to provide details of the information required to be submitted by any buyer in this annual
statement of accounts, where such buyer is required to get his annual accounts audited under any law for the time being
in force.
5.24.1  The Clause was adopted  without any change.
Clause 25
5.25     The Clause seeks to provide to disallow, for the purposes of computation of income under the Income-tax Act,
1961, the amount of interest payable or paid by any buyer, under or in accordance with the provisions of the proposes
legislation.
5.25.1  The Clause was adopted  without any change.
Clause 26
5.26     The Clause seeks to give the provisions of Clauses 17 to 25 an over-riding effect over anything inconsistent
therewith in any other law for the time being in force.
5.26.1  The Clause was adopted  without any change.
Clause 27
5.27     The Clause seeks to empower the Central Government or the State Government to appoint officers and other
employees for the purposes of this Act and to entrust to them such of the powers and functions as it may deem fit.  This
Clause further empowers the officers so appointed to require, by order, any persons to furnish such information, in such
form, as may be prescribed.
5.27.1  The Clause was adopted  without any change.
Clause 28
5.28     the Clause seeks to lay down penalty for contravention of Clause 8 or Clause 16 or Clause 24 or Clause 27.
5.28.1  The Clause was adopted  without any change.
Clause 29
5.29     The Clause seeks to specify that no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first
class shall try any offence punishable under this legislation.
5.29.1  The Clause was adopted  without any change.
Clause 30
5.30     The Clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act
and also provide that every notification issued under sub-Clause (1) of Clause 9 and every rule made by the Central
Government under this Clause shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
5.30.1  The Clause was adopted  without any change.
Clause 31
5.31     The Clause seeks to empowers the State Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act
and also specifies that the rule made under this Clause shall be laid before the State Legislature.
5.31.1   The Clause was adopted  without any change.
Clause 32
5.32     The Clause seeks to empower the Central Government to remove difficulties which may arise in giving effect to
the provisions of this Bill and also provide that every order made under this Clause be laid before each House of
Parliament.
5.32.1  The Clause was adopted  without any change.
Clause 33
5.33     The Clause seeks to repeals the Interest on Delayed payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial
Undertakings Act, 1993 as the provisions of that Act have been suitably incorporated in the Bill.
5.33.1  The Clause was adopted  without any change.
Clause 1, the enacting Formula and the Title
5.34     The Committee recommends that the Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title should be accordingly
changed to include the tiny sector.
5.35     Subject to such changes, Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted.
6.0       Out of thirty three Clauses, the Committee recommends amendments in fourteen Clauses and adopts the
remaining nineteen Clauses without any change.
7.0       The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating amendments approved by it and
giving due consideration to the other observations of the Committee.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS AND GENERAL OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A
GLANCE
 
8.1       The Committee during the course its interactions with various stake-holders including the representatives of
State Governments and the industry associations observed that there was a general approval of the Bill. However,
certain States and industry associations sought greater elaboration of the provisions of Bill particularly on the enabling
Clauses for promotion, development and enhancement of competitiveness of the tiny, small and medium enterprises. 
The Committee expressed its support and approval to the Bill, as the tiny, small and medium enterprise sector, which  is
an engine for social change and economic growth  needed a separate legislation according to its specific requirements.
8.2       The Committee appreciates that this Bill is an important initiative to relieve the tiny and SME sector of multiple
inspection regime. The Committee recommends that the government should take cognizance of the views expressed by
the State governments and industry association seeking a progressive trend towards self-certification and self-regulation.
The Committee also views that the inspections should be gradually replaced with a check-list of do and don’t to be
monitored by a single inspector. 
8.3       The Committee recommends that the Ministry of SSI should hold wide consultations with the industry
associations and State Governments while framing the rules, so as to incorporate the views of the State Governments
who shall be executing the provisions of the Bill. The Committee also recommends that Ministry should take a view of
the suggestion that enterprises with an investment upto Rupees one crore in plant and machinery, should be given some
preferential treatment while framing the rules.
8.4       The Committee recommends that the Ministry should widely published the provisions of the Act and the
corresponding processes / procedures for the public information.  Having formulated the enabling rules, the Ministry
should continue to monitor their execution by agencies at local level and should ensure that the agencies evolve
processes / procedures that are simple and in-consonance with the objectives of the Act.  The Committee underscores
the need for streamlining the rules and procedures while administering the provisions of the Act.  There must not be any
disjoint or contravention in the rules of procedures and processes at various levels and among various agencies.
8.5       The Committee also recommends that in order to encourage tiny, small  and medium enterprises to adhere to
pollution control norms, as per the Order dated the 10
th December 1997 of the Department of Industrial Policy and
Promotion, the cost of pollution control and R&D devices should not be included while calculating the investments in
plant and machinery. Similar exemption should be made with respect to industrial safety devices to promote such units
to adopt industrial safety norms.
8.6       Considering the significantly high incidences of sickness in tiny, small and medium enterprises, the Committee
was of the view that the Bill should also deal with the exit norms for the tiny and SME units. The Committee
recommends that Government should look into the matter and find out simpler exit mechanism at least for tiny and
small enterprises, after they have settled their dues and liabilities under the supervision of Industrial Facilitation
Council.
 
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
Minutes of the Meeting
XXIX Meeting
***
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m on Friday, the 21
st June 2005 in Room 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
Present
Shri Santosh Bagrodia              —        Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. M.M. Agarwal    
Shri Suresh Bharadwaj
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan        
Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
Shrimati Vanga Geetha
LOK SABHA
Shri Kailash Baitha
Shri Swadesh Chakraborty

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan          
Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria          
Shri Sunil Khan                                    
Shri Rajnarayan
Shri Badiga Ramakrishna                                 
Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
Shri Gurjeet Singh Rana           
Shri Manvendra Singh
Shri Ganesh Singh                    
Shri Suraj Singh
Shri Chandramani Tripathi
Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
Secretariat
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Dr.S.Sivakumar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of SSI 
Shri Anupam Dasgupta, Secretary
Shri Satyanand Mishra, AS&DC
Dr. S. Rohini, ADC
Ministry of ARI
Smt. Shruti Kakkar, Joint Secretary
Shri A.P. Padhi, Joint Secretary
Smt. Maya Sinha, CEO, KVIC
Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri Z.S. Negi,  Addional  Secretary  ( Legislative Department)
2.         The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members and the representatives of the Ministries of SSI, ARI
and Law and Justice and then requested the Secretary, Ministry of SSI to explain the background, objectives and
provisions of the proposed Small and Medium Enterprises Development Bill, 2005.
3.         The Chairman of the Committee also sought to know if the Bill was a consummate measure to bring about
positive and comprehensive change in the SME sector. He also observed that the policies meant for this sector had not  
achieved desired objectives. Chairman further sought to know if the Bill covered Khadi and Village industries. The
Secretary replied that there was a separate KVIC Act. Members of the Committee too raised questions regarding the
provisions of the Bill.
4.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The meeting was adjourned at 5. 30 pm.
 
New Delhi K.P. Singh
21
st  June 2005 Under Secretary
 
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
Minutes of the Meeting
XXX Meeting
***
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m on Friday, the 30th June 2005 in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe ,
New Delhi.
 
Present
 
Shri Santosh Bagrodia              —        Chairman
     

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. M.M. Agarwal    
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
Shri Piyarimohan Mohapatra    
Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
LOK SABHA
Shri Kailash Baitha
Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan          
Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria          
Shri Sunil Khan                                    
Shri Rajnarayan
Shri Badiga Ramakrishna                                 
Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
Shri Gurjeet Singh Rana           
Shri Manvendra Singh  
Shri Chandramani Tripathi
Secretariat
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Dr.S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of SSI 
Shri Anupam Dasgupta, Secretary
Shri Amir Subhani, JDC
Ministry of ARI
Smt. Maya Sinha, CEO, KVIC
Shri Ashutosh Mishra, Director
Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri S.K. Dhaleta,  Addional Legislative Counsel
SSI Associations
Federation of Association of Small Industries of India
Maj. D. Dhawan, Executive Committee Member
Laghu Udyog Bharti
Shri Sudarshan Sareen, Former National President
Indian Council of Small Industries ( West Bengal)
Shri K.K. Sarkar, Secretary General
Federation of Indian Women Entrepreneurs
Ms. Rajnee Agarwal, President
ASSOCHAM
Shri Nalin Kohli, Chairman, Expert Committee on SMEs
Federation of Indian Exports Organisation
Shri V.R. Sharma, Chairman, Carpet Export Promotion Council
Federation of Indian Lady Entrepreneurs (AP)
Smt. Ramadevi Kanneganti, President
Confederation of Indian Industries
Shri Gupal Singh, Dy. Director General
Federation of Indian Micro and Small & Medium Entreprises
Shri Anil Bharadwaj, Consultant
The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members and the representatives of the Ministries of SSI, ARI and Law
and Justice and the representatives of industry associations.
3.         Thereafter, the Chairman of the Committee sought know  the views of industry associations on the provisions of
the Bill. He also asked the representatives of the Ministry of SSI to take note of the views of the industry associations.
4.         Industry associations generally welcomed the Bill and suggested more concrete measures for the development of

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
SME sector.  Members of the Committee also raised the questions on the provisions of the Bill.
5.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. Witnesses then withdrew.  The meeting was adjourned at 1.15
pm.
 
New Delhi K.P. Singh
30
th June 2005 Under Secretary
 
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
Minutes of the Meeting
XXXI Meeting
***
 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m on Friday, the 22nd July 2005 in the Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
Present
Shri Santosh Bagrodia              —        Chairman
      RAJYA SABHA
Prof. M.M. Agarwal    
Dr. K. Malaisamy        
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan        
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
LOK SABHA
Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan                      
Shri Sunil Khan                        
Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel           
Shri Rajnarayan                                   
Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana     
Shri Manvendra Singh              
Shri Suraj Singh           
Secretariat
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of SSI 
Shri Anupam Dasgupta, Secretary
Shri Satyanand Mishra, AS&DC
Government of Jammu & Kashmir
Shri S.S. Sahni, Principal Secretary
Government of Himachal Pradesh
Shri S.S. Parmar, Chief Secretary
Shri  Rajinder Chauhan, Adviser, Industries
Government of Uttranchal
Dr. Sanjeev Chopra, Secretary, Department of Industries
Government of Haryana
Shri P.K. Chaudhery, Principle Secretary, Department of Industries
Government of  Uttar Pradesh
Shri Atul Kumar Gupta, Principal Secretary, Department of Industry
Government of Punjab
Shri S.C. Aggarwal, Principal Secretary, Department of Industry.
Government of Rajasthan

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
Shri  Anil Vaish,  Chief Secretary
Smt. Asha Singh, CMD, Rajasthan State SIDC
SSI Associations
Uttar Pradesh
Shri Tarun Kheterpal, President Indian Industries  Associations
Shri Praveen Sadana, Sr. Vice President                                                                                                                     
                       
Punjab 
Shri Y.P. Chopra, President, Federation of Punjab Small Industries Association.
Shri Varinder Kapoor, G.S. United Cycle and Parts Mfg, Association.
Uttaranchal
Shri Pankaj Gupta,  President, Indian Industries Association.
Rajasthan
Shri Anil Aggarwal, Hon. Secy. Jodhpur Industries Association.
New Delhi
Shri Nalin Kohli, President, Association of S & M Electronic Industries
Shri Joginder Kumar, President, FTSII
2. The Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee, the Secretary, Ministry of SSI, representatives of the State
Governments and SSI associations from Jammu & Kashmir, Himanchal Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Uttaranchal, Uttar
Pradesh and Rajasthan.
3. The Committee asked the representatives of the SSI associations of their views on the various clauses of the Small
and Medium Enterprises Development Bill, 2005.
4. Thereafter, the Committee listened to the views of the representatives of respective State Governments on the Bill. 
5. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee raised queries pertaining to the Bill. In the end the Committee asked the
Secretary, Ministry of SSI to respond to the issues raised in the meeting, which he did.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The meeting was adjourned at 5.45 pm.
 
New Delhi K.P. Singh
22
nd July 2005 Under Secretary
 
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Committee on Industry
Minutes of the Meeting
XXXII Meeting
***
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m on Monday, the 25th  July 2005 in the Room 63 , Parliament House, New Delhi.
Present
Shri Santosh Bagrodia              —        Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. M.M. Agarwal
Shri Surendra Lath
Shri Suresh Bharadwaj
Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
Shrimati Vanga Geetha
LOK SABHA
Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
Shri Sarvey Satyanarayana
Shri Bapu Hari Chaure             
Secretariat
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
Dr. S. Sivakumar
WITNESSES
Ministry of  Commerce and Industry
Shri S.N. Menon, Secretary, Department of Commerce
Shri Joyant Dasgupta
Ministry of SSI 
Shri Satyanand Mishra, AS&DC
Shri Amir Subhani, Joint Development Commissioner
Ministry of Law and Justice
Legislative Department
Shri S.R. Dhaleta, Additional Legislative Counsel
2. The Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee, the Secretary, Department of Commerce, representatives of the
Ministries of SSI and the Legislative Department.
3. The Committee asked the Secretary, Department of Commerce of the Department’s view on the SME Development
Bill 2005, from the view point of encouraging exports of SSI sector. The Committee also asked him to ascertain the
measures that could be taken under this legislation in conformity with the country’s commitment under WTO regime. 
4. The Committee also heard the views of the representative of the Ministry of SSI on the issue.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. Witnesses then withdrew.
6. The meeting was adjourned at 4.30 pm.
 
New Delhi K.P. Singh
25
th July 2005 Under Secretary
 
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Committee on Industry
Minutes of the Meeting
XXXIII Meeting
***
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m on Tuesday, the 26th July 2005 in the Main Committee Room , Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
 
Present        
  Shri Santosh Bagrodia            —Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. M.M. Agarwal
Shri Surendra Lath
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
Smt. Vanga Geetha
LOK SABHA
Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
Secretariat
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of SSI
Shri Anupam Dasgupta, Secretary
Shri Satyanand Mishra, AS&DC

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
Shri Amir Subhani, JDC
Ministry of Law and Justice
 ( Legislative Department)
Shri S.R. Dhaleta, Additional Legislative Counsel
Government of Chattisgarh
Shri Shivraj Singh, Principal Secretary, Department of Industries
Government of Gujarat
Shri R.M. Patel, Principal Secretary, Department of Small Industries and Tourism
Government of Maharashtra
Shri V.B. Mathankar, M.D. SIDC
2. The Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee, the Secretary, Ministry of SSI, Legislative department,
Ministry of Law and Justice, representatives of the State Governments of Gujrat, Maharashtra and Chhattisgarh.
3. The Committee asked the representatives of the State Governments of their reaction to the Small and Medium
Enterprises Development Bill, 2005.
4. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee raised queries pertaining to the Bill. The Chairman asked the Ministry of
SSI to consider an enabling provision in the Bill to ensure the supply of raw materials to the SSI units at reasonable
rates and also a similar provision ensuring transportation of SSI products by Railways. The representative of the
Legislative Department also clarified that the Department would have no objection if the concerned Departments agreed
to such provisions. The Secretary, Ministry of SSI however informed the Committee of the existing enabling provision
in this respect within the Bill.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The meeting was adjourned at 5.45 pm.
New Delhi K.P. Singh
26
th  July 2005 Under Secretary
 
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Committee on Industry
Minutes of the Meeting
XXXIV Meeting
***
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m on Wednesday, the 27th July 2005 in the Main Committee Room , Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
Present
Shri Santosh Bagrodia  —Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. M.M. Agarwal
Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
Smt. Vanga Geetha
LOK SABHA
Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
Shri Sunil Khan
Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
Secretariat
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer 
Witnesses

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
Ministry of Small Scale Industries
Shri Anupam Dasgupta, Secretary
Shri Satyanand Mishra, AS&DC
Shri A.P. Padhi, Joint Secretary (ARI)
Shri Amir Subhani, Joint Development Commissioner
Ministry of Law and Justice
( Legislative Department)
Shri S.R. Dhaleta, Additional Legislative Counsel
Government of Karnataka
Shri N. Gokulram, Principal Secretary(C&I)
Smt.  Latha Krishna Rao, Secretary (C&I)
Government of Kerala
Shri T. Balakrishnan, Principal Secretary, Department of Industries
Government of Tamil Nadu
Shri D. Rajendran, Secretary, Department of Industries
 Government of Andhra Pradesh
Shri B. Kripanandam, Secretary, Department of Industry
SSI Associations
Small Industries Service Organisation
 Shri  Ravindranathan, Chairman
 Smt. K. Saraswati, Director
Karnataka
Shri Mahadev   S.  Dhadd, President, SSI Asso.
Andhra Pradesh
Shri T.V.R Murthy, Director, FAPSIA
Shri V.B. Shanker
Pondicherry
Shri K. Parthasarathy, Secretary, Asso. of  SSI
Tamil  Nadu
Shri G. Balakrishnan, President, Tamil Nadu Small & Tiny Industries
Shri L. Leela Krishna, Vice President
2. The Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee, the Secretary, Ministry of SSI, Legislative Department,
Ministry of Law and Justice, representatives of the State Governments of Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Andhra
Pradesh and the representatives of select industry associations.
3. The Committee asked the representatives of the industry associations and the State Governments of their views on the
various clauses of the Small and Medium Enterprises Development Bill, 2005. The industry associations of the States
from South Zone made a combined presentation before the Committee.  Representatives of the State governments
favoured registration of small as well as medium units with the State government. 
4. The Members of the Committee then raised queries pertaining to the Bill. 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. The meeting was adjourned at 5.45 pm.
 
New Delhi K.P. Singh
27
th  July 2005 Under Secretary
 
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Committee on Industry
Minutes of the Meeting
XXXV Meeting
***
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m on Thursday, the 28th July 2005 in the Main Committee Room , Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
Present
Shri Santosh Bagrodia  —Chairman

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Surendra Lath
Shri Suresh Bharadwaj
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
K.B. Krishna Murthy
LOK SABHA
Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
Shri Sunil Khan
Shri Ganesh Singh
Shri Chandramani Tripathi        
Secretariat
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer 
Witnesses
Ministry of Small Scale Industries
Shri Anupam Dasgupta, Secretary
Shri Satyanand Mishra, AS&DC
Shri A.P. Padhi, Joint Secretary (ARI)
Shri Amir Subhani, Joint Development Commissioner
Ministry of Law and Justice
Shri R.L. Meena, Secretary (Legal Affairs)
Shri T.K. Vishwanathan, Secretary (Legislative Department)
Shri Z.S. Negi,  Addional  Secretary  ( Legislative Department)
Shri  Y.P.C. Dangey, J.S.  (Legal Affairs)
Shri S.R. Dhaleta, Additional Legislative Counsel
Ministry of Finance (Banking Division)
Shri Ashok Jha, Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs,
Shri Vinod Kumar Rai, Additional Secretary
Govt. of Delhi
Shri S. Raghunathan, Chief Secretary
Shri S.C. Poddar, Secretary and Commissioner (Industry)
Govt. of Orissa
Dr. Subas Pani, Chief Secretary
Shri Gokul Chandra Pati, Commissioner-cum-Secretary (Industry)
Govt. of West Bengal
Shri A.K. Deb, Chief Secretary
Shri  Moinul Hassan,  Chairman, SIDC
Shri Mira Pande, Principal Secy. Cottage & SSI Department.
Govt. of Sikkim
Shri R.K. Purkhayastha, Secretary Law Deptt.
Govt. of Arunachal  Pradesh
Shri Ashok Kumar, Chief Secretary
Govt. of Meghalya
Shri P.J. Bazeley, Chief Secretary
Govt. of Jharkhand
Shri S.K. Satapathy, Secretary, Department of  Industries
Govt. of Assam
Shri P.C. Sarma, Addl. Chief Secretary
Govt. of Nagaland
Shri Alemtemshi Jamir, Principal Secretary (Indusrtry & Commerce)

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
Govt. of Tripura
Shri Sudhir Sharma, Special Commissioner
Shri M.L. Dey, Joint Resident Commissioner
Govt. of Bihar
Shri K.C. Mishra, Resident Commissioner
Shri Pankaj Kumar, Director of Industries
Shri R.N. Tiwari, Chairman cum Managing Director, SSI Corp. Ltd.
Govt. of Manipur
Shri P.C. Lawmkunga, Principal Secretary (C & I)
SSI Association
Orissa
Shri Sanjay Modi, President, SSI Association
 2. The Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee, the Secretaries, Ministry of SSI, Department of Economic
Affairs ( M/O Finance) Legal and Legislative Departments, (M/O Law and Justice), representatives of the State
Governments of the Eastern zone and the North Eastern States and the representative of industry association.
3. The Committee asked the representatives of the industry associations and the State Governments of their  views on
the Small and Medium Enterprises Development Bill, 2005. Representatives of the State Governments from NE region,
expressed view in favour of ensuring adequate representation of NE region in the National Small and Medium
Enterprises Board. Representative of the Government of Bihar sought special provisions for the backward states.
Representative of the industry association from Orissa sought to enhance the interest rate in case of delayed payment.
4. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee raised queries pertaining to the Bill. 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The meeting was adjourned at 5.45 pm.
New Delhi K.P. Singh
28
th  July 2005 Under Secretary
 
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Committee on Industry
Minutes of the Meeting
XXXVI Meeting
***
The Committee met at 1.30 p.m on Friday, the 29th July 2005 in the Committee Room 139, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
Present
Shri Santosh Bagrodia  —Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. M.M. Agrawal
Shri Surendra Lath
Shri Suresh Bharadwaj
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
LOK SABHA
Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
Shri Sunil Khan
Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
Shri Ganesh Singh
Shri Chandramani Tripathi
Secretariat
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer 
Ministry of Small Scale Industries
Shri Anupam Dasgupta, Secretary

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
Shri Satyanand Mishra, AS&DC
Shri A.P. Padhi, Joint Secretary (ARI)
Shri Amir Subhani, Joint Development Commissioner
Ministry of Law and Justice
(Department of Legal Affairs)
Shri R.L. Meena, Secretary (Legal Affairs)
Shri  Y.P.C. Dangey, Joint Secretary  (Legal Affairs)
(Legislative Department)
Shri T.K. Vishwanathan, Secretary (Legislative Department)
Shri Z.S. Negi,  Addional  Secretary  ( Legislative Department)
Shri S.R. Dhaleta, Additional Legislative Counsel
While considering the Bill, the Committee observed that the Bill does not refer to the Tiny sector, which constitutes a
large segment of the small-scale sector. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the tiny sector should be duly
incorporated in the Bill.  Accordingly, the Committee felt that appropriate Clauses may be incorporated in the Bill to
define the Tiny Sector  and also the consequential changes may be made in the  relevant Clauses of the Bill.
The Committee then took up Clause by Clause the SMED Bill 2005 and made its recommendations and observations.
Clause 2
The Committee was of the view that the definition of “Appointed day” in Clause 2(b) and “the day of acceptance” and
deemed acceptance” in explanation thereto did not provide the desired relief to the small supplier from the vice of
delayed payments.  The period of ‘30 days’ as provided in the Bill needed to be reduced.  The Committee, therefore,
recommended that it should be reduced to 15 days.
The Committee considered the phrase “ in relation thereto” in Clause 2 (e) as superfluous and accordingly
recommended its deletion. 
The Committee recommended that the term `industrial’ in Clause 2 (g) and 2 (l) may be replaced with “ enterprises” so
as to include both manufacturing and service enterprises both in small and medium sector.
In Clause 2 (m) the Committee recommended for inclusion of ‘Tiny enterprises’ so as to avail the benefits of the
provisions the Bill as referred to in Clause 8(1).
In Clause 2 (m) the Committee recommended for the inclusion of  `any commission, company, cooperative society,
society or trust registered as such under the relevant Act and engaged in selling of goods or services produced or
rendered  by such enterprises’.
The Committee recommended that the Tiny Sector may be suitably defined in this Clause.
Subject to such changes, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 3
The Committee was of the considered view that the National Small and Medium Enterprises Board (NSMEB) should
have widest possible representation from all the States.  While constituting the Board the Government should ensure
that all the States are represented and more than one representation from a State may be avoided.  The Committee
accordingly recommended as under:
(i)         Number of Ministers of State Governments as provided in the Clause 3(3) (c) may be increased from five to six
and out of them one representation be provided to one of the North Eastern States.  Principle of rotation may be
followed while nominating the State Governments in the Board.
(ii)        In order to ensure greater representation of the industry associations in the Board, the Committee recommended
that membership under Clause 3(3) (k) be increased from ten to twenty representing associations of tiny, small and
medium enterprises.
(iii)       In order to give Board the benefit of expertise on technological issues that were vital for the development of
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), the Committee further recommended to increase membership under Clause 3
(3) (i) from two to three so as to include eminent experts from the field of science and technology along with those from
the fields of economics and industry.  However, the Committee underlined that such experts should be truly independent
of government.
(iv)       In order to give Board the benefit of parliamentary input, the Committee recommended that the Chairman of the
Department related Parliamentary Committee dealing with Small and Medium Enterprises may also be nominated to the
Board,  in the ex-officio capacity.
The Committee welcomed the provision in the Clause 3(8) empowering the chairperson of the Board to invite at his
discretion the Ministers / Administrators of State/U.T. Governments and representatives of Associations of tiny, small
and medium enterprises in the meeting of the Boards.  The Committee, however, was not in favour of restricting the

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
number of such meetings to two.  The Committee, therefore, recommended that the limit of ‘not more than two 
meetings’ for inviting non-members to the Board should be replaced with  ‘at least two’ meetings with a view to
facilitate consultation with wider spectrum of stake holders in the Board.
Subject to such changes, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 4
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 5
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 6
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 7
The Committee noted that tiny enterprises have not been classified along with small and medium enterprises.  The
Committee strongly felt that tiny enterprises may also be classified under this Clause.  The Committee, accordingly,
suggested that (i) the enterprises engaged in the manufacture or production of goods where the investment in plant and
machinery does not exceed twenty five lakh rupees and;  (ii) the enterprises engaged in providing or rendering of
services where the investment in plant and machinery does not exceed the 10 lakh rupees be classified as tiny enterprise
under this Clause.
The Committee also felt that the tiny, small and medium enterprises should be adequately represented as individual
sectors in the proposed Advisory Committee.  The Committee, accordingly, recommended that the strength of Advisory
Committee be increased from five to nine so as to include three representatives of the State Governments instead of two
as provided in the Bill and one representative each from association of tiny, small and medium enterprises.
The Committee was also of the view that the scope of functions of Advisory Committee may be enlarged.  It should also
examine the matters referred to it by the National Small and medium Enterprises Board in connection with discharge of
the latter’s functions under the Act and submit its report to the latter.  The Central Government may seek the advice of
the Advisory Committee on the matters falling under the purview of the relevant Clauses of the Act.
The Committee was of the opinion that as the tiny, small and medium enterprises were being defined in accordance with
standard parameters of investments in plant and machinery only; inclusion of other parameters would be superfluous. 
Hence, the Committee recommended deletion of ‘ land and building’ in the Clause.   
Subject to such changes, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 8
The Committee felt that in order to have clearer scenario in the tiny, small and medium Enterprises sector in the
country, it was necessary that such units must be registered. It would enable the Government to discern the trends in the
sector and take appropriate policy initiatives. The Committee, therefore, recommended to make filing of Memorandum
by the tiny, small and medium enterprises mandatory. It would enable the units to avail the benefits of Government’s
schemes.
The Committee however, emphasized that the filing of Memorandum should be simple and after a given period if no
objection was raised by the relevant authority, the unit should be deemed as registered. As regards the industry referred
to in proviso to clause 8 (i) such Memorandum may be filed with in one hundred and eighty days instead of ninety days
as provided in the Bill from the commencement of this Act.
Subject to such changes, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 9
The Committee recommended that this Clause should also specifically include the ` tiny sector’ under the coverage of
promotional measures.
Further, the Committee was of the view that there was a need to encourage the women entrepreneurs in tiny, small and
medium enterprises. Therefore, the Clause 9(1) should have specific mention of women enterprises to underscore the
need for special incentives for women entrepreneurs.
The Committee acknowledged that competitiveness of Small and Medium Enterprises sector was severely constrained
by the outdated, inefficient technologies. Upgraded technologies were an imperative for these enterprises to withstand
the competition. Therefore, the Committee recommended that technology up-gradation must be reflected in Clause 9 (1)
for the promotional measures.
The Committee was also of the view that the growth of tiny and small sector has been stunted by the insufficient
infrastructural support and availability of critical inputs at reasonable prices. The Committee therefore felt that there
should have been specific mention of such measures to overcome these constraints in the Bill.  Accordingly, the
Committee recommended that Clause 9 should provide for the railways to earmark a definite percentage of its freight

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
capacity for the transportation of raw material meant for tiny, small and medium enterprises as well as for the
transportation of the products of such units in wagon loads and small parcels.  Similar mention may be made in the
Clause 9 seeking the steel manufacturers and coal producers to reserve definite percentage of their production for the
tiny and small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) sector.
Subject to above changes, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 10
The Committee was of the view that credit facilities under RBI guidelines have existed for several years without much
of avail. The Committee also took cognizance of the views expressed by the State Governments and industry
associations on the inadequacy of bank credit at concessional rates to the tiny, small and medium enterprises despite
repeated RBI guidelines in this regard.  Implementation of RBI guidelines by banks has been major concern of the
Committee. While appreciating that the Bill recognized the need to clear such bottlenecks, the Committee recommended
to give greater force of law to the provisions of this Clause. The Committee accordingly suggested that term ‘ credit
facilities’ may be replaced with the phrase ‘ The policies and practices in respect of credit to the tiny’  
Subject to such change, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 11
The Committee recommended that Tiny enterprises may be included along with the small and medium enterprises
Subject to such change, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 12
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 13
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 14
The Committee was of the view that in order to facilitate that the Funds were utilized by the tiny, small and medium
enterprises all over the country, it was necessary that States too should establish similar funds with matching
contribution by Center and State governments. The Committee suggested that such provision should be made while
formulating Rules for this Clause under this Act.
Furthermore, the States should use these funds to finance R&D for the SME and Tiny enterprises.
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 15
The Committee recommends for inclusion of Tiny sector at appropriate places in the Clause.
Subject to the change, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 16
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 17
The Committee felt that there was a need to expedite the payment due to tiny and small enterprises to enable them to
timely settle their liabilities with Banks without affecting their credit ratings. The Committee, therefore, recommended
that the small and tiny suppliers should get their payment within Forty –Five days instead of Seventy-five days from the
day of acceptance or deemed acceptance as mentioned in proviso to this Clause.
Subject to such change, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 18
The Committee was of the view that the rate of interest payable by the buyer on delayed payment should be high enough
to prevent delays in payment to tiny and small suppliers. The Committee, therefore, recommended that such interest rate
should be three times the bank rate instead of nine percent plus bank rate as prescribed in this Clause.
Subject to such change, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 19
The Committee was of the view that the recourse to recovery of amount by way of suit took longer time and involved
other procedural complexities.  Perhaps, this was the reason that Industrial Facilitation Council (IFCs) had to be
constituted to settle the dispute amongst the parties.  However, the Industrial Facilitation Council (IFC) did not have
power to execute its award.  The Committee, therefore, was the view that while recovery through civil suit remains an
option, the Industrial Facilitation Council (IFC) should be empowered with the powers to execute the awards, to provide
relief to the supplier.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that Industry Facilitation Councils should conferred with the similar powers as
vested with the Consumer Forum, to execute their awards.
 Subject to such change, the Clause was adopted.

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
Clause 20
The Bill provided for setting up of one or more Industry Facilitation Council by State Governments under Clause 22
specifying its jurisdiction. The Committee then considered the situation of inter-state disputes and recommended that
the Industrial Facilitation Council of the State where the supplier was located, should have the jurisdiction over such
inter-state cases. Such provision should be reflected specifically in the Clause.
The Committee was also of the view that the references made to Industrial Facilitation Council (IFCs) should be
decided within ninety days.
Subject to such changes, the Clause was adopted.
Clause 21
The Committee felt that filing appeal against any award made by an arbitrator like Industrial Facilitation Council   was a
right of the buyer that can not be infringed by such provisions as given in the Clause.  Further, the condition imposed on
buyer to deposit seventy five per cent of the amount due would critically affect the buyer without providing any relief to
supplier.  The Committee, therefore, recommended that such a condition might be removed from this Clause. The
Committee also noted that the Bill did not specify the Forum where such an appeal against the award could be filed. 
The Committee, accordingly, recommended that such appeal against the award of Industrial Facilitation Council could
be made in the High Court of that State and the clause may be amended accordingly.
Subject to such changes, the Clause adopted.
Clause 22
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 23
The Committee suggested while constituting the IFCs the Tiny Sector should represented along with Small and Medium
Enterprises.
Subject to change the Clause was adopted.
Clause 24
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 25
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 26
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 27
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 28
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 29
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 30
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 31
 The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 32
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 33
The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 1, the enacting Formula and the Title
The Committee recommended that the Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title should be accordingly changed to
include the tiny sector.
Subject to such changes, Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted.
Out of thirty-three Clauses, the Committee recommended amendments in fifteen Clauses and adopted the remaining
eighteen Clauses without any change.
In addition to the amendments to respective Clauses, the Committee made further observations and recommendations.
The Committee recommended that the Bill could be passed after incorporating amendments approved by it and giving
due consideration to the other observations of the Committee.
The verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The meeting was adjourned at 4.30 pm.

176th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/176threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:46]
 
New Delhi K.P. Singh
29th July 2005 Under Secretary
 
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Committee on Industry
Minutes of the Meeting
XXXVII Meeting
***
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 2nd August 2005 in the Room 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
Present
Shri Santosh Bagrodia  —Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. M.M. Agrawal
Shri Surendra Lath
Shri Suresh Bharadwaj
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
LOK SABHA
Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
Shri Sarvey Satyanarayana
Shrimati Rubab Sayeda
Shri  Bapu hari Chaure
Secretariat
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer 
 
The Chairman welcomed the Members and sought their views on the Draft 176
th Report on the Small and Medium
Enterprises Bill, 2005.
The Committee then adopted the Report unanimously.
The meeting was adjourned at 3.45 pm.
New Delhi  K.P. Singh
2
ndAugust
2005                                                                                 
                                                              
Under Secretary
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------