I 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABRA 
Ind. 27/98 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON l~'DUSTRY 
453-vR$-IA 
TWENTY ·SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE ACTION TAKEN REPORT OF MINlSTRY 
OF STEEL Or\ THE 18TH REPORT OF 
THE COMMI'ITEE 
(PRESENTED ON THE lOTH DECEMBER, 1998) 
-... 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 199&/AGRAHA YANA, 1920 (SA.KA) 

-
CONTENTS 
I'AOL~ 
I. CoMros•nos o~ Tlil! CoMMrrrte .......................................................... (i)·(ii) 
U. INTKODUC"IION ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••.•.•••••••••••....•.••... . ••••.•..... ... .............. (in) 
Ill. RnORl Of TilE CoMMrriU.! ....... ....................................................... 1-16 
IV. ANNf.XliKt-1 .... • ............ • • .............. ..... • ................................ 17-20 
V ANN!oXUR!l·ll • .................. ....... .... .. ....................... ..... • ... • • ... .. • . 21 
VI. ANNtXUKt·lll . .. . .. ....... .... . ........ . ............................................ . 22·23 
VII. ANN~XURE·IV .............................................................................. 24-28 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMJTTEE 
I. Shn Raghavji - Cbamnan 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
3. Shri Maurice KujuQ 
4. Shri Kann:~ Topden 
5. Shri Rojubhai A. Pannar 
6. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
7 Dr. Ranbir Singh 
8. Shri C.O. Poulose 
9. Shri P. Pmbhakar Reddy 
10. Shri Nagmani 
11 Shri Bhagaban Majht 
12. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
13. Shn Santosh Bagrodia 
14. Shn Shibu Soren 
15. Shri Gaya Singh 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shn Muni Lall 
17. Shri M Srinivas 
18. Shri Vijay Shankar 
19 Shri Gyan Singh 
20. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
21 Shri Rnmanand Smgh 
22 Shri Annasaheb M.K Patil 
23 Shri Jual Oram 
24 Shri Anand RaUla Maurya 
25. Shri Punnulal Mohale 
26. Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
27. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
28. Shri Duua Meghe 
29. Shri Konijeli Rosaiah 
30. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
31. Dr. Shakeel Ahmad 
32. Shri Sunil Khan 
33. Shri Ananda Pathak 
34. Shri Kirti Vardhan Sangh 
35. Shri K. Palanaswamy 
36. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav (Jahanabad) 
37. Shri Shakuni Choudhury 
38. Shri Malyala Rajaaah 
39. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samantaray 
40. Shri Ajay Chakraborty 
(i) 
I 

~1 Shri Zora Sinp.h 
42 Shri Ajil Kumar Panja 
43 Shri S.S. Palanimamckam 
44 Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
SECRETARIAT 
(ii) 
Shri Sati~h Kumar. Jomt SecretaT)' 
Shri Tapa\ OM Gup~;~, Director 
Shri P C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Sing)l. Commtttee Officer 

l!'<IRODUCTIOI' 
!, the Chairmen of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry having been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this 27th Report on 
Action Taken by the Ministry of Steel on the recommendations/observations contained in 
the 18th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants of Ministry for Steel 1996-97. 
2. The 18th Report of the Comm iuee was laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 
29th August, 1996 and presented to Rajya Sabba on the 30th August, 1996. The Mu11~try of 
Steel was requested to furnish action taken replies ag!linst the recommendataonslobscrva­
ttons contained in the Report The replies of the: Ministry an respect of all the 
recommendations/observations were received. 
3. Subsequently, the Commiuee at tts meeting held on the 28th July, 1997, constituted 
inter ali~ Sub-Commiltee-Il to examine and report on the Action Taken Reports of the 
Manimy of Steel on its 18th Report. The Sub-Committee considered and adopted its draft 
Report on the 18th September, 1997. The umc report could not be adopted by the full 
Commattec as it became defunct consequent upon di~oluuon of the lith Lok Sabha. 
4. The newly constituted Commauee met on the 14th August, 1998 and adopted the 
Report of the Sub-Committee (Minutes of meeting arc appended us Annexure) 
Nuw DELIIt; 
14tl! August, 1998 
(iti) 
RAGHAVJI, 
Chairman 
Department Related Pnrliamenlllry 
Standing Committee on Industry 

REPORT 
The Department Related Parlmmcntary Standing Committee on Industry at the meeting 
held on the 28th July, 1997 romtlluted, mrer-a/i,,, Sub-Commmee-U to examine and report 
on the ATRs of the 18th Repon of the Comm1ttee on the Demand for grants 1996-97 of the 
Ministry of Steel. The Sub-Comm.ttee has the fo!I0\\1ng conslitulloll'-
I . Shri Pradeep Bhattac.:harya - Convenor 
MEMBERS 
2 Shri Maurice Kujur 
3 M1-s Saroj Khaparde 
·1. Shri Sanjay N1rupam 
5. Shri Sunderbl Pat\\ a 
(), Shn Uduysmghrao Gaikwnd 
7. Shri Chuturi Ravmdra 
8 Dr N. Subramanyam 
9. Shn B L Shankar 
10. Shn Sunil Khan 
11. Shn V A l;,ikalaruJ 
12. Shn Anandrao Adsul 
13. Shri V. A1~~;msam) 
14. Shn P.C. Thomas 
2. The 18th Report of the Comml!lee was pre~nted to the Rnjya Sablm on the 
30th Augu>t, 1996 and wa, laid m the Lol: Sabha the S3mc day. Government h~ve furnished 
rcphc> mdicating the action taken on the various recommendar.ions of the Committee. 
3. The Sub-Committee met on the 18th August, 1997 and considered the ATRs 
furnished by the Ministry of Steel on the various recommendations of the Commntee anti 
decided Lo have certain A TRs furnished bv the :Vfinistry of Steel on the various 
recommendations of the Committee and decided to have certain clanfications. The Sub­
Commmee again met on the 29th Augu~t, 1997 and further considered the AT&. in the light 
ot the clarifications rece1ved from the ~hn1stry. 
ol The Sub-Committee con>idered and adopted the draii report at Its meeting held on 
the ll>th September, i997. ~1 nutes of the <it!ings of u'!e Sub-Commmee are reproduced as 
Annexure- I\' 
5 The Comments'Observauons 01 lhe Sub-Committee on the various ATRs as rP-ccived 
!rom the ;\1inistry oi Steel are contamcd in the succeeding paragr:1phs 
I 

2 
l. RECOl\i'tENDA TIO~ 
The relevance of the observations made above is borne out by the detarls of the 
Demand for Grants for Ministry of Steel for 1996·97. The Department Related Standing 
Committee on Industry had last year drawn attention to the ~teadily declining fiscal 
outlay for this Ministry over the years. The development can be termed with JUStification 
as most unususl. (para i) 
The task of ensuring the advancement of steel producllon on a wide front has rested 
with the public ~ector That role cannot be easily abdic;lted notwithstanding the changes 
that have taken place in the e,onom)' in the course of the put de<:ade. It is, therefore, 
somewhat puzzling that the budgetary appropriations for the Ministry have in fact been 
lowered in current year's. Demands for Grants 'compared to what these were last yenr. 
Such a downward slide in the Ministry's appropriations is precisely the reverse of what 
this Committee had recommended in its earlier reports. The present committee can only 
reiterate the same point of view. The economy is badly in "eed or more steel produc;tion, 
market forces by themseh•es are unlikely to be able to attain the targets set in this 
reg~ d. (pan 5). 
Considering the maJor· tasks that lie ahc;ad for it, Ministry's annual appropriations 
nu·t be r•r.ed ~ubMantially (para 14). 
Action Token 
It may '>e pornted out that the budgetary support viz. funds provided by the Central 
Government ior Capital E.xpendrturc is only one of the several components o r plan 
fundrng others being intcmall~· generated re,ource s (retained profit plus depreciation etc.) 
and extra· budgetary resources such as bonds, ,upplier•. credit, external commercial 
borrowings etc. It is the total me of capital expenditure, which will better reCiect the 
level of invotmcnt in the PSU~ m the stce! sector The following figures will show that 
there has actually been substantial increase rn plan expenditure by these PSUs:-
Fmancial Year 
1992-93 (Actual) 
1993·94 (Actual) 
1994-95 (Auual) 
1995-96 (Actual) 
l996-9i (RE) 
outlay (Rs. in Crore) 
2831.92 
2559.10 
3201.93 
3104.56 
3618.39 
In the recent years Steel Sector has witnessed a compound growth rate of around 
12% to 15% which indrcatcs that smaller size of budgetary support has not been allowed 
10 affect the overall performance adversely 
Comments!Ob>er•atioos 
The Sub-Commiuee appreciates that the Budgemry Support is only one of the 
several components of plan funding, but keeping rn view the role the Ministry of Steel 
and the major tasks that lie ahead oi it in the steel sector as envisaged by the 
Committee the Sub-Conuruttee reiterates the Committee's recommendation that the 
Ministry's steadily declimng fiscal outlay and the appropriations should be checked. ln the 
opinion of the Sub·Comminee budgetary support from nil the resources, including home 
as well as extema, borrow1ng dul)· guaranteed by Government will have to be augmented 
on mass scale. 

3 
U. RECOMMENDATIO~ 
India bas the appropriate geolog~cal resources for specialising in steel production and 
emerging as one of the world's leaders in 11m area. We have ncb deposits of iron o~ and 
also command the highest global reserves of coal. We also possess skilled manpower with 
the potential of their performing ac:x:ording to highest international standards with adequate 
initiative guidance and deployment of investment funds, it should be possible to raise the 
level of steel production in country to the neighbourhood of what Japan currently produces 
despite hardly and domestic availability of basic raw materials. (para 4) 
For us tQ attain the level of steel outpue ~y 100 million tonnes In the cou~ of the 
next decade or thereabout is by no stretch wishful thinking. This goal is feasible in case the 
Government makes the budgetary appropriations to match ·the requirements and the Minhtry of 
Steel gear itself for the purpose. (para ol) 
Without question the country needs to set up more primary and secondary steel producang 
unats of different sizes and specilicauons. Equ:.lly important is to expand the scale of operataon 
of the major primary steel producing units and balance this by es11bhshmen1 of a scnes cf 
am:dlary units, including mini steel 140rb in dafferent parts of the coun1ry. Govemmcntol 
amhatave under the leadership of the Mmistry of Steel is called for on a sustamed bans, if thew 
objectives are to be fulfilled. (p.ua S) 
Gave the masstve nature of cap1tal invC$tments that are needed, the produ~llon uf 
primary steel is likely to continue to be the re1ponsabihty largely of the pubhc 'ector for •1111 
n con~iderable wh1le. An intensive programme of installing mim·steel planb, wh1ch could 
stand on their own as in reasonable tame will also necessitate some iDIIial injcctaons or State 
Furtls apart from managerial and technological guidance of appropriate kind lnveMment on 
technology and uplifuncnt of skill~ will huve to be ac:x:orded top priority for activities in both 
1pheres. There has to be besides, continuous expenment with shop floor management and 
marketing strategies Despite the advances claimed for globalisation and liberalisation in 
recent yean, the guidance of the Miniury of Steel, In the Committee\ vaew cannot be 
immediately dispensed with in the steel sector . (para 5) 
Action Taken 
The Above observations of the Committee mamly focus on the need to ~ub>tantially 
augment the production of steel in the country specially when we are ble~ed with vast 
reserves of raw materials required for the production of steel, and the role to be played by 
this Ministry. Ministry of Steel fully agrees with the perception of the Commillee as 
reflected in their above mentioned observations. However, following is:>ues are relevant:-
(i) The production of the ste~l has to be 1n line with the domestic demand and export 
demand. It has been observed that there is a strong relationship between GDP 
growth rate and the demand of steel. Recently this Ministry has carried out an 
exercise, wherein it has been proJected that demand for finished steel will be 3&.68 
million tonnes including 6 million tonnes for exports during 2001..02 against which 
availability has been prOJected as 38.01 million tonnes 
(ii) Regarding the raw material availability it is fact that country has got one of the 
largest reserves of iron ore in the world. However the availability of coking coal is 
limited and is not sufficient even to meet the requirement of current level of 
production forcing the large scale imports. which is expected to grow bigger in stze 
by the tum of the century Therefore, there is a need to have a cautious approach 
while drawing up expansion plans. 
(iii) Iron a.nd steel sector has been removed from the list of andustries reserved for the 
public sector and has also been exempted from the provision of compul~ory 

4 
licensing in tenns of lDR, 195! bamng cenaw locational restncttons. Our 
approved plans do not envisage setting up of new steel plants in the public sector. 
Rather, it will be a more rational approach tf the existing public ""•:tor plants 
•ennenl thetr strategtes to impro•e theu cost competitiveness and to tmprov,. the 
quahty of theu products by means of modernisation, upgradation of technology, 
etc Additional ~:apacity, therefore has to be created in the privat~ sector and 
ex, nt of creating of capacit) as wc:U as tuning thereof will depend upon the 
Judgement of the entrepreneur~. 
(iv) 11m Ministry is playmg on active role of a bc11itator and tnes its best to remove 
any )tumbling blocl<s commg m the "'"Y of gro,.,tR of Ind1an steel sector. Some of 
1hc major ~tep~ in this dltecuon are as under-
(a) lbere arc two hnl<age Comnu!lees operatmg tn this ~tinimy to provide the 
linkages l)f raw matenals and transpoll tO sponge iron, pig iron :1nd p1g tron 
bused steel plants 
(h) Constant mteract.vn wuh the All lnd1a Findnt"oal lnslllutoons. 
(c) Close interaction with the: concerned Central Ministne,;, State Governments 
entrepreneurs to resolve the usues com;ng up in the way of growth of thi$ sector. 
Cummtni•,/Ob\tn·nlion• 
lbc 'iut>-Commottec notes the policy of Government "hereby steel sector has bc"n 
ope cd up to the provatc 5ector and no new stc:el plants are envisaged in the Public Se~tor. 
TI1c Sub-Committee further note> Government's viev.' point that additional capacities will 
now be created in the private sector only. Dut, the Sub·Committcc as not convtnced with the 
Mim>try's >tatcmcnt that the extent of creation or additoonal capacity and the timing thereof 
will depend upon the judgement of the cntreprcneut. The Sub-Commottee expects 3 much 
onort posiuve role on the pan of Ministry of Steel in this regard. The Sub-Commiuee 
rcitcr.llcs 1~ new poont that produc!lon of primary steel 1S likely to be the responsibility of 
tlw public sector for some time, given the massive nature of capital in,estment called for. 
Further. th" moni ~tee! plants en•1saged in the pn~·att: sector also need care and attentoon at 
the ~ onds Jl Gm ernment on the tonn of managerial and technologiC~ I guidance of the 
upproprootc kind rather than leav1ng them to the judgement oi the entrepreneurs. As regards 
the .carcuv of nght quantities and quality o! coal beong the llmmng factor in achieving the 
higher targets of >tee! production, the Sub-Commiuee recommends that Government should 
take steps to overcome these. The Sub-Commiuee suggests that Government should come 
fof"'ard to enrich tt>e dom~uc coal which has hi<>h ~sh contents. For thts purpo 1se the coal 
"'a'heries ~llould be m~talled near the various <Ou l mines inst.:ad of the steel pl~nts so that 
not only good quality of coni is made available for Steel Plants but its transportation charges 
arc further reduced. 
m. RECOl\~fEI'I'DATIONS 
Not only should the output of s!eel and that oi steel Authority of India increase at a 
fast.:r pace that at present and requ1site financial provi~ions be made for the purpose, 5uch 
productions should also be evenly spaced out over the different parts of the country so as to 
accelerate the pnee of industrialosation even in the remotest parts. (para 6) 
The Ministry of Steel should, in consultation with the Planning Commission, chart a 
national perspective plan for steel productoon. The perspective "ill aucmpt to integrate the 
demands fc•r different steel items and categories over the years v.1th potenttal sources of 
supply Such planmng. should even comprise regional and ~easonal dovetailing. The 
perspective plan must also incorporate the measures to be pursued over the vears "lth 
rcsp ct to both exports and importS of steel. (para 8) 

I 
I 
5 
The Comm1ttee does not have !be least 1 nlenuon to take a n!!ld v1ew on such 1ssue~. If 
the Indian economy. particularly ir~ industrial \ector 1s to be rendered 1ntemationall) 
competnive protecuve measures have to be gradually abandoned, but "'lthout hann to the 
prospects of self-reliant growth. The proper thing would be to drav. up a "hemata wh1ch 
informs both stec:l producers and ~!eel consumers the targets set, for each of the f1ve or ten 
years, for reduction of domestic unit cost for vanous items and the corrc,ponding downward 
adJUStments the rates of 1mport du11es Should 1t be possible to prepare ~uch a \Chcmata m 
consuhmion with the various panics concerned. there would be few occa\lon~ for heart­
burning on the part of anyone: d1fferen1 inter~t group' "ould be able to JdJUSI them,clve, 
to the evolving Circumstances. (para 12) 
The Commillee, it \hould be obv1ous by no,.. ha' a two-fold ob)ecuvc 1n \lew. F1rst 
considering the major tasks that he ahead for it the Mtni\lry ' annual appropnat1on, mu't be 
raised substantially. Second, the Mini\tl)· must be persuaded to emerge out or the groove or 
nnrrow one-year budgetary exerctses and accept a longer term pcn;pective of 1t' ;tctovitie' 
within the contours of which the details of the obJect.- :s arc to be spelled out Thc'c dctaob 
will cover prOJected mve~tment\, tncludong on,•cstmcnt' Cor rui~ing tcdtnolugoc;o l ..rtd 
managerial skills. the proposed deployment of mnnpo"'er over the ~c·"'· dctt>ton m•tkong 
With respect to product plunmng, the pcr~pectiVe fur dt~<:tpltmng u111t ~O\t of d•flcrent 
Clltegoncs, the phasing of import duty reduchOn\ and of export expan\lon 1nt~ratcd wnh 
one another Such planmng mu't also tncorpor.ue target~ ~t on the corrc>pnnd ing iltCII\ nf 
aron ore mtning «S well as establishment and improvement or coal w.o,hcroc' (par.• 14) 
Action Takrn 
In mder to have: a long tenn pcnpectwe and planmng exerctsc, a v.orkm~ Group for IXth 
Five Year Plan was constituted for iron and steel under the aegt~ or l'l;~nmng Commi'"on 
The Workmg Group has deliberated upon all "'peels and \U!:._S(estt I ·• >tratcgy for an 
mtegrntcd and h:trmon10us gro,.th of the steel ~ctor dunng IXth Plan and thereafter . Bnd 
summary of the report and recommendation\ of the Work1ng Group " cnclo>ed '" 
ANNEXURE II for perusal or the commtttcc. 
To summerise, the demand for fim;hed ~teel tn the country " tn"c:"''"!\ "' a rate I 32 
limes the GOP growth and would touch 32.68 millton tonnes (net) uunng 2()(11-0~ The 
domestic availability of finished :;teel from all sources would be 38.01 m111ion tonnes. almo>t 
adequate to meet the domestic demand and aho export potenual of 6 m1llton tonne\ us 
identified by the Working Group The mstalled capacny 1s e'pected 10 reach -H.(>(lli nulhon 
tOn[\C; by the end of !be Ninth fi,·e Year Plan . Stmolarly. by 2006-07 the demand for 
finished steel is estimated 10 be 48.80 million tonnes whereas production m the: country 
would be 57.80 million tonnes. prov1dtng adequate surplus Cor meeting the projected export 
potential of 9 million toones. 
The maJOr pubhc sector mtegrated steel plants namely SAIL and RINL. would be able to 
contribute about II.U9 million tonnes and :!.41 million tonnes respecttvely With T!SCO's 
contribution of 3.1 million tonnes of finished steel. the integrated steel plant~ are expected 
to produce 16.959 million tonnes. The balance 21.053 million tonnes would be from 
secondary steel sector dunng 2001-02. In olher "'ords the Secondary Sector •s expected 10 
contribute about 55.4 per cent or the availability of fini~hed steel 1n the country. The 
domestic product1on of steel is expected (rom the follo .... mg :.ourcc~:-
(a) Existing steel making capaciues in the country, 
(b) Upcoming additional capacitie~ in existing plants. 
(c) New plants to be commissioned by :!001-02. 
It may be menttoned !bat ne" investment will be requtred mainly in ~reas (b) and (c) 
above and in modernisation of existing capacittes to improve their competiuvenes' and 
upgrade the quality of the products 

6 
The Working Group has idcnttfied the follo\\ tog pattern of the investment during the 
Nmth Five Year Plan:-
(Rs. m crorr) 
Area Pubbc Sector Pnvate Sector Total 
Steel 1620~ 00 3!658."0 47860 00 
Sponge Iron 0 oo· 635.00 635 (XI 
l'tg Iron 0.00 200.00 200 ()() 
R.tw Material 3479.00 o.oo· 3479 ()() 
and Oth~rs 
TOll\l 196&1.00 32493 00 52174 00 
lnvcstrncnt ptnJc~tcd by SAIL lor expan>~on \l[ :O.ptlngc Iron capacity etc. has been 
wnsidcrcd 111 the category or raw matcnals and other\ . Investment likely to be made tn the 
pnvJtc >ccttH m raw matcriah anti uthen. cmtld not be estimated uuc to pauctty ut 
lllfOIIILIItOn 
It will he :.ecn that out or tutal cstunatcd tn\cstrnent ol Rs. 5217~ crorc m iron and \tct·l 
:.e~·tor uunng !Xth Plan penO<t, publt.: sector's eontnbutton would account for Jbout ls'¥. 
and the balantc 6~% would be m the private ~ccl<lr. As on I 1 1997 a'l India hnanctal 
Institutions h.tvc cleared 21 large prOJects mvolv111g ;nt annual c.tpactty o! 12.23 mtlhun 
tonncs of salcahlc \!eel and investment of R' 22 2~5 crore. 6 more projects with an 
estimated capacny of 4.85 milhon tonnes per annum and tnvolvmg mve•tment of Rs. 10,105 
crorc a·c undt•t appratsal . 
Thus, Mtntmy of St<!el h~\ formulated a v.ell-l.nu ~cheme m consultdtion v.uh Planmng 
Cummi~sion for ,~If-reliant ;mu healthy gro"' th ol the steel sector kecpmg m vtc:w Jll 
g.unute~ of growth perspective for thl\ sector. l'hl\ mcludes matnt3tntng conttnOu> growth 
tempo coupled ~ith projected 11we~tments both tn pubhc and private sectors, mvestment for 
mtsing technologtcal and manager"'' ~ktlls, deo,ion makmg for protluct plannmg, man-power 
deployment etc The recommendations made b~ the \\'orktng Group are yet to be formally 
approv~d b} Planmng Commi s~ion. 
Comments 
The sub-Committee notes that Government arc tal..ing action in line 1.\lth the Committee's 
recommendation~ regardtng drawing up a long term perspecuve and planntng exerctse . ·The 
Sub-Committee, however docs not agree with the Government's view thut out of the total 
esumated invc,tment or Rs. 5217-1 crores in the tron Jnd steel sector durmg the lXth Plan 
period pubhc sector investment will account for about 3S% and the balance 62% would be 
in the pri\ate ~ctor . In the opmton or the Sub-Committee, the 10\.'Cstment ID the public 
~ctor should be much more 'o that the much needed motlernisation programmes in respect 
of the Steel plants in the public sector an: ac~omplished . 
IV. RECOI\.fMENDA TION 
The ptllicy of freight equali~ation for steel and steel ttems. which in an earlier phase was 
the kingpin or the strategy for mdu,trial dispcf'!.al ha' been suspended at least in part smce 
January, 1992. Despite a specific sugsestion contained in the Committee·, report last year. 

I 
{ 
\ 
7 
the Government has not yet been persuaded to msutute an tnqutry into either the r~sults 
that flowed from the policy of [reight equalisation or ~fter effects o! it> parttJI 5U~pen~•· ~ 
Government )hould now in~tllute an cnqu1ry mto thi> mauer Urgently. (pura 6) 
If freight equalisation of steel d:d not help to narrow the dispanlles m industnnl growth 
between different zones and parts of the country, a case exists for drawing up a long range 
design for expanding the steel industl} m a phased mannc~ 1n areas, "htch are both remote 
from the steel belt and have remained ensconced in backwardness. Such a dcstgn for 
expansion or steel output wh1o:h embod1es vast poss1bil::1es of new employment in hnhc1t0 
dcpreS\ed areas. nus requ1rcs to be dovetailed mto overall planning proce~s . (para 7\ . 
Action Tuken 
The Government had already msututed a ~:udy m the mauer soon after the receipt ol 
the recommendations made by the Committee. Ia~ I year 10 Augu't. 19'.15. 'J'he Eco:t<'ttllc 
Rc,earch Um: (ERU) of Joint Plant Commntee is destmauonststock~ards sprcJd ot..t .•II 
o1cr the 'ountry. l:RU has wught some more tunc to complete th~ Mudy ~') us 10 ensure 
authcn:1etty ;~nd proper All·lnd1a cover.~ge of the 1-:1pact of the changed pohcy In vacw ol 
the :~bnv~ recommendatiOn, and Ill order to cxped1te the complcuon o[ the ~tud1 .1 
Commtllcc has been .on~:.tulcd under the Chaumar.s'up of de1clopmcn1 C.>mmts,mn 11 r 
I ron and S tee I. 
The Sub·C'omnHUcc i• unhapp) to note that Go1-emment are taking un10 ~.11l)· long lime 
to >tuJy the rnallcr. They ha1e, 111 the process, lo't ~ight of the urgency 1n1olvcd. f'he Suh 
Comrmllce recommend' that Government 'hould come out "'lth there decasron m a dcfuutc: 
umc fr;•me cxpcndtttou,ly. 
V. RECO~l~IEI\l>ATIO:-: 
Wlulc new mint stec:l plants proposed to be set up und~r long range pbn could be under 
private Initiative, the venture capa:al may need 10 be proqdcd from Government sources 
Re,ources for the purpose .,.ill have to be carm~rked in the budget or the !l!;m.;ry of Steel. 
A bcgmmng towards th1' direction could as well as have been made 111 the current )·car 
appropriations. Should there be such a rearrangement 1n the Demands for Gran• for the 
current ) car bccau~e ot ~honage of lime and other f~ctor,, the Government may be urged to 
en,ure that measures be imtiatcd to enable this sttJte~y of dtspersal of steel output to be 
mtcgrated "'1th the :>.!1nisuy's plan budget during the 9th pl.m period. (Para 7) 
Action TakM 
Because of liberalisation mea~ures initiated b~ Go .er·men t an the steel senor the 
prt,~te >ector has shown a lot oi cmhu!.!asm an setting up producuon !Jciliues and All lndw 
Ftnancial Institutions have already sanctioned seH~ projectvsclleme> The entrepreneur 
are free ro set up Iron and steel plant> based on the c2pacity and technologic~ of thcar 
choice. Government of India, ho"'e'·er does not prov1de budgetary s1.:ppon ~o the pnv,ue 
sector; nor does it Intend to do so. The budgetary suppon which is being extended is only to 
help a few PSUs who are not an po'tllOn to generate ,ufficient internal resources for tt eir 
plan e~pendnure. 
Commeots/Obsen ·atlons 
The Sub-Committee notes Government's stand that with the liberalisation of steel sector 
11 does not propose to provide budgetary support to priv•ate sector. 

8 
VI. RECOMMENDATION 
Given our reservoir of resourees, physical a' well as human, 11 ~hould be in the realm of 
possibility for this nation to emerge as a maJor exporter of steel products after meeting 
internal requtrements. The technology is available, labour is available, coal and tron ore are 
available, all that is needed i~ the will to go forward and a Vt\IOn on the pan of the 
authonties. II is for the Mmsstry of steel to take up the challenge . (para 9) 
Action Taken 
It may be mentioned lhal lndta has already regt~tered i~ prtseocc in the internauonnl 
market in recent times. While lndta started steel productton in the yc~r 1911, stee l cxpon' 
[rom lndiJ began only in 1964 to 1968 lndta e~ported a large quanltly of steel ma10ly due to 
reccs~ton tn the domcsttc tron and steel market. subsequently, export~ decltned wtth the 
revival of domc.Mic demand lndta once ag;un MartcJ c:xpomng >tcc:l from 1975, touchmg a 
record export of steel in 1976-77. E.~pon agatn fell thereafter a• dornc•ltc shortages had to 
be met Export ha~ aga10 ptc!..cd up 10 the la•l ~.J yeal"'> llle quanttty and value of ptg tron 
and steel exported s10ce 199().91 tlo gtven 10 the table placed at ANI"EXURE. 
It wtll be seen that the tncrea'e in <!lCporl of '"!cable steel tn 1995·96 as compurcd lo 
1990·91 wu~ 31:13% in quantity term and 837% tn value term E~rltcr exports con\i\ted 
matnly or plate~. bars and ro.h and structurah. "'hereas nqw ~<:tnt\, hot rolled co1h. cold 
rc:l)led cotl\, ptg non and ~pongc iron are also bctng e~ported. In future, 11 is expected that 
more of value added items wtll be expo ned . 
The IXth Plan working Group for Iron and Steel has C>ttmatcd that lndta wtll have Hn 
export potentiul of 6 million tonne\ of steel by 2Cl0l·02 and 9 milhon tonncs by 2006·07. Tite 
above projection Cor expom has been made keeping in view the need for proJecung export 
as a dbttnct market whtch need to be developed as also after mcettng the domestic 
rcqunements 
Mtlllslry or steel has coMtttuted an Expert Group to evolve a strateg) to give Impetus to 
the export of iron and steel The report of the Comminee is awattc:d. 
E~pert of Steel and Pig Iron 
Year Saleable Steel 
0•~ . \".1luc 
1~91 3.11 lSI 
1991·92 3.87 2S3 
(24.4%) (S6.3%) 
1992-93 8.94 102 
(131%) (l.:S%) 
1993-94 16.01 1417 
(79%) (101%) 
1994-95 13.19 1238 
(- 18'4) (-ll"'o) 
1995·96 15.02 1696 
(U.S%) (37%) 
1~97 5.50 621 
(Apr.-Sept) 
(Prov,) 
Ot) Value 
0.16 0 
6.l0 261 
J.67 :::00 
5.().1 143 
(7 9'%) 21.5'-
l.OS 51 
(Ou:mcicy in /akb connvs) 
(Value in crort:s) 
Total Iron & Steel 
Oty 
311 
)87 
(24.4%) 
9. 10 
(135%) 
2221 
(I~%) 
IH6 
(-19.6%) 
10.06 
(12.32o/o) 
6.55 
Voluc 
1&1 
2$3 
{56.3o/o) 
708 
(150%) 
1678 
(137%) 
1438 
(-14.3%) 
193 
(2.7%) 
n 
Figurts on bra<kets indtcatc the pcrcenUt~ tncruoe'dect<><: o>'er the prc>10US ~eartcorrespondrng period 

9 
It will be seen that the percentage mcrease in export of saleable steel in 1995-96 as 
compared to 1990-91 was 383% in quantity term and 837 m value term. Earlier exports 
consist mainly of plates, bars and rods and structurals, whereas now semis, hot rolled coils, 
rold rolled coils, pig iron and sponge iron are also being exported. ln futures, it is expected 
that more of value added temts will be exported . 
The lXth Plan working Group for !Jon and Steel has e:oumated that India will have an 
export potential of 6 million tonnes of Meet by 200l-02 nnd 9 mllion tonnes by 2()()6..07. 'The 
above projection for exports b~ been made keeping in view the need for projecting export 
as a distmct market which need to be developed ns also after meeting the domestic 
requ1rements Ministry of steel h 1S coruot1 uted an Expert Group to evolve a Strategy to give 
1mpetus to the c)(port of 1ron and steel. The report of the CQmmille<; is awaited. 
Cornmcnt<VOb\en:otions 
The Sub· Commutee rs not satisfied with the targets for export of steel fixed by 
Government. In the opmion of the Sub-Comminee Government should set up higher targets 
10 VIC\\ our reservoir of rerources, both ph)'1iical and human. 
\'11. RFCO)l~tr::~D.\TIOS 
The ISsue of llllpon~ and thc1r 1mpact on the domcsll' mdustry cannot b<' under·rateJ 
ellhl·r The Comminee ha. m th1~ connection considered in rome dettnl the likely 1mpoct of 
the \tVCI ~ rec.Jucuon m 1mport duties on variou~ steel Clh:gories that have been taking place 
m rc ·ent year pur,uant to the policy of liberalisation. :~nd ' which have bc:en a feature of this 
yem's budget proposals too. lnerc is, the CQmmlllee feeb, considerable sub~tance in the 
pomt of view that where both excise and import duLies are concerned, the budget proposals 
should not be deployed to spring a surprise on either steel producers or steel consumers. 
Rather than that, a schedule of proposed adJUStmenrs, upwards, or downwards, may be laid 
down for a five·year period, and the endeavour on the pan of the authorities should be to 
adhere to th1s schedule. Of course, were unexpected developments to occur. the government 
may have few alternative:> but to disrurb the schedule. But unhappiness is likely to be 
contained if the circumstances are properly explained. (Para 10} 
Action Taken 
The budgetary exercise on fiScal levies is an annual fearure. Finance Mmistry is the 
nodal Ministry for this exercise. They are being requested to keep the above 
recommendatiOns in view while fmalising the duty proposals for the Lron & steel sector in 
coming years. It may also be menuoned that ever)· year pre-budget discussions arc held by 
Ministry of steel with various producers and Asrociations of Iron & Steel and their 
suggestions/recommendations are kept in view, while finalising the proposals, which are 
forwarded to Ministry of Finance for their consideration. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that the budgetary exercise on fiscal levies is an annual 
feature. 

10 
Vlll. RECOMMENDATION 
11. Some anguish has been expressed by producers of alloy steel, including stainless 
steel, in both the public and privnte sectors beca!Use or the sharp reduction in import duties 
for various items they produce in the revenue proposals for 1996-97. U the proposed 
reductions in duty are left undisturbed, the interests or the dom<:ltic producers, tt is feared 
would be grievously hurt. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of steel examines 
the matter and makes a reference to the ~li niSlry or rmance so that some relief h 
forthcoming. (para 11) 
Action Token 
Ministry of steel reviewed the diCCiculti<=l of producers of alloy/stainless steel after the 
budget presentation and made su1table recommendation to tbe Finance Mmistry. As a result 
some modifications were incorpOrated while passing the rmance Bill for 1996-97. The\c 
are:-
(i) The 1mport duty on stamless steel sem1s, other than slabs, would be 30% as against 
20% proposed earlier in the budget; and 
(ii) Reduct1on of import duty on stamless steel scrap for the purpose of melting from 
20% to 10% 
ComrntntvO~trva tions 
The Sub·Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. It, however, recommends that Government should be more sensitive 
towards the requ1rements of Steel Industry while determining the rates of excise ~nd import 
duties. 
IX. RECOMMENDATION 
There IS a necessity to dovetail the nation's steel c'l'port plan with the long range steel 
product1on programme. There must be a clear cut view of tire' direction towards which steel 
exports are heading and what diffieulues and problems these are likely to encounter Once 
the Ministry commences such an exercise, 11 will immediately n:alise that it is equally 
importa nt to look into the othe r srde of the p1cture namely the extent to which foreigners 
are to be permitted to penetrate into our domestic market or have already attempted to do 
so because of reduction of import duties or recourse to dumping . Dumping is a double 
edged weapon. If we, in short run, want to work up certain advantages Cor oursclvc~ by 
practising stratagems of exports that arc: not altogether transparent. We must be prepared 
for retaliatory action on the part of the foreigners too in our home market. It then becomes 
the responsibility of the authoriues to ensure that the country's losses do not exceed 
country's gains from such endcavoaurs. (para 13) 
Action Taken 
Export of steel depends upon vanous factors like demand in international & domestic 
market, domesuc & international prices. export benefits, etc. As the export of iron & steel 
1S freely allowed, the decision in this regard is tdken by the producers/exporters themselves 
keeping in view the economics of exports. Howe,•cr, wirh an objective to give impetus to 
exports , the Mmistry has constituted an expert group on exports whose recommendations 
are awaited. However. efforts are made from time to time to remove the bottleneck!V 
difficu1t1es of exporters by having a contmuous interaction with producers, exporters. 
associations of iron & steel etc Their issu<:l are taken up with the concerned Government 
Ministrie!Vdepartmcnts like CBSE, DGFT Ministry of Surface Transport, etc. As stated 

• 
\ 
11 
earlier, the imports of iron and steel are freely allowed Also, although the import duties on 
various items of iron and steel have been gradually reduced over the years, no complaint 
regarding dumping of steel products in the lndian market by foreign sellers has yet been 
liled with the designated authority under the provisions of the Customs Tariffs Act, 1975. 
Comments/Obsenntions 
The Sub-Comminee notes that as per the Government'~ policy, export and import of 
steel are freely allowed. The Sub-Committee, however, reiterates the necessity on 
Government's part to dovetail nations >teel export plan with long range ~teel production and 
formation of clear cut view over the direction towards which steel exports are headtng so 
that there IS a con<tstant nse tn the exports. The Sub-Comminee hopes that the export 
group ~ct up by Government on exports would acccnnphsh lis task expeditiously. 
X. RECOI\IMENOA TION 
TI1e nauonnl plannmg tn any sphere cannot afford to by-pass the call the employment 
gcncr~tmn the pre\\ure in thi\ re~pect can only mount. It is conce1vable that in primary S\CCI 
produ((ion, where cost effccuvc:ne'>' ha\ to be the dommaun~· consideratiOn the long term 
outlook for employment will rema1n constncted . OrKe huwc,er n•erall output tn the primary 
steel sector registers an impre~t,·e tncrease and downstream mdustries come to nuumh' m 
consequence. prospects of a considerable increase 1n employment opportuntties c:1nnot at 1111 
be ruled out. 13ut \uch scheme of thing~ can be ~ucce~ful, only 1f the p:1r:unetcr' or broad 
strategy arc carefully charted out and made mtcmally con~~>tent . (para 15) 
Action Taken 
An inherent advantage, which Indian Steel industry possesses, is the avnilubility or 
technically trained manpower w1thm the countr) . The observations of the Committee will be 
kept m '1ew wh1le formulatmg future strategtes A 'tudy undertaken by one of the Indian 
Institutes of Technology has tndtc:ated that productton of one tonne of ~teel in thc country 
lends to employment of one person, through forward apd backward linkages. ThiS will 
mdicate that with the huge growth expected m proJucuon or steel in the country, the steel 
-.:ctor w11l create a larger avenue of emplo} ment. Again mcrcase m produ~llon as envisaged 
w1ll also result m enough employment generation downstream through crtation or new unjts 
m vanous segment> like agriculture, automobiles, tub<!making, wire rod m1lls, small scale 
units etc. The creation of ancillary units in the vicinity of steel plants for manufacturing 
variou~ Items required for processing' produang addnion~l steel "ill also help in indirect 
employment generation. 
Comments/Obstr\ a liOilli 
The Sub-Committee note the observations made b) the Mmistry on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
XI. REC0:\1MENDA TION 
The programme of modernisation or the major works under the Steel Authority of lndia 
such as of Steel Units of Durgapur. Rourkela and Boknro as also of lhe unit at 
Visakhapatnam are nearly complete. The spin-<>ff of such modernisation is visible in the 
increased turnover of some of these umts and spectaCUlar nse m the realised profit~ of the 
Steel Authority of India L1mited. Problems however perSISt both at the Durgapur and 
Rourkela units and excessive dependence on specialisation in semi·!ini~hed products will 
need to be quickly redressed . (para 16) 

12 
Action Tahn 
The major facilities under modernisation of Durgapur Steel Plant have been 
commassioned Some of the benefits so far emanatmg from the modermsation of plant at 
Durgapur are as enumerated as under: 
Item 1994·95 1995-96 
Saleable Steel Production ·ooo T 852 947 
Growth m Saleable 
Stec I Productaon % 33 II 
Energy Consumption G . cavr~ 9 75 9.89 
% tmprovement 9 I 
Coke Rate Kg 'filM 752 749 
% tmprovement 14 04 
(Growttv.mptovcmtnt rndJc:aac:tJ • .r.t CXJtrC:t.jlCindin& pcrtud of prcv.ou:s ,-c.ut 
The BOF - CC route at Dwppur Steel l'bnt " un~er pr~"' of >!obh,..uon 
1996-97 
(Apr -Nov.'97) 
678 
13 
9.19 
7 
(t?() 
8 
Rourkc:l• mod<:miSelion htcthttet. vc b<m~ J'lrOCttU•W:I) comm..rs:stoncd and '41ll be coms,tctcd by 
J9()7.fJ8 Rourkc.la Steel Plant doc. not have a probkm '4'Jth r~cl IU W:ml-flnt,hc:cJ rroduC:h 
Rourkeln modernisation facihue~ are bemg progressively cornmtsMonc:d und wall be 
completed by 1997-98. Rourkeln Steel Plant d~ not have a problem With rc\pc:Ct to 'i<!mt· 
finished produCL\. 
However. the post mode~tion product-mix in DSP will have a stgnaltcant productaon 
of semis. It is hence planned to provide fim~hmg malb to DSP m the 9th/10th plan pcnod to 
conven semis into finished products depcndang upon .,vaiJability of fun<h. 
Comm rnl'rObservations 
ln the view of the Sub-Comminee, the pace of moderrusation of the Mecl planb " not 
sati~factory The Sub-Committee is gaven to understand that one blast fumuce at the 
Durgapur Steel Plant and another at Bokaro have already been damaged. The Sub­
Commauce recommends that the modernisation work should be executed expeditiously. The 
Sub-Committee further recommends that the Alloy Steel Plant at Durgapur should also be 
modernised. 
XU. RECOMMENDATION 
For each of the SAil. Units, modernisation has till now been made possible because of 
significant budgetary support ex1ended by the Government. The positive contributions made 
by such budgetary support are mirrored in the record levels of output. Some of the SAIL 
Units have of late reached so much so that the SAIL has been able to post a dividend with 
Government. 
Against thts background. it is mcongruous that the Government bas persistently refused 
budgetary assistance for the re,ival of the other SAIL unit, namely, the Indian iron and 
Steel Company. Following several inCructuous endeavours to lift USCO from the morass it 

13 
has fallen into, a proposal is now on the anvil to revive and modernise the unit by re· 
organising its corporate structure and infusing fresh equity. As currently proposed, the SAIL 
is to hold 51 per cent of the equity of the new corporate entity and 6 per cent each are to be 
held by liSCO employees and the Government of West Bengal. and the rest or the equity 
are to be offered to private parties through open global tender. It is not yet clear whether 
private capital of the right kind will be available within the stipulated period . Should ~uch 
capital play truant, there IS a danger of a shortage of resources which might once more 
endanger liSCO's revival. The Committee would strongly recommend that, to guard aga1nst 
such a contmgency, the Government should consider offering to the entity budgetary 
support, extending over the next five years or thereabouts, in the runge of Rs. 100 to 200 
crore per annum (para 17, 18) 
Action Tak~n 
No budgetary support IS being given to SAIL by Government smce 1986·87 SAIL is 
meetJng 1ts resource to finance 1ts plant schemes through its own internal accruals and extra 
budgetary resources. 
In M> far ab rehabilitation of liSCO 1S concerned. th1s company wo~ referred to DIFR in 
June. 1994 A rev1val proposal was submitted to BlFR b) SAlUllSCO based on fca~ibility 
report of Central for Engmeering and Technology (CET), an m·hOu!>C de~ign and 
COnsultancy organisation or SAlL lO October, 1994 With an inve~tment proposal orR~ 3486 
crores and with an 1mplcmentallon schedule of 5 years . The propo>oll envisaged budgetary 
support of around Rs. 1100 crores from Government, besides Government guarantee for 
issue of bonds for Rs. 1299 crore>. Government of India has since 1ndicatcd its inability to 
provide the env1saged budgetary $Upport SAJL i\ c~nsidering the option of entering into a 
joint venture (JV) wilb any other partner for revival of liSCO v.1th SAIL's equity holdmg of 
six of re~ponse to SAiL's advertisement for JV partner, only ~Vs Mitsui. Japan and 1\-Vs 
Tinhprome Expon (TPE), RUSSia submitted the1r offers . Both the offers are 10 the form of 
an approach note for modermsation, subsequently, 1--Vs Mitsui have express;:d lhe1r mability 
to invest in equity of llSCO The proposal of the Russian party, which env1sages uulisation 
of rupee funds repayable to Russia is under examination . 
Comments/Obsuva tlom 
The Sub-Commiuee is unhappy over Government's failure m accomp!i s.'ung the rev•val 
of liSCO. In the option of the Sub-Commmee, Go,cmment should not delay the de<lSlOn 
for modernisation of nsco any more. 
XID. RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee bad occasion to refer to 10 the past to the issue of advertising and 
rehabilitating such units as the Visvcsvaratya Iron and Steel works in Kamataka or 
Neelancbal Plant in Orissa. Rather than doling out periodically driblets of funds to meet the 
wage bills of these units, Ministry should in the opinion of the Committee, engage in a 
major exercise involving managerial and technological uansfonnation or these units in case 
necessary through infusion of resources from the National Renewal Fund. Whether following 
resuscitati on, these units shall continue to be managed by SAIL or alternative arrangements 
arc made for the purpose is a problem that can be resolved separately. (para 19) 
Action Taken 
The Neelanchal lspat Nigam Limited which was previously under the administrative 
control of Ministry of Steel bas since been transferred to State GoYernment of Orissa. In so 

14 
far as VISL is concerned which is a subsidiary of SAIL. the observauons of the Committee 
have been noted. 
Commeots/Observatlons 
TI1e Sub-Committee is not satisfied with the Ministry's reply that it has noted the 
Comm ittee's observation with regardo to VISL. The Sub-Committee recommends that 
Government should provide for nece&sary funds for revival of VISL 
XIV. RECOMMENDATION 
Pari passu with the expansion of steel output is the chaUenge of adequate iron ore mining 
and the raising of high grade coal. It is unfortunate that despite our rich resources or iron ore, 
certain special categories of steel cannot be fabricated 10 the country not just because of 
lagging technology, but on account of the non-avuilabthty within the country of ore of the 
right specifications. Similarly. while the country has reportedly the highest reserves of coal, 
technological deficiency is currently forcmg us mto large s<.:ale imports of mdustnal coke. 
There would appear to be both a m1smatchmg between demand and supply due to lack of 
coordination and a holding back of necessary mvestment of funds . As far as ore mining is 
concerned, the major responsibility devolves on the National Mineral Development 
CorpOration, a Public Sector Undertaking under the umbrella of the Mini~try of Steel, itself 
Coordination should therefore have been ea~y In reality it has not been so. (para 20) 
Action Taken 
The production of iron ore has increased from 58.52 million tonnes 10 19'.11·92 to 66.24 
million tonnes in 1995-96. The domestic/internal consumpuon in the country during the same 
period has increased from 2.5.8 million tonnes to 36.5 million tonnes It would, thus, be seen 
that the domestic iron ore requirements are bcmg fully met It is only the ~urplus quantity, 
ufter fully meeting the domestic requirements , is exported . Gas-based Sponge !ron Plants 
need iron ore of very high grade (+66% Fe). Pre,ently, the production of high grade iron ore 
is limited to around 2 million tonnes from .Bailadlila dcpo~•t·5 of NMDC and some small 
quantities are purchased by the sponge iron plants from other mmes in the country . The 
balance requirements have to be met by these sponge iron plants through other sources 
because of limited availability of the ore of the reuired quality in the country. 
Comments/Obse r vations 
The Sub-Commirtee is unhappy to note that the Ministry of Steel have not touched upon 
the Committee's recommendation in their comments. The Sub-Committee, accordingly. 
reiterates the Committee's recommendation that there should be proper coordination so that 
necessary funds are available to enable NMDC to undertake mining activiues more vigorously 
to help to find out improved variety of iron ore and coal. 
XV. RECOMNrnNDATION 
To accelarate ore mining the NMDC bas emered into, in recent years a number of 
contractual arrangement with private parties. The results of these arrangements are yet to be 
precisely assessed. It is important that a review is made of the contracts signed over the past 
few years, so that imperfections which inhibit transparency and lead to charges of favouratism 
are identified and eliminated. The Department Related Standing Commitlee on Industry had, 
through a decision taken in December. 1995. expressed the intention to undertake such a 
review and information was asked for from the Ministries. This exercise needs to be 
completed. (para 20) 
(Foot rrote: Miss Saroj Khaparde is in total disagreement with the contents of this 
paragraph). 
Action Taken 
The Department related Standing Commmee on Industry had called for information from 
different Ministries regarding contracts and agreements signed bv the public sector companies. 
Ministry of Steel had furnished the requisite information to the Rajya Sabba Secretariat 
on 20.2.96. (Annexure 111) 

lS 
CommeniSIObser•·utions • 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on Committee's 
recommendation 
XVI. RECOMMENDATION 
One other area where difficulties per~ist 1s with respect to the alleged irregularities in 
the linkages between a parhcular Steel Plant a nd til" mtne supplying ore to 1t. All that the 
Committee would suggest is that care should be tJken to ensure that ores fed into a steel 
plant arc: of ~pcciftcat1 0n wh1ch do not lead to high umt rost and the supply arrangements 
are nnt mterrupted in an abrupt manner. (para 21) 
Action Taken 
SAIL and liSCO have their •wn captl\e mtnes and therefore there IS no problem in this 
regard . Iron ore lmkages to Vizag Steel Plant of RL"<L have been provided from BailaLlila 
nunes "hich have the highor quahty 1ron ore in the country, fur other pnvntc ~teel plants, 
there is .t Lmkage Committee in the Ministry of Steel under the Chairmcnship of Secretary 
(Steel) At the time of pro,iding hnkages, factors hke locatton of the steel plant, loct~tion of 
the nunc >upplymf iron ore. 3f!Ll transport nrrangemcnts are take due n• •tt. ,f. 
('ommentvOb,enmions 
The Sub -Commt tee notes the actton tal;cn by Go,c:mnwr.t un Commtttc:c'~ 
rccu tnmcndattons. 
X\'11. RECOl\IMENDATIO;-..' 
Anuther .• :c:a of concern for steel producing and ore mming umts IS the necessity of 
cnvironrncnwl protection. There ts cultural lag in this respect in the mimng pis a' w•·ll "' 
\ted pl;mh (dtstributmg to both mdustrial polutton on the one hund and deforc~tut t on ,,u 
the uthcr The Mtnlstr) or Steel , the Committee hope>. IS ~ized or the problem. It Will be 
worth conMdcring to attach spectal t·ell on environmental protection in the Mtntstry. Thi~ 
hus. however to be an active body . (para 2:! 
t\dlon Tnken 
As regard> the pollutiOn control and environment protection it rnay be stated that the 
matter t~ under the admimstntive control of the M1nist.ry of Envtronmcnt .tnd Forests. 
However, J\11ntstry of Steel also mont ton the status of pollution cont.col in the tron and steel 
tndustr} regubrly . The de,·elopment Commt>sioner for Iron and Steel who is under the 
MHmtry l1f Steel organises semmar.. on pollution control and c:rwironment protection from 
ttmc to t1me With objective ot creatmg awareness . 
Commcnts·Obser-·ations 
The Sub-Committee have noted the observauon of the Ministry of Steel on the 
Committee's recommendations. It would, however, like the Ministry to reconsider the 
Cornmrttee's proposal to set up a special cell on environmental protection in the }..unist.ry of 
Steel. 
XVlli. RECOMMENDATIO!'< 
A parallel cell to tackle the problems of the !\1ini Steel Plants will appear to be equally 
demable. The need ior such a cell arises because of seeming official insensitivity in the past 
in this regard. This apathy has the ripple effect and has harmed such other activities as those 
of the comtruction industry. The cell the Committee bas in mind may be charged with the 
responsibility of arrangmg regular supplies at f3vourable rates of raw materials. such as 
pnmary steel and power. The revival and modernisation of sick mini steel plants, wherever 
feasible should also be the responsibility of the cell. (para 23) 

16 
Action Taken 
Recently an Industrial Development Wing has been created in the Ministry to provide all 
necessarv assistance to the private sector which inter-alia covers Mini Steel Plants. The main 
raw materials of M.im Steel Plants are steel melting scrap and sponge iron which are 
dccanalised. Units are free to procure these materials either from domesuc or international 
sources. Power ts another imponant input for such units. The issue of supply of 
uninterrupted power at concessional rate has already been taken up with concerned State 
Governments. Government of India has also constituted a "Core Group" under the 
Chairman~hip of Development Commissioner for Iron and Steel to assist such units to draw 
their revival plans. 
CommcntstObservations 
The Sub-Committee notes the acuon taken by the Ministry of Steel on the Committee's 
recommendation 

Al'INEXURE·l 
ANNEXURE REFERRED TO L"i REPLY TO THE RECO!\L\IEJ'It'DATIOS NO. 7, 11, 
15 &: 18 
Brid Summll.r)' of lb~ R~pori/Recommendstions of the LYth Plan Working Croup 
Guidelines to the Sub-Groups 
1l1e Worlong Group 1n Its first meetmg latd down broad parameters for preparation of 
reports of the four sub-groups, after c-Jreful consideration of the trend~ in lkvc:loprnenl 
of the Indian iron and steel industry, e~pecial!y the structural change.> which have 
occurred stnce commencement or the process of libcralisallon of the nauonul economy 
nnd the phenomenal growth 10 production. and consumption dunng 1994-95 and 
IY95-96. While these parameters dtffered considerably from the approach followed by 
the Workmg Group for VI mad VII Five Year Plans, they were stmllar to the appro:\ch 
of the Working Group for Vlll Five Year Plan. 
Approach of Working Group 
2 In \'I Plan, e>llmate of consumptton level and avatlabtluy of carbon steel and ptg tron 
m 1979·80 was the b.lstc premtse In the VII P13n, prOJeCtion of future demand WJs 
based on global GNP growth rotc of 4'l'o to 5'l'o • .lo the Vlll Plan, production pl.m~ 
were worked out constdenng non and steel as the baste raw m.tterul for the growth, 
dtvemficatton and mod~rmsatton of the economy. The Workutg Group hns rut asil.lc 
the tradoloonal COil$Crvatl\e approach and has made bokl pr-'Jccllun• bu,etl un the 
prcmosc th~t the 'tee I 111du~t1), being a •tratcgtc tnframuctur~ indu•try, shnuld he the 
engine for industrial ~:rowlh, provic.hng an impctu~ to Cc<'llutnic activotic• and 
gluhall\ai!On 
3 l:wnomctric models hnlong giO'-'th tn production of stcc' wtth gm'-'lt' In GDI' may be 
rnathcmJtocally prt:ctSC but do not t4ke 11110 ac.:oun: ;c:ccnt development\ Thcrcrorc, 
the prOJection> of domc>tiC demand ba>ed on mathcrnattcal models have been rcvoscd 
upward after detailed dehberta.:tons tnl:tn& tnto account the growth rdtes or consumtng 
~ector~. 
4 Export ha.> been idenufied as dtsunct market b~ itself and prOJccuons h:l\C been made 
taking into consideration not onl) the eap3cttics in existence and under crc:ttJon but 
also the developments taking p!~ee globally :lild in South-East Asta. 
5. c)(pon promouoo and tntcmattonal compeuuvcoess arc closely hnked. Measures for 
building up or impro\lng competitiveness of different segments of the 1ron and steel 
mdustry have been suggested, taking due note of the need ior tmprovemcnt of 
infrastructura.l facilities and policy and procedural changes. The emphasis is not on 
subsidies but on enhancmg inherent strengths of various segments. 
6. As in the report for \'Ill Plan, greater emphasis bas been laid on technological options, 
upgradation of quali:y, research and technology etc. rather than suggesting detailed 
production programme~ of individual plants. This is an obvious corollary to the 
liberalisatioo process which Jays more emphasis on the market and consumers than on 
production. Tentallve producuon plans of individual plants have been taken into 
account for computing gaps a·.-ailability of individual categories of iron and steel 
7. The VIII Plan repon shtfted the emphasis from export of raw matenals to semi-finished 
goods. This report Ia)-:> greater emphasis on export of finished steel. more specifically 
value added products such as Oat products. 
17 

e 
18 
8. This report also takes into acxoun1 the huge inv~stments being made on creation of 
capacities for production of steel of hig.her quality through various technology routes 
including some of the latest options, and on modernisation of existang antegrated plants 
to improve the competitiveness in terms of quality and cost . 
9. The approach followed by this Group bas been delibentely bold to ensure that further 
investment in the iron and steel is facilitated not only to cater to the domestic demand, 
but also the transnational markets 
Projections 
10. The production by the main and secondary steel producers has been esumoaed by the 
Working Group as follows: 
Crude Steel Productioo 
Source 
SAJL 
T1SCO 
VSP 
TOTAL 
(C) Main Producers 
Secondary 
Producers 
1996-97 
U .10 
3.0S 
3.00 
l81S 
6.10 
24 2S 
Major new developments 
2001-02 
15.37 
3.40 
40S 
22.82 
2.2.09 
44.91 
(in million tonnt.s) 
Increase during 
1X Plan period 
3.27 
0.3S 
! .OS 
4.67 
15.99 
20.66 
8. Some of the maJor new developments envisaged in the report are: 
(i) Massive developments of production capacities in the Secondary Sector (including 
emerging steel majors) will conunue. 
(ii) Consumptaon of steel within India will grow to 32.68 million tonnes by 2001·02, the 
terminal year of the Ninth Five Year Plan. 
(iii) The share of flat products in the domestic demand will continue to increase and 
touch 49.51 'Yo (net) by 2001-02 and the growlh will flatten out thereafter due to 
infrastructure development. 
(iv) The demand for special and alloy steels will grow to 2.15 million tonnes by 2001-02. 
There will be no capacaty constnints in meeting this demand Export of these 
products will continue to grow. 

I 
19 
(v) The domestic demand for pig iron, spum:d by growth of the foundry industry 
and increased use m the Electric Furnace industry, will touch 3.45 million tonnes by 
2001-02. There will be an excess capacity in this sector, prompting stand-alone pig 
iron units to go into steel production. Export of pig iron will be to the tune of 
0.9 million tonnes during 2001-02. Forward integration of pig-iron units into steel 
making may see a further structural change in the steel industry. 
(vi) The domestic demand for DRJIHBI will touch 7.67 miUion tonnes by 2001·02 
whereas availability will be limited to only 6.18 miUion tonnes. Constraint of 
availability of natural gas may not allow further large scale capacity creation in this 
sector. A major policy change will be called for if large scale metnllics import is to be 
avoided. 
(vii) Requirement of bulk ferro alloys by the Indian steel industry will be to the tune of 
0.97 million tonnes during 2001-02. 
(viii) Policy initiatives and liberalisatioo of procedures will be vitally required if the export 
potential of 6 million tonnes of carbon steel is to be realised by 2001-02. 
lnfrastructural facilities will also need to be developed with the specific. objective of 
promoting exports . 
(ix) There 1S an urgent need for creation of steel exporters, Forum to devise ways nnd 
means of tmproving intemattonal competitiYenesli of the exporting units. 
(x) There is u need for augmentation of iron ore mimng capacity to meet the expected 
demand . High grade iron ore should be preserved for value addition within the 
country. 
(xi) Evolving of a mechanism for quick environmental clearances for mining projects with 
adequate care for ecological pre~rvation is essential. 
(xii) High grade Limestone and Dolomite deposits need to be identified and developed to 
cater to domestic requirement. 
(xiii) Steps are necessary for augmenting coking coal production in the country through 
opening of new mines, commissioning of new wasberies, improving operational 
efficiency of existing washeries and encouragement of captive mining. 
(xiv) Development of refractory industry through upgradation of existing manufacturing 
facilities and manufacture of more sophisticated products is an immediate necessity 
considering that refractories are more of a technologi~ inputs for the steel industry. 
(xv) Total investment of Rs. 20005 crores is envisaged during the IX Plan period by PSUs 
under Ministry of Steel, with internal generation estimated at Rs. 9590 crores. 
Research and Technology 
9. Research and Technology will play a key role in reduction of cost, improvement of 
quality and decrease of pollution by the Indian Steel Iodsutry. 
10. There is a need for sening up a Research and Technology Mission with an assured 
corpus of funds and an autonomous decision making body. 
11. Adoption of technologies suitable for Indian steel industry is an immediate necessity 
for improving its competitiveness for Exports. 
-

U. The: export potent• l for d1ftc:rc:nt categones cf steel hM been ~ssed as 6 mulion 
1onnes dunng 2001·02 and 9 million tonnes dunng :OO<:.J7. Th1s prOJection t.1ken mto 
account the h~:ge productiOn opaCities commg up m the pn,.ate sector, some umts 
bemg 100% .E:.Ot:s, and lhc need for senmg lb: transnational markets for fully 
exploiting the competitiveness of the Indian steel andustry. 
13. Oe\-elopmc:nt of rcqu1red mfrastructural facilit1es and framing of exporter-friendly 
policies and procedures are essential 1f tbe projected expon potential is to be 
realised 
14. The en\lronmcnt created by the policy initiauves since the onset of the Jiberalisation 
process has acted as a catalyst, e;peaaDy dunng 1994-95 and 1995·96 , in accelc:raung 
producuon, comumpuon and 10\'estment. Globalisation of the national economy 
po5e> the tw•n challenges of beang truly intemauonally competitive to compete 10 the 
export m;,rke: ar.d compc:ltl\C enough ,..,tl-.1:: lhe country to v.ithstand the onslaught 
from 1mports. consequent to gradual rcducuon m 1mport tariff barriers. some of the 
pohcy anuia•cs 1Jcnufied by the Workmg Group for helpmg the lnd1an steel mdustry 
to face the'c: cha ':nges arc -
ll) Import of "'k1ng coal und manang am.! wa;hang of dometiC co:sl need to be developed 
m order to !Jc~o•tate blcndmg of tmported BnJ mdigenous coal to optimise techno­
c,onormc benef1t~ Cupu'e mmmg should be encouraged to complement and support 
avn•l~h1111y from co~l numng PSUs 
(u) Pnonty ihOuld be &Jvcn to dl!ocation of Natural Gas for lhe DRJ sector m the 
context of unti.lp;Jted huge gap betv.een demand and 3\':ll!ab•!,ty of 2001·0:! Due 
pnonty should also be ass1gned to supply of good quahty non coking coal from 
eJustmg gas well as nev. mmcs to coal bssed ~ponge tron plants. 
(1i1) !'here as a need for further reducuon m 1mport duty on non·cokmg coal to service the 
reqUlrcmc:nts o! sponge iron units loc~::d away from coal mines and to enable 
blending of imported and mdigenou~ coals. 
(1\') Proper and adequate mir;•strue~ure should be developed for optimum and eliicu:m 
"orkmg of the 1tee! l!):lustry. and for faCJhtatmg ::..'por..s. 
(') Pnvausat•on, espec•ally in are3s suC'h M constr~:~uon of new berths for ports, 
w~rchousmg facilitic,, etc will help cxpor.s 
(VI) Development oi coastal sh1pping. ~~ot:h hnked road transpon arrangements. "ill help 
to reduce mland trar.,portauon co,ts, del.•~ 111 movement, etc 
(v1i) lf export potenlial " to be realised, procedural fomulities .,.j!( have to be !ibcralised. 
(vui) CreJllOr: 1i Steel Exporter.> forum to de'ise "'3)-S !l!ld means of impro>ing 
intemation u et, npemivcness of industry !r.d to tai\e up shor!coming> in policies and 
pro;:edures with Government bodies is a~ m:.-nediat~ ~e=ll}. 
(1x) In the context of gradu3l reduction in irr.port t2nff 2nd falling international price,, it 
" desirable to devise a me..:hamsm oi linkmg tan(( levels with international prices. 

A:-.'NEXURE·ll 
NOTE ON DEVELOPMENT OF BAILADJLA DEPOSIT 11·8 AS A JOI!'o"f \'E:-oTllltE 
CO~U'ASY 
The Government bad granted approval to National Mineral De~c:lopmcnt Corporation 
Ltd. (NMDC) to paitlcipate tn joint venture company to be set up with M~ . Nippon Dcnro 
bpat Ltd. for the development of BailadiJa Deposit ll·B and to in~est to the extent of II% 
in the total equ•ty or the joint venture company wbtch, on the basis of cost estimate:~ ,,s per 
the DPR, comes to about Rs. 2.S crores The Govt. approval was communicated -.de: lc:ucr 
dt 12113.6.95. The jotnt venture agreement wtth N.D. IL. was signed on 10.7.95 and the 
)Oint venture company under the name ~nd sryle or Mol>. Ba1ladila Mineral Development 
Company Ltd. was incorporated on 31 7 95. 
As per deta1led Project Report prepa red 
Project are as under:-
(i) Esllmated cost or the project 
(ii) Debt: equity ratio 
(iii) Debt 
(iv) Equity 
(v) Mmeable reserves 
(vi) Projected production 
(a) Run or Mine (ROM) 
(b) Net yields 
(i) Caliberated 
Lump Ore (CLO) 
(ii) Ftnes 
(vii) Employment Potential 
by NMDC, the salient features of the: ll·U 
Rs. .515 'rores 
(ba-c March. '93) 
I : I 
Rs 242 crores 
Rs 273 crores 
104 million ronn~ 
5 million tonncs per 
annum 
2 2 miUion tonnes per 
annum 
2.5 million tonnes per 
annum 
The mine is expected to be commissioned by 
1600 
1999·2000 A.D. 
21 

ANNEXURE-III 
DISINVESTMENT OF 1\~tDC's SHARES 
The shares of the National Mineral De\·elopment Corporation Limited (NMDC) were, 
for the first time, dasmvested by the Government of lodia in Marth 1993, as was indicated 
by letter No.DPE/12(1}'92-Al" d~ted 14.7.H93 of OPE. lo the said letter 11 "'as indicated 
that the shares bad been sold in Cavour of the Collowmg by the Government:-
(!) LIC 10,00,000 Equity Shares of Rs. 1()1. each. 
(2) LIC 2,00,000 Equaty Shares of Rs. HY- each . 
Mutual Fund 
(3) GIC 4,30,000 Equity Shares of Rs. 1()1. each . 
(4) GlC 5,00,000 Equity Shares of Rs. HY- each. 
Mutual Fund 
TOTAL 21,30,000 
DISINVESTM ENT OF SAIL'S EQUITY SHARES BY GOVERl,~fEl'<l OF INDIA 
In regard to SAIL (then a fully owned Government Company) the followmg table gives 
the details of disinvestment of shares made by Government of Iodia 
Month No.of Shares %age of total 
share capatal 
J3rvfeb.'92 19907~00 5.00 
October, 1992 20567000 0.52 
December, 1992 199294000 5.00 
March, 94 (Employees) 14120410 0.35 
October, 1994 3720000 0.09 
October, 1995 4400250 0.11 
TOTAL 441177060 11.07 
ln all, the Government has so far disinvested 11.07% of the equity capital of SAIL. 
However, the transfer of shares in !he names of new investors in the last round of 
disinvestment is not yet comple ted. Required formalittes are being complied with. 
POST-UBE RALISA TIO :'\ CO~ 'TRACTS 
After the economic liberalisation policy was announced in July, 1991. SAIL has made 
investment only in one JOint venture company UEC-SAIL Information Technology Pvt. Ltd. 
on information technology. The joint venture company has been formed by SAIL in India 
under Companies Act. 1956 in BSSOtlation "'ith USX Eng~neers and Consultants Inc, USA (a 
subsidiary with SAlL as a minority promoter). The authorised capital of the joint venture 
company is Rs. 10 million and initial subscribed capuaJ is Rs. 45 lakhs. SAIL's conuibution 
towards equity conuibution m th1s company is 40%. 
The joint venture company bas been formed for development and marketing of 
mformataon technology 10 India and SAARC countries e.xcept Pakistan and rendering of 
required technical servicing in respect thereto. 
22 

The FlPB approved the proposal for foreign collaboration/investment on 3rd December, 
1993, and the Government of lndia accorded its approval for SAIL to make investment in 
NC on 8th April, 1994. The joint venture agreement was signed on 13th September, l993 
and SAIL has so far made an investment of Rs. 18 lakhs in this company. 
KUDREMUKH IRON ORE COMPANY LIMITED (KIOCL) 
Government have so far disinvested 0.97'Yo of thear shareholding in Kudrcmukh Iron Ore 
Company Limited (KIOCL). Government have also 'permmcd KlOCL to promote a new 
joint venture company in association with Metallurgical & Engineering Consultants (India) 
Limited (MECON) and MSTC Ltd., for implementation or Pig Iron and D;.ctile Iron Spun 
Pipe (DlSP) Plant at Mangolore. While the three PSUs will anvcst in the equity or the JV 
Company to the extent of SO'Yo (maxamum) of the equity capital, the balance equaty will be 
contributed by the public and financial anstafutions. It as, however. mentioned that the PSUs 
were permaued to take up manufacture or pig iron through JV prOJects even pnor to 
announcement of the present liberallsed policy . 
23 

MINUrES OF THE MEETING 
I 
fiRST MEE'I lNG 
ANNEXURE-IV 
The Sub-Committee met 8t 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 19th August, 1997 m Comm111ee 
Room A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi . 
PRi::Sf.l'tT 
I. Shn Pradccp Dhauacharya---convtnor 
LOK SABIIA 
. 2 Shn Sun1l Khan 
SECRETARIAT 
Shn Om l'arka~h. Dcp111y Secretary 
Shri Deepuk Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shn Morn RaJ Singh, Comm •llcc Officer 
2. ·n1e Sub-Commutee constdercd the ATR~ rece•vcd from the Mlmstry of Stee l on the 
18th Report of the Commiucc: and after some discussion dectded to seek further 
clarilic<Hions from the Mini~try on ccnam pomts. The Sub·Commiuee, therearter, decided to 
meet next at 10.00 A.M. on the 29th Auguu, 1997 to finalise its report in the light of that comment ~ought for from the Ministry, 
3 ·111e Sub-Committee then adjourned 8t 3.45 P.M. 
24 

n 
SECOND MEETING 
The Sub-Committee met at 10.00 "' ·"'· on Friday the 29th August, 1997 in Commiltee 
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Pradeep Bbauacharya-Conv~nor 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK SABRA 
3. Shri Sunder l.al Patwa 
4. Shri Sunil Khan 
S. Shri Anandrao Adsul 
SECRETARIAT 
Shn Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Comm111ee Orticer 
2. The Sub-Commiuee considered the A TRs on the 18th Report of the Commluee In 
the light of the clarifications received from the Mmtstry of Steel und after 'ome discussion 
decided that a drart repon may be prepared in the light of the: d1scus~lon . The Sub· 
Committee , therc:afler, decided to meet next at 3.00 P . M . on Thursday the 18th September, 
1997 to consider and adopt the draft report . 
3. The Sub-Committee then adJOurned at 10.55 A .M . 
2S 

ru 
THIRD f>tEEIING 
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M on Monday, the 18th September, 1997 in 
Commmee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Anncxe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Prudcep Bhattacharya - - Convenor 
RAJY A SABRA 
2. Shri Maurice Kujur 
:3. Mil'S Saroj Khaparde 
4. Shn Sanjay Narupam 
LOK SABHA 
S. Shn Sunil Khan 
6. Shn Anundrao Adsul 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Commiuee OfCicer 
2. The Sub-Commiuee considered the drar[ report on the action taken by the Ministry 
or Steel on the 18th Report or the Commillee and adopted the same wath certain 
modifications 
3. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 3 30 P.M. 
26 

vrn 
EIGHTH MEETD\G 
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 
3.00 P . M. on Friday. the 14th August, 1998 1n Room No. 63, Fm.t Floor. Parliament House, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Raghavji - Chamnan 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shn Govindrao Adtk 
3. Shri Karma Topden 
4. Shn Rajubhat A Parmar 
5. Dr Ranbtr Smgh 
6. Shri Nagmam 
7. Shn Bhagaban MaJhi 
8. Shn Sanpy 1\trupam 
9. Shn Santosh Bagrodta 
LO!o. St\BILA 
10. Shn M Srinivas 
11 . Sh11 Vijil)' Shunl.ar 
12. Shn Gyan Smgh 
13. Shri Tamchand Sahu 
14. Shn R:,manand Singh 
15. Shri Anno~ahcb M K. Pall! 
HI. Shn Afland Ratl)a Maur}a 
17. Shri Punnulal Mohale 
1!1. Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
19. Shn K H !\iumyappa 
20. Shri Dutta !\!eghe 
21. Shn Konijen Rosatah 
22. Shn Suml Khan 
23. Shn Ananda Pathak 
24 Shn K Pa1aniswamy 
25. Shri Shakuni Choudhury 
26. Shri Mslyala RaJainh 
27. Shn Prabhat Kum~r Samantaray 
2S Shri Zora Singh 
29. Shri S. S. Palammanickam 
30. Prof. Jogendra Kav.ade 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P. C. Paikra) linder Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh . Commtttee Officer 
2 
3 
···Rcla1c~ to other m~lleB 
27 

28 
4 The Commaltee then took up the Reports of three previous Sub-Comma11ees on 
Action Taken Reports of Mmistnes of Steel, Mines and Industry on its 17th. 18th. 19th and 
20th Reports for discussion. After bnef deliberations, aU the Reports were adopted The 
Committee authorised Lhe Chairman to nommatc: the Members for the prc\cntation of the 
Repom to the both Houses of Parliament in the Winter Session 
5. • • 
6. The Committee then adjurned at 4.30 I'.M. 
• • · Relate to other matteD. 