RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON 
INDUSTRY 
SEVENTii REPORT 
MINISTRY OF MINES- BHARAT GOLD MINES LIMITED 
Presented on· 19th April) 1994 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 1994/CHAITRA, 1916 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
I. Composition of the Committee ..... ... .............. .......... ................... ........ . . 
II. Report ..... ..... ....... ........ ....... .. •.............. ............................................. 
Ill. Study Report of the Sub-Committee (Annexure I) .................. ....... ......... .. 
IV. Minutes of the meetings (Annex ure II) ...... ....... ........ ..... ... .................. ... . 
PAGES 
(iii) 
1 
4 
11 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao----Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Anil Kumar 
4. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
5. Shri J.P. Javali 
6. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
7. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
8. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
9. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
10. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
11. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
12. Shri Nyodek Y onggam 
13. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABHA 
14. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
15. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
16. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
17. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
18. Shri Rama Kri sh na Konathala 
19. Shri K. Ramamu r:h y 
20. Shri Balin Kuli 
21. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
22. Shri Vishweshwar Bhagat 
23. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
24. Shri Mullappally Ramachandra n 
25. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
26. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
27. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
28. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
29. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
30. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
31. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
32. Shri Ramdew Ram 
33. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katharia 
34. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
35. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
36. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
37. Shri Manjay Lal 
38. Shri Rasheed Masood 
39. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
40. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
41. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
42. Shri P.G. Narayanan 
43. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Shamsher Singh Rana, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
(iii) 

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
I, the Chairman of the Department Relat ed Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been author ised by the Committee to present on its beha lf, present this 
Seventh Report of the Committee on the working of Bharat Gold Minies Limited which falls 
under the jurisdiction of Ministry of Mines. 
2. The Committee at its meeting held on 15th June, 1993 identified 'Bharat Gold Mines' as 
one of subjects for indepth study and report. The Committee directe d the Secretariat to obta in 
a detailed Background Note on the subject from the Ministry of Mines. 
3. At its sitting held on 28th June, 1993 the Committee held a general discussion on the 
note furnished by the Ministry on the subject and finalised a questionnaire for furth er 
clarificatiOns by the Ministry. 
4. The Committee also heard the oral ev1aence of the Secretary of the Ministry alongwith 
the representat ives of Bharat Gold Mines Limited at its two meetings held on 30th September 
and lOth November, 1993 respectively for clarifications. 
5. The Committee at its meeting held on the 9th November, 1993 also heard the oral 
evidence of the representatives of the Workers' Unions operating at Bha rat Gold Mines Limited 
witl;l a view to eliciting their views on the functioning of the company. 
6. In its meeting held on 11th November, 1993 the Committee decided to constitute a Sub­
Committee to visit Kolar Gold Fields, Karnataka for an on the spot study of the working in 
Bharat Gold Mines Limited . The Chairman of the Committee accordingly constituted a Sub­
Committee of the following Member s for the purpose. 
1. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan - Convenor 
2. Shri J.P. Javali 
3. Shri K. K. Veerappan 
4. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
5. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
6. Shri Tej Nar<tyan Singh 
7. Shri P.G. Narayanan 
7. The Sub-Committe e visited the Kolar Gold Fields on 5th and 6th January, 1994. The 
Sub-Committee heard the oral evidences of the repre sentatives of the worke rs unions operating 
at Kolar Gold Fields and also the representatives of Bharat Gold Mines Limited Management 
and the Ministry of Mines. The Sub-Committee submitted a study report on its visit. The study 
report was considered by the Committee at its meeting held on 22nd Febr uary, 1994. After 
some discussion the Committee unanimously adopted the report submitted by the Sub­
Committee. 
8. The Committee at its meeting held on 23rd February, 1994 heard and considered the 
views of Shri S. Natarajan on the subject as recommend ed by the Sub-Committee. 
9. The Committee considered the subject in 11 sittings and ado pted the draft report at its 
meeting held on 30th March , 1994. 
10. The study report of the Sub-Committee is annexed (Annexure 1). 
11. On the basis of the documents furnished by the Ministry of Mines, the oral evidence of 
the representatives of the Ministry, workers unions management of Bharat Gold Mines and the 

study VISit of the Sub-Committee to Kolar Gold Fields as stated above the Committee 
recommends that:-
11.1 It is necessary to allay the fear of imminent closure of BGML at Kolar which is 
looming large on the workers and their families and other inhabitants of the area. 
They are living under a fear psychosis as the sword of closure is hanging over their 
heads. To remove this fear psychosis it is necessary to declare in unequivocal terms 
that the Company will not be allowed to close down and every effort will be made to 
revive it at the apex nation,al level. 
11.2 The Company has been referred to BIFR. Now it can not take any action for the 
revival without the prior permission of BIFR. Hence it is necessary that the reference 
of BGML, Kolar to BIFR be revoked forthwith and taken out from the purview of 
BIFR. 
11.3 To bring the company on rails· requisite funds should be given to establish a plant for 
recycling the huge stock of tailing so as to extract gold therefrom. The Committee 
observes that once the plant is established and it starts running within two to three 
years not only the company will wipe out its losses but it will also start earning 
profits. To boost the morale of the company the Ministry of Mines must come 
forward. The Government may either make available 41 crores of rupees as 
Budgetary support or soft loan to the company or stand as a gurantor to enable the 
company to get loans from banks and financial institutions. The management can also 
explore the possibility of hypothecating its surplus land to raise the funds for the 
plant of course with the prior approval of the Government. 
11.4 The management can raise the requisite funds for its revivial by selling its surplus 
land at the existing market rates as the land can fetch good prices but this step should 
be resorted to as the last step because the land can be utilised for agricultural 
pruposes particularly the cashew growing. Presently the management has planted 
eucliptus in parts of the surplus land and expecting to get some revenue therefrom 
but keeping in view that this variety makes the land infertile its plantation may be 
discouraged. 
11.5 The Security network of the company should be streamlined and every effort should 
be made to prevent pilferage of gold produced by the company. Frisking be mae 
compulsory for everyone coming out of the premises where gold is produced 
irrespective of his status. The Security personnel be provided modern gadgets to 
detect pilferage of gold. A vigilance wing should also be established to keep overall 
watch over the movements in the premises including that of security personnel. 
Surprise checks should be conducted and activities of the goldsmiths living around 
Kolar be monitored to prevent passing of pilfered gold. 
11.6 Survey of the gold deposits in the area should be counducted in more and more 
scientific way. BGML is presently wholly dependent on Geological Survey of India 
for this purpose. The management may have its own team to do this job. Technology 
from other countries like South Africa and Australia can be obtained in this field as 
they have the latest know-how in this area. South Africa in particular have the 
resembling conditions as that of Kolar and doing very well. Their co-operation can be 
more helpful. 
Technology from countries like South Africa, Australia etc. can be explored who can help in 
modernising the existing techniques of BGML on profit sharing basis. 
11.7 The BGML is undertaking diversification activities to earn more revenue. It is 

manufacturing mmmg equipments and also providing mmmg consultancy services. 
The Government can help BGML by securing orders from other departments. Export 
possibilities should also be explored. The diversification activities should be encour­
aged to create more job opportunities. 
11.8 BGML being a Government of India enterprise it is the onus of the Government to 
provide funds for the modernisation of the mills and mining techniques of the 
company. The funds may be in the form of long term loans with reasonable interest 
thereon. Since it is the only one establishment engaged in production of precious 
yellow metal in the country phasing out is not advisable at all. If proper investments 
are made in this company and new era of hopes and dedication is generated the 
company can run smoothly for the next fifty to sixty years. But there must be a will 
on the part of the Government to run this company. 
11.9 The BGML is spending a substantial portion of its earnings on power tariff. 
Understandably the Karnataka Electricity Board had established a power house 
exclusively for BGML. The production cost pe~; unit in that power house comes to few 
paise but the Board is charging exorbitant tariff from BGML. The State Electricity 
Board should be apprised of the gravity of the situation and persuaded to reduce the 
power tariff to reduce the burden of BGML. Similarly the State Government is 
charging royalty from BGML without extending any facility. The State can also be 
persuaded to forgo charging royalty from BGML. 
12. The ·Committee has come to conclusion that the past performance of the present 
management has· been quite dismal and the change of the management could be a better future of 
the company. 
13. The Committee is of the opinion that i( the above mentioned steps are take n by the 
Government and BGML there is every possibility of the revival of BGML and certainly it will 
prove to be a national asset. · 
14. The Committer~. trusts that its observations and recom·mendations as mentioned above 
will receive serious consideration for implementation. 
NEW DELHI; 
30 March, 1994 
MOTURU HANUMANTHA RAO, 
Chairman, 
Department Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry. 

ANNEXURE-I 
STUDY REPORT OF THE VISIT OF SUB-COMMITTEE ON BHARA T GOLD MINES TO 
KOLAR GOLD FIELDS KARNATAKA ON STH AND 6TH JANUARY, 1994 
T.i ' Visit of Sub-Committee to Kolar Gold Fields emanated from the decision of 
Department Relate J Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry to send a sub-committee of 
its members to KJl:.~r Gold Fields for an on the sport study of problems in the working of Bharat 
Gold Mines Limited so that a better solution other than closure could be found out. The Sub­
Committee compnsed of a Convenor, 4 members from Lok Sabha and 2 members from Rajya 
Sabha thus bearing representation of a member from each party. The purpose of the visit was to 
seek a better appraisal of the situation and therefore it was made very clear to the Workers 
Union and Management of Bharat Gold Mines Limited that the Committee has come here for 
fact finding mission. 
The Sub-Committee camped at Kolar Gold Fields on 5fth and 6th January , 1994. On 5th 
January the Sub-Committee heard the views of Shri Sanjay Dasgupta Deputy Commissioner, 
Kolar about his study of the situation. Thereafter, the Committee took an apportunity to hear the 
representatives of Bharat Gold Mines Limited Labour Association Kolar Gold Fields Citizens 
(inclduing All Trade Unions and political parties), Bharat Gold Mines Limited Workers Union, 
Bharat Gold Mines Limited Medical Health and Sanitation General Union, Kolar Gold Fields 
Panchayat etc. 
On 6th January, 1994 the Sub-Committee proceeded to mining sites to see the working 
conditons of the gold mines, mills and workshops both at ground and mining levels. Thereafter, 
the Committee heard the representatives of the Bharat Gold Mines Limited Management and the 
Ministry of Mines. 
Based on the evidence of the rep.t:,esentatives of workers' Unions and Management and also 
the practical view of the sites the Committee has come to the following conclusions about the 
working of Bhar at Gold Mines Limited. 
Kolar Gold Fields have a vast area consisting of gold ore banks stretching over 200 
kilometres but the true potential has not been explored and no scientific survey has been done in 
this regard. Only the Geological Survey of India has been doing this job with its conventional 
approach. Now they are doing it in collaboration with a Ftanch Company but no report has yet 
been submitted by them. The Committee feels that expertise from South Africa should have been 
associated in the survey of gold ore and also in mining operations. So far these mining operations 
have not been taken by BGML due to its high cost and lack of modern technology. However, 
there have not been much efforts or excercises to reduce the mining costs, which of course 
require modernisation of the exploration process of gold deposits. The Sub-Committee was told 
that one Shri S. Natarajan former Director (Technical) had som~ concerete proposals for 
development and exploration of mining at Kolar but his studies/expertise was lost with his exit 
from the company. The Committee has been told that his experience in processing of gold at 
KGF could have certainly given new dimensions in scientific extraction of gold in KGF. 
The Sub-Committee has been given to understand that faulty process of extraction and 
pilferage of the finished gold are the two important factors responsible for escalation of cost of 
production. The machines and other equipments used in extraction of gold ore are either 
defective or have become outdated in terms of their viability. The mining technology is at present 
is in dire need of modernisation. 

The Management infonned the Committee that the renewal of machinery could not be taken up 
due to lack of adequate funds. Bharat Gold Mines Limited Authorities have submitted a 
rehabilitation proposal worth Rs. 107.83 crores to the Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation 
of India Limited, the operating agency appointed by BIFR and a ~py of the report has been sent to 
Central Government. The cut off date for rehabilitation proposals is 1.4.1994. During first three 
years of the rehabilitation period a total sum of Rs. 88.98 crores, is required from Government as.per 
the following details:-
(a) Development of Mines (includin g Rs. 0.50 crore 
normal renewal expenditure per year) 
(b) Modernisation of Mill 
(c) C.I.P. Project 
(d) Computerisation needs 
(e) V.R.S. 
(f) Statutory liabilities 
(g) Working capital margin 
Total Cost 
of project 
9.11 
4.95 
39.07 
0.15 
50.93 
1.41 
2.21 
107.83 
Rs. in Crores 
Amount sought 
from Government 
2.60 
4.95 
29.30 
0.15 
50.93 
1.41 
2.21 
o9.55 
The difference between total project cost and assistance sought from Government is proposed to 
be met out of projected internal resources of the company. The sugge~tion of the Managr:mcnt of 
BGML deserves sympathetic cosnideration by the Government. 
The Management also highligh ted certain concessioned they have sought from Governm .. 1t ci 
India with regard to conversion of Government plan and non plan loans interest on such loans Jr..d 
the intercorporate loans from Hindustan Zinc Limited and NALCO into equity. The Managem ent 
has also approached the State Governments of Karnataka :Ind Andhra Pradesh for concessions in 
royalt v charges. Similarly the Man agement has also !:>een seeking concessions in terms .Jf high power 
tariff levied by these two State Governments resutlting therein a significant increase in cost of 
production of the company. The Committee may give a definite recommendation covering these 
aspects. • 
SECURITY, PILFERAGE 
The Sub-Committee has been given to understand that leakage/pilferage of gold has 
significantly resulted into high cost of production. The poor security arrangements have given 
sufficient room for pilferage. At present there is no Security officer to head Sc<..Jrity network. 
Frisking of workers and officers at the site has been quit e casual as the security norms are not 
adhered to strictly. Security personnel have been put to all sorts of problems in performence of their 
dutues. Not to talk of any incentive s to them they are even denied the basic working conditions in the 
company. The Committee also gathered that a large number of goldsmiths and pawnbrokers are at 
present operating in and around gold field areas. The present erection of 6 feet wall and the level of 
fencing around the compound is far from req.!1rcd level of security. There is ample scope for an 
individual to cross over these fences for their nasty activitic.;. The .security personnel have not been 
provided proper arms and ammunitions to deal with crimin al c.kmeuis. At present it is estimated that 
the pilferage of gold is about 30 crores per annum. The Managemen t Joes not contest the court cases 
of pilferages. However the Managem ent seems to be pretentlmg that it is not aware of these hand in 
glove malpracties as at no point they have conceded the possibilit) 01 pilferage. 

TAILING 
1 he Sub-Committee found tha1 in the course of time tailing from the BGML has 
accumulated in and around the KGI· and large deposits thereof were visible. The Management 
told the Committee that this tailing also have some gold in it which can be extracted if a CIP is 
established. Even at present a large volume of tailing is being released in the nearby agricultural 
fields from the KGF. No arrangements h,tve been made either ·to process or dispose of the same. 
The flow of tailing has taken an ugly turn by destroying the agriculture in and around the area. 
The Sub-Committee visited the affected agncultural sites and found that a lot of waste water 
containing cyanide solution has filled in the tanks ncar agricultural fields. The cyanide has 
deposited in the agricultural fields above the level of tank bunds and deposited in the crop fields. 
1hcsc tanks arc the mam source of irrigation for agriculture sector to the farmers. The Sub­
Committee noted that despite their representation to Union Government and Management of 
BGML no action has so far been taken to avert the depositing the cyanide contained tailing in 
the tanks and fields. 
The Management, on the other hand has contenclccl that the setting up of CIP could check 
flow of tailings. The proJcl't would help in processing the waste. a sun of Rs. 29/- crores is 
required for setting up this project. this amount can be extended in three instalments of Rs. 5 
cnm. 111 the very first year of ensuing financial year followed by Rs. 19 crores in second year and 
another Rs. 5 crores in third year. This project h.ts been identified as sole survival factor of the 
company as a v.·hole in terms of its likely profits in ncar future. The Sub-Committee io; of the 
opini~>n that either the Government :-.hould provide the funds or stand as a guarantcr to enable 
lhe BGML to get loans from the finaflcial institutions or Banks. . 
PRODlJCTION 
The major gold exploration activities are concerntratcd in Kolar Schist belt which is about 80 
Km. long and about 4.5 Km. wide. Kolar Gold Fields arc almost in the middle of the Schist belt. 
The Committee noted a mixed picture about gold production per tonne of ore. As gathered from 
the Workers Unions the existing average production of gold is 5-6 glt of raw material. It 
sometimes goes lower to 3 glt and as higher as 8 to 9 glt depending on the richness of ore in 
different zones. The Management has however conceded that the pres~nt average production is 
around 2 3 glt. From the figures made available by the Management at the site it has been found 
that the capaetty utilization of the ore has been declining. The production which was around 45 gl 
t in the first decade of current century has now come clown to 2.2 glt in 1992. The company is 
producing about 55 Kg. of golcl per month. 
It has been noted that the projected potential in terms of production in respect of certain 
projects was actually not achieved after exploration establishing thereby no major discovery. 
Thc<>c projects were the explorations during 1960's and 70's in the Bharat Gold Mines Limited 
lease area and North Kolar area. The exploration prospects in Mallappakonda turned out to be a 
non fea~ible proposition due to low grade ore (around 3 glt) besides gold recovery problen1S due 
to high arsenopysitc and oth.er sulphide~ . Again the scheme of High Priority Integrated 
Expl01ation for gold executed jointly by Bharat Gold Mines Limited, MEC and GSI during 
April, 19~5 to May 1988 did not indtcatc any significant economic gold mineralisation. Prospects 
!of gold production nrc still available in Old Bisaqthm Area. Exploration programme in the 
North Kolar area is in progress by Geological Survey of India in collaboration with BRGM 
France. The Phase I work has been completed and Phase II exploration is in progress. A reserve 
of 86763 tonnes at in insitu grade of 5.24 g!t has been estimated provisionally in shallow Depth 
Gold prospects at Kolar Gold Fields. 

LAND 
The Deputy Commissioner Junnb !1i-; evidence informed the Sub-Committee , 11.1t about 
12,000 acres of land is lying unutilised i.1 the .npus of KGF. The total estimated valu e of land io; 
around 400 lakhs. A~cording to his infomHih on about 400 acres of land has already been 
encroached upon and if not properly utilised immediately the remaining portion of land has every 
chance of being encroached. The Management has not bothered to consult the district authorities 
about use of the land and has given the criminals free i1and to encroach upon the land for reasons 
best known to them. The Deputy Commissioner suggested that tourism could be developed at 
this barren land or some sort of project study could have been evolved for productive use of land. 
The Sub-Committee is of the 10pinion that the land can be used for the purpose c,f setting up 
small industrial units to create more job oppotumties for local peopie and it will be an additional 
source of revenue for the company. A suggestion regarding plantation of ca~hew nut in thl! J,mcl 
was also put forth before the Management. Resources could also be generated by selling the 
surplus land at profitable prices. 
GOLD PRICE FORMULA 
The Sub-Committee has gathered that till the formation of the company the gold was bought 
by the Government at IMF prices. In April, 1974. the pricing policy underwent a change and the 
old was to be sold at London Metal Exchange Rates The pricing policy further underwent a 
change during 1976-88 as per details given below:-
(i) The subsidy payable is equal to the difference between the IMF Price (Rs. 84.40 per 10 
grams) and the cost of production of 10 grams of gold in 1975-76 plus 12% on capital 
and reserves. 
(ii) Government could review from time to time the cost of produ ction and take into 
account any inescapable increase in cost of production. 
(iii) This price was subject to a minimum of the average international price in the prccedmg 
month and a maximum of the average international price in the rrc ceding month plus 
25%. 
(iv) The Government of India from November, 1982 fom1ulatcd the following formula: 
"Bharat Gold Mines Limited (BGML) and .Butti Gold Mines Limited (HGML) each 
be allowed to meet half of the total industrial demand for gold at the prevailing 
domestic price. The production of BGML and HGML over and above this quantity as 
well as the ehtire production of Hindustan Copper Limited would be taken over by the 
Mint at an average international price during the preceding month plus 12.1/2% or the 
average domestic price during the preceding month whichever is lower.·· 
(v) From 1.4.1984, the pricing policy of Government for BGML gold was LMc price 35% 
or Indian Market rate whichever is lower. 
However with effect from 1.4.1988 the Government permitted BGML to sell gold in the 
open market. BGML has nominate-.! ag..!nt~ in the open market and 10% commission in terms of 
value of agents had been fixed. There have been cases of irregularities in terms of commission 
paid to these agents and the company had to bear some losses on this account. Thus it is 
apparent that the Ministry of Mines prescribed the terms and conditions in the matter of gold 
selling policy. Government of India had released a sum of Rs. 172.24 crorcs as subsidy, Rs. 
132.26 crores as prices differential, Rs. 24.81 crores as Non-Plan loan and Rs. 54.28 crores as 
Plan loan respectively during the years 1972-73 to 1992 91. The Management feels that b;td the 
company been given the market price for gold it would have had a surplus of Rs. 5.02 crores on 
31.3.1985 even after taking the unprecedented Joss of Rs. 6.62 crores in the years 1984-85 into 

account. Now the Company has started selling its gold in the open marke t without any pre­
condit ions and it hopes to get reasonable market price for its gold. 
WORKER'S REHABILITATION 
As per the figures place before the Sub-Committee the BGM.L manp ower which was 11,026 
at the end of 1988-89 has come down to 8448 in 1992-93. As on 20.6.1993 the company had 
manpower of 7828 which has further reduced to 7607 as on 31.8.1993. Out of these 2159 persons 
are surplus for whom VRS of the Company is applicable. The latest figures during the visit show 
that the present strength of company is around 7000 persons. According to the Management the 
existing mines are getting fast depleted and efforts have been made to deploy surplus manpower 
in other activites. In addition over the years the workers have developed expertise in other 
activit ies like manufacturing components of equipment and mine construction activities. 
The workers unions arc of the view that despite reduction in number of employees the 
company has maintained the steady production rate of ore. Though no mechanisation is taking 
place. the employees have been forced to go on retirement on the plea of moderni sation. A 
number of equipments are lying used due to callous attitude of the Management towards its 
manpower and these equ ipments are likely to become junk in due course. A lot of talent has 
been thrown out of the company which has resulted into 40% loss of gold. By excess placement 
of people at unviable deep mining sites ignoring the manpower at profitable sites the 
Management has enjoyed free hand in declaring people surplus. Even Voluntary Retirement 
Scheme is not being implement in letter and spirit. G_old mine expert retiring or VRS is included 
and shown in salary figure. The Nat ional Renewal f-'und meant for rehabilitation and retraining of 
workers has been diverted to some other heads. The Manage ment has shown indifferentness 
towards its employees. fhey arr bring charged very high monthly instalment for the dwelling 
units (huts) which were built about 50 to 60 years back by the Britishers. 
'The Management has however projected their two point formula for rehabilitation of 
displaced workman as below:-
(i) To allot a house site at reasobale rate adjacent to Municipal area and permit them to 
dismantle and carry present house materials on payment of reasonable price and pass 
on the liability of maint enance of civic amenities to the Municipality. 
(ii) Agricultural Finance Corporation has been engaged at the instande of Government of 
Indi a to study the land available with BGML at KGF and to suggest an utilisation plan 
which includes utilisat ion of some land for rehabil itating the workmen who may be 
affected due to restructur ing of the company. 
The Sub-Committee after hearing the workers living in KGF and passing through the localities 
of the workers found that the workers are liviP.g in small houses ·in inhuman conditions. They are 
getting electricity for not more than one hour a clay that too at a very low voltage. Similar is the 
case of potable water. Sanitary condit ions are also not satisfact ory. Their localities are stinking. 
The workers have no other options but to live there with their families. The management is 
charging ren tals for these small houses, electricity and water from the low paid workers whereas 
the officers of the company are perhaps enjoying rent free accommodations. The Sub-Committee 
was told that rehabilitation measures are not take n for the dependent of those workers who die 
while in service. Their depend ents are not given suitable jobs on compassionate grou nds as a 
result such families are forced to live in agony and miseries which can be avoided 
if adequate welfare measures are undertaken by the BGML management. After talking to the 
local people at KGF the Sub-Comrr.ittee found that majority of the people do not know any 
other profession except mining because they are in this field generation after generatio n and 
when these peo ple are not given jobs in KGF they remain unemployed and loiter around in the 

hope of getting job. It is, therefore necessary to create more job opportunit ies in KGF or the 
Sub-Committee is afraid that the unemployed youth of the area may join hands with an~i socials. 
As such the BGML management has to initiate welfare measure in a systematic way and on a 
larger scale to benefit the work ers and their families. 
The Sub-Committee was shocked to learn that scanvenging by scavengers is still in existen ce 
in KGF despite its abolition at the national level and a law coming into force banning scavenging. 
The management showed a will to remove this inhuman practice but it appears that Governmen t 
has not provided adequate funds to the management for this. The Sub-Committee is of the 
opinion that Ministry of Mines should bring this matter before the Ministry of Welfare and obtain 
adequate funds for the rehabilitation of scavengers of KGF. 
REVIVAL OF THE COMPANY 
Finally the Sub-Committee is of the opinio n that following measures need to be taken for the 
revival of the BGML by the Governmental and BGML managemen t:-
(a) It is necessary to allay the fear of imminent closure of BGML at Kolar which is looming 
large on the workers and their families and other inhabitants of the area. they are living 
under a fear psychosis as the sword of closure is hanging over their heads. To remove 
this fear psychosis it is necessary to declare in unequivocal terms that the · Company will 
not be allowed to close down and e very e ffort will be made to revive it at the apex 
national level. 
(b) The Company has been referred to BIFR. Now it can not take any action for the revival 
without the prior permission of BIFR. Hence it is necessary that the reference of 
BGML , Koar to BIFR be revoked forthwith and taken out from the purview of BIFR. 
(c) The management must be given a chance to bring the company on rails. It should be 
given the requisite funds to establ ish a plant for recycling the huge stock of tailings to 
extract gold therefrom. The management is confide nt that once the plant is established 
and it starts running within two to three years not only the company will wipe out its 
losses but it will also start earning profit s. To boost the morale of the manag e ment the 
Ministry of Mines must come forward. The Government may either mak e ava ilable 41 
crores of rupees as Budgetary support or soft loan to the compan y or stand as a gurantor 
to enable the company to get loans from banks and financial institutions. The 
management can also explore the possibility of hypothecating its surplus land to raise the 
funds for the plant of course with the prior appr oval of the Government. 
(d) The management can raise the requisite funds for its revival by selling its surplus land at 
the existing market rates as the land can fetch good prices but this step should be 
resorted to as the last step because the land can be uitlised for agricultural purposes 
particularly the cashew growing. Presently the management has planted eucliptus in parts 
of the surplus land and expecting to get some revenue therefrom but keeping in view 
that this variety makes the land infertile its plantation may be discouraged . . 
(e) The security network of the company should be streamlined and every effort should be 
made to prevent pilferage of gold produced by the company. Frisking be made 
compulsory for everyone coming out of the premises where gold is produced irrespective 
of his status. The security personnel be provided modern gadgets to detect pilferage of 
gold. A vigilence wing should also be established to keep overall watch over the 
movements in the premises including that of security personnel. Surprise checks should 
be conducted and activities of the goldsmiths living around kolar be monitored to 
prevent passing of pilfered gold. 
(f) Survey of the gold deposits in the area should be conducted in more and more scientific 

way. BGML is presently wholly dependent on Geological Survey of India for this 
purpose. The management may have its own team to do this job . From other countrie s 
like South Africa and Australi a can be obtained in this field as they have the latest know 
how in this area. South Africa in particular have the resembling conditions as that of 
Kolar and doing very well. Their Co-operat ion can be more helpful. 
(g) Technology from countries like South Africa, Australia etc. can be explored who can 
help in modernising the existing technique s of BGML on profit sharing basis. 
(h) The BGML is undertaking diversification activities to earn more revenue. It is 
manufacturing mining equipments and also providing mining· Consultancy services. The 
Government can help BGML by securing orders from other departments. Export 
possibilities should also be explored. The diversification activities should be encouraged 
to create more job opportunities. 
(i) BGML being a Government of India enterprise it is the onus of the Government to 
provide funds for the moderni satio n of the mills and mining techniques of the company. 
The funds may be in the form of long term loans with reasonable interest. thereon. Since 
it is the only one establishment engaged in proauction of precious yellow metal in the 
country phasing out is not advisable at all. If proper investments are made in this 
company and new era of hopes and dedication is generated the company can run 
smoothly for the next fifty to sixty years. But there must be a will on the part of the 
Government to run this company. 
(j) The BGML is spending a substantial portion of its earnings on power tariff. Understand­
ably · the Karnataka Electricity Board had established a power house exclusively for 
BGML. The production cost per unit in that power house comes to few paise but the 
Board is charging exorbitant tariff from BGML. The STate Electricity Board should be 
apprised of the gravity of the situation and persuaded to reduce the power tariff to 
reduce the burden of BGML. Similarly the State Government is charging royalty from 
BGML without extendi.ng any facility. The State can also be persuaded to forgo charging 
royalty from BGML. 
The Sub-Committee has come to the conclusion that the past performance of the 
present management has been quite dismal and the change of the management, as a test 
case, could be a better future of the company. 
The Sub-Committee is of the opinion that if the above mentioned steps are taken by 
the Government and BGML there is every possibility of the revival of BGML and 
certainly it will prove to be a national asset. 
The Committee may consider. 
CONVENOR. 

APPENDIX-II 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
·vni 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. to 1.00 P.M. and 3.00 P.M. to 5.30 P.M. on 15th June, 
1993 in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri J. P. Javali 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
5. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
6. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
8. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
9. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
10. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
11. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
12. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
13. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
14. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan 
15. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
16. Shri Ramdew Ram 
17. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
18. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
19. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
20. Smt. Suseela Gopalan 
21. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
22. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
23. Shri P. G. Narayanan 
24. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri G. K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Under Secretary 
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Committee Officer 
*Minutes of the Ist to Vllth meetings of the Committee relate to other matters. 

·2. • • • • • 
3. The Committee , thereafter reconsidered its future programme of sittings and decided to 
meet on 28th, 29th and 30th June, 1993 to examine in detail the following subjects relating to the 
•• • •• Ministry of Mine s:-
A . • • • • • 
B. Ministry of Mines 
(i) Bharat Gold Mines; and 
(ii) • * • * * 
4. The Committee directed the Secretariat to obtain from the Ministries the detailed notes on 
the above mentioned subjects for its consideration in the next series of meetings. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 P.M. 
IX 
NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 28th June. 1993 m Committe e Room 
No. 63, First Floor , Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rae-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
3. Shri J. P. Javali 
4. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
5. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
6. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
8. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
9. Shri Balin Kuli 
10. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
11. Shri Chiranji La! Sharma 
12. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
13. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
14. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
15. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
16. Shri Manjay Lal 
17. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
18. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
19. Shri P. G. Narayanan 
•Relates to other matters. 

SECRETARIAT 
Shri G. K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Under Secretary 
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee considered the notes received from the ***** Ministry of Mines relating to 
the following subjects:-
(A) * * * * 
(B) Ministry of Mines 
(i) Bharat Gold Mines; and 
(ii) * * * * * 
2. In this connection the Committee also considered the background note prepared by the 
Secretariat on the subjects. The Committee felt that the issues I points identified in the 
background note need further comments from the Ministry. After some discussion the Committee 
decided that members may send their questions on the subjects so that comprehensive 
questionnaires may be prepared for obtaining further comments of the Ministries. 
A Summary of the discussion was kept. 
3. The committee then adjourned 4.45 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 29th June, 1993. 
xm 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 16th September, 1993 m Committee 
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New J)elhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain· 
4. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
5. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
7. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
8. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
9. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
10. Shri Balin Kuli 
11. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
12. Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat 
13. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
14. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
15. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
16. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
••••• Relates to other matters. 

17. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
18. Shri S. N. Vekaria 
19. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katharia 
20. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
21. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
22. Shri Manjay Lal 
23. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
24. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
25. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
26. Shri Bolla BulJi Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri G. K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
2. 
Shri Shamsher Singh Rana, Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
• • • • • 
3. • • • • • The Committee also decided to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Mines on 
Thursday, the 30th September, 1993 with regard to-(i) Bharat Gold Mines and (ii) • • • • * 
4. The Committee thereafter considered its future programme and decided to meet on 12th, 
13th, 28th and 29th October, 1993. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 2.35 P.M. 
XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 30th September, 1993 in Committee 
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hamumantha Rao-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SAHBA 
2. Shri K. K. Veerappan 
3. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
5. Shri Balin Kuli 
6. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
7. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
8. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
9. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
10. Shri Barish Narayan:· Prabhu Zantye 
11. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
12. Shri S. N. Vekaria 
13. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
• • • ••Relates to other matters. 

14. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
15. Shri Manjay Lal 
16. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
17. Shii Tej Narayan Sir :;;h 
18. Shri P. G. Narayanan 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri G. K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Mines: 
1. Shri I. G. Jhingran, Secretary 
2. Shri M. Gopalkrishna, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Divakar Dev, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri M. L. Mazumdar, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri N. Gopalan, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
6. Shri Rama Kant, Director (Finance) 
7. Shri Satish Chandra, Director 
8. Shri P. A. K. Shettigar, CMD, Bharat Gold Mines 
9. Shri A. P. Vittal, G. M. (Finance) Bharat Gold Mines 
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses by way of 
clarifications to the replies to the questionnaire on the Bharat Gold Mines. The Committee was 
not Satisfied with the clarifications given by the witnesses and directed them to send an updated 
ncte on the subject for its consideration by 20th October, 1993. The Committee decided to hear 
the witnesses again on 29th October, 1993 on (i) Bharat Gold Mines; and (ii) "* * * * * 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee also decided to meet on lOth and 11th November, 1993 to consider its 
pending business. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.15 P.M. 
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met from 11.00 A.M. to 1.30 P.M. and again from 3.00 P.M. to 5.10 P.M. 
on Tuesday, the 9th Novenber, 1993 in Committee Room 'A', Ground.Floor, Parliament House, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hamumantha Rao-Chairman 
••• "*Relates to other matters. 

MEMBERS 
RAJYA SAHBA 
2. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
3. Shri J. P. Javali 
4. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
5. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
7. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
8. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
9. Slui Balin Kuli 
10. Shri Manoranjau Bhakta 
11. Slui Chiranji Lal Sharma 
12. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
13. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
14. Shri V. Dh,u1anjaya Kumar 
15. Shri S. N. Vekar;a 
16. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
17. Shri Manjay La! 
18. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
19. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
20. Slui Tej Narayan Singh 
21. Shri P. G. Narayanan 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri G. K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. S. Rana, Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
1- * * * * * 
11-Representativcs of the Workers' Unions Operating at Bharat Gold Mices Limited 
1. Shri S. Rajagopal, Ex-MLA, President, BGML Labour Union 
2. Shri M. Bhakthavatchalam, MLA, BGM workers Anna Trade Union 
3. Shri S. Savaridoss, BGM Employees Union 
4. Slui K. Subramanyam, President, KGF Crusade 
2. * * * * • 
3. The Committee thereafter heard the oral evidence of the witnesses at II above i.e. the 
representatives of the four Workers' Unions operating at Bharat Gold Mines Limited, Kolar 
Gold Fields with regard to the working of the Bharat Gold Mines Limited. The Committee 
considered a joint memorandum submitted by the witnesses on the subject. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on lOth 
November, 1993. 
••• .. •Relates to other matters. 

XlX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met from 11.00 A.M. to 1.45 P.M. and again from 3.00 P.M. to 5.50 P.M. 
on Wednesday, the lOth Novenber, 1993 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hamum antha Rao--Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SAHBA 
2. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
3. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
5. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
6. Shri Balin Kuli 
7. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
8. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
9. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
10. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
11. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
12. Shri Ramdew Ram 
13. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
14. Shri Manjay Lal 
15. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
16. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
17. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
18. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri G. K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. S. Rana, Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
I-* * * • • 
II-Representatives of the Ministry of Mines and Bharat Gold Mines Limited 
1. Shri I. G. Jhingran, Secretary 
2. Shri M. Gopalkrishna, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri B. P. Mathur, Additiona l Secretary and Financial Adviser 
4. Shri M. V. Majumdar, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Rama Kant, Director (Finance) 
6. Shri D. K. Tyagi, Deputy Secretary 
7. Shri P. A. K. Shett igar, CMD, BGML 
8. Shri A. P. Vittal, G. M. (Finance) BGML 
"****Relates to other matters. 

2. • • • • • 
3. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the witnesses at II above i.e. the Secretary and 
.lther officers of the Ministry of Mines and Bharat Gold Mines in context of the replies to the 
questionnaire on the working of Bharat Gold Mines Limited. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.50 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 11th 
November, 1993. 
XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A. M. on Thursday, the 11th November, 1993 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Ra~hairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
LOK SABRA 
3. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
4. Shri Balin Kuli 
5. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
6. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
7. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
8. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
9. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
10. Shri Ramdew Ram 
11. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
12. Shri Manjay Lal 
13. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
14. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
15. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
16. Shri P. G. Narayanan 
17. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri B. G. Gujar, Director 
Shri G. K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. S. Rana, Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
2. The Chairman informed the Committee that some Members had suggested that a Sub­
Committee of the Committee may be Constituted to go into the working of Bharat Gold Mines 
Limited and making an on-the-spot study of the problems faced by workers due to the reported 
closure of the Bharat Gold Mines Limited. The Chairman pf the Committee, in this connection 
•• ••• Relates to other matters. 

drew the attention of Members to the advice of the Presiding Officers of Rajya Sabha!Lok Sabha 
not to undertake any outside tours. Members expressed their views on the subject and after some 
discussion the Committee decided to constitute a Sub-Committee for the purpose i.e. on-the-spot 
study of the working of the Bharat Gold Mines Limited and authorised the Chairman of the 
Committee to constitute such Sub-Committee of six members and approach the Hon'ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha for obtaining his permission on the proposed visit. 
A verbatim record of the discussion was kept. 
3 .• * * * 
4. The Committee then considered its future programme and decided to meet on 25th and 
26th November, 1993. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 1.15 P.M. 
XXIX 
TWENTY NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the lOth February, 1994 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Ra(}-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
3. Shri J.P. Javali 
4. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
5. Shri K.K. Veerapan 
6. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
7. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
9. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
10. Shri Balin Kuli 
11. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
12. Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat 
13. Shri Chimaji Lal Sharma 
14. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
15. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
16. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
17. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
18. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katharia 
19. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
20. Shri Manjay Lal 
21. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
22. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
23. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
*-**Relates to other matters. 

SECRETARIAT 
2. 
3. 
Shri G. K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. S. Rana, Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer . 
• • • 
• • • 
• • • • 
• • • • 
4. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan, Convenor of the Sub-Committee appointed · for an on the spot 
study of the Bharat Gold Mines Limited, Karnataka submitted a study report on behalf of the 
Sub-Committee to the Chairman of the Committee who decided that the study report will be 
considered by the Committee on the 21st February, 1994. 
A verbatim of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee then considered its future programme and decided to meet on 21st, 22nd 
and 23rd February, 1994, respectively, to consider its pending business. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 P.M. 
XXX 
THIRTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met at 5.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd February, 1994 in Committee . Room 
'A', Ground floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
3. Shri J.P . Javali 
4. Shri Rejendra Prasad Modi 
5. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
· 7. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
8. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
9. Shrimati Pratibha Devi Singh Patil 
10. Shri Rama Krishan Konathala 
11. Shri Balin Kuli 
12. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
13. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
14. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
15. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
16. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
17. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
18. Shri S. N. Vekaria 
19. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
20. Shri Manjay Lal 
•••••Relates to other matters. 

21.. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
22. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
23. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
24. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S. S. Rana, Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal., Committee Officer. 
2. The Committee considered the study report submitted to it by the Sub:.Committee on Bharat 
Gold Mines regarding its visit to Kolar Gold Fields, Kamataka. After some discussion the 
Committee decided to hear Shri S. Natarajan, Former Technical Director of the Company before 
finalising its report on the subject . 
3. • • • • • 
A verbatim of the proceedings was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 6.30 P.M. to meet again 5.30 P.M. on 23rd February, 
1994. 
XXXI 
THIRTY FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 5.30.·P.M. ,on Tuesday, the 23rd February, 1994 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliamefit House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
3. Shri J.P. Javali 
4. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita· 
5. Shri 1st Dutt Yadav 
6. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABIJA 
7. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
8. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
9. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
10. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
11. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
12. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
13. Shri S. N. Vekaria 
14. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
15. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
••• ••Relates to other matters. 

SECRETARIAT 
Shri S. S. Rana, Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer. 
WITNESS 
Shri S. Natarajan, Professor, Mining Engineering Department, Annamalai University. 
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence tendered by the above witness on the working of 
Bharat Gold Mines. The Committee directed the witness to send a detailed note on the subject 
for its consideration. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 7.20 P.M. 
XXXIX 
TIDRTY NINI'B MEETING 
The Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on the 30th March, 1994 in Committee Room 'C' , Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Cbairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri J.P. Javali 
4. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
5. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
6. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
7. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
8. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
9. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
10. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABRA 
11. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
12. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
13. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
14. Shri Balin Kuli 
15. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
16. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
17. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
18. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
19. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
20. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
21. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
22. Shri Naval Kisbore Rai 
23. Shri Manjay La1 

24. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
25. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
26. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
27. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
SHRI G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
SHRI S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
23 
Shri Jagmohaa .Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
2. * * * 
3. • • • 
* * 
• • 
4. The Committee thereafter considered the draft Report on Bharat Gold Mines Limited and 
adopted it unanimously. The Committee decided to present the Report on the 19th April, 1994 
and authorised Shri Jibon Roy and Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita to present the Report to the Rajya 
Sabha. The Committee also authorised Shrimati Suseela Gopalan and Shri K.H. Muniyappa to 
lay a copy of the Report on the Table of Lok Sabha on behalf of the Committee. A .summary of 
the proceeding was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M. to meet again at 2.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 
31st March, 1994. 
•••••Relates to other matters. 