 1 
        PARLIA MENT OF INDI A 
         RAJYA SABH A                  
                        
 
                                                                                                                            
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAME NTARY STAND ING  
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY  
 
TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
                                            ON 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 20 9TH   REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008 -09) 
PERTAINING TO  
 
The Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises 
(Department of Public Enterprises) 
 
____________________________________________________________________________   
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON   4 th March, 2010  )  
   (LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 4 th March, 2010)  
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIA T 
NEW DELHI 
  
March, 2010/Phalguna, 1931 (SAKA)  
213 


 2 
                      PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
  
  
           
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAME NTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY  
 
TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
                                  ON 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 20 9TH   REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008 -09) 
PERTAINING TO  
 
The Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises  
(Department of Public Enterprises) 
 
   _________________________________ __________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON    4 th March, 2010)  
   (LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 4 th March, 2010 )  
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIA T 
NEW DELHI 
  
 March, 2010/Phalguna, 1931 (SAKA)  
 
 
 
 
 


 3 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
  
                                                                 PAGES 
   
 1.       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                               ( i )                                                                                                
 2.  INTRODUCTION                                          ( ii)                                                                       
 3. REPORT                                                                                                                 
   (i) CHAPTER – I                                                                                                     
      Recommendations/observations, which have been 
      accepted by the Ministry.                      
  
(ii) CHAPTER–II                                                   
                                                                                                                                         
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
does not desire to pursue  in view of the  
Government's replies                              
  
(iii) CHAPTER–III                       
  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the  
Committee has either not accepted the replies of the Ministry                 
or has asked the Ministry to review its replies.               
     
(iv) CHAPTER – IV                                                                                                                                                                                   
  
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final  
replies of the Ministry have not been received                                                                                                                            
  
4.    OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS                      
        OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 4 
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAME NTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INDUSTRY 
(Constituted w.e.f 31 st August , 2009)  
 
   RAJYA SABHA  
 
    
 1.   Shri Akhilesh Das Gupta  —  Chairman 
2. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
3.   Shri  Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
4. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
5.   Shri Natuji H. Thakor 
6. Smt. Kusum Rai 
7. Dr. K. Malaisamy 
8. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
9. Shri  O. T. Lepcha 
10.  Shri Nandamuri Harikrishana  
          LOK SABHA  
 
11.    Shri Suvendu Adhikari 
12.   Shri Badruddin Ajmal 
13.   Shri Bansagopal Chowdhury 
14.   Shri Sabbam Hari 
15.   Smt. Poonam Veljibhai Jat 
16.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
17.   Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
18.   Shri Pakuri Lal 
19.   Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
20.   Shri Devendra Nagpal 
21.   Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
22.   Shri Krishanbhai V. Patel 
23.   Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
24.   Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
25.   Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
26.   Shri Raju Shetti  
27.   Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware 
28.   Smt. Ingrid Mcleod 
29.   Vacant 
30.   Vacant 
31.   Vacant 
        SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri A.K. Singh, Director 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint  Director 
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Committee Officer  
Shri Dharmendera Mohley,  Committee Officer 
 
  


 5 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
 I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having   been  authorized  by the Committee, hereby present this  Two Hundred  and 
Thirteenth Report on Action Taken Notes  furnished  by the Ministry of Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) on the recommendations contained in the 
Committee’s Two Hundred and Ninth  Report on the  Demands  For Grants (2008 -09) pertaining 
to Department of Public Enterprises.   
  
2. I thank the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public 
Enterprises) for furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the 
Committee’s Two Hundred Ninth  Report. 
  
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the   11th December, 2009 considered and adopted 
the Report. 
  
 
  
                                                         Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta    
                                                                                                                                          Chairman                                                                                   
                                                                                                  Department -related Parliamentary 
                                                                                                       Standing Committee on Industry 
 
New Delhi 
11th December, 2009 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  


 6 
 
REPORT 
  
  
 The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry 
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two hundred and ninth  Report on the  Demands 
For Grants (2008-09) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises.   
  
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public 
Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)   in respect of the   recommendations contained in 
the Report.   These have been categorized as follows: 
  
Chapter -I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.  
  
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recomme ndations 
as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report.   
Chapter -II- The recommendation/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies.  
  
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced wit h the logic and 
explanations advanced  by the Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue them for the 
present.  
Chapter -III- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has either 
not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non -implementation of recommendations 
contained in Chapter – III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanations  
therefor. 
Chapter -IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
have not been received.  
  
     In respect  of recommendations placed in Chapter -IV, the Ministry has  either   
furnished the interim replies or couched its language in  vague terms like  note d for 
compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desires  that the Ministry should furnish Action 
Taken Notes in  respects of recommendations categorized   in Chapter -IV  in detail and to the 
point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
    
3. The details of the ATR is being discussed in the succeeding pages.  
  
 
 


 7 
 
 
 
Chapter I 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government  
  
Impact of VRS/VSS on the wage Bills. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The C ommittee recommends that the DPE should issue guidelines to the PSEs asking 
them to reflect the separate wage/salary bills in respect of Executive, supervisory and workers 
respectively, in their annual statements.  
 Para 80 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
Necessary modification has been incorporated in the data input sheet to be filled up and 
submitted by CPSEs for the preparation of Public Enterprises Survey for 2007 -2008 which will 
be laid in  Parliament in the next Budget Session so as to reflect separate wage/salar y bills in 
respect of executive, supervisory and workers respectively. 
 
R&D Consultancy to State Level Public Enterprises  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The reply of the Department did not reflect the objective, scope and method/mechanism 
to implement the a nnual survey of SLPEs. The Committee may be informed of the criteria on 
which such a survey is to be conducted. The Committee asks the Department to furnish greater 
details of the scheme. And if the State Governments too will share the financial burden to 
conduct such survey and consultancy.   
Para 84 
 
 
Action Taken Note 
  
The Annual Survey on State Level Public Enterprises(SLPEs) is proposed to be brought out on 
the advice of the Planning Commission as information on SLPEs, which constitutes very important  
segment of the economy, would be useful for Plan exercise. There are over 1100 SLPEs functioning in 
various States covering different sectors of the economy. 
 


 8 
It is proposed to bring out the survey in collaboration with the State Governments. State 
Departments concerned with the public sector enterprises in each of the States have already been 
requested to furnish information regarding the performance of SLPEs. 
  
 


 9 
 
Chapter-II 
 
The recommendation/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies.  
 
Mandate of DPE 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee observes that the actual expenditure, both Planned and Non -Planned, 
have been less than the RE for the year. The Committee should be informed of such a shortfal l in 
the expenditure for the Counseling,  Retraining and Redeployment Scheme. 
Para 12 
Action Taken Note 
 
Shortfall in expenditure for the CRR Scheme is mainly due to non -utilization of funds 
earmarked for North East Region. As per existing norms of the pla n expenditure, 10% of the 
Annual plan funds is earmarked for the development of North Eastern Region. In North East 
Region non availability of sufficient VRS optees is a handicap. VRS is not very sizeable in the 
units located in the North East Region. Beca use of this the fund earmarked for North East 
Region under CRR remained unutilized. The unutilized fund was transferred to non lapsable pool 
for deploying that fund for other plan activities for North East Region by the Government, as per 
policy of the government. 
 
BRPSE 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee only wonders that of the cash support approved how much of that is 
meant for capital investments other than settling the dues of the employees and other sundry 
dues.  
Para 33 
Action Taken Note 
 
Out of the total cash support of Rs.1976.13 crores from Government of India approved 
for revival of 30 CPSEs, a sum of Rs.558.35 crores was meant for capital expenditure. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Department assured that the views of BRPSE on the negat ive bidding would be 
intimated separately after it is discussed by the Board in its next meeting. Also the Committee 
may be informed of the method to implement such bidding.  
Para 39 


 10 
 
 
 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
The Board had considered the issue of ’Negative Bidding for the Zero Networth CPSEs 
as Government ’s policy option ’ in its meeting held on 13.6.2008. The Board observed that 
‘negative bidding’ cannot be resorted to for all ‘zero networth CPSEs ’ across the Board. The 
Board will examine these CPSEs about the ir revivability and if it is felt that the CPSE can be 
revived only through private sector participation, it would recommend the mode of selection of 
the private partner either through negative bidding or through normal bidding after cleaning up 
the Balance Sheet on case by case basis.  
 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
Keeping in view the depleting membership of the ICPE and also bearing in view the level 
of participation during the last three years, when only 28 executives from 16 PSEs attended the 
courses at ICPE, the Committee considers that level of annual membership fee to ICPE can not 
be justified when the similar courses are available in India at the competitive cost to the company 
( CTC). The Committee also observes that most of the PSEs have sent onl y one executive to a 
course at ICPE. It is obviously led to wonder if the training of a single executive could make any 
worthwhile change in any PSE, except for adding to the qualification of the individual 
participant. The Committee finds such an approach  of piecemeal training  of  the executives, 
patently faulty.   
Para 51 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
India is a founder member of ICPE which was set up at the initiative of UN in 1974.  The 
ICPE designs, develops and imparts a variety of tailor made and standardized programmes to 
meet the requirements of Managers and Administrators.  ICPE regularly conducts an 
international one year MBA programme for practicing Managers and Policy Managers of 
organizations from various countries in which India has been taking an activ e part.   ICPE also 
conducts short duration programmes viz., Total Quality Management, Public Policy & 
Management, Sustainable Management, and Advanced Management for the benefit of Executive 
Programme.  CPSEs sponsor their executives both for short durati on and long duration 
programmes being conducted by ICPE as per their requirements and necessity.  The courses 
being undertaken by ICPE provide inputs in the areas of marketing, finance, operations and also 
help the participating executives in  working in cross cultural environment.     
 
 
 


 11 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 
Furthermore, the Committee rejects the view of Ministry of External Affairs that 
membership of a multilateral inter -government academic organization is required to promote 
what is essentially bilateral relation between the two countries. The membership of ICPE can not 
be justified on the basis of an objective cost - benefit analysis. Exposure of an individual 
executive to the European experience can hardly be an argument for such a costly burde n on the 
budget. The Committee therefore recommends that while individual PSE may negotiate price/fee 
with the ICPE, the membership must not be a burden on the budget.    
Para 52 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
ICPE was set up in 1974 at the initiative of UN.  Since t hen, the Government of India has 
been playing active role in the functioning of ICPE. India is a major donor country for this 
organization.  More than 250 executives of CPSEs have availed the training from ICPE in MBA 
programme and other short duration pro grammes. Since India is a founder member of 
International Centre for Promotion of Enterprises the annual contribution has to be paid out of 
the budget of the Department. 
 
 
 
Chapter-III 
The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has either 
not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply.  
 
Mandate of DPE 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee takes very serious note of inexplicable ambiguities in classification of 
Demands. The Committee takes cog nizance of the reply presented by the Ministry of Finance 
which concedes that while classification on the basis of Capital and Revenue expenditure was a 
Constitutional requirement adding to it another sub classification of Planned and Non -planned 
expenditure, just because it has been in vogue and institutionalised has led to arbitrariness, which 
even the representatives of the Department have found difficult to elaborate. In absence of a 
convincing reply from the Department, the Committee gets an impression  that the Department 
and its relevant wing too could not comprehend the current format of classification. Absence of 
any standardised definition of the hybridised categories obviously has serious consequences and 
may have resulted in arbitrariness. The Com mittee is in agreement with the observation made in 
the Economic Survey regarding Planned and Non -Planned expenditure.  It is the considered 


 12 
opinion of the Committee that once the Budget is approved by the Cabinet for the presentation to 
the Parliament, it is superfluous to indicate in the SBE the approval of Planning Commission or 
any other expert body to individual expenditures. The Committee therefore feels that if a 
classification can not be explained even by the representatives of the Department and th e 
Planning Commission, it must be done away with. The Committee recommends that in view of 
the reply from the Ministry of Finance and the observations made in the Economic Survey, the 
Financial Advisor to the Department must peruse with the Ministry of Fin ance to stop an 
institutionalised  practice in favour of Constitutional requirement.  
Para 18 
Action Taken Note 
 
The matter was referred to Ministry of Finance. Comments furnished by them are as follows:- 
(i) Classification of Government expenditure as Revenue  and Capital expenditure 
is Constitutional requirement whereas classification of expenditure as Plan and 
Non-Plan is non-statutory. 
(ii) The distinction between Plan and Non -Plan expenditure is essentially 
“Institution Driven ”. Plan expenditure generally refers  to the expenditure 
provided for by the Planning Commission out of the Gross Budgetary Support 
(GBS). 
(iii) The reference in the Economic Survey to the illogical/dysfunctional nature of 
distinction between Plan and Non -Plan expenditure was made in a Box item 
with view to generating further debate on the subject. 
 
 
Further Recommendation  
 
The Committee is not happy with the reply given by the Ministry in its Action 
Taken Note. The way the reply is presented at point (iii) reflects the casual approach with 
which th e issue has been taken. This is a technical issue of classification in order to 
understand and analyse the budgetary provisions in a meaningful manner and does not 
require to be debated further.  The Committee reiterates  that in view of the reply from the 
Ministry of Finance and the observations made in the Economic Survey, the Financial 
Advisor to the Department must peruse with the Ministry of Finance to stop an 
institutionalised  practice in favour of constitutional requirement  and see to it  that the 
main concern of this Committee is addressed suitably .  
 
BRPSE 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
After almost four years of BRPSE ’s existence, the Government had approved only 30 
cases for revival. Of an expected investment of Rs. 28513.51 crores, so far only ab out Rs 
8430.48 crores have been approved.  Of the requisite cash infusion of Rs 4440.67 crores, only Rs 
1976.13 crores have been approved. The Committee expresses serious concern as to how could 


 13 
Government generate such resources for the revival. And if th e delay in arranging the resources 
could escalate the cost of revival.  
Para 34 
 
The Committee recommends an objective appraisal of the need for selective revival 
against the cost of revival. Without such a selective  criteria the policy as enunciated in t he 
National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) may become a drag on the exchequer instead 
of being an enabling provision to revive the PSEs to revitalize overall industrial sector in the 
economy. In this context the Committee also notes that the annual perfor mance target set 
prospectively for next five years for the revived PSEs are rather conservative. Considering the 
huge cost of proposed revivals and the limited resources actually committed thus far, it is 
imperative that some benchmarks of acceptable cost ought to be prescribed. Such benchmark 
cost of revival may vary for core/strategic and non-core/ non strategic sectors.  
Para 37 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
Out of the total assistance of Rs.28514 crores recommended by BRPSE from GOI in 
respect of 51 cases of CPSE s, the cash assistance was Rs.4441 crores and the balance amount of 
Rs.24073 was in the form of non -cash assistance. The non -cash assistance recommended from 
Government of India comprises of waiver of interest/penal interest/loan, conversion of loan into 
equity/preference capital and debentures, provision of guarantee, etc. The amount of cash and 
non-cash assistance recommended by BRPSE in respect of the cases under consideration of the 
Government works out to Rs.2562 crores and Rs.16859 crores respectively . Processing and 
implementation of the recommendations of BRPSE is essentially the responsibility of the 
concerned administrative ministries/ departments which take  steps for providing the funds 
required for the revival of the CPSEs under their control in  consultation with Ministry of 
Finance.  
 
The revival package to be approved for a sick CPSE depends on a number of factors like 
its networth, accumulated losses, outstanding loans/interest, statutory dues, funds required for 
capital expenditure, working c apital, technology upgradation and manpower rationalization, 
funds that could be raised by sale of surplus assets, etc. which vary from unit to unit . Therefore, 
the cost of revival may differ from one CPSE to another CPSE.  BRPSE considers all the 
relevant factors before giving its recommendations. It is therefore felt that it may not be feasible 
to prescribe any benchmark of cost of revival for the sick CPSEs. 
  
Further Recommendation  
 
The Committee does not find the reply of the Ministry convincing.  A num ber of 
factors that necessitate revival are already known to BRPSE. Once the diagnosis is known 
the treatment has to start in a time bound manner and the cost of treatment has to be 
worked out well within the time . The Committee does not agree with the rep ly that  it may 
not be feasible to prescribe any benchmark of cost of revival for the sick CPSEs.  Rather it 
cannot be called a decent trend on the face of the fact where Ministry reply negatively on 


 14 
such an important issues, t herefore the Committee urges the government to workout on the 
benchmark of revival cost on the top priority basis.  
 
Recommendation/Observation   
 
The Committee observes that with such exhaustive details on the one hand  the Board had 
considered and recommended 51 cases in its 56 meeti ngs till February 2008 inter alia it took on 
an average just about one meeting to consider and recommend the revival or closure of a PSE, on  
the other hand the Committee also observed with reservation the delay in making reference of 
BRPSE’s recommendations to the competent authority. Considering that the BRPSE includes the 
Secretaries of the Ministry of Finance, Department of Public Enterprises and that it relies 
significantly on the inputs of administrative Departments, the Committee finds the practice o f 
further referring its recommendations Inter-Ministerial Group or the Committee of Secretaries as 
superfluous and time consuming. The views of the Government on the BRPSE ’s 
recommendations are further ratified by the BIFR. Often the revival packages get s tuck on the 
issues with the State Governments and other agencies. The Committee objects to such a practice 
that leads to further critical delays. On the one hand BRPSE is not provided with adequate 
budget to make its own independent assessment and is made to rely upon the administrative 
Ministry, on the other hand its recommendations are further referred to a collateral body of 
Secretaries.  In view of the Committee such a practice only undermines the recommendations of 
the BRPSE.  The Committee recommends that the BRPSE should also ascertain the views of 
other stakeholders particularly the State/local Governments  independently before making its 
final recommendations.   
Para No.42 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
The recommendations of BRPSE are advisory in nature. The concerned administrative 
ministries/departments process the recommendations of BRPSE for obtaining the approval of the 
competent authority (Cabinet or Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA)). It is 
essential to complete inter -ministerial consultation s before the proposals are put up to 
Cabinet/CCEA. The competent authority may refer inter-ministerial issues to any body including 
Committee of Secretaries so as to sort them out.  
 
The administrative ministries/departments prepare a package for revival/r ehabilitation or 
closure of loss making CPSEs under their control after consultations with all the stake holders. 
The proposals thus prepared and submitted by the administrative ministries/ departments are 
considered by the Board. The Board, while consider ing the proposals of the CPSEs, whenever 
required, invites the representatives of the concerned state governments to attend its meetings in 
order to elicit their views. The above recommendation of the Committee has been conveyed to 
BRPSE. 
 
Further Recommen dation 
 


 15 
The line of argument put forth in the action taken note does not take into account  
the required sensivity of the issue and the logic given in the recommendation. The idea in 
the recommendation is to avoid delay in taking action on the recommendati ons of BRPSE 
which includes Secretaries of Ministry of Finance and Department of Public Enterprises. 
The Committee strongly feels that the entire process of revival plan has to be made less 
bureaucratic and more sincere and brisk. Hence, the Committee reit erates its earlier 
recommendation.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee notes that Rs 0.15 crores were allocated to BRPSE for Salaries and it 
finds rather strange that yet another Rs. 5 lakhs were allocated to pay the honoraria to the 
Chairman and the non-official members of the Board for the 10 meetings held during the FY 07 -
08. The Department may provide the details of salary expenses.   
Para 45 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
The pay and allowances of Rs.0.15 crore relating to the officers and staff (Secreta ry and 
his personal staff, Personal staff of Chairman, etc.) of BRPSE were paid and booked under the 
head ‘Salaries’. The honorarium payable to Chairman and non -official members of BRPSE were 
paid and booked under the head ‘Professional Services’.  
 
 
Further Recommendation   
 
The Committee in the above recommendation had asked for the details of salary 
expenses as well as honoraria, whereas the reply contains only the categorisation of 
expenditure. It appears that the Committee ‘s recommendations have not be en given due 
cognizance. The Committee  therefore, takes a serious view of this kind of casual reply and 
would like the Department to provide complete details of salary paid during 2006 -07 as 
well as the honoraria also explain how budget allocated under th e head honoraria could 
booked under ‘professional charges ’.  
 
ICPE 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee takes serious objection to the approach of D/O Higher Education which it 
finds rather intransigent. The Committee had made its recommendations in itially in its 168 th 
Report ( 2005). Even after the passage of three years, D/O Higher Education( M/O HRD) has not 
shown any inclination to follow up on the Committee ’s recommendation which may project 
India’s growing professional/ academic profile to a gl obal constituency of the developing 


 16 
countries. Considering that India has signed bilateral educational exchange agreements with most 
of the developing countries, the Committee asks the Department of Public Enterprises to pursue 
the issue with the highest l evels of M/O HRD and also to convey to the Secretary, D/O Higher 
Education, the displeasure of the Committee on the callous delay of two years. The Department 
of PE must also seek expeditious reply from the Secretary, D/O Higher Education and report to 
the Committee in its Action Taken Note on this Report. 
Para 55 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
The above observations of the Committee have been conveyed to Secretary Department 
of Higher Education. They have also been requested to indicate the status of the case to appr ise 
the position to the Committee.   
 
 
Further Recommendation   
 
The Committee  finds it difficult to believe that a Department in the Government of 
India is not taking its recommendations seriously and even after a lapse of 3 years and with 
repeated recomme ndations no response is coming forward. The Committee views such a 
weak effort of the Department extremely seriously and if the response form the D/o Higher 
Education is not obtained within three months  from the date of presentation of the Report 
to the Parliament, it would take up the matter at the appropriate level.  
 
CRR 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee finds the Department ’s response indifferent and apathetic to its 
recommendation on a very emergent situation. Instead of formulating the guidelin es itself, the 
DPE has left the assignment to SCOPE, which further gave the project to a Consultant, on whose 
advice the SCOPE planned two conferences with HR managers. Despite such an elaborate 
process of consultation the urgency to address the emergent i ssue has been completely missed. 
The Committee found the reply lacking in earnestness. It recommends that the DPE must 
prescribe strict timeline of maximum six months to the SCOPE to formulate the guidelines. The 
Committee may also be informed of the detai ls if the SCOPE has been allocated and disbursed 
any fund for formulating such guidelines. 
Para 59 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
SCOPE has already engaged a consultant for framing comprehensive guidelines of skill 
development programme for the shop -floor employees, supervisors and workmen of CPSEs. At 
the instance of the consultant series of conferences have been held to discuss the issue. In the 
month of April ’08 a conference was held in SCOPE to finalize the guidelines in this regard. 
Subsequently, a meeting was he ld in July, 2008 to have further discussion.  SCOPE has been 


 17 
requested to expedite the formulation of guidelines within six months (September, 2008) as 
desired by the Committee. 
 
Further Recommendation  
 
 The Committee desires that it may be apprised of the  guidelines formulated and 
further action taken of the DPE for its implementation.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 
The Committee reiterates its concern over limited coverage of the scheme. With 
revamped 
scheme in 2008 -09, the annual allocations and the tar get has been reduced to only 8000 VRS 
optees. The Committee should be informed about such drastic reduction in annual allocations 
and the target. As per the annual target for 2007 -08, less than half VRS optees of 2006 -07 were 
to be covered under this schem e. It is also conspicuous that till the very last month of the 
Financial Year, only 3100 optees could be trained while for remaining 7400 VRS optees training 
was still in progress. However, no commitment has been made in the reply regarding the 
redeployability of such trainees. In view of such conspicuous reply the Committee recommends 
that the DPE should set annual target in terms of redeployed trainees instead of the current 
practice of setting target for number of trainees. Such targets would be more cre dible and give an 
idea about the quality of training. 
 Para 69 
 
 
Action Taken Note  
 
No Action Note has been received from the Ministry. 
 
Further Recommendation  
 
The Committee is perplexed to note that the Action Taken Note has conveniently 
ignored this recommendation. The Committee is forced to take a serious view of this 
omission and recommends to furnish the action taken note on the issue immediately.  
 
CRR 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
No information has been provided regarding the agency -wise number of t rainees.  
Considering that the Scheme was under the review during the first half of the FY 07 -08 and the 
funds were released only in the Second half, the Committee must be informed agency -wise 
redeployed trainees, in the Action Taken Note of the Department. 
Para 74 


 18 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
Agency-wise number of VRS optees trained and redeployed during 2007-08 is given as under: 
 
No. of VRS optees Sl. No. Name of Agency 
Trained Redeployed 
1.  Academy Suburbia, Kolkata 500 262 
2.  ASSOCHAM, New Delhi 600 157 
3.  Central Institute of Plastics Engg. & 
Technology, Amritsar 
100 13 
4.  Central Institute of Plastics Engg. & 
Technology, Bhubaneswar 
150 59 
5.  Electronics Service & Training Centre, 
Ramnagar (Uttarakhand)  
200* 80 
6.  Indian Council of Small Industry, Kolkata 1157 744 
7.  Institute of Labour Development, Jaipur 719 368 
8.  MITCON Consultancy Services Ltd., Pune 1000 401 
9.  Madhya Pradesh Consultancy Organization, 
Bhopal 
1101* 593 
10 Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises 
Development Institute, Patna 
200 39 
11 National Institute of Micro, Small & Medium 
Enterprises, Hyderabad. 
1276* 732 
12 National Productivity Council, New Delhi 200 139 
13 National School of  Computer Education, 
Kolkata 
1100 387 
14 U.P. Industrial Consultants Ltd., Kanpur 1400 309 
   15 CIPET, Guwahati 50* -- 
 Grand Total 9753 4283 
   
  Note:  These agencies had spilled over batches in 2008-09.  
 
Further Recommendation  
 
 The Committee notes that number of VRS optees redeployed after training is less 
then 50 per cent and recommends that the Department sh ould make concerted efforts so 
that more and more trainees are redeployed gainfully.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The DPE has not responded to the Committee ’s specific query if the VRS optees were 
being employed as casual/daily wage employees in the same  PSE. The DPE may also explain if 
its existing guidelines were also applicable for such casual/daily wage workers. The Committee 
asks the DPE to ensure the factual situation if the VRS optees have been re -employed as 
casual/daily wage workers despite existing guidelines and inform the Committee. 
Para 77 


 19 
 
Action Taken Note 
  
As per DPE guidelines there will be no recruitment against vacancies arising due to VRS. 
Subsequently, it has also been clarified that once an employee avails himself of voluntary 
retirement from a CPSE, he shall not be allowed to take up the job in another CPSE. Data is 
being obtained from CPSEs about VRS optees employed as casual/daily workers within the same 
CPSE / other CPSE. 
 
Lump Sum to NE 
 
 
 
Further Recommendation  
 
 The date regar ding VRS optees employed as casual/daily wage workers may be 
complied and furnished to the committee for its perusal  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee expresses its concern over under utilisatuion of funds meant for a 
Plan Scheme for economically under-developed NE region. This has been the pattern year 
after year. However due to the policy requirement a certain percentage of Planned 
allocation is earmarked for the NE region.  The Committee expresses its reservation over 
locking scarce funds withou t utilizing them.  
Para 89 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
During 2007-2008 two agencies viz NSCE Kolkata and CIPET Guwahati retrained 150 
VRS optees under CRR programme in NE Region.  During 2008 -2009  VRS optees in NE 
Region would be covered under CRR programme. As p er existing norm 10% of the total plan 
fund is to be earmarked for NE Region. The unutilized amount in respect of NE Region under 
the CRR programme is transferred to Non -lapsable Pool for utilization in various projects of NE 
Region. 
 


 20 
 
 
Chapter-IV 
The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
have not been received. 
 
 
ICPE  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Department of Public Enterprises must also inform the Committee of the substantive 
academic exchanges/joint programmes between ICPE and CSIR after the signing of MoU. 
Para 56 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 ICPE/CSIR has been requested to furnish details on this issue indicating the further 
developments on MOU.  
 
 
