  
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November 2014/ Agrahayana 1936 (Saka) 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN ON THE 237th  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON  
Revival and Restructuring of Hotel Corporation of India Ltd 
 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26
th  November, 2014) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27 th  November, 2014 ) 
 
 REPORT NO.  
262 

  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November 2014/ Agrahayana 1936 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN ON THE 237 th  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON  
Revival and Restructuring of Hotel Corporation of India Ltd 
 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26
th  November, 2014 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27 th  November, 2014 ) 
 

  
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………………………..      (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………        (ii) 
 
3. REPORT …………………………………………………………………………………..        1 
 
(i)  CHAPTER – I 
  Recommendations/observations, which have been acc epted by the 
Ministry……………………………………………………………………………………2 
 
 
(ii)  CHAPTER–II 
   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  does not desire to pursue 
in view 
  of the Government's replies………………………………………………………….. …3 
    
 
(iii)  CHAPTER–III 
     Recommendations/Observations in respect of whi ch the Committee has not                        
accepted the replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its                
replies…………………………………………………… …………………………...4-6 
 
(iv)  CHAPTER – IV 
   Recommendations/observations in respect of which  final replies of the Ministry 
have not been 
received…………………………………………………………………........................7 
 
 
4. Minutes………………………………………………………………………………………….      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Date of Constitution 1ST  SEPTEMBER, 2014 ) 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
1. Shri K.C. Tyagi  _   Chairman  
2. Shri M. P. Achuthan 
3. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
4. Shri Vivek Gupta  
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
6. Shri Praful Patel 
7. Shri T. K. Rangarajan 
8. Shri Narendra Budania 
9. Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
10. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
11. Shri Deepak Adhikari (Dev) 
12. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
13. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary 
14. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque 
15. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
16. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena 
17. Smt. Poonamben Maadam 
18. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
19. Shri S. P. Muddahanumegowda 
20. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
21. Shri M. Srinivasa Rao 
22. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
23. Shri Konda Veshweshwar Reddy 
24. Shri Y. V. Subba Reddy 
25. Shri Rajkumar Saini 
26. Shri B. Senguttuvan 
27. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
28. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
29. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
30. Smt. Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen) 
31. Shri Rajan Vichare 
       
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
  

  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, to hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Sixty-second Report on Action Taken Notes furni shed by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation on the recommendations contained in the Co mmittee’s Two Hundred and 
Thirty-seventh Report on the Revival and Restructur ing of Hotel Corporation of India 
Limited.  
 
2.  I, thank the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
& Department of Public Enterprises 
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprise s) for furnishing the Action Taken 
Notes on the recommendations contained in the Commi ttee’s Two Hundred and Thirty-
seventh Report. 
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on the 20 
th  October, 2014                                 
considered and adopted the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
K.C Tyagi        
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
New Delhi 
October, 
 2014  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
-1- 
 
REPORT 
 
 The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals wit h the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation on the recommendations c ontained in the Committee’s Two 
Hundred and Thirty- seventh Report on the Revival a nd Restructuring of Hotel 
Corporation of India Ltd. 
  
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the M inistry of Civil Aviation in 
respect of the recommendations contained in the Rep ort. These have been categorized as 
follows: 
 
Chapter I -  The recommendations/observations which have been  accepted by the 
Ministry. 
 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter -II -  The recommendations/observations which the Commi ttee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic 
and explanations advanced by the Ministry and there fore do not want to pursue them for 
the present. 
 
Chapter -III -  The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has 
not accepted replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry should furnish 
logical explanations thereof. 
 
Chapter -IV - The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received. 
 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its langua ge in vague terms therefore; the 
Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of 
recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention 
and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 

  
-2- 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
The Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry. 
 
Recommendation/observation 
 
Centaur Hotel, Delhi: 
 
 
 The Committee strongly recommends for substantial allocation of resources made 
available to the Air India for making the units wor king under the HCI more financially 
viable and sound.  The amount so released must be i n addition to Rs.11 crore earmarked 
in the outcome budget for renovation and upgradation of the Centaur Hotel, Delhi. 
Para No.9 
 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 Government has approved Rs.35.29 crore in 12 
th  Five Year Plan for carrying out 
renovation works in three Units of HCI located in D elhi and Srinagar. Out of which 
Rs.24.20 crore has been allocated for Centaur Hotel , Delhi and Chefair Flight Catering, 
Delhi. Rs. 10 crore was sanctioned during the finan cial year 2012-13 and Rs. 12 crore 
was sanctioned during the year 2013-14 for renovati on of HCI properties.  Based on this, 
unit-wise Project Report had also been prepared, al locating fund for repair/renovation of 
each Unit.  Accordingly, the work of Centaur Hotel, Delhi is in progress for repair of roof 
top terrace, replacement of leaking pipes in the du cts, up-gradation of kitchen 
equipments, service lifts, guest lifts, guest rooms , effluent treatment plant, DG sets with 
higher capacity etc.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
-3- 
 
CHAPTER–II 
 
The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 
 
 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
-4- 
 
CHAPTER–III 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted 
the replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its replies. 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 
Chefair Flight Catering, Delhi: 
  
  
 Commissioned in 1986 its capacity utilization is o nly 22 per cent.  This pathetic 
performance of the unit is attributed to lack of re novation of its kitchen infrastructure.  
Initially the capacity utilization ranged from 35 t o 40 per cent due to depreciation and 
normal wear and tear of the equipments installed.  The Committee takes note of the fact 
that rupees six crore have been allocated in the ou tcome budget 2012-13 of the Ministry 
for renovation and restoration of the facilities available for flight kitchen. 
Para No.19 
 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 Chefair Flight Catering Delhi was commissioned with  a capacity of 8000 meals 
per day.  Initially, the Unit was having total cate ring business of the erstwhile Indian 
Airlines/Air India. However, subsequently a policy decision was taken by Indian 
Airlines/Air India for bifurcating their catering c ontract amongst private players after 
which a major chunk of their catering business went to the private sector.  This led to loss 
of large volume of business to the Unit and thereby under-utilisation of its capacity. 
 
 A decision has been taken by Air India to reserve 30% of the total volume of its 
in-flight catering business for Chefair Flight Catering. 
 
 Also Government of India has approved the budgetar y support to renovate/repair 
the HCI properties located in Delhi and Srinagar. A fter the necessary up-gradation/ 
renovation in the Kitchen, it will able to tap the potential business from Airlines. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 
Chefair Flight Catering, Mumbai: 
 
 
 The Unit which started functioning in 1986 is able  to utilize 32 per cent of its 
installed capacity.  The same problem of lack of re novation which plagued the Centaur 
Hotels in the Chefair Flight Catering Delhi is plag uing the Chefair Flight Catering 
Mumbai.  Its problems have been further compounded because of the bifurcation of the 
catering contract by the Air India.  As a result, t his unit only caters to a few flights which 
is far below the target.  The Committee was informed that the area where the Chefair unit  

  
 
-5- 
 
of Mumbai was operating was taken away for expandin g the airport.  As a result, the 
Chefair was shifted and relocated.  The Committee u nderstood that the HCI is insisting 
for a fully developed infrastructure in the vicinit y of the airport to run the flight kitchen.  
The Committee takes note of the fact that work for this purpose is in progress.  The 
Committee also takes note of the fact that rupees t hree crore has been allocated in the 
outcome Budget for the year 2012-13 of the Ministry  for the renovation of the flight 
kitchen in Mumbai.  The HCI maintains that with the  new infrastructure to be made 
available to the flight kitchen in Mumbai and with the new budgetary provision for its 
renovation and upgradation the flight kitchen would  get adequate business not only from 
Air India but also from other airlines.  The turn-a round plan proposal for the 12 th  Plan 
period stated that Chefair Delhi and Chefair Mumbai  are expected to commence 
operations of Air India lounges at Terminal 3 Delhi (both domestic and international) and 
Air India Maharaja Lounge at Terminal 2C at Mumbai respectively to fulfill the 
requirements of Air India. 
Para No.20 
 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 At the time of commissioning, Chefair Flight Cater ing, Mumbai had a capacity to 
produce 10000 meals per day and was also catering t o erstwhile Air India and Indian 
Airlines besides other international airlines.  Lik e Delhi, Air India decided to shift 
majority of its catering business in Mumbai to priv ate caterers, which led to loss of 
business to the Unit.   
 
 It was proposed to relocate the Chefair facilities  at Mumbai and MIAL had 
proposed to relocate the existing facilities at its  cost on a piece of land to be made  
available by NACIL/Chef Air. Keeping in view the sa me, renovation work of Chefair 
unit at Mumbai was dropped from the proposal of ren ovation/repair of HCI units at 
Mumbai. However, in view of the discussion that the  Chefair Mumbai would be handed 
over to MIAL, repair work of Flight Kitchen Mumbai was dropped from the same. 
 
 However, it has now been confirmed by Air India th at 30% its total in-flight 
catering business will be given to Delhi and Mumbai Unit of Chefair. 
 
Further Recommendation/ observation  
 
 Chefair Flight catering, Delhi and Mumbai have to make the most of the 
30% reservation of the total volume of flight cater ing by Air India and the 
Budgetary support approved by the Government for th e 12 th  Five Year Plan.  They 
must keep in mind that in the long term their viabi lity will only be through catching 
up with the private catering operators and survivin g through competing with them. 
Chefair Flight catering should utilize the captive market provided by Air India and 
financial support to consolidate their business and  carve out a market share of their 
own in the flight catering field. 
 
 

  
-6- 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 
 The Committee would like to see the Air India, the parent body of the HCIL, take 
measures so that at least some portion of amount is  released for its revival is utilized for 
HCIL. It will help the HCIL to improve its MoU perf ormance.  The Committee 
recommends that this amount must be at least Rs.100  crore which would be exclusive of 
Rs.25 crore already earmarked in the outcome budget s as mentioned in the earlier 
paragraphs. The involvement, dedication and commitm ent of the employees, 
management and the government are fundamental perqu isites for the maintenance, 
revival and success of any PSE like Centaur Hotel, Srinagar.  No tangible result would be 
achieved by pumping more money unless the employees and management of the Hotel do 
not qualitatively improve their performance.  In ad dition to the monetary or budgetary 
support there must be innovative and creative planning to revamp the infrastructure of the 
hotels and flight kitchens under the HCL and refurb ish their image for attracting tourists 
and passengers to its quality products and services. 
 
Para No.22 
 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 As Government has sanctioned the total amount of R s. 35.29 crore to HCI for the 
renovation / upgradation of its three Units i.e. Ch efair Flight Catering Delhi; Centaur 
Hotel, Delhi and Centaur Lake View Hotel Srinagar.  The work has already been 
entrusted to AAI and the progress of the work is re gularly being monitored by Ministry 
of Civil Aviation. Till date an amount of Rs.22 cro re has been released to AAI for the 
work. Further, Air India have come forward and deci ded that 30% of its in-flight catering 
business shall be provided to Chef air unit at Delh i and Mumbai. MOU of HCI with Air 
India is also being signed for the year, 2014-15. 
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 The reply does not mention anything about steps ta ken to improve employee 
efficiency and quality of service in hotel like Cen taur Hotel, Srinagar. The 
Committee reiterates that Budgetary support alone c annot turn around a PSE, if all 
round qualitative improvement is ignored. Quality o f personnel, in the opinion of 
the Committee, is a deciding factor in the hospital ity business. It is, therefore, felt 
that HCL should choke out clearly defined capacity building programmes for 
improving its man power efficiency. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
-7- 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
have not been  received. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 
Centaur Lake View Hotel, Srinagar: 
 
 
 The Committee reiterates that more funds out of th e corpus earmarked for the Air 
India may be used for renovation and upgradation of  the facilities of the Centaur Hotel in 
Sri Nagar. 
Para No.15 
Action Taken Reply 
 
 Government has approved Rs.35.29 crore in 12 
th  Five Year Plan for carrying out 
various works in three Units of HCI. Out of which R s.11.09 crore was allocated to 
Centaur Lake View Hotel Srinagar for renovation. Rs .7.64 crore was sanctioned during 
the year 2012-13 for repair and renovation of the p roperty. The repair work which has 
been assigned to Airport Authority of India, which started in 2013, is already in progress 
in a phased manner so as to have a minimal effect i n the functioning. On completion of 
the repair/renovation work, it is expected that the Hotel will be able to encash the spurt in 
tourism and generate additional revenue. The progre ss of the work is regularly being 
monitored by Ministry of Civil Aviation so to ensur e that work is being completed by/ 
within the target date. 
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 The reply does not contain informations regarding the fund allocated 
and status of work done at Centaur Lake View Hotel, Srinagar for the year 2013-14.  
The Committee may be apprised of the status of repa ir and renovation of the 
property and whether there is cost escalation?  
 
************* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
-8- 
 
VI                                                 
Sixth Meeting  
 
 The Committee met at 11.30 a.m. on Monday, the 20 th  October, 2014 in 
Committee Room `A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present  
 
Shri K.C. Tyagi - Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
1. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
2. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
3. Shri Vivek Gupta 
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
5.    Shri T.K. Rangarajan 
6.    Shri Narendra Budania 
7.    Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
8.    Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
9. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
10. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary 
11. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena 
12  Smt. Poonamben Maadam 
13. Shri S.P. Muddahanumegowda 
14. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
15. Shri M. Srinivasa Rao 
16. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
17. Shri Konda Veshweshwar Reddy 
18. Shri Y.V. Subba Reddy 
19. Shri Rajkumar Saini 
20. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
21. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
22. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
 3. Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
 4. Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 

  
-9- 
 
WITNESSES  
MINISTRY OF MS&ME  
 
1. Shri Madhav Lal, Secretary 
2. Shri Amarendra Sinha, AS & Development Commissioner 
3. Shri S.N. Tripathi, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri B.H. Anil Kumar, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Samarendra Sahu, ADC 
6. Shri M.P. Singh, ADC 
 
1. At the outset the Chairman of the Committee welc omed the members of the 
Committee and briefed them that the agenda of the meeting was to consider and adopt the 
draft 262 
nd  and 263 rd  Reports of the Committee on Action Taken on the 23 7 th  Report on 
Revival and Restructuring of Hotel Corporation of I ndia Ltd. and on the 246 th  Report on 
Revival of Nagaland Pulp and Paper Co. Ltd.  The Co mmittee considered the draft 262 nd  
and 263 rd  Reports and adopted the same after brief discussio n.  Thereafter the Chairman 
welcomed the Secretary of the Ministry of MS&ME alo ngwith their officers. In his 
opening remarks the Chairman underlined the very im portant issue of skill development. 
He also underlined that the MSME sector has a huge potential of employment generation, 
preserving and developing traditional skills and al igning them with expending market.  
He also informed that recently, the Prime Minister has launched a programme for 
demand-based skill development and sought to know t he Ministry has done any mapping 
of emerging job market and has aligned its skill de velopment institutions to the job 
requirement.  The Chairman also observed that the M inistry was expected to train 8.5 
lakh youth every year to achieve the target of 1.5 crore by 2022, however, by 2013-14; 
the Ministry had reached a target of 6.1 lakh perso ns only.  He also noted that the Prime 
Minister's Task Force had given specific recommenda tions with specific timelines and 
the working group of MSME sector had proposed setti ng up of 100 such Tool Rooms.   
The Committee sought to know the status on these counts. 
 
 
2. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of MS&ME mad e a presentation on the 
mandate and the working of the Ministry and its sch emes and gave an overview of their 
performance in Entrepreneurship Development and Ski ll Development through their 
various institutions and through the budgetary support under plan.   
 
3. The Development Commissioner, MS&ME gave the ove rview of the performance 
of the Tool Rooms and Technology Centres and the expansion plans. 
 
4.   The Secretary also informed that the KVIC are conducting the training and 
capacity building programmes and likewise, there ar e programmes for the coir sector 
being conducted by the Coir Board.  The cluster dev elopment programme in which one 
of the components is to enhance the capacity and sk ills of those people who are running 
the cluster and those who are employed in such clusters.   
 

  
-10-  
 
5. Members asked the question pertaining to setting  up of more industry specific 
Tool Rooms in various parts of the country.  Member s also enquired about employability 
of the short term courses in such tool rooms and source of their revenue. 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meet ing was kept. 
 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 1.25 p.m. 
 
 
 
************** 
 
 