168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-06) PERTAINING TO
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
(MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND
PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 5TH MAY, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 5TH MAY, 2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2005/VAISAKHA, 1927 (SAKA)
E-mail: rsc_ind@sansad.nic.in
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
CONTENTS
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTION
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
5. MINUTES
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 5th August, 2005)
     1.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
     2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.  Shri Surendra Lath
     4.  Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
     5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
     6.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
     7.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
     8.  Dr. Vijay Mallya
     9.  Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
    10.  Shrimati Vanga Geetha
LOK SABHA
    11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
    12.  Shri Kailash Baitha
    13.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
    14.  Shri Subhash Deshmukh

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
    15.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
    16.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
    17.  Shri Sunil Khan
    18.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
    19.  Shri Prakash Paranjpe
    20.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
    21.  Shri Rajnarayan
    22.  Shri Bagida Ramakrishna
    23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
    24.  Shrimati Rubab Sayeda
    25.  Shri Gurjeet Singh Rana
    26.  Shri Manvendra Singh
    27.  Shri Ganesh Singh
    28.  Shri Suraj Singh
    29.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi
    30.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
    31.  Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
SECRETARIAT
          Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
          Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
          Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
          Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
          I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised by the
Committee, hereby present this One Hundred Sixty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to the Department of
Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
2.       The Committee during its detailed discussions on the 30th March, 2005 with the representatives of the Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises assessed the performance of the CRR Scheme and the coordination of the various policies for PSEs
issued by the Department of Public Enterprises.
3.       The Committee's queries, recommendations and observations are reflected at appropriate places in this Report.
4.       The Committee acknowledges the cooperation of the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises in providing useful
inputs.
5.       The Committee at its meeting held on 3rd May, 2005, considered and adopted the Report.
NEW DELHI;
3rd May, 2005
 
SANTOSH BAGRODIA        
 Chairman,
 Department-relatedParliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry
 
REPORT
1.         MANDATE OF DPE
1.1        As per Allocation of Business Rules of the Government the following subjects have been allotted to the Department of Public
Enterprises :–

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
                   •  Bureau of Public Enterprises including Industrial Management Pool.
                   •  Coordination of matters of general policy of non-financial nature affecting all public sector industrial and commercial
undertakings.
                   •  Matters relating to Memorandum of Understanding as mechanism of improving the performance of Public Sector
Undertakings.
                   •  Matters relating to Permanent Machinery of Arbitration for the Public Sector Undertakings.
                   •  Matters relating to Counselling, Retaining and Redeployment of rationalized employees of  CPSEs.
1.2        DPE have constituted the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) to strengthen and restructure CPSEs.
1.3        The Department of Public Enterprises acts as the nodal Department for all Central Public Sector Enterprises, assists in the
formation of policies pertaining to performance evaluation, autonomy, delegation, personnel management and related areas.
2.         ROLE OF DPE IN THE NEW LIBERALIZED ECONOMY
2.1        With the onset of liberalization, Government has taken various steps for CPSEs to cope up with the new challenges. Managerial
and Financial autonomy have been given to CPSEs. DPE has already deleted more than 762 guidelines in a bid to provide more
autonomy to CPSEs. Voluntary Retirement Scheme has been formulated for the workers of CPSEs to protect their interest. In order to
improve the order book position to sustain in the competitive market, guidelines have been issued by DPE on Purchase Preference Policy.
As a safety net, Counselling, Retaining and Redeployment Scheme has been introduced to rehabilitate the rationalized employees of
CPSEs.
2.2        The NCMP provides for making the public sector strong and effective. Government is considering to give enhanced financial and
operational autonomy so as to enable CPSEs to take quick and timely decisions. Further, the cases of sick and loss making CPSEs are to
be considered by the BRPSE and recommendations made for their revival/rehabilitation/closure/sale as the case may be to the
Government. The revival packages may include financial and business restructuring, formation of joint ventures, modernization of plant
and machinery, technology upgradation, need based cash infusion, rationalization of manpower, improved marketing strategy etc.
2.3        The financial restructuring of sick companies will increase the credibility of the enterprises in the market resulting in increase in
bankability of their product. Further, formation of joint venture may bring both finance and technology to the Company. Funds may also
be mobilized by sale of surplus land and other assets. Need based funds may also be provided by the Government.
2.4        The Committee was informed that after the abolition of some of the Divisions of DPE, viz., production, construction etc., DPE
has withdrawn its role for monitoring of the schemes/programmes of CPSEs. It is the primary responsibility of Administrative
Ministries/Departments to monitor the schemes/activities of CPSEs working under their administrative control.
2.5        The Committee feels that abolition of some of the divisions is unacceptable. It observes that without constant monitoring and
consultations, the policy formulation will be reduced to a mere academic exercise. The Committee considers that such a situation will
limit the full-potential and utility of a Department and thereby affecting the efficiency of the policy. Governance requires an objective
and periodic assessment of the policies by the agencies that formulate such policies. As envisaged in its mandate, to evolve DPE as the
key policy-coordinating department for the CPSEs, it must undertake constant monitoring, consultations and modifications of its
guidelines. It must also compile the data pertaining to the PSEs under all the Ministries/Departments and make appraisal. These
information should be posted as its Website for public access.
3.         BUDGET
3.1        The Committee takes note of sub-head wise budget allocation for DPE :–
(Rs. in crores)
                                                                                                                                       
 Revenue  BE 2005-06
Sl. Major Head Sub-Head Plan Non- Total
No.    Plan  

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
1. 3451 Secretariat Economic Services – 2.56 2.56
2. 3451 Information Technology 0.60 – 0.60
3. 2552 North Eastern Areas 3.00 – 3.00
4. 2852 International Cooperation – 0.36 0.36
5. 2852 Awards to Public enterprises for Excellence in – 0.01 0.01
  Performance    
6. 2852 Counselling, retraining, redeployment, setting up of new 26.40 – 26.40
  centres/addition of nodal agencies, etc.    
  TOTAL : 30.00 2.93 32.93
4.         BRIEF EXPLANATION TO BUDGET PROVISION
4.1        Secretariat Economic Services : Provides funds for Secretariat Expenditure like pay and allowances, T.A., D.A., medical
allowance etc.
4.2        Information Technology : Planning Commission has earmarked 2-3% for information technology out of the total budget.
Planning Commission has, therefore, earmarked Rs. 60 lakh for information technology during 2005-06. This will facilitate in monitoring
of the implementation of CRR programme.
4.3        North Eastern Areas : Every Ministry/Department has to earmark 10% of their total budget allocation for North Eastern Region
and Sikkim. This money will be utilized for the various developmental works/schemes for the benefit of North Eastern Region and
Sikkim.
4.4        International Cooperation : India is the founder member of International Centre for Promotion of Enterprises (ICPE) in
Ljubljana, Slovenia. The annual contribution of India to ICPE is $ 75,000. Therefore, budgetary provisions have been made under this
head.
4.5        Awards to PSUs for Excellence in Performance : DPE is responsible for finalisation and signing of MoU between Secretary,
Administrative Ministry and Chief Executive of CPSEs. On the basis of MoU targets, Department of Public Enterprises give MoU
Awards to Chief Executives of CPSEs for their excellent performance for which the funds are provided by the Government.
4.6        Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment (CRR) Scheme : CRR has been assigned to this Department for benefit of
rationalized employees of CPSEs. This scheme is carried out by various nodal agencies. Government provides them fund for imparting
training and also for setting up of new centres for imparting training of these rationalized employees of Central Public Sector Enterprises.
5.         EXPLANATION ON THE PLANNED OUTLAY TO IRON AND STEEL INDUSTRY
5.1        The Committee was informed that the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure provides funds to various
Ministries/Departments under different heads of Development. The funds being provided to Industry including DPE come under Iron and
Steel Industry. Under this head, the fund allocation of CRR is also placed. It is also clarified that the funds under Iron and Steel head does
not necessarily mean that the fund is meant only for the development of Iron and Steel Sector.
5.2        The Committee does not approves such an arrangement of allocating funds for the DPE under Iron and Steel Industry head. This
needs to be corrected. The Committee accordingly directs the DPE to take up the matter with appropriate Department to correct the same.
6.         INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
6.1        The Committee noted that Rs. 60 lakhs were provided in BE 2004-05 as planned allocation for Information Technology, however
it came down to Rs. 10 lakhs at RE stage in 2004-05, however, it has been again raised to Rs. 60 lakh in BE 2005-06.
6.2        The Committee was informed that while allocating the target under plan fund during 2004-05 and 2005-06, Planning
Commission have specifically made a provision of 2-3% of the Plan outlay to be incurred on IT application. This was done in pursuance
of the recommendations of the Expert Group on "Computerization of the Information on Personnel and Citizens Services" for improving

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
administrative efficiency by using Information Technology. Accordingly, against allocation of plan fund of Rs. 30 crore, DPE during
2004-05 (BE) had earmarked Rs. 60 lakh being 2% for IT application.
6.3        The Committee was informed that the allocation for IT could not be utilized last year, and therefore, at RE stage it was reduced to
Rs. 10 lakh. For the year 2005-06 also the same criteria has been applied by the Planning Commission while allocating the fund and
accordingly, DPE has earmarked Rs. 60 lakhs for IT application. Exclusive earmarking of fund under IT application is being done since
2004-05 at the instructions of Planning Commission. This year the efforts will be made to utilize the said fund for the purpose it has been
allocated by the Planning Commission.
6.4        The Committee expresses its dismay over the non-utilization of the fund for IT. The Committee would like to know the reasons
of DPE's inability to utilize the funds allocated for "Computerization of the Information on Personnel and Citizens Services", as its
objective is to improve administrative efficiency. The Committee also impresses upon the Department to take necessary steps so that such
a situation does not occur in future.
6.5        The Committee also recommends that the Website of the DPE must be enriched with updated information and statistics on PSEs
particularly on the schemes coordinated by the DPE.
7.         SECRETARIAT
7.1        DPE incur expenditure under Major Head Secretariat Economic Services for payments of salaries to the staff, TA, DA, sitting
fees for attending meetings of MoU negotiations meetings, meetings for Search Committee for selection to Non-Official Directors in the
Boards of Mini-Ratna and Nav-Ratna CPSEs, sitting fees for BRPSE members and Ad-hoc Expert Group set up for recommending for
more autonomy to CPSEs. In addition, office expenses of the Department is also met under this Head.
8.         ALLOCATIONS FOR NORTH EASTERN REGION
8.1        The Committee is informed that Rs. 3 crore has been provided for the NE Region as a part of Government policy to earmark 10%
of Department's budget for NE Region.
8.2        The Committee takes note of under-utilisation of funds as indicated below :–
Year Fund allocated Fund released Fund utilised Physical Achievement
 (Rs. in crore) (Rs. in lakh) (Rs. in lakh) target  
2001-02 0.80 39.50 2.20 500 24 (156 under 3 day counselling)
2002-03 1.00 – 5.73 – (219 under 3 day counselling)
2003-04 1.00 15.80 – 200 –
2004-05 3.00 7.90 – 100 –
TOTAL : 5.80 63.20 7.93 – 123 (375 under 3 day
counselling)
8.3        The Committee was informed that funds under the Scheme could not be utilised in the NE Region, mainly because of non-
availability of rationalized VR employees in the region. Two agencies namely Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship (IIE) and National
Productivity Council operative in the region have conducted survey time to time to identify VR Optees, but could not find positive
results. In the recently held local Coordination Committee Meeting, representatives of the units of various PSUs located in NE Region
participated, but the response was not encouraging.
8.4        The Committee was also informed that during 2004-05, a proposal was received from IIE, Guwahati to allow them to start the
residential programmes to attract the VR Optees. DPE favoured the proposal and it was sent to Planning Commission for their
concurrence. However, in view of a communication received from Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region (MoDONER)
which necessitates that all the requests with regard to relaxation of norms etc. should be sent to them, the said proposal has been
forwarded to MoDONER.
8.5        The Committee takes a serious note of under-utilization of funds for NE Region and under achievement of annual targets of CRR
beneficiaries. The Committee finds such case to be a sorry state of governance and indicative of serious disjoint in Government
departments that must be avoided in public interest.
8.6        The Committee, keeping in view the lack of cooperation among various Departments, recommends the DPE to undertake a

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
serious study to ascertain the causes of under achievement of CRR beneficiaries and make corrections in the policy. The training should
have forward linkage with market. The Department must also look for the possibility to cover at least one of the family members of the
beneficiary under CRR scheme so as to increase the family income.
9.         BREAK-UP OF RS. 30 CRORE UNDER PLAN-REVENUE EXPENDITURE
9.1        Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment Scheme for rationalized employees of CPSUs is the only Scheme under Plan Fund.
Entire amount of Rs. 30 crore is under Revenue Expenditure head because grants in aid is treated as revenue expenditure Budget
allocated under CRR Scheme is in form of grants-in-aid. This amount has been allocated to cover a target of 30000 rationalised
employees.
10.        BREAK-UP OF ALLOCATION FOR CRR
10.1      Under CRR Scheme, the amount of Rs. 30 crore was allocated during 2004-05. Same amount has been allocated in the current
year i.e. 2005-06 also. Out of Rs. 30 crore, Rs. 0.60 crore and Rs. 3 crore has been earmarked for IT Plan and for NE Region. Break of
the allocation of Rs. 30 crore under CRR Scheme is given as under :–
            Retraining and Redeployment Scheme of rationalized employees of central                            26.40
            public sector enterprises
            I.T. Plan                                                                                                                         0.60
            Lump sum provision for projects/schemes for the benefits of North East Region                    3.00
            and Sikkim
            Total                                                                                                                             30.00
10.2      CRR Scheme falls under social safety net and basically it is a welfare scheme approved and sanctioned by the Planning
Commission, and therefore, the allocation of fund comes under plan expenditure.
11.        YEAR-WISE DETAILS OF TOTAL VRS OPTEES
11.1      The Committee was informed of year-wise figure of VRS optees in CPSEs, fund allocated, physical target and achievement as
under :–
Year VRS Fund allocated Physical target Achievement
 (No. of persons) (Rs. crores) (No. of persons) (No. of persons)
2001-02 54,367 8.00 8000 8064
2002-03 63,741 10.00 11900 12066
2003-04 46,069 10.00 12000 12200
2004-05 Not available 23.40 30000 29,200
    (upto Feb. '05)
11.2      The Committee was also informed that the success rate i.e. rate of rehabilitation during 2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04 has been
30%, 40% and 45-50%.
11.3      The Committee observes with concern the huge gap between VRS optees and the target set by the DPE for CRR coverage.
Though the Committee appreciates that the yearly targets are achieved, however, it seeks reasons for such a gap between actual VRS
optees and annual target for CRR.
11.4      In response to the Committee recommendation in its 150th Report, on extending the benefits of schemes like PMRY, REGP or
KVIC, it is informed that the response is not encouraging in view of the fact that centrally sponsored schemes (REGP, PMRY etc.) are
employment oriented whereas being under social safety net, basic objective of the CRR scheme is to rehabilitate the rationalized
employees into self-employment activities through short duration retraining programmes.

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
11.5      The Committee appreciates that the success rate is gradually increasing. Yet compared with the total VRS optees of whom CRR
beneficiaries are only a small part, it can be safely inferred that the rate of rehabilitation of the rationalized employees is hardly
satisfactory. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government must look the success rate in comparison with total VRS optees
and make serious corrections to increase the success rate of rehabilitation.
11.6      The Committee also feels that in the CRR scheme, preference should be given to those junior level functionaries to whom the
VRS dues have still not been paid. Also the Committee would like to know about the interim measures taken to provide sustenance to
such VRS optees whose dues are still pending with the PSEs.
11.7      The Committee be apprised of the reasons on which its recommendation to extend the benefits of CRR scheme to family
members was refused by the Planning Commission. The Committee reiterates its recommendation as contained in its 150th Report in this
respect, and recommends a re-look into the issue as it will increase the family income of the VRS optee.
12.        CONSTRAINTS IN IMPLEMENTATION OF CRR SCHEME
12.1      The Committee was informed of the following constraints in implementing the CRR scheme :–
                   •  Response from CPSEs needs to be more proactive for success of the scheme.
                   •  There is usually a time gap between the date of separation of the rationalized employees and date of survey.
                   •  Issues in training design and delivery needs to be standardized.
                   •  Although, there has been more emphasis on accelerating the success rate, there is need to ascertain the quantum of failure
cases also.
12.2      The Committee recommends that DPE must take up the issue involved in the implementation of CRR Scheme with respective
PSEs and their Administrative Ministries to remove these constraints. The Committee would also like to know the steps taken on the
evaluation study conducted by V.V. Giri National Labour Institute, to overcome the above constraints.
13.        BRPSE
13.1      The Committee was informed of the mandate of Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE). The Board will
advise the Government on ways and means for strengthening Public Sector Enterprises in general and making them more autonomous
and professional; consider restructuring – financial, organizational and business (including diversification, joint ventures, seeking
strategic partner, merger and acquisition) of CPSEs and suggest ways and means for funding such schemes; examine the proposals of the
Administrative Ministries for revival/restructuring of sick/loss making CPSEs for their turn around and to make suitable
recommendations related thereto; advise the Government on disinvestments/closure/sale, in full or part, in respect of chronically sick/loss
making companies which cannot be revived, in respect of such unviable companies the Board will also advise the Government about
sources of fund including sale of surplus assets of the enterprise for the payment of all legitimate dues and compensation to workers and
other costs of closure; to monitor incipient sickness, i.e., PSEs incurring loss for two consecutive years; and make recommendations and
advise the Government on such other matters as may be assigned to it from time to time.
13.2      The Board consists of Chairman, three Non-official Members and Secretary, Expenditure; Secretary, Disinvestment as Official
Members and Secretary, DPE as Member Secretary. The Department of Public Enterprises provides secretariat assistance to the Board.
Chairman, Public Enterprises Selection Board is a permanent invitee and the Secretary of the concerned Administrative
Ministry/Department is a special invitee to the meetings concerning his Ministry.
13.3      The Committee would like to know the details of professional eligibility criterion for the non-official Members of the BRPSE
and the way they are selected.
13.4      The Committee was informed that the Board convenes two meetings in a month. In order to meet the expenditure of the Board
for sitting fees to the non-official members, air fare to outstation members, transportation facility to the Chairman etc., this Department
submitted a proposal to Department of Expenditure for allocation of additional fund to the tune of Rs. 26 lakh. Department of
Expenditure has, however, advised this Department to manage the fund within the budget ceiling for 2004-05. For the year 2005-06,
Ministry of Finance have also advised to accommodate the expenditure within the approved BE 2005-06 and if necessary, additional fund

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
may be obtained at RE 2005-06 stage.
13.5      The Committee feels that sufficient provisions should be made available to meet BRPSE's requirements for providing expert
advise on techno-financial issues pertaining to revival of PSEs. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Government to provide
sufficient funds for the smooth functioning of the BRPSE.
13.6      The Committee was informed that as per the resolution of the Government constituting BRPSE, the Board would be expected to
make recommendations within two months from the date of receipt of the complete proposal from the Administrative
Ministry/Department and will also fix reasonable time limit for implementation of the recommended package. Since BRPSE has
commenced its function recently, the average time taken for revival of CPSEs can only be ascertained after final view taken by the
respective ministries on the recommendations of BRPSE.
13.7      The Committee, however, expresses concern over delay in finalizing the revival of PSEs that has incurred heavy cost of such
delay in terms of depleting net worth and rising liabilities of PSEs. The Committee hopes that the delay in finalisation of the revival of
PSEs would be avoided.
13.8      The Committee suggests that the Administrative Ministries/Departments should be given time limit to refer the complete
proposal to BRPSE.
14.        LINKAGE BETWEEN BRPSE AND BIFR
14.1      BRPSE is an advisory body, BIFR is a statutory one to sanction suitable revival/rehabilitation packages in case of viable sick
industrial Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) and recommend winding up in case of unviable units. The scope for BRPSE is
larger as it may consider cases of non-industrial enterprises as well as incipient sick enterprises also. The mechanism of BRPSE is
expected to expedite the process of revival/rehabilitation of sick and loss making CPSEs. The Board may also take the advice of experts
in the relevant field, if considered necessary. The recommendations of the Board shall be advisory in nature. The implementation of the
recommendations of the Board will essentially be the responsibility of the concerned administrative Ministry/Department, which shall, in
consultation with DPE, monitor their timely implementation. The administrative Ministries/Departments have been advised to identify
the sick CPSEs under their administrative control and submit comprehensive proposal for taking holistic view by the BRPSE. Since the
definition of sick industries for BRPSE has been broadened, the cases of enterprises which are continuously loss making but the networth
is still positive may also be considered by the BRPSE to avoid further erosion of the networth.
14.2      BIFR being a statutory body all industrial CPSEs whose accumulated losses are equal to or more than the networth are
mandatorily to be referred to BIFR. Hence, in case of such enterprises registered with the BIFR decision is taken by this body only.
However, the Government while forming its point of view on the proposals relating to revival/rehabilitation of CPSEs may consult
BRPSE.
14.3      The Repeal of Sick Industries Companies Act Bill, 2001 has already been passed by both the Houses of Parliament in December,
2003. It has also got assent of the President of India in January, 2004. As soon as the notification of Repeal of SICA is issued the BIFR
will be dismantled and all pending cases with it will be abated. However, in case of revival schemes already sanctioned the new body
namely National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) will continue to monitor such schemes. The setting up of NCLT is held up due to the
matter being sub-judice in the Supreme Court.
14.4      The Committee observes that pending the notification to repeal SICA, the linkage between the two bodies BIFR and BRPSE
remains undefined.
14.5      The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should decide on linkage between BIFR and BRPSE at least, till
such time a final decision on BIFR is taken by the competent Court.
15.        HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
15.1      The Committee is informed that during the last three years more than 76 executives of CPSEs, recommended by DPE, have been
benefited under different international cooperation programmes.
16.        INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR PROMOTION OF ENTERPRISES (ICPE)

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
16.1      India is a founder member of International Centre for Promotion of Enterprises (ICPE), Ljubljana, Solvenia. Secretary, DPE is
currently, the President of the ICPE Council. India makes an annual membership contribution of US$ 75000 to ICPE from DPE budget.
DPE has been associating itself closely in the ICPE activities by way of taking part in its Assembly and Council Sessions and finalization
of ICPE – Work Programme for management development of enterprises in the developing countries both in private and public sector,
which inter-alia includes management development programmes (Long-term/Short-term), development projects, studies on topics of
interest in the public sector enterprises in the scenario of globalization/economic liberalization. ICPE has introduced some new short-term
management development programmes in the field of Total Quality Management, Advanced Management, Sustainable Development
Management, Public Policy and Management and Project Management. The programmes are instrumental in providing international
exposure and upgradation of skills to the middle/senior level executives of PSEs in India to the best management practices, which can be
emulated for further growth and the development of their PSEs.
16.2      The Committee acknowledges the initiatives taken by the DPE to enhance the skills of the middle and senior level executives in
PSEs.
16.3      The Committee also notes that management development courses are the main benefit of DPE's membership of ICPE, which has
been availed by only 76 executives in last three years with DPE paying an annual membership fee of US $ 75000. The Committee may
be apprised of the items included under this contribution. The Committee would also like the DPE to take a fresh look into the cost-
benefit ratio of such membership and justify the same for next year's Demands and inform the Committee accordingly.
16.4      The Committee may also be apprised of the criteria and process for the selection of candidates for such courses.
17.        DOMESTIC SKILL ENHANCEMENT PROGRAMMES
17.1      The Committee was informed that DPE is supplementing the efforts of the Public Enterprises towards Human Resource
Development by organizing Executive Development Programme (EDP's) for senior and middle level executives in collaboration with
premier management/training institutes in the country. EDPs programme covers wide range of activities viz. management techniques,
technologies, financial management, production management etc. Human Resource Development is the thrust area of Public Sector
performance. These programmes are organized in collaboration with Indian Institute of Management, Institute of Public Enterprises,
Hyderabad, National Institute of Financial Management. During the last three years 112 executives of CPSEs have been benefited under
these programmes.
17.2      The Committee recommends that DPE must make efforts with concerned Departments and Institutions, to conduct similar EDPs
in India, with Indian Professional Institutions, for other ICPE members. Indian institutions must enter into huge global market of
professional training and consultancy. Such programmes for other countries will enhance the academic and professional profile of our
premier professional institutions.
17.3      The Committee notes with reservation that there was no specific programme for enhancing the skills of shop-floor level
technique. The Committee views it to be a stunted approach towards overall human development in PSEs.
17.4      The Committee, therefore, recommends that DPE must organize orientation and skill development programme for floor-shop
level technical functionaries as they are the end users of new material management and production techniques. The efficiency at shop-
floor level ultimately reflects in the corporate performance of the Company. The Committee recommends that CPSEs must adhere to the
principles of Total Quality Management.
17.5      As regards, training in industrial health and safety measures the Committee was informed that "As far as impart training for
industrial health is concerned, the management of PSEs also provide training to their executives regarding capital market negotiation
strategies and skills, health and stress management, industrial relation and labour issues etc. EDP programmes are devised in such a way
that they cover almost all the aspects of the industries. In addition, the management of CPSEs also imparting training to their personnel
about the safety measures. In order to maintain the industrial health, management also remains in constant touch with workers
representative to avoid hartal, lockout, strike tc."
17.6      The Committee finds the reply hardly convincing, and impresses upon the DPE to give a more serious effort to impart more
structured and elaborate orientation to the management and technical staff in this regard.

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
18.        MoU SYSTEM
18.1      On its query on the Government's obligations as one of the contracting party in the MoU, the Committee was informed that the
Government/Administrative Ministry's obligations were to support the PSEs to achieve the pre-defined targets in the MoU. The specific
issues which are incorporated in the MoUs pertain to approval of various projects, delegation of powers, financial assistance,
coordination with various Government agencies etc.
18.2      The Committee would like to know the nature of such support to PSEs in achieving the targets in MoU. The Committee observes
that the number of PSEs earning favourable ratings is increasing while those getting 'Poor' rating have decreased. Keeping this in view,
the Committee has also observed that the number of PSEs entering the MoU has been falling from 108 in 1999-2000 to 96 in 2003-04.
The Committee wonders, if the PSEs having poor ratings are being excluded from the MoU system. If that is true, is it safe to construe
that the Government's support under MoU system is practically not available to the loss making PSEs. The Committee would like to
know if there is a policy to exclude such PSEs from signing the MoU. If so, the Committee would like to know the rationale behind such
policy.
18.3      The Committee desires that the Government should extend its support to the PSEs signing MoU without compromising the MoU
parameters. The policy should be such so as to include more PSEs to sign MoU. It desires the PDE to examine the issue.
19.        DETAILS OF MOU PARAMETERS
19.1      There are four categories of the parameters against which achievements of any PSE is rated :
                   •  Static Parameters,
                   •  Dynamic Parameters,
                   •  Enterprise-specific Parameters, and
                   •  Sector-specific Parameters.
19.2      Static parameters reflect cost and benefits associated with the operation of the enterprise in a given period of time, while the
dynamic parameters result in benefits in the future. Static variables referred to financial performance indicators (profit related), financial
indicators (size related) and financial returns indicators (total factor productivity/labour productivity). Variables that depict the health of
the company such as product quality of the future, products share with high value realisations, customer satisfaction, extent of
globalisation, market share, R&D outlay etc., are referred to as dynamic factors. Enterprise specific parameters relate to parameters like
safety, environment, ecological considerations viz., Parameters that do not get reflected in increased profits either during the year of
investment or later but considered important from the view point of the society. Sector specific parameters reflect how the macro
environment affects the PSE.
20.        RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE NCAER ON MOU SYSTEM
20.1      The Committee was informed of the efficacy of the MoU system that has been appreciated by the CEOs in the study conducted
by the NCAER on the issue.
20.2      All recommendations in respect of guidelines made in the NCAER Report were accepted and incorporated in the MoU
Guidelines. The Committee is informed that in the Guidelines, the total weight in MoU assessment format was divided into points against
groups of parameters viz. common parameters, sector-specific parameters and enterprise-specific parameters. The common parameters
carry 80% weight which includes 'static financial parameters (50%) and dynamic parameters (30%)' applicable for all PSEs other than
social, financial trading and consultancy PSEs. Sector-specific parameters, which reflect sectoral thrusts and priorities, carry 10% weight
and enterprise-specific parameters, which reflect performance improvement measures at the enterprise/unit level carry 10% weight.
20.3      Added value concept has been incorporated in the MoU system to capture productivity improvement in real terms. Added value
is to be computed as gross margin less returns to capital, which in turn may be computed as capital recovery factor @ 4% the capital
employed for social sector PSEs and @ 10% of the capital employed for all other PSEs.
20.4      The Committee feels that the financial parameters in the MoU system still do not reflect the fact that the PSEs are still largely

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
dependent on bulk Government orders. Most of the PSEs still do not have any significant presence in global export market despite being
in the business for long. Most of the Excellent-rated PSEs function in monopoly market environment. The PSEs have not been able to
secure the 'Brand loyalty' of customers, wherever the sector has been opened up for private sector and this is reflected in the receding
market share of such PSEs. The Committee would like to have DPE's comment on its observations.
20.5      The Committee takes note with reservation that DPE has not conducted any specific Survey conducted in relation to
technological obsolence of PSEs.
20.6      In view of the fact that the PSEs were established as the pioneers in industrial technology, the Committee recommends that the
Government must undertake a survey to ascertain the technology status of PSEs that has definite bearing over profitability and efficiency
of the Public Sector. The DPE being the nodal coordinating Department on non-financial policies, must prepare a comprehensive
approach paper on Sector-wise technological status of PSEs in consultation with respective PSEs, Administrative Departments and expert
agencies like DSIR.
20.7      The Committee was informed that Research and Development has been given 4% weightage in the MoU guidelines for the year
2005-06. As regards technology status in the MoU parameters, no such weightage has been given, but a provision has been made to
incorporate any dynamic parameters if the Task Force comes to the conclusion that new parameters are relevant to that particular PSE.
20.8      Considering that the PSEs were envisaged as the pioneers in industrial technology, the Committee observed that Technology and
R&D have not been suitably factored in MoU ratings of the PSEs that are essentially Techno-commercial entities. As such Technological
upgradation and R&D should be an integral part of revival strategy of the PSEs. It is observed by the PSEs that most of the PSEs do not
have an elaborate R&D set up. The Committee wonders if PSEs have owned any patent in recent years, which itself is a distinct
commercial activity.
20.9      The Committee recommends that technology upgradation and R&D must be given due weightage in MoU parameters in
consultation with expert bodies like DSIR.
20.10    The Committee also recommends that as a part of re-aligning with market, the PSEs should involve in technology trade and
consultancy services that may be enhance their profitability at a lesser additional investment.
21.        POLICY OF PROFESSIONALISATION OF BOARDS
21.1      The Committee notes that while routine functions of the PSE are performed by the Functional Directors and Policy decision is
vested with the Board of Directors consisting of Functional Directors, Official Directors and Independent Directors. The
professionalisation of Board of Directors was considered by various Committees and on the recommendations of these Committees,
detailed guidelines were issued in September, 1984 which was subsequently modified in 1992 with a view to professionalise the Board of
PSEs.
21.2      The Committee has been informed by the DPE that emphasis is laid on inclusion of such persons from outside in to the Boards
who have experience in the industry or academics or research in the relevant fields. The policy advocates that measures must be taken to
make these enterprises more growth oriented and technically dynamic which would not have been possible without inducting
professionals on the Board of Directors. The non-official Directors to be inducted on the Board are to be drawn from the public men,
technocrats, management experts and consultants and professional managers in industry and trade with a high degree of proven ability.
21.3      Department of Public Enterprises accordingly issued guidelines in 1991, which stipulates that outside professionals should be
inducted on the Board of PSEs and also the number of such Directors should be at least 1/3rd of the actual strength of the Board. The
guidelines also provide that the number of Government Directors on the Boards should not be more than one-sixth of the actual strength
of the Board subject to a maximum of two. Apart from this there should be some functional Directors on each Board whose number
should not exceed 50% of the actual strength of the Board. In the case of listed PSEs headed by executive Chairman, the number of non-
official Directors (Independent Directors) should be at least half of the strength of the Board.
21.4      The Committee has studied the implementation of the policy of including Independent Directors in the Boards and its impact on
Professionalisation of Boards, during its interaction with the representatives of the PSEs across the sectors viz., Coal India Ltd., NALCO,
Hindustan Copper Ltd., MSTC Ltd., KIOCL, BPCL and Chennai Refineries, Goa Shipyard, HAL and BEML.

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
21.5      Despite elaborate policy intentions to include persons of proven expertise in the Boards of PSEs, the Committee has observed
that former bureaucrats, serving representatives of autonomous organisations under Government, representatives of subsidiary
companies, have been included in the Boards as Independent Directors in addition to Functional and Official Part-time Directors. In
several cases the retired bureaucrats are reappointed as Independent Directors. The Committee feels that such an arrangement does not
fall in the spirit of the policy of appointing Independent Directors on the Boards of Directors of the PSEs. The Committee also expresses
reservation on the practice of renewing the tenures of existing Directors in some cases. The Committee urges the department to ascertain
that the implementation of policy is in consonance with its true objectives and bring to the notice of this Committee any dilution in the
'Professionalisation' of Boards.
21.6      While interacting with the PSEs, the Committee has observed a clear disjoint in the Central and State Governments that has
seriously imperiled the viability of such PSEs.
21.7      The Committee is of the view that greater involvement of the stakes of the respective State Government is essential to clear such
disjoints. Also a senior representative of the concerned State Government should be included in the Boards of PSEs as one of the two
Government Directors.
21.8      The Committee observed that distinct preference was given to serving officers from Armed Forces in the Board level
appointments in the PSEs under the Ministry of Defence, on the plea that Armed Forces were the premier customers of these PSEs. The
Committee wonders, if such an arrangement reduces PSEs as a captive Company instead of an autonomous commercial entity. The
Committee is of the view that the products of these PSEs have a large civilian market too. The Committee feels that if the private sector is
being involved in the defence sector, why cannot the defence related PSEs harness potential in civilian and export market with their dual-
use products and technology.
22.        APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTORS
22.1      The Committee was informed of the institutional mechanism for the appointment of Directors. Appointment of Functional
Directors are done on the recommendations of the Public Enterprises Selection Board. The recommendations of the Board are processed
by the concerned Administrative Ministry/Department and with the approval of concerned Minister/ACC. In case of PSEs other than
Miniratna and Navratna, the appointment of non-official Directors is done by the concerned Administrative Ministry on the
recommendation of PESB and with the approval of ACC. In case of Navratna and Miniratna PSEs, the Government has set up a Search
Committee for selection of Non-Official Directors. The recommendation of Search Committee is processed by the Administrative
Ministry for obtaining approval of ACC.
23.        COMPOSITION OF PESB
23.1      The PESB consists of one Chairperson and three Members. The Chairperson and Members shall be persons who have had a long
and distinguished career in management of public or private corporations or public administration and have a proven record of
achievements, preferably, in the field of personnel, finance, production or marketing. The three Members of the PESB shall be :
                   •  A distinguished former Chief Executive of a PSE;
                   •  A distinguished behavioral scientist with experience in selection of top management personnel;
                   •  A distinguished former civil servant with experience in management of PSEs or in areas of finance, industry or economic
affairs.
24.        CATEGORIES OF DIRECTORS ON THE BOARD
24.1      There are three categories of Directors in a Board of Directors of the CPSEs consists of the 
followings :
                   •  Functional Directors including CMD/MD
                   •  Part-time Official Directors/Government Directors
                   •  Part-time Independent Directors/Non-official Directors
24.2      The Functional Directors are appointed by the Government with reference to the job descriptions of each post and following the

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
laid down procedure. The PESB recommends name for each particular post based on his/her educational qualification, experience etc., as
described under the job descriptions. The Administrative Ministry concerned appoints Government Directors on ex-officio basis.
24.3      The Committee is of the opinion that there should be uniformity in the qualification, selection and mandate of Non-Functional
Part-Time Directors, as too many categories within one Board may affect its efficiency and autonomy. The Board must be defined in
terms of its mandate and the interest of the Company and not by the categories of its Directors. The Committee would like to have
Government's comments on the need for uniformity in Part-time Directors.
25.        DELAY IN APPOINTMENTS OF DIRECTORS
25.1      The Committee expresses grave concern over large number of unfulfilled vacancies of Directors and delay in appointments. The
Committee is informed that the appointment of Directors on the Boards of PSEs is the responsibility of the concerned Administrative
Ministry/Department. 30 posts of Chief Executives and 67 posts of functional directors were vacant in different PSEs in December, 2004.
25.2      The Committee is informed that in some cases delay has been taking place in appointments to some board level posts due to non-
availability of suitable candidates in the case of some sick/loss making PSEs.
25.3      The Committee is also informed that a time-frame for selection and completing other formalities has been laid down. The
vacancies are monitored from time to time. On the basis of review carried out by DPE, the Administrative Ministries have been advised
at the highest level to expedite the process for filling up the vacancies at the Board level.
25.4      The Committee recommends that the Government must impress upon the concerned 
Ministries to adhere to the time frame for the selection of Directors and expedite the appointments of Directors.
25.5      On the Committee's query, if the DPE had considered recommendations of Kumar Mangalam Birla Committee, Naresh Chandra
Committee and Narayan Murthy Committee, on corporate governance, particularly on the role, selection and composition of Board of
Directors particularly the criterion of Independent Directors and their role in the Audit Committee of Board of Directors, the Committee
was informed by the DPE that "As far as Kumar Mangalam Birla Committee and Narayan Murthy Committee are concerned, they were
appointed by Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), which is under the control of Ministry of Finance, Department of
Economic Affairs. The Naresh Chandra Committee was set up by the Ministry of Company Affairs to give the suggestion about the
corporate governance."
25.6      The Committee is constrained to observe that the information provided by the DPE was not only evasive but also insufficient and
incomplete. The Committee observes that DPE has not reacted to the criteria of "Independent Directors" as elaborated by the Naresh
Chandra Committee. Similarly the DPE has not responded to the Narayan Murthy Committee's recommendation on "Nominee Directors".
25.7      The Committee observes that these expert Committees were set up by the Government or the agencies under its control. The
Reports of these expert Committees are extremely relevant to the issue of Professionalisation of Boards as they deal extensively the
mandate, functional 
autonomy, obligations and the constitution of Boards of Directors. Their findings can be applied to enhance the autonomy and efficiency
and draw greater degree of professional excellence to the Boards of Directors.
25.8      The Committee recommends that the DPE should assess these reports more fruitfully instead of dismissing them for
administrative nuances and inform the Committee of its view and rationale thereof.
26.        CRITERION FOR NON-OFFICIAL PART TIME DIRECTORS
26.1      The Committee is informed of the criteria for the selection of Non-Official Part-Time Directors on the Boards of PSEs.
Accordingly, the part-time non-official Director should have a minimum qualification of a graduate degree from a recognized university;
he should have not less than 10 years experience at the level of Joint Secretary and above in the Government of CMD/MD in Corporate
Sector/PSE or Professor level in an Academic Institution/professionals of repute like eminent Chartered Accountants/Cost Accountants at
the level of Directors of Institutes/Heads of Department; and he should be between 45-65 years of age.

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
26.2      The Committee feels that the minimum educational qualification should be raised to a Post-Graduate Degree/Diploma from a
premier institution in a professional course, management, engineering, financial management or HR management. Also the size of
corporate body should be specified for the CMD/MD being appointed as the Independent Directors.
26.3      The Committee feels that a Joint Secretary belongs to a generalized service, he may not have requisite and relevant expertise to
become an Independent Director in a PSE unless he has the experience of those many years in the field relevant to the functioning and
corporate objectives of the PSE. The Committee recommends that this aspect should be specified in the eligibility criteria for Independent
Directors.
26.4      The Committee feels that the maximum age for Independent Directors too should be appropriately reduced to maintain
uniformity in the Board of Directors.
27.        PURCHASE PREFERENCE POLICY
27.1      As per the Purchase Preference Policy (PPP) where the quoted price is within 10% of the lowest price, other things being equal,
purchase preference should be granted to the public enterprise concerned, at the lowest valid price bid (L 1). The main objective of this
policy was to enable the CPSEs to adjust themselves to the new environment of competition and efficiency in the wake of
liberalisation/globalization. The policy aimed at to make the CPSEs viable through utilization of the created/installed capacities to the
fullest extent by improving order booking. It was however, provided that the quality requirements and delivery schedules should of
course be enforced.
27.2      As per available information, during 2002-03 and 2003-04 CPSEs obtained orders of Rs. 2745 crore under the policy. The details
are as under :–
Year No. of CPSEs Amount of order
2002-03 36 Rs. 1167 crore
2003-04 35 Rs. 1578 crore
27.3      As compared to turnover of the 36 CPSEs during 2002-03 the percentage of orders received by these enterprises due to purchase
preference was only 0.40%.
27.4      In response to a querry on over dependence of PSEs on Government orders, the Committee was informed that the Government is
not the only major buyer in many sectors such as Oil, Steel, Chemicals, Consumer Goods, Fertilizers. In these sectors, the PSEs are
supplying their products to their customers both in the Government and Non-Government sector. The quantum of orders received due to
PPP is merely 0.40% of the turnover.
27.5      Many PSEs particularly in Heavy Industry Sector, have complained lack of orders from Government and PSEs as major cause of
their financial constraints. The Committee would like DPE to identify the Sectors that still rely heavily on Government orders.
27.6      The Committee feels that Purchase Preference Policy could be treated only as an interim arrangement. Such as arrangement
contributes practically nothing to the Consolidated Fund by way of earning from market. The PSEs must be increasingly encouraged to
diversify in the open market and realign themselves with the emerging market through Joint Ventures and global marketing alliances
instead of relying solely on Government/PSEs for orders. Though the Policy provides a cushion for PSEs, they must take benefit of
current buoyancy in the market.
27.7      The Committee was apprised of the recent Chief Executives of PSUs' Meeting of 4th September, 2004 and Indian CEOs –
Competence for Success Summit of 22nd January, 2005.
                   •  The Committee was informed of the following recommendations that emerged from the two meetings.
                   •  Government to devolve full managerial and commercial autonomy to successful profit making companies operating in their
competitive environment.

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
                   •  T.K.A. Nair Committee Recommendations regarding review of DPE Guidelines should be implemented.
                   •  Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises should be in position quickly.
27.8      The Committee was also informed that in order to give more autonomy to CPSEs, an adhoc expert group under the Chairmanship
of Dr. Arjun Sen Gupta has been set up and its recommendation is likely to be finalized by March, 2005. On the basis of Nair Committee
Recommendation on reviewing the DPE guidelines, 66 guidelines have already been deleted and 11 have been removed and in respect of
22 guidelines for merger cum modification is on way in consultation with other Ministries/Departments.
27.9      The Committee further noted that at the Summit of Indian CEOs - Competence for Success held on 22nd January, 2005, 11
Competencies were identified for broad discussion like managing the environment, energizing teams, business excellence and inner
strength and discussion was held in syndicate groups.
27.10    The Committee seeks information on the action taken by the DPE and the Government on the outcome of these meetings.
27.11    The Committee seeks DPE to apprise it on Revised Estimates and Supplementary Demands.
27.12    The Committee directs the DPE to give its comments on the Committee's queries, observations and recommendations contained
in this Report.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
            The Committee feels that abolition of some of the divisions is unacceptable. It observes that without constant monitoring and
consultations, the policy formulation will be reduced to a mere academic exercise. The Committee considers that such a situation will
limit the full-potential and utility of a Department and thereby affecting the efficiency of the policy. Governance requires an objective
and periodic assessment of the policies by the agencies that formulate such policies. As envisaged in its mandate, to evolve DPE as the
key policy-coordinating department for the CPSEs, it must undertake constant monitoring, consultations and modifications of its
guidelines. It must also compile the data pertaining to the PSEs under all the Ministries/Departments and make appraisal. These
informations should be posted at its Website for public access.       (Para 2.5)
            The Committee does not approve such an arrangement of allocating funds for the DPE under Iron and Steel Industry head. This
needs to be corrected. The Committee accordingly directs the DPE to take up the matter with appropriate Department to correct the
same.                                                                                                                 (Para 5.2)
            The Committee expresses its dismay over the non-utilization of the fund for IT. The Committee would like to know the reasons of
DPE's inability to utilize the funds allocated for "Computerization of the Information on Personnel and Citizens Services", as its objective
is to improve administrative efficiency. The Committee also impresses upon the Department to take necessary steps so that such a
situation does not occur in future.                                                                     (Para 6.4)
            The Committee also recommends that the Website of the DPE must be enriched with updated information and statistics on PSEs
particularly on the schemes coordinated by the DPE.                                                                                                 (Para 6.5)
            The Committee takes a serious note of under-utilization of funds for NE Region and under achievement of annual targets of CRR
beneficiaries. The Committee finds such case to be a sorry state of governance and indicative of serious disjoint in Government
departments that must be avoided in public interest.                                               (Para 8.5)
            The Committee, keeping in view the lack of cooperation among various Departments, recommends the DPE to undertake a
serious study to ascertain the causes of under achievement of CRR beneficiaries and make corrections in the policy. The training should
have forward linkage with market. The Department must also look for the possibility to cover at least one of the family members of the
beneficiary under CRR scheme so as to increase the family income.                   (Para 8.6)
            The Committee observes with concern the huge gap between VRS optees and the target set by the DPE for CRR coverage.
Though the Committee appreciates that the yearly targets are achieved, however, it seeks reasons for such a gap between actual VRS
optees and annual target for CRR.                                                                                                                             (Para 11.3)
            The Committee appreciates that the success rate is gradually increasing. Yet compared with the total VRS optees of whom CRR
beneficiaries are only a small part, it can be safely inferred that the rate of rehabilitation of the rationalized employees is hardly
satisfactory. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government must look the success rate in comparison with total VRS optees

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
and make serious corrections to increase the success rate of rehabilitation.                     (Para 11.5)
            The Committee also feels that in the CRR scheme, preference should be given to those junior level functionaries to whom the
VRS dues have still not been paid. Also the Committee would like to know about the interim measures taken to provide sustenance to
such VRS optees whose dues are still pending with the PSEs.                             (Para 11.6)
            The Committee be apprised of the reasons on which its recommendation to extend the benefits of CRR scheme to family members
was refused by the Planning Commission. The Committee reiterates its recommendation as contained in its 150th Report in this respect,
and recommends a re-look into the issue as it will increase the family income of the VRS optee.           (Para 11.7)
            The Committee recommends that DPE must take up the issue involved in the implementation of CRR Scheme with respective
PSEs and their Administrative Ministries to remove these constraints. The Committee would also like to know the steps taken on the
evaluation study conducted by V.V. Giri National Labour Institute, to overcome the above constraints.     (Para 12.2)
            The Committe would like to know the details of professional eligibility criterion for the non-official Members of the BRPSE and
the way they are selected.                                                                                             (Para 13.3)
            The Committee feels that sufficient provisions should be made available to meet BRPSE's requirements for providing expert
advise on techno-financial issues pertaining to revival of PSEs. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Government to provide
sufficient funds for the smooth functioning of the BRPSE.                                          (Para 13.5)
            The Committee, however, expresses concern over delay in finalizing the revival of PSEs that has incurred heavy cost of such
delay in terms of depleting net worth and rising liabilities of PSEs. The Committee hopes that the delay in finalisation of the revival of
PSEs would be avoided.                                                                                                                                    (Para 13.7)
            The Committee suggests that the Administrative Ministries/Departments should be given time limit to refer the complete proposal
to BRPSE.                                                                                                            (Para 13.8)
            The Committee observes that pending the notification to repeal SICA, the linkage between the two bodies BIFR and BRPSE
remains undefined.                                                                                                             (Para 14.4)
            The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should decide on linkage between BIFR and BRPSE at least, till
such time a final decision on BIFR is taken by the competent Court.                                                                    (Para 14.5)
            The Committee acknowledges the initiatives taken by the DPE to enhance the skills of the middle and senior level executives in
PSEs.                                                                                                            (Para 16.2)
            The Committee also notes that management development courses are the main benefit of DPE's membership of ICPE, which has
been availed by only 76 executives in last three years with DPE paying an annual membership fee of US $ 75000. The Committee may
be apprised of the items included under this contribution. The Committee would also like the DPE to take a fresh look into the cost-
benefit ratio of such membership and justify the same for next year's Demands and inform the Committee
accordingly.                                                                                                                       (Para 16.3)
            The Committee may also be apprised of the criteria and process for the selection of candidates for such courses.            (Para 16.4)
            The Committee recommends that DPE must make efforts with concerned Departments and Institutions, to conduct similar EDPs
in India, with Indian Professional Institutions, for other ICPE members. Indian institutions must enter into huge global market of
professional training and consultancy. Such programmes for other countries will enhance the academic and professional profile of our
premier professional institutions.                                                                                (Para 17.2)
            The Committee notes with reservation that there was no specific programme for enhancing the skills of shop-floor level
techniques. The Committee views it to be a stunted approach towards overall human development in PSEs. (Para 17.3)
            The Committee, therefore, recommends that DPE must organize orientation and skill development programme for floor-shop
level technical functionaries as they are the end users of new material management and production techniques. The efficiency at shop-

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
floor level ultimately reflects in the corporate performance of the Company. The Committee recommends that CPSEs must adhere to the
principles of Total Quality Management.                                                            (Para 17.4)
            The Committee finds the reply hardly convincing, and impresses upon the DPE to give a more serious effort to impart more
structured and elaborate orientation to the management and technical staff in this regard.   (Para 17.6)
            The Committee would like to know the nature of such support to PSEs in achieving the targets in MoU. The Committee observes
that the number of PSEs earning favourable ratings is increasing while those getting 'Poor' rating have decreased. Keeping this in view,
the Committee has also observed that the number of PSEs entering the MoU has been falling from 108 in 1999-2000 to 96 in 2003-04.
The Committee wonders, if the PSEs having poor ratings are being excluded from the MoU system. If that is true, is it safe to construe
that the Government's support under MoU system is practically not available to the loss making PSEs. The Committee would like to
know if there is a policy to exclude such PSEs from signing the MoU. If so, the Committee would like to know the rationale behind such
policy.                                                                                  (Para 18.2)
            The Committee desires that the Government should extend its support to the PSEs signing MoU without compromising the MoU
parameters. The policy should be such so as to include more PSEs to sign MoU. It desires the DPE to examine the issue.            (Para
18.3)
            The Committee feels that the financial parameters in the MoU system still do not reflect the fact that the PSEs are still largely
dependent on bulk Government orders. Most of the PSEs still do not have any significant presence in global export market despite being
in the business for long. Most of the Excellent-rated PSEs function in monopoly market environment. The PSEs have not been able to
secure the 'Brand loyalty' of customers, wherever the sector has been opened up for private sector and this is reflected in the receding
market share of such PSEs. The Committee would like to have DPE's comment on its observations.            (Para 20.4)
            The Committee takes note with reservation that DPE has not conducted any specific Survey conducted in relation to technological
obsolence of PSEs.                                                                                         (Para 20.5)
            In view of the fact that the PSEs were established as the pioneers in industrial technology, the Committee recommends that the
Government must undertake a survey to ascertain the technology status of PSEs that has definite bearing over profitability and efficiency
of the Public Sector. The DPE being the nodal coordinating Department on non-financial policies, must prepare a comprehensive
approach paper on Sector-wise technological status of PSEs in consultation with respective PSEs, Administrative Departments and expert
agencies like DSIR.                                                                          (Para 20.6)
            Considering that the PSEs were envisaged as the pioneers in industrial technology, the Committee observed that Technology and
R&D have not been suitably factored in MoU ratings of the PSEs that are essentially Techno-commercial entities. As such Technological
upgradation and R&D should be an integral part of revival strategy of the PSEs. It is observed by the PSEs that most of the PSEs do not
have an elaborate R&D set up. The Committee wonders if PSEs have owned any patent in recent years, which itself is a distinct
commercial activity.                                                               (Para 20.8)
            The Committee recommends that technology upgradation and R&D must be given due weightage in MoU parameters in
consultation with expert bodies like DSIR.                                                                            (Para 20.9)
            The Committee also recommends that as a part of re-aligning with market, the PSEs should involve in technology trade and
consultancy services that may enhance their profitability at a lesser additional investment.        (Para 20.11)
            Despite elaborate policy intentions to include persons of proven expertise in the Boards of PSEs, the Committee has observed that
former bureaucrats, serving representatives of autonomous organisations under Government, representatives of subsidiary companies,
have been included in the Boards as Independent Directors in addition to Functional and Official Part-time Directors. In several cases the
retired bureaucrats are reappointed as Independent Directors. The Committee feels that such an arrangement does not fall in the spirit of
the policy of appointing Independent Directors on the Boards of Directors of the PSEs. The Committee also expresses reservation on the
practice of renewing the tenures of existing Directors in some cases. The Committee urges the department to ascertain that the
implementation of policy is in consonance with its true objectives and bring to the notice of this Committee any dilution in the
'Professionalisation' of Boards.                                                                      (Para 21.5)
            While interacting with the PSEs, the Committee has observed a clear disjoint in the Central and State Governments that has

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
seriously imperiled the viability of such PSEs.                                                                        (Para 21.6)
            The Committee is of the view that greater involvement of the stakes of the respective State Government is essential to clear such
disjoints. Also a senior representative of the concerned State Government should be included in the Boards of PSEs as one of the two
Government Directors.                                                                                                                                        (Para 21.7)
            The Committee observed that distinct preference was given to serving officers from Armed Forces in the Board level
appointments in the PSEs under the Ministry of Defence, on the plea that Armed Forces were the premier customers of these PSEs. The
Committee wonders, if such an arrangement reduces PSEs as a captive Company instead of an autonomous commercial entity. The
Committee is of the view that the products of these PSEs have a large civilian market too. The Committee feels that if the private sector is
being involved in the defence sector, why cannot the defence related PSEs harness potential in civilian and export market with their dual-
use products and technology.                                                              (Para 21.8)
            The Committee is of the opinion that there should be uniformity in the qualification, selection and mandate of Non-Functional
Part-Time Directors, as too many categories within one Board may affect its efficiency and autonomy. The Board must be defined in
terms of its mandate and the interest of the Company and not by the categories of its Directors. The Committee would like to have
Government's comments on the need for uniformity in Part-time Directors.             (Para 24.3)
            The Committee recommends that the Government must impress upon the concerned 
Ministries to adhere to the time-frame for the selection of Directors and expedite the appointments of Directors.          (Para 25.4)
            The Committee is constrained to observe that the information provided by the DPE was not only evasive but also insufficient and
incomplete. The Committee observes that DPE has not reacted to the criteria of "Independent Directors" as elaborated by the Naresh
Chandra Committee. Similarly the DPE has not responded to the Narayan Murthy Committee's recommendation on "Nominee
Directors".                                                                             (Para 25.6)
            The Committee observes that these Expert Committees were set up by the Government or the agencies under its control. The
Reports of these Expert Committees are extremely relevant to the issue of Professionalisation of Boards as they deal extensively the
mandate, functional 
autonomy, obligations and the constitution of Boards of Directors. Their findings can be applied to enhance the autonomy and efficiency
and draw greater degree of professional excellence to the Boards of Directors.          (Para 25.7)
            The Committee recommends that the DPE should assess these reports more fruitfully instead of dismissing them for
administrative nuances and inform the Committee of its view and rationale thereof.                   (Para 25.8)
            The Committee feels that the minimum educational qualification should be raised to a Post-Graduate Degree/Diploma from a
premier institution in a professional course, management, engineering, financial management of HR management. Also the size of
corporate body should be specified for the CMD/MD being appointed as the Independent Directors. (Para 26.2)
            The Committee feels that a Joint Secretary belongs to a generalized service, he may not have requisite and relevant expertise to
become an Independent Director in a PSE unless he has the experience of those many years in the field relevant to the functioning and
corporate objectives of the PSE. The Committee recommends that this aspect should be specified in the eligibility criteria for Independent
Directors.                                                                                        (Para 26.3)
            The Committee feels that the maximum age for Independent Directors too should be appropriately reduced to maintain uniformity
in the Board of Directors.                                                                                    (Para 26.4)
            Many PSEs particularly in Heavy Industry Sector, have complained lack of orders from Government and PSEs as major cause of
their financial constraints. The Committee would like DPE to identify the sectors that still rely heavily on Government Orders. (Para
27.5)
            The Committee feels that Purchase Preference Policy could be treated only as an interim arrangement. Such an arrangement
contributes practically nothing to the Consolidated Fund by way of earning from market. The PSEs must be increasingly encouraged to

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
diversify in the open market and re-align themselves with the emerging market through Joint Ventures and global marketing alliances
instead of relying solely on Government/PSEs for orders. Though the Policy provides a cushion for PSEs, they must take benefit of
current buoyancy in the market.                                             (Para 27.6)
            The Committee seeks information on the action taken by the DPE and the Government on the outcome of these meetings.           
(Para 27.10)
            The Committee seeks DPE to apprise it on Revised Estimates and Supplementary Demands.                          (Para 27.11)
The Committee directs the DPE to give its comments on the Committee's queries, observations and recommendations contained in this
Report.          (Para 27.12)
MINUTES
X
TENTH  MEETING
          The Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on Monday, the 30th March, 2005 in the Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
          Shri Santosh Bagrodia  —  Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
     1.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     2.  Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
     3.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
     4.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
     5.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
     6.  Shrimati Vanga Geetha
LOK  SABHA
     7.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
     8.  Shri Sunil Khan
     9.  Shri Rajnarayan
    10.  Shri Sarvey Satyanarayana
    11.  Shri Ganesh Singh
    12.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi
    13.  Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
SECRETARIAT
          Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
          Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
          Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
          Shri Priyadarshi Thakur, Secretary
          Shri Naresh Chaturvedi, AS&FA
          Shrimati Archna Nigam, Chief Controller of Account
          Shri S.V. Bhave, Joint Secretary
          Shri A. Didar Singh, Joint Secretary
          Shri D.R.S. Chaudhary, Joint Secretary
          Shri K.D. Tripathi, Joint Secretary
          Shri Sushil Kumar, I.A.
          Shri V.D. Vatwani, OSD
          Shri M.K. Singh, Director

168th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/168threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:52:31]
          Shri A.K. Singhal, Director
          Shri Mukul Kumar, Director
          Shri Sanjiv Ranjan Director
          Shri Mukesh Nigam, Director
          Shri B.B. Singh, Director
          Shri G.S. Bothyal, Director
          Shri S.S. Negi, Director
2.       The Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee, the Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises.
3.       The Committee asked the Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises to its projected demands for 2005-06 and
the corresponding Budget proposals. The Committee also sought the justification of allocations and the methods to bridge the gap
between allocations and actual financial requirements. It sought the road map of the revival of PSEs and role of a new BRPSE. The
Committee raised concern over delay in finalizing the revival decisions and its consequent costs.
4.       The Secretary explained some of the queries of the Committee and with the permission of Chair assured to reply the rest separately.
5.       A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. Witnesses then withdrew.
6. The meeting was adjourned at 12.30 P.M.