            
  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  245 TH  REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON REVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION 
OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES 
DEVELOPMENT ACT, 2006  
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
      
 (PRESENTED TO  THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 TH  FEBRUARY, 2014) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 TH   FEBRUARY, 2014) 
258 
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  245 TH  REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON REVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION 
OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES 
DEVELOPMENT ACT, 2006  
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
      
 (PRESENTED TO  THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 TH   FEBRUARY, 2014) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 TH   FEBRUARY, 2014) 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………(i)  
2. INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………(ii) 
3. REPORT …………………………………………………………………….   1 
(i) CHAPTER-I 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by 
the Ministry…………………………………………………………2-3 
(ii) CHAPTER-II 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies………………………4-6 
(iii) CHAPTER-III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has 
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry 
to review its replies…………………………………………………7-13 
 
(iv) CHAPTER-IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the  
Ministry have not been received………………………………… 14-20 
 
 4. MINUTES ……………………………………………………………………… 
                  
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE   
(Date of Constitution w.e.f.  31 st  August,  2013) 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
     
 1.  Shri K.C. Tyagi —       Chairman  
       2.  Shri M.P. Achuthan  
 3.  Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel  
 4.  Shri Narendra Budania 
    5.  Shri Vivek Gupta  
 6.  Dr. V. Maitreyan   
 7.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar  
 8.  Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
 9.  Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
10. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor  
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.   Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
16. Shri Hassan Khan 
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
18. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod  
19. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
20. Shri Somen Mitra 
21. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26.   Shri Ramsinh Rathwa  
27.   Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
28.   Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
29.   Ch. Lal Singh 
30.   Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
31.   Shri E.G. Sugavanam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3.      Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
(i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred Fifty 
Eighth Report on Action Taken Note furnished by the  Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained  in the Committee’s Two Hundred 
Forty Fifth Report on Review of the implementation of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises Development Act, 2006.  
 
2. I thank the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for furnishing the 
Action Taken Note on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred 
Forty Fifth Report. 
  
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 17 
th  February, 2014 considered and adopted 
the report. 
 
  
 
  
K.C. Tyagi 
                          Chairman                                                                                   
                Department -related Parliamentary  
                                                                                       Standing  Committee   on    Industry  
 
New Delhi 
17 
th  February, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained in 
the Committee’s Two Hundred Forty Fifth Report on R eview of the implementation of 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act , 2006  pertaining to the Ministry 
of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises in respect of the recommendation s contained in the Report. These 
have been categorized as follows:  
 
Chapter –I   The recommendations/observations, which have bee n accepted by the 
Ministry. 
 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter -II   The recommendations/observations which the Commit tee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and 
explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore  do not want to pursue them for the 
present. 
 
Chapter -III    The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has 
either not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry should furnish 
logical explanations therefor. 
 
Chapter -IV    The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received. 
 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its langua ge in vague terms like noted for 
compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desir es that the Ministry should furnish 
Action Taken Notes in respects of recommendations c ategorized in Chapter-IV in detail 
and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 

-2- 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry  
       
 
Recommendation/observation 
 
 
The Committee notes that the Press Note 5 of (20 th September 2012) mentions only 
the Small Industries and not enterprises thereby ex cluding the service sector. Further the 
Micro and medium enterprises have largely been excl uded in the Press Note. The 
Committee recommends that Ministry of MSME may take  up the issue with Department of 
IPP in this respect. The Committee also notes that the said Press Note defines a Small Scale 
Industry as having an investment of US $ 1 Million in Plant and machinery. And that “if at 
any point of time, this valuation is exceeded, the industry shall not qualify as ‘small 
industry’ for this purpose.” This will put severe c ap on the growth prospects of small 
supplier, which goes against the intent of the MSME D Act. However, the Committee notes 
the Budget proposal for the year 2013-14 which prop oses to restore the benefits and 
preferences enjoyed by the MSME units for another t hree years after they grow out of their 
category. The Finance Minister said that “to begin with, I propose that the non-tax benefits 
may be made available to a MSME unit for three year s after it graduates to a higher 
category”. The Committee also notes that the Depart ment of Industrial Policy and 
Promotion, is in the process of seeking necessary a pprovals to amend the Policy in this 
regard  
(Para 26) 
 
Furthermore, going by the current Foreign Direct In vestment (FDI) policy, there 
could be possibility of global retail companies set ting up their subsidiaries for sourcing the 
supplies, instead of sourcing the supplies from Indian Small Scale Industries (SSIs). 
(Para 27) 
 
Action Taken on Paras 26 & 27  
 
The Government has recently approved liberalizing o f the norms relating to FDI in 
multi-brand retail trade by including medium enterp rises and farmers/ agro co-operatives 
under the sourcing requirement, so that these entit ies also have opportunity to get 
integrated in the value chain. 
 
As per revised FDI policy in Multi Brand in Retail Trade (MBRT), at least 30% of 
the value of procurement of manufactured/ processed  products purchased shall be sourced 
from Indian micro, small and medium industries whic h have a total investment in plant & 
machinery not exceeding US $ 2.00 million. This valuation refers to the value at the time of 
installation, without providing for depreciation. T he ‘small industry’ status would be 
reckoned only at the time of first engagement with the retailer and such industry shall 
continue to qualify as a ‘Small Industry’ for this purpose even if it outgrows the said 
investment of US$ 2.00 million, during the course of its relationship with the said retailer.  
 

-3- 
 
Sourcing from agricultural co-operatives and farmer s co-operatives would also be 
considered in this category.  Small manufacturers w ill   benefit, as it would provide the 
necessary scales for these entities to expand capac ities in manufacturing, create more 
employment and also strengthen the manufacturing ba se of the country. They will derive 
the benefits of improved productivity due to techno logy upgradation, resulting in increased 
profitability and earnings. The sourcing condition will also enable the small enterprises to 
get integrated with global retail chains, thereby e nhancing their capacity to export products 
from India. New manufacturing opportunities will op en for the nation’s micro, small and 
medium enterprises. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-4- 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do es not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee recommends that like the Central Mini stries /Departments /PSUs, 
the private sector companies should also procure a minimum of 20% of annual 
requirements of goods and services from MSEs. 
 
(Para 11) 
Action Taken  
 
Public Procurement Policy for Micro and Small Enterprises Order, 2012 is effective 
from 1 st  April. 2013 and overall procurement goal of minimu m of 20% shall be mandatory 
w.e.f. 1 st  April, 2015. The impact of Public Procurement Poli cy may be appropriate for any 
proliferation of procurement policy. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should e nsure that the Industrial 
Facilitation Councils (IFCs) in different States sh ould award interest rates as per section 16 
of the MSMED Act. 
 
(Para 21) 
Action Taken 
 
 
Micro Small Enterprises Facilitation Councils (MSEF Cs) have been advised to 
adhere to provisions of MSMED Act while disposing o f the cases relating to delayed 
payment whenever any complaint was received. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 In this regard the Committee also takes note of th e Section 11 of the Act which too 
is limited only to micro and small enterprises. The  Committee believes that as the idea of 
this Act was to facilitate an organic progression o f any enterprise from micro to small and 
to medium enterprise, and recommends that the Minis try of MSME may explore the 
possibility to include medium enterprises in the Pu rchase Preference Policy without 
diluting stress on the interests of micro and small enterprises. 
 
(Para 23) 
 
 

-5- 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
 
Inclusion of medium enterprises in Public Procureme nt Policy may deprive upto a 
relevant extent MSEs to get the benefits/ facilities available under the policy. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee is aware of the fact that while this Sector is largely unorganized, the 
new giants will set a well organized supply chain. Therefore, there is inherent dichotomy in  
existing MSE sector in India and the intended retai l trade. There is a vast difference in the 
business processes, structure and philosophy of the  two sectors. The Committee therefore 
recommends that the Government should monitor the i mpact of FDI in retail trade on the 
MSE sector. There should be biennial survey to see the incidents of sickness/ takeovers/ 
mergers and other effects on the Sector. 
 
(Para 28) 
Action Taken 
 
 
The policy of FDI in Retail Trade has just taken a start. Therefore it is in an infancy 
state. Empirical data will be available only after a few years of its implementation. The 
surveys thereafter will be able to provide informat ion on incidents of sickness, takeovers, 
mergers etc. 
 
Further as per the Cabinet decision dated 14.09.2012, a high-level group to examine 
various issues concerning internal trade and make r ecommendations for internal trade 
reforms, has to be constituted under the Minister of Consumer Affairs. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee too feels that the Banks too should b e more responsive and 
sympathetic towards any new prospective entrepreneu r. The Banks should prescribe time 
bound disposal of applications and the reasons for rejection should be communicated in 
writing so that the applicant may after fulfilling the conditions re-submit the application. 
The Committee recognizes the similar recommendation given by the Task Force which was 
to be complied within 2 months. Committee would lik e to know the status of compliance. 
The Committee recommends that Banks should aggressi vely publicise their products for 
MSMEs and the Government sponsored schemes. A certain part of their annual expenditure 
on publicity must be earmarked for publicity of suc h programmes/products targeted for 
MSMEs. 
 
 
(Para 36) 
 
 
 

-6- 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
In terms of RBI’s Master Circular dated July 1, 201 3 on ‘Loans and Advances-
Statutory and Other Restrictions’, Scheduled Commercial Banks have been advised that the 
time frame within which loan applications up to Rup ees two lakhs will be disposed of 
should also be indicated in acknowledgement of such  applications. In case of all categories 
of loans, irrespective of any threshold limits, the lenders should convey in writing, the main 
reason/reasons  which, in  the  opinion  of  the  bank  after  due  consideration,  have  led  to  
rejection of the loan applications within stipulate d time. Further, IBA has informed that 
Banks have set up web portals giving details of var ious schemes, application forms, etc. 
Banks acknowledge receipt of loan applications and time norms are fixed for disposal of 
applications. Reasons of rejection are communicated  in writing. Banks also publicize their 
products and schemes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-7- 
 
CHAPTER-III  
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which th e Committee has either not 
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its replies  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
However, the Committee notes that the National Boar d of MSME had so far held 
only nine meetings at random intervals as against t he statutory requirement of one meeting 
every three months. The Committee also expresses re servation over the proposal to amend 
the relevant Section of the Act which provides for quarterly meetings of the Board and 
placing it under the Rules which would fall within the scope of subordinate legislation. The 
Committee is unable to comprehend the rationale beh ind such proposal. It only reinforces 
the apprehension that the role of statutory Board w ould be further diluted. The Committee 
strongly recommends for creating a Monitoring Cell for Delayed Payment in office of the 
Development Commissioner, MSME. 
 
(Para 6) 
Action Taken 
 
 
At times it becomes difficult to convene the meetin g at a period of three month 
because of reasons such as running session of the P arliament, any important event etc. 
Therefore a flexible approach for organization of the meeting is needed. 
 
Monitoring of constitution / reconstitution of MSEF Cs in the states /UTs, as per 
Section 21 of the MSMED Act, 2006 and the Delayed p ayment cases filed, disposed off 
and remaining cases available with the MSEFCs, are already being monitored on Quarterly 
basis in the office of DC (MSME). 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee does not agree with the stand taken by the Ministry.  
Quarterly meetings of the Board is a statutory requ irement which must be fulfilled.  
To remove it from Act and place it in the Rules, will tantamount to dilution of Board’s 
role and its eventual redundence.  The Committee ca nnot share the view that first, 
institutions are created under the law then gradual ly they are relegated to 
redundence. The Committee is of the view that the A nnual Report of the Ministry 
must include the meetings, agenda of the Board for the year alongwith the details of 
pending and new cases before Micro Small Enterprise s Facilitation Councils 
(MSEFCs)   in terms of volume and numbers. 
 
 
 

 
 
-8- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee takes note of the performance of the Facilitation Councils in States. 
It is rather strange that in certain States/UTs no fresh cases were filed during year 2011-12. 
Also there is large pendency of cases and disposal rate is rather slow. This is clear violation  
of Section 18(5) of the Act which make disposal of references within Ninety days, 
obligatory. The Committee also apprehends that decl ine in the filing of fresh cases may be 
due to dwindling faith in the efficacy of this mechanism. The Committee therefore suggests 
that the rate of disposal of cases should be faster . Further, it appears that as per Section 19 
the supplier does not have right to appeal against the Award given by an IFC. Considering 
that the IFC do not have powers to enforce the awar d, the suppliers too should have the 
right to appeal. It also reiterates its previous re commendation that “The Industrial 
Facilitation Council should evolve into an effectiv e forum of arbitration, to resolve the 
issue of delayed payments to small and tiny enterpr ises, conferred with sufficient mandate 
to execute its award, appeal against which could be filed only in the High Court of the State 
where IFC is located.” The Committee also takes not e of the amendments to make IFCs 
more effective, that are under consideration of Gov ernment. These amendments pertain to 
bringing earnest money/ security deposit submitted during tender and falls within the ambit 
of provisions related to delayed payment. The amoun t of award given by the Facilitation 
Council should be realizable as arrears of land rev enue. The amount of award given by the 
Facilitation Council would be made enforceable and should include earnest money and 
securities submitted during the tender. The Committ ee recommends that by bringing 
earnest money, security deposit within the ambit of  provisions related to delayed payment 
in MSMED Act 2006, this delay may be checked and regulated. 
 
(Para 12) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
For speedy disposal of cases referred to MSEFC, thi s office Vide letter no. 
16(2)/1/2013-MSME Pol. dated 30 May, 2013 , has already requested  the  Commissioner / 
Director (Industries / Micro & Small Enterprise/ Me dium Enterprise / Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprise) to ensure disposal of cases refe rred to the MSEFC within the time 
frame stipulated in the MSMED Act, 2006. 
 
Inclusion of earnest money/security deposit/ any ot her deposit etc. made by the 
MSEs to the buyers during the tendering process, in  the ambit of delayed payment are 
under consideration. 
 
The implementation of the Awards of Arbitration pro cess of MSEFC is achieved 
through the established provisions of Arbitration and Conciliation Act.  
 
 
 

 
-9- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee recommends that the Act should give supplier the right to 
appeal.  The Ministry in its Annual Report should i nclude State-wise details of new 
cases and cases with pendency of more than 90 days in terms of volume and numbers.  
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
 
The Committee shares the concerns of the Working Gr oup on MSME for 12 th  Plan     
which states that “The reduction in Net Bank Credit  to the SSI in the last decade and in the 
number of SSI accounts is a cause of serious concer n. This needs to be monitored 
periodically through effective meetings of the Standing Advisory Committee of RBI.” 
 
(Para 30) 
Action Taken  
 
 
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has informed that t he outstanding credit to the 
Micro and Small Enterprises (MSE) sector as on the last reporting  Friday of March of the 
years 2008 to 2012 and as on last day of March 2013  by Scheduled Commercial Banks 
(SCBs) is as under: 
 
                                              (No. of A/cs in lakh)     (Amount Rs. In crore) 
 
Year All Scheduled Commercial Banks 
Last Friday of No. of A/cs Amt O/s 
March 2008 48.51 213538.60 
March 2009 48.51 (No Change) 256128.07 (19.94%) 
March 2010# 85.05 (75.32%) 362290.74 (41.44%) 
March 2011 93.02 (9.37%) 478527.20 (32.08%) 
March 2012 98.58 (5.98%) 527684.58 (10.27%) 
31 March 2013 (Provisional) 112.33 (13.95%) 684796. 92 (29.77%) 
 
 # Retail trade included in service sector 
Source: RBI 
Note: Figures in brackets indicate Y-o-Y% growth/ decline 
 
            The position of banks regarding their a chievement of targets (mentio 
ned below) 
prescribed by the ‘PM’s Task Force on MSMEs’ for le nding to MSE sector is monitored 
by Reserve bank on quarterly basis. 
 
 
 

-10- 
 
 
• 20% year-on-year growth in lending to MSE sector 
• 10% y-o-y growth in number of accounts of Micro enterprises 
• 60% of 
 total MSE lending (as on preceding March 31) shoul d go the Micro 
enterprises from March 2013 
 
 In the Standing Advisory Committee (SAC) meetings,  the position of banks in 
regard to their lending to MSE sector is also revie wed and banks are impressed upon to 
achieve the above targets recommended by the PM’s T ask Force on MSMEs. The 
outstanding credit to MSE sector by SCBs as %age of  their Adjusted Net Bank Credit 
(ANBC) is as below; 
 
(Amount Rs. in crore)  
Year ended March Scheduled Commercial Banks 
 ANBC MSE O/s % 
2008 1835016.56 213538.61 11.64 
2009 2262137.38 256128.07 11.32 
2010 2713448.93 362290.74 13.35 
2011 3195084.30 478527.20 14.98 
2012 3941744.49 527684.58 13.39 
2013 (Provisional) 4652302.24 684796.92 14.72 
 
Above data shows that there has b een increase in outstanding credit to MSE sector 
as a percentage ANBC except the year ended March 2012. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The figures given in the table above shows that 10 % annual increase in 
number of Micro accounts was not achieved in 2010-1 1 and 2011-12.  Also Prime 
Minister’s Task Force had recommended 20% year on y ear increase of credit to MSE 
sector, whereas figures in the table are of total o utstanding credit and do not indicate 
year on year increase. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The interactions of Committee with various associat ions and banks revealed that 
interest rates charged by banks differ. The Ministr y of Finance should intervene to fix the 
upper limit of rate of interest which must be adher ed to by the banks while extending the 
credit to MSMEs. The Ministry of Finance must ensure its implementation. 
 
(Para 35) 
 
 

-11- 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
Interest rates have been deregulated by RBI. Banks determine their actual lending 
rates on loans and advances with reference to their  Base Rate. Banks have, however, been 
advised that the actual lending rates charged by them should be transparent and consistent.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee observes that while interest rates h ave been de-regulated to 
encourage competition among Banks, the interest rates are almost identical across the 
Banks.  The MSME sector has not benefitted by such de-regulated environment, their 
plight remains the same.  Therefore, the Committee suggests that while RBI 
prescribes base rates, it may also prescribe a cap on interest rate for MSMEs.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 
The Committee notes that the burden of insuring the  bank credit through CGTMSE 
ultimately falls upon the entrepreneur who in any c ase pays higher interest rate to Bank. 
The Committee recommends that cost of insuring the credit should be borne by the Bank 
and not by the entrepreneur. In this regard, the Co mmittee would also like to know the 
recommendations of the Working Group under the Chai rmanship of the Executive 
Director, RBI.  
(Para 37) 
 
Action Taken  
 
As per extant guidelines of Credit Guarantee Scheme , the cost of guarantee cover 
has to be paid by the respective Member Lending Ins titutions (MLIs) to Credit Guarantee 
Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE).   H owever, the amount equivalent to 
the guarantee fee and/or the service fee payable by  the eligible lending institution may be 
recovered by the MLI, at its discretion from the el igible borrower whose credit facility is 
covered under Credit Guarantee Scheme. A composite all-in Guarantee fee up to a 
maximum 1% of credit facility sanctioned to be paid  upfront has now been introduced 
w.e.f. January 01, 2013. 
 A Working Group under the Chairmanship of Shri V.K . Sharma, Executive 
Director, RBI, was constituted to review the Credit  Guarantee Fund Scheme for MSEs to 
make it more effective. The Working Group had recom mended that the Government may 
bear the credit guarantee fees for collateral free loans up to Rs. 10 lakh to micro enterprises 
in order to encourage financial inclusion in the se ctor. The Group was of the opinion that 
the micro enterprises should not be burdened with t he cost of guarantee fees and it might 
not be appropriate to ask banks, which are commerci al entities; to bear the guarantee fee as 
any scheme for banks has to be a reasonable busines s proposition for it to be readily 
acceptable. Further, if banks were made to bear the  fee, they would somehow either 
discourage lending to MSEs, especially Micro Enterprises, or somehow  indirectly load  the  
 

-12- 
 
 
same on the customer by charging a higher rate of i nterest on the facility provided thereby 
defeating the very purpose of fostering and developing the MSE sector. 
 
 The above issue was also discussed in the 14 
th  SAC meeting held on November 21, 
2012 and it was decided that as per extant guidelin es banks would provide collateral free 
loans and the guarantee fee would have to be borne by the borrowers or banks or shared by 
both as per the bank’s policies. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 On the issue of bearing the cost of credit guarant ee fee, the Committee is of the 
opinion that either Government or Banks should bear  the cost, atleast in respect of 
Micro Enterprises as part of support to the sector.   
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee also appreciates the concern regardin g shorter repayment period to 
banks. The SMEs face huge pressure of performance a nd work under constant threat of 
defaulting on repayment, which may eventually leads to sickness. 
 
(Para 38) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
As informed by the RBI, credit related matters have  been deregulated and banks are 
free to sanction the credit, including fixing the r epayment periods, as per their commercial 
judgment and the merits of each case keeping in view the loan policies as approved by their 
Board of Directors.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee takes note of the suggestion that the  repayment period may be 
increased up to 15 years and recommends that RBI sh ould take note of such suggestions in 
view of increasing sickness in the sector. The Comm ittee would also expect that RBI 
dilutes NPA norms for micro and small enterprises m ost of whom often suffer constraints 
in cash flow from their respective buyers or face severe vagaries of market. 
 
 
(Para 39) 
 
 
 
 
 

-13- 
 
Action Taken  
 
As indicated above, credit related matters have bee n deregulated and banks are free 
to  sanction  the credit, including  fixing  the  repayment  periods, as  per  their  commercial 
judgment and the merits of each case keeping in view the loan policies as approved by their 
Board of Directors. In this context, IBA has inform ed that repayment period of term loans 
is normally linked to the economic life of the asset covered. 
 
 As regards diluting the NPA Norms, the RBI has inf ormed that guidelines on 
Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning Norms are uniformly applicable 
across all sectors, including MSE sector. The 90 da ys delinquency norm for NPAs evolved 
over a period and was brought in through calibrated  process in our efforts to bench mark 
our prudential regulations to the international sta ndards. Further, any delay in recognition 
of NPAs removes pressure on the banks to deal promptly with the problem. As these norms 
have been prescribed with a view to ensuring financ ial soundness of banks, any deviation 
would not be desirable. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation on paras 38 & 39
 
 
 On the one hand it has been stated that the credit  related matters have been 
deregulated but on the other hand, the NPA guidelin es are stated to be uniformally 
applicable.  The Committee finds the reply ambivale nt.  Despite supposed 
deregulation, repayment norms remain almost identic al in all the Banks.  In case of 
NPA too, the Committee is not convinced with intern ational standard   argument at 
the cost of domestic MSMEs.  Given that MSME are at the base of industrial pyramid 
and have to depend on extraneous factors beyond the ir control, the Ministry of 
MSME must take up the issue with Department of Fina ncial Services and Reserve 
Bank of India to relax NPA and other repayment norm s to ease the pressure on 
MSMEs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-14- 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which fi nal replies of the Ministry have 
not been received 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee notes that the number of enterprises who had filed memoranda has 
increased exponentially from about 1.75 lakh in 2007-08 to 2.82 lakh in 2011-12. However, 
the Committee observes reduction in number of regis trations in successive years in case of 
certain States.  The Committee would like to explore the reasons for such reduction. 
(Para 8) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
As per the data on number of Entrepreneurs Memorand um Part-II (EM-II) filed by 
MSMEs a consistent growth is observed in number of filing of EM-II, every year at All 
India Level.  However, it is also noticed that ther e is a variation in number of filing of EM-
II by entrepreneurs in successive years in case of certain States/UTs.  This is because in the 
recent time, the MSMEs have shown consistent growth  of more than 10% every year in 
terms of number of filing of EM-II every year. The number of EM-II filed during 2007-08 
at the district Industries Centres across the count ry has increased from 1.73 lakh to 1.93, 
2.14, 2.38, 2.38 and 3.22 lakh during 2008-09, 2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12.   
The filing of memorandum is optional under the MSME D Act, 2006 for micro and 
small (manufacturing & service enterprises) and med ium (service enterprises).   However, 
it is mandatory for the manufacturing medium enterprises.  Ministry of MSME has pursued 
hard with the States to implement online filing of EM.  As a result Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, 
Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, U ttarakhand, Jharkhand, Kerala and 
Assam have already implemented it.  For the rest of the States, the Ministry is still pursuing 
for the same.  As online filing will ease the filin g of EM, the number of EMs filed shall 
improve. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee is of the view that gradually the re gistration requirement 
should be extended to all SMEs.  To facilitate this , online registration should be 
encouraged with automatic approval after reasonable  time.  Also, the industry 
associations too should share data of their members  with District Industrial Centres 
and encourage their Members to register.  
 
 
 

-15- 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee observes that the said notification d oes not cover the Autonomous 
organizations/Societies/Trusts/ Institutions/ Unive rsities and other Government aided 
organizations under the various Central Government Ministries/ Departments. The 
Committee also wonders if the notification includes  the Constitutional bodies. The 
Committee recommends that the said notification sho uld include such institutions. The 
Committee also recommends that the Central Governme nt should persuade the State 
Governments to adopt similar policies, for which Go vernment can use the National Board 
as a forum where State Governments are also represented by rotation. 
(Para 10) 
 
Action Taken  
 
Under the provision of section 11 of MSMED Act, 200 6, Government of India has 
introduced a Public Procurement Policy for Micro and Small Enterprises Order, 2012.  This 
policy is applicable on Central Ministries, Central  Departments and Central PSUs. The 
Chief Ministers of all the State Governments have b een requested by the Hon’ble Minister, 
Ministry of MSME to formulate similar policy in their States. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee is of the opinion that Autonomous Org anizations, Government 
Societies/Trusts and Universities/Educational Insti tutes too should be covered under 
this Scheme.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
Considering the inflation and dynamic market situat ion, the Committee feels that 
definition of MSMEs as provided in the Act may be revised every five years. 
(Para 16) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
To facilitate flexible approach for defined limit o f MSMEs, the Ministry is 
considering to provide it in the notifications only and not in the Act. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee feels that if needed, the Act should be amended to make 
definition flexible.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 

-16- 
 
The Committee notes that the Report of the Working Group on the MSME for the 
12 th  Plan, too recommended    that   the States should encourage ‘online’ filing of 
Memoranda. Considering the consensus on the issue, the Committee expects that necessary 
steps should be taken to resolve the issue expediti ously. The MSME Ministry should 
encourage the Micro and Small Enterprises to register themselves 
 
(Para 19) 
Action Taken  
 
On the initiative and pursuance of Office of Develo pment Commissioner (MSME) 
many States have implemented online filing such as Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Odisha, Uttar 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Jharkhand, Kerala and Assam. The O/o  
DCMSME is pursuing hard for an early implementation  of online filing of EM by rest of 
the States. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee recommends that registration should b e granted automatically 
after a reasonable period of submission of application. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee recommends to the Ministry to assess whether enjoining the IFCs 
with the provisions of Arbitration and Conciliation  Act, 1996, has actually rendered the 
mechanism ineffective and to devise more effective provisions for IFC. The Committee 
also suggests that methods like supply against Lett ers of Credit etc. should be used more 
regularly to make payment predictable. The Committe e suggests that Ministry should 
explore the possibility if such methods could be made mandatory. 
(Para 20) 
Action Taken  
 
The process of arbitration is a faster approach for  solving of disputes. The same 
case in Civil Courts will take longer period thus c ausing increased suffering for the MSEs 
leading to sickness.  
 
The mode of supply against Letter of Credit by the supplier depends on the contract 
agreed by it with the buyer. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee recommends that to assess the effici ency of Industrial 
Facilitation Councils (IFCs), the Ministry in its A nnual Report should include the 
State-wise figures of new and pending cases with mo re than 90 days in term of 
number and reference. 
 

-17- 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee notes that the Procurement Preference  Policy notified by the 
Government in March 2012 will come to effect from 1 st  April 2015. However the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of MSME work  in close coordination with the 
Directorate General, Supply and Disposal (DGS&D)      and other similar Government 
procurement agencies to iron out initial functional  bottlenecks in implementing the Policy. 
The Ministry must see that tender specifications mu st not be designed to exclude the MSE 
sector. The Committee also notes the exclusion of Medium enterprises from the Policy. 
(Para 22) 
 
Action Taken  
 
The Ministry of MSME has been tirelessly communicat ing and coordinating with 
the Central Ministries/ Departments/ CPSUs for effe ctive implementation of the Public 
Procurement Policy. Further, Ministry of MSME is ta king up the grievances/ suggestions 
of MSEs related to tender specification with all the concerned departments/ DGS&D etc. as 
and when it is brought in the notice of Ministry of MSME. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should study the provisions of 
the Public Procurement Bill and highlight the enabl ing provisions of MSME.  The 
NSIC too while extending help to MSMEs, liaise with  DGS&D on their behalf, should 
also provide in its Annual Report State-wise data o f cases in terms of numbers and 
volume with respect to MSME under its programme of Consortia and Tender 
Marketing and Single Point Registration for Government Purchase.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee is in agreement with the suggestion o f the Working Group on 
MSME for 12 th  Plan that ‘Each Ministry/Department and CPSU, etc. , should make a 
specific mention of the compliance with the prefere nce policy in its Annual Report to be 
tabled in Parliament. Progressive Associations of M SEs should be associated with 
monitoring implementation and suggesting appropriate revision of the policies.’ 
(Para 24) 
 
Action Taken  
 
Every Ministry/Department/ CPSU has to report goals  set with respect to 
procurement to be met from MSEs and achievement made thereto in their respective annual 
reports. The suggestions of MSME Associations are c onsidered for coordinating and 
implementing of the policy. The MSE Associations ar e also invited in the revision of the 
policy through Review Committee. 
  

-18- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Ministry of MSME may compile data on compliance  with the preference 
policy and provide the same to the Committee.  Also , the Ministry of MSME too 
should publish Ministry-wise targets and achievemen ts on Public Procurement Policy 
in its Annual Report.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee recommends that a monitoring mechanis m should be set up to 
effectively monitor 30% procurement from small industries. 
(Para 29) 
Action Taken  
 
The constitution of above mentioned committee is un der consideration in the D/o 
Consumer Affairs. The proposed Terms of Reference, inter-alia include the following: 
(i) to determine the safeguards to be put in place to protect the interest of small traders vis-
à-vis organized retail; 
(ii) to examine the need and the possible mandate f or a Regulatory body/authority for the 
regulation of organized retail trade. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee is of the view that the monitoring or  regulatory mechanism 
should include Ministry of MSME and that changes in  FDI Policy in Multi Brand 
Retail Trade (MBRT) must be discussed in National MSME Board.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
Considering the benefits MSEs get in interest rate,  the Committee would like to 
know the coverage of the Performance and Credit rat ing Scheme and steps taken to expand 
the coverage. The Committee suggests that the MSEs should be encouraged to adopt credit 
rating. In view of similar suggestion of the Task F orce, the Committee would like to know 
from the Ministry about Government’s response to th e suggestion of interest rate 
subvention in respect of MSEs. However, the Committ ee again notes that the Scheme 
excludes the Medium enterprises, which goes against  the inherent intent of the MSMED 
Act that considers MSME sector as an organic progression. 
(Para 34) 
Action Taken  
 
The Indian Banks’ Association has informed that cre dit rating is being used by the 
banks in assessment of credit needs of MSME units a nd better rated units are offered finer 
rates of interest for borrowers. Since inception of  the scheme, its performance is 
continuously showing an increasing trend.  For cont inuation of the scheme in 12 th  Plan 
period, EFC Note has  been circulated  among  various Departments.  Inclusion of  Medium 
 

 
-19- 
 
Enterprises under Performance & Credit Rating Scheme has also been proposed in the EFC 
Note. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 So far the Performance & Credit Rating Scheme excl uding the Medium 
enterprises.  The Ministry in its reply has informe d that inclusion of Medium 
Enterprises has been proposed in EFC Note.  The Com mittee desires that Ministry 
may inform the final outcome of EFC Note. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee also takes note of new concepts like factoring services. The Act 
must provide for such mechanism so as to enable the  MSME units to avail these 
mechanisms for easy access to institutional credit. 
(Para 40) 
Action Taken 
 
 
The Department of Financial Services, Ministry of F inance has informed that an 
EFC Note for Setting up of Credit Guarantee Fund fo r Factoring has been prepared and 
sent to D/o Expenditure to convene EFC meeting. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Ministry of MSME must provide in details of suc h Schemes as and when 
approved alongwith its comments to the Committee.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee takes note of the recommendations of the Task Force, which has 
identified the concerned Ministries and set the tim elines for the implementation of its 
recommendations. The Committee would like to know t he status of implementation of 
these recommendations. In this respect, the Committ ee also took note of the observation 
made by the Task Force which stated “None of these measures will work unless their 
implementation status is monitored regularly at the  highest level. The issues are simply too 
diverse to be handled by a single line Ministry. Th e Task Force accordingly recommends 
the establishment of Prime Minister’s Council on Micro and Small Enterprises in the Prime  
Minister’s Office which may oversee implementation of  these  recommendations on  a half  
yearly basis. The Ministry of MSME shall be the ser vicing arm for the Council.” The 
Committee though shares the apprehensions and conce rn of the Task Force regarding 
implementation of its recommendation; it is convinc ed that the implementation should be 
monitored by a Ministry that is answerable to the P arliament and its Committee, directly 
and  not  a  Task  Force.  The  Ministry  must make use of the available statutory forum like 
 
 

-20- 
 
 
 National MSME Board where concerned Ministries, Ba nkers/ financial institutions, State 
Governments and select associations are represented . Side tracking a Statutory Board shall 
only dilute the eminent force of a law passed by the Parliament 
(Para 42) 
Action Taken 
 
  
 
The Prime Minister’s Task Force on MSMEs made 85 re commendations under 
various areas including credit, marketing, labour, rehabilitation and exit policy, 
infrastructure/ technology/skill development and taxation. Out of the 85 recommendations; 
 
I. action on 39 recommendations have been completed. 
II. action on 24 recommendations completed but follow up to be monitored. 
III. action on 14 recommendations at various stages of implementation and  
IV. 8 recommendations dropped/ delinked as decided in t he 3 rd  meeting of the Steering 
Group held on 1.8.2011. 
 
To monitor implementation of the recommended measur es, a Steering Group under 
the Chairmanship of Principal Secretary was also co nstituted. The Steering Group held its 
three meeting 1 st , 2 nd  and 3 rd  on 06.04.2010, 29.07.2010 and 01.08.2011 respectiv ely. 
Further, based on Task Force recommendations, a Cou ncil for MSME was constituted with 
Hon’ble Prime Minister as Chairman to lay down broa d policy guidelines and review 
development of MSME sector. The Report of PM’s Task  Force on MSMEs and action 
taken thereon was discussed in the 7 th  meeting of the National Board for MSMEs held on 
07.04.2010. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed of  the status of  Prime Minister’s Task 
Force’s 24 recommendations whose follow up is to be monitored, 14 recommendations 
on which action are at various stages and 8 recomme ndations that have been dropped 
and reason therefor.  Also, the Committee reiterate s its stand that National Board 
must continue to discuss and monitor the policy cha nges in respect of 
recommendations of the Task Force.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee believes that the Ministry will give due consideration to the issues 
raised by it in the Report and incorporate the same in the proposed amendments. 
(Para 44) 
Action Taken  
 
The Ministry has taken a note of this.  
 
 
********* 

 