PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYASABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMJTTEE ON INDUSTRY 
THIRTY-THJRD REPORT 
ON 
THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMEND A TONS CONTAINED IN TWENTY- THlRD REPORT 
OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS ( 1998-99) 
PERTAINING TO MINISTRY OF STEEL 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 28m FEBRUARY, 2000} 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28TH FE13RUARY,2000} 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY 28. 2000/P'AUSA . 1921 (SAKA) 

r 
• 
I. 
2. 
J. 
4. 
S. 
CONTENTS 
COMPOSITI0:-1 01' THE COMMifrEE 
IN rRODIJC.,-10!11 
REPORT Of THE COMMI ITEE 
0BSERVATI01\S'CO!IICLUSIONS AND 
RECOM"'I:"~DATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE­
AT A GI.A:'-ICE 
MINUTI::S CREI.EVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF COMMIITEF.) 
PAGES 
(i)-{ii) 
(iii) 
1- 16 
17-21 
23-28 

. 
I 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
L Shri Raghavji - Chairman 
RAJYASA BHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3 Shn Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
4. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
5. Shri Suresh A. Keswani 
6. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
7. Shri Jibon Roy 
8. Shri Somappa R. Bommai 
9. Smt. Saroj Dubey 
I 0. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhundar 
II. Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
12. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha 
13. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
14. Shri Bhagaban Majhi 
15 Shri Shibu Soren 
LOKSADHA 
16. Shri Pon Radhakrishnan 
17. Shri Chunnilal Thakur 
18. Shri Ramanand Singh 
19. Shri R. Basanagouda Patil 
20. Shri G. Mallikarjunappa 
21. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
22. Shri Anant Nayak 
23. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
24. Shri A. Narendra 
25. Shri A. C. Jose 
26. Shri Unamarao Deorao Patil 
27. Shri ICP. Smgh Oeo 
28. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
29. Shri Thomas Hansda 
30. Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
3 I. Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
32 Shri Sunil Khan 
33. Shri P. Rajendran 
34. Shn B.B. Rama•ah 
35. Shri :vi. Raja1ah 
36 Kunwar Surv RaJ Singh 
37. Shri Dcepa~ Kumar 
(i) 

38 Shri Manjay La I 
39. Shri Anant Mahadcoappa Gudhe 
40. Shri Ram Saj ivan 
41. Shri K. Malaisamy 
42. Shri Nagmani 
43. Shri Rarndas Athawalc 
• 44. Shri Riz" an Zaheer 
• *45. Shri K.H. Muni)appa 
SECRET ARLo\ T 
Shri Sat ish Kumar. Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta. Dir<>ctor 
Shrr P.C. Paikra). Under Secretary 
Shri M.R. Verma. Commrttee Officer 
• 'ommJ.ttd \\ c: ( 13' Jantsal). 2000 
.. N(nmnatcd w e.f 141J' hnu3J) . 2000 

I • 
INTRODUCTI0:-1 
I. the Chainnan of the Depanment-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
having been authorised by the Committee. hereby present this Thirty ·third Repon on Action 
Taken by the Ministry of Steel on the recommendations/observations contained in the T\\ent) .. 
th1rd Repon of the Committee on Demands for Grants ( 1998-99) pertaining to the Ministf) of 
Steel 
2. The Twenty-third Rcpon of the Committee was I a·id/presentcd to the Parliament on the 
9th July. 1998. The Ministry of Steel was requested to furnish action taken replies against the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Repon. The replies of the Ministry in respect of all 
the recommendations/observations "ere received and examined during the detailed examination of 
Demands for Grants (I 999-2000). 
3 The Committee in its meeting held on II" January. 2000 dectded to consider. adopt and 
prC$Cnt the Repon . 
4 The Committee 111 its meeting held on the 27th January. 2000 considered and adopted the 
Report. 
NEW DeLHI: R/\GHA V Jl 
Jwwan 27. 2000 Chmrman 
(iii) 
Deparlmem-related Purlwmemun 
Sta11d111R Comn1111ec on llldtNn 

• 
REPORT 
The Report deals with the Action Take n by the Governme nt on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty·t hird Report on the Demands for Grants( 1998-99) of the Minislry of Steel 
which was presented to Rajya Sabha on the 9'' July, 1998. 
(I) INDIAN STEEL INDUSTRY PARA 6 
(a) Recommendation 
"The Committee recommends that the Department of Steel should play a proact ive role to 
ensure harmonious and integrated growth of steel sector and act as a facilitator to remove all 
stu mbling block coming on the way of growth on the Indian Steel Sector." 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Stee l plays the role of a facilitator and a catalyst for the development and 
growt h of the steel sector in the country. Min istry is extending all possible support to the Iron & 
Steel Industry in the private sector . Some of the main support activities are as under: 
• Gra nting linl..ages of raw material, transport and port. 
• Interaction with All India financia lln stitut ions. 
• Interactio n and follow up with infrastructure and other concerned 
• Ministries to remove major bott lenecks. 
To boost cxpon of iron and steel, Gove rnment have set up a Steel Exporters Forum . under 
the Chairmans hip of Development Commissio ner of Iron & Steel. with major stee l producers and 
as~oc iatio n as its Members. Government have also decided to earma rk Rs.5 crores tor export 
promotion and market deve lopment of iron and steel products. 
Some of the other measures taken by Govern ment to f.1cilitate export include: 
(i} Full eonvenibility of exports earnings at market rate. 
(i i) Facility available to exporters. to import their requirements of raw material duty 
free under the Advance Licens ing Scheme. 
(iii) Refund of duty paid on any imported or excisable material used in manufacture of 
export products. 
(iv) Exemption of export earnings fro m income tax. 
(v) En~ancernent of duty credit rates under duty E ntitlement Pass Boo!. (DEPB 
Sche me) on most iron and stcc I items. 
Ministry of Steel has also projected imponam •ssues pcnai ning to the Industry at the 
level of Comm ittee of Secretaries (COS) . 1t submitted a COS note highlig hting the need for 
planning for the infrastruc ture requirements for Ule steel industry in May. 1994: Further in 
January, 1997 the Ministry submitted a second Note for the COS highlighting the prospective plan 
for the Iron & Steel sector, with specia l emphasis on problems and issues. 
The above has been followed by interaction with the. conceme d Ministries! Agencies . 
Fuither, in the back drop of the current rcccss ionary trend, Ministry of Steel convened a Round 
1 

Tab le on Steel wherein the stce) producers, financial institutions, economic and infrastructur e 
Ministries were invited. 
(b) Commi ttee's Obnrvation and Recomm endation 
The Committee observes that the Department has 'sufficient structural bodies' to play the 
intended role and the only thing required is application of functional behaviour which is 
indispensable not only to jus tify the existence of structural set up but also to discharge the 
functions "ith a sense of purpose and pursuit to achieve the cherished objC(;ti•es. 
Steel Exporters' Forum ma) really play a catalyst's role in tl}e field of expo rt-promotion. 
The Ministry of Steel should expedite the process of formu lating the prospccllve plan for the Iron 
& Steel Sec tor. 
The Committee. further. hopes that all the Four Working Groups should play pro-acti•e 
role in their respecth·e fields i.e. marketing. infrastructure, finance and inputs for be11er tomorro" 
of Indian Steel Industry. 
II. TAX CONCESSION PARA 7 
Recommendati on 
In order to help the steel sector to recover from rece~sion the Comm ittee. after careful 
exam ination of the suggestions. recommends that Special Additional Duty (SAD) should not be 
levied on raw-materials used for stee l making and products for which duty Is 5 percent and belo\\ 
Duty Entit lement Pass-BooJ.. (DEPB) should be exempted from SAD: imposition of 4 percent 
SAD on goods imported for trading purposes: reduction of basic customs dul} on Ferro Ntcl-cl 
'lickel Oxide Sinter charge nickel from 10 percent to 5 percent and suitable reduction in cxci'e 
duty on al l tron and steel products : import duty on seco nds and defectives of Iron and Steel and 
waste and scra p of tinned iron and steel should be enhanced by 10 percent over and above the dut} 
applicable on prime finished >teel items and MODVAT shou ld not be rest ricted to 95 percent and 
should be credi ted I 00 percent. 
Action taken 
Ministry of Steel and Mines, Department of Steel has ta~en action on all s u ggestio n ~ h} the 
Committee in its post-budget memorandttm. i.e raw materials used in steel making for which dut) 
is 5% and below. Should be spared from SAD. exemptio n of OEPB from SAD. imposttion of 4°;• 
SAD on goods imported for trading purposes (Department. of Steel has a~ked \ l mtstf) of finance 
to revie\\ this). reduction of basic customs duty on ferro nickel. mckel oxide suucr, charged nickel 
from 10% to 5% and suitable reduction in excise duty on iron & steel products. import dut) on 
seconds and defec tives of iron and steel and waste and scrap of tinned iron nnd steel shou ld be 
enhanced by I 0% ove r and above duty applicable on prime finished steel items and MODVA T 
restricted to 95% and should be credited I 00%. On each item suitable recommendations had been 
~ent to \llini>try of finance. 
(c) Com mittee' s Observn tion 
The Com mittee apprecia tes the efforts made by Ministry of Steel in observing the 
recommendation of this Committee regarding the rational isation of tax-structure and providing the 
level-playing licld to all the plants in the steel sector. 
2 

.. 
111. MODERNISATION OF STEEL PLANT PARA 8.01 
(A) 011rgapur Steel Plant 
Recommeodalioo 
Department of Steel should henceforth adopt a "time bound programme" in respect of any 
future modernisation scheme and sticl. to the time schedule and in case of delay fix the 
responsibility so that tht: public money spent on such projects do not go unaccounted for. The 
Committee also recommends that the Department should conduct an enquiry regarding the 
undesirable delay for the modernisation of Durgapur Steel Plant which caused extra financial 
burden of thousands of crores of Rupee. 
(d) Action Taken 
The modernisation of Durgapur Steel Plant was approved by Govt. in February'89 at an 
estimated cost ofRs.2667.56 crores with a scheduled date of completion ofMarch'98 and units arc 
under operationfcommercial production . The antic1pated cost of modernsation is now estimated at 
R~.4870. 77 crores. (Base 3rd Qtr 1998) 
The Main reasons for the time over-run of the project are: 
(i) Disintegration of USSR resulting in various problems. like the supply of Plant and 
equipment and fund flow. 
(ii} Substantial increase in volumes of work at detailed engineering stage over those 
envisaged attbe stage of comracti ng. 
(iii) Inadequate cash now for major consortium partners/major contractors like 
HSCL,EPI. Jessop, Braithwaite, NBCC, TPE and BTS etc. 
(iv) lntra-eonsortium claims and counter claims between the consortium members 
themselves. 
The cost over-run is mainl} due to monetary reasons (78%) e.g. price escalation cll.change 
rate variat1on. changes in taxes & duties, interest, etc . CAG had undertaken a detailed rev1ew of all 
the stages of the project, starting from its sanction to implementation and finally the performance 
of various post modernised units and furnished the report which was tabled in both the !louses of 
Parliament in June.l998. 
The critical observations brought out in the report are being examined to identify remedial 
measures wherever possible and as well as to usc the suggestions made in the report as guidelines 
for future projects. 
Committee's /Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee is not quite satisfied w1th the reply of Ministry of Steel and feels that time 
and cost over-run amounts to mismanagement which is a loss to the national exchequer The cost 
over run by almost (Rs.4870.77- Rs.2667.56) •Rs.2103.21 crores and time over-run by almost a 
period of 5 years is a lapse of serious nature. 
3 

It is a mauer of severe grief to know that the CAG Report on the financial irrcgularit) of 
Durgapur Steel Plant " -hich \\3S tabled in both the Houses of Parliament tn June'98 is still hanging 
at the exam ination stage in the Minimy of Steel and it has not been possible to lix the 
'responsibility for the undesirable delay in the modernisation of the plantS. The Comminee is 
constrained to express its displeasure ovcrthe procrastinating anitude of the Minosrry of Steel and 
falls to understand as to why the Department of Steel is dithering to conduct an enqmry into the 
delay aspects. The Commmee 1s of the considered view that it 1s only by conducti ng an enqu1ry 
the Ministry can absolve itself from apprehensions . This 1s all the more necessat]- because the 
functioning of the Governme nt machinery is being questioned in various fora and there is a 
demand for do"nsizing Government DepartmentS 
(B) Rourkela Steel Plant 
Recommendation 
The Government of India sanctioned in October, 1989 the modernisation of Rourke Ia Steel 
Plant at an estimated cost of Rs.2461 crores. Subseque tJtly on 12.5.92 the Government further 
approved the revised cost estimate Rs_ 3954 crorc with a complete schedule of Rs.3954 crore with 
a completion schedu le of December, 1995. The anticipated cost of modernisation is now estimated 
at Rs. 5112 crore. The Comminec hopes thnt the modern1:sation of Rourkcla Steel Plan should be 
as per the approved plan/programme. 
Action Ta ken 
The modcmisat1on of Rourkela Steel Plant was approved by Govt. in Octobcr'89 at an 
estimated cost of Rs.246l crores.The Govt. have further approved the Revised Cost Esumate of 
Rs.3954 crores on 12.5.92 with a completion schedule of December'95. The modernisation work 
has been completed in August'98 except one reheating furnace (Reheating FumaceNo .l5) at llot 
Strip Mill. Reheating Furnace No.5 is likely to be completed by March'2000. The \1odemisation 
units are under stabilisa tion. 
The time over-run is due to the following reasons: 
(i) Inadequate deployment of resources for design engineering work for global and 
critical indigenous packages. 
(ii) Delay in linalisation of orders and financing agreement under Indo- French Protocol 
for Reheating Furnaces. 
(iii) Slow progress of structural fabrication work by the contractors . 
(iv) Delay in supply of indigenous equipments for all global and critical ind1genous 
packages. 
(v) Inadequate mobilisation of resources at site by the contractors, particularly, EPl, 
MECON and llEC. 
(vi) Constramts of funds with the contractors, particularly, EPI, HEC and BTS. 
The cost over-run is mainly due to monetary reasons (95%) e.g. price escalation, exchange 
rate variation, changes in taxes & duties, interest etc. 
4 

.. 
' 
• 
Committee's /Observations/Recommendations 
rhe Committee finds the reasons for delay in the modernisation ofRourkela Steel Plant as 
forwarded by the Ministry of Steel as superficial and many of the reasons accounted for are due 10 
inadequate monitoring. administrati,•e incmc iency on the pan of SAIL in particular Ministry of 
Steel in general resulting into undesirable delay causing cost escalation to the tunc of Rs.2651 
~rore~ . The Committee feels that time and cost ovcr-ru11 might have seriouslv affected the 
profitability of the plant. - -
The Committee feels thai the Ministr)' should conduct an enqmry. within a time-frame' to 
r,, the responsibility for the time & cosr-over-run in the modernisation of the Ro111·kcla Steel 
Plant. The enquiry should not only find out the rea.sons for deley but also to fix the responsibi lity 
behind the delay. 
The Committee. rurther hopes that Reheating F'umace No.5 at Hot Strip Mill would be 
modernised within the stipulated time frame i.e. March 2000 without any fi.tnher cost escalation. 
(C) Boka.ro Steel Plant 
Recommendation 
"The Committee recommends that hencet'orth in such c.ases when there is time and cost 
over-run, the performance Budget should give cogent reasons for the delay in order to obviate the 
apprehensions of financial irregularities". 
Action Taken 
The recommendation of the Hon'blc Committee has been noted for compliance. 
Committee's Observation 
The Committee !s happy to observe' that its recommendalion,to highlight the cogent reasons 
for time and cost-over-run in the Performance Budget has been noted lor compliance by the 
Mi11istry of Steel in order to obviate the apprehension of financial irregularity and at the same 1 imc 
strongly hopes that the recommendation noted for compliance would be put into p ractice without 
any excuse. 
(D) Bbilai Steel Plant 
Recomme nda tion 
The Committee recommends that the settimg of new Sinter Plant-lll should be completed 
within the stipulated time i.e. in March, 1999, in order to avoid any further cost escalation. 
Action Taken 
The Government have approved installation of Sinter Plant-3 at Bhilai Steel Plant at an 
estimated cost of Rs.809.72 crores in January'96 with completion schedule of Scptcmebr'98. The 
scheme is now likely to be completed by April'2000, due to the delay in basic and detai led 
engineering work by M/s. Mitsui and Mls. Tiazpromexport, Russia, and lack of re~ou rce s by other 
agencies involved for rhe site activities. 
5 
1 

Comm ittee' s Observa tion And Recommendation 
The Committee observes that the scuing of nm Siuter Plant-Ill in the Bhilai Steel Plant 
suffered the ill-luck of time and cost over-run i.e. the project which was to be completed in Sept'98 
is no" likel) to be completed b) April. 2000. A glaring example of time O\er-run. 
rhe Commit1ee feels it pertinent to recommend that tbe Department of Steel should prevail 
upon the contractor(s) to Mls \llitSui and l\1/s Tiazprom export to complete the project within the 
rev1sed stipulated period otherwise liquidated damages as well ns the price escalation would be 
borne by the contractors. The Committee further feels that the delay in completion of Sinter Plant­
Ill m1ght ha'e damaged the profitability of the plant during the delayed phase causing loss of 
ph:rsical & financial performance of the plant and this obvious fact should be communicated to the 
contractor(s) by the Ministry. llaving the experience of DSP & RSP the Committees feels that 
cautious approach should be ta~cn with regard to sening up ofSmter Plant-Ill. 
(IV) REVIVA L OF STE EL PLANTIPSUS PARA 8.02 
(A) Indian Iron And Steel Company (fl SCO) 
Recommendation 
Resource constraint has been cited as the main reason for the Government & the SAIL not 
to take an imestment decision with regard to the modernisation of the plant. TI1e Comm1ttee wa~ 
apprised that Govcmment of India directed SAIL to explore the possibility of 
revival/modernisation of liSCO through joint venture arrangements subject to SAIL eontinumg to 
retain S !%share holding in the joint venture. Initially only Mls. Tya7hprom espon (TPE) of 
Russia and M/s Mitsui & CO. of Japan submitted their offer Mitsui subsequently withdrew as it 
was not nHerested to participate in the equity of liSCO The only offer left "ith SAIL i~ TPE's 
offer. TPE.'s offer for participation in equny depends on oppro1 al of the Govemmcnt of Russia ftir 
utilisation of the Rupee-Rouble Debt Funds in Escrow account. In the absence oJ' 
imergo1ernmemal agreement~ on this •ssue. this proposal is not li~ely to fructif). In the 
circumstances the only available alternative for revival of liSCO by SAIL is through Steel 
Development Fund (SOF) route in two parts namely write off of liSCO's accumulated loss and 
other liabilitie'\ and requirementS of funds to the tune of Rs.2107 crores. The Committee "as 
informed that revival through the SDF route is under the consideration of the Government. 
The need to revive the Steel Plant was felt way back in 1994. Since then the Comrninee has 
been recommending for quick action on the pan of the Government in this regard and impressing 
on them that any further delay may take the plant to a point of no return. As the Government is not 
inclined to e:~.tend any Budgetary Suppon to SAIL for this purpose, the Committee recommends 
that the Government should take an early decision with regard to liSCO and any furtl1er delay will 
not only cause hardship but also will have serious financial implications. 
Action Taken 
liSCO is a sick company and has been under reference to BIFR since June, 1994 for 
determination of measures in regard to the future of the company. Several modernisation proposals 
were formulated in the past but none of them could fructify mainly due to funds constraints. SAIL 
have submitted a proposal to revive liSCO in a Joint Venture (N) partnership with Mls. 
Tyazhprom export (TPE) of Russia. This proposal is dependent on the use of Rupee Debt Funds 
for which an Inter Governmental Agreement between the Government of Russia and Government 
6 

f 
.. 
of India is required. The project envisages an investment of Rs.21 Oi crores. Govt. of India's effons 
in this direction culminatt:d in the signing of a Protocol in the Fifth Session of lndo-Russtan Inter 
Governmental Commission in November, 1998. In the Protocol it has been proposed to use a part 
of India Rupee Debt!\' as contribution of the Russian side to the Joint Yenmre Company. 
Accordingly. Govt. of India have already formally presented to the Russian side that draft 
of an agreement which could be signed between the two countries. The respo nse of the Russian 
Govt. is awaited. However. any scheme to be taken up for modernisat ion will have to be in 
accordance with the orders of the BIFR in this regard. 
Committee's Observation 
. . 
For a long spell of time liSCO has been in a moribund stage but the Comminec perceive a 
ray of hope in liSCO's lite due to efforts of Govt. of India which culminated into the signing of a 
Protoco l in the Fifth Session of Indo-Russian !mer-Governmental in November, 1998 whereupon 
it has been proposed to Govt. of Russia (a condit ion of Russian Govt. to approve TPE's offer to 
participate in equity of liSCO . for its reviva l package) to use a part of India-Rupee· Rouble Debt 
Fund in Escrow account as a contribution of the Russian side to the joint venmre company. Now, 
when the ball is in the G0\1 . of Russia's Court, the Govt. of India should make every effort to 
expedite the signing of the agreement. 
lfl case the TPE's offer does not materialise , SA IL should take initiative to revive liSCO . 
As far as the accordance of BIFR to the modernisation package of liSCO is concerned, the 
Committee feels that BIFR should have no objection to a substantia l and sustainable 
moderni sation scheme of liSCO. As BIFR has to play a pro-constructive role in the life of a sick 
company. sooner the modernisation package starts in the 'life of liSCO the better it would be 
for its sustainabi lity, otherwise the plant is already heading towards a point of no return. 
(B) Rasbtriya lspat Nigam Ltd, (RINL) 
Recommendation 
The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that Yishakhapatnam Steel Plant (VSP), 
the first shore based integrated stee l plam set up in the country was almost at the door steps of 
BIFR and had a narrow escape because of time ly intervent ion by Government. The plant has been 
given to submit its "turnaround strategy" within three months. The Committee recommend s tha t 
RINL sho uld start work in right earnest to complete its task within the time frame . The 
Department of Steel should monitor the act ivity and should have no excuse if things go wrong. 
Action Taken 
In May, 1998, the Government has approved a seco nd capital restructuring convening 
Rs. 13 3 3.47 crores of Government loans into Preferential Share Capital as an interim measure 
and directed the company to subm it a comprehensive turnaround strategy with the help of a 
consultant. Accordingly, RINL had submitted a turnaround strategy in consu ltation with a reputed 
international consultant viz. Mls A.T. Kearney . 
A draft propo~al has since been prepared and circu lated for inter-ministerial consideration. 
7 

Comminec's Obscr- ·ation 
The Committee cxprcssc; its pleasure that the Go,emmem has approved a Second Capital 
rcwuctun ng converting Rs. 1333.47 crore of Govt loans into preferential share capital '" an 
interim measure but at the same ttme the Committee desires that the Go' t. should c~pc<.htc 
the intcr-rnini5tcrial consideration of the comprehensive tumaround qraiCb'). submi11cd by RI/\:L 
~o that the said comprehensive turnaround strategy may be put in to opcrauon without further 
dcla}. 
(C) Sponge Jron India Limited (SUL) 
Recommendation 
Sponge Iron is a mewllic product and contains a large percentage or metallic iron. This •~ a 
substitute of ~tcel melting scrap. The mdigenous availability of metal scrap tS low and large 
quuntity have to be imported in order to meet indigenous demands. The SilL \\3; set up in 1980 
for producmg sponge iron from lump iron ore and I 00% non coking coal. The Compan~ made 
profit upto 1992-93. In order to make the Company viable on a sustainable basis. a turn around 
prl1posal submitted . 
Keepin!; in ,;e" the utility of spo nge iron. and the performance record of the SilL the 
Committee recC!mmcnd> that the Government should clear rum around proposal ~ubmitted b) Sil l 
at the earlies t ;~ n d enhance the budgetary suppo rt to the Company in theRE for 1998-99. 
Action T aken 
I. The Spotlge Iron India Limited (SilL) was incorporated as 3 Public l.imited Company in 
March . 1975 under the Companies Act, 1956. Equity shares in the company are held by the 
Governmeu t of lnuia and the Government of Andhra Pradesh in the ratio of 97:3. The Com pan~ 
set up a 30,000 tonnes per annum (tpa) Demonstmt ion Sponge Iron l'lant at Kothngudcm (Andhnt 
Pradesh with the as.istance of L TNDPIUNIDO in 1975. The Plant went into production in I 980 
The capacity of the plant was doub led by putting another unit of 30,000 tpa with m-housc 
engineering and expertise. The plant has been producing qual ity sponge iron suitable for ,,eel 
ma~ing . The Compan> has also been rendering Consultancy services for setti ng up sponge trnn 
plums for variC!us clients both in India and abroad. 
2. lnitiall~, the "orking result;, of Sill . were not encouraging due to the initial difficultte-. 
nortna lly expected in introduction of a new product . llo"ever. the Compan) started sho" i11g 
better financial results from 1989-90 onwards . Though the Company made profits upto 1992-93. 
the highest of Rs.2.91 crores being in 1992-93, a11d paid dividends to the Governrn~nt i11 1991-92 
and 1991-93, it suffered net losse> of Rs.2.45 crores in 1991-92 and 1993-94. Sin~e then the 
Compa 11y has been incurring losses except for the year 1995-96, "hen it had shm'n .\ margtnal 
profit of Rs.Q.29 crores. During the year 1997-98, the loss registe red by the company "a' of the 
order of Rs.3.36 crores (provis ional). The main reasons reported for decline in the profitability or 
Si lL are increase in tho cost ofraw material and other inputs, closure of units in the southern India 
forcing the company to market its product at farther areas/states entailing higher transport cost. 
etc . 
8 

' 
.. 
3. Keeping in \ie" the present financial position. a Tum Around Plan ha~ been prepared b} the 
Company v.hich ha~ suggested expansion of the cxi;ting sponge iron capacity from 60,000 tpa to 
1,20,000 tpa (including 3ugmentation of captive po\\er generation), as the major components. TI1e 
other proposals contained in the Tum Around Plan arc (i) Grant of financial relief like moratorium 
for repayme nt of Gove rnment loan. (ii) waiver of interest on Govern ment loan etc.; and (i ii) 
participation i11 the equity of SilL by National Mineral Development Corporation Limited 
(NMDC). a PSU of the Ministry of Steel. 
4 In terms of the existing pr<><.-edure. the proposal for expansion of the Sponge Iron Plant of 
SilL was circulated to the project apprising agencies in the Government mcluding to the Mini~try 
of Environment and Forest have pointed out that SilL will have to obtain CO\ ironmental clearance 
for the proposed expansion project. further. as cost estJmat~ for expansion prOJect \\ere prepared 
b> SilL based in the prices prevalent in September, 1997. the same will have to be updated, 
particularly in view of the proposals announced in the Union Budget for 1998-99. 
5. Accordin gly, STI L has been advised to obtain the requisite environmenta l clea rance and 
~ubmit the same to the Gove rnment alongwith the updated cost estimates for the expansion project 
for consideration of the Governme nt. These arc awaited from the Compan) . 
6. SilL \\3S pro\lded budgetary support of Rs.J crores during 1997-98. For the current )Car vi7_ 
1998-99. the bud !leta f) support has been proposed at a higher level of Rs.4 crorcs. The plan outlay 
is also projected at Rs.21 crores for 1998-99 as against Rs.3 crores (Provisional) during the 
prcv•ous ye~r. "h•ch is eam1arked for meeting expe nditure on the proposed expansion project. 
Committee's Observation 
The C'01111l1ittcc feels that the Ministry of Steel is not banking lln a sound decision with 
regard to SilL. On the one hand the Ministr> of Steel is egging with the idea that it is not prudent 
to allo" further mvestment on Sponge Iron Plant in view of 1ts extremely adverse financ.al 
snuation which Js the result of dull market for Sponge Iron and on the other hand an outla) of 
Rs.26.00 crorcs has been provided in BE 1999-2000, out of"hich Budgetaf) ,upport b Rs.I.OO 
crores for its propo>cd scheme of expansion of liS mstalled capacity from 60.000 tonne> to 
I ,20.000 tonnes \\hilc the MiniStry of St.:cl has advised SilL management agamst the very 
expans ion scheme b the Ministry of Steel not in doldrums? If the Departmen t of Steel finds the 
necessity of an alternauve package of relief I rom Government and other sources to make the 
SilL's operat ion financially viable on a long term basis it should prevail upon the SilL'~ 
management and impress upon the Government for alternative Relief J>ac~agc 
(D) Hiodu stan Steel Cons truction Ltd. (HSCL) 
R«ommeodatioo 
At the same tunc Committee recom mends. that the management of c,,rnpan~ should come 
put of slumberncss and strive to obtam maximum work order for the company in the post 
liberalis ation cru "hen· private entreprencu1·; have entered steel sector and arc in the process of 
establishing ne"' plants. The rationalisation of manpower in the Company ~hould take place 
J,eeping in vie" the worl.. order the Company has in hand . 
9 

\ 
Acti.1o Taken 
The management of HSCL has been directed to and are strhing hard to obtarn maximum 
worl.. order from steel and non-stee l secto rs. A meeting at the level of Minister of Steel and M1nes 
held recently on 28th Jul) , 1998 emphasized this aspect v.hile considering the overall situation of 
HSCL and its future prospects . 
Committee 's Observation Aod Recomme ndation 
The Comnuttee feels that the repl)c of the Go\'t. bears tbe tact.. of truth on its face value as 
the USCL management is failing badly in obtaining even tl:e required level of work order from 
Steel and non-~teel sectors for the survi\ at of USCL. 'Vear after )'ears has elapsed but USCL 1s 
meeting the same dwindling fate and workers are the worst victim of the situation \\h1ch is be)Ond 
their reach 
The Committee funher opines that "hat USCL requir es is not only introspection but also 
prospective o'erhauling including infusion of fresh funds The Committee reiterates its earlier 
recommendation of rationalisation of man power and further recommends for managerial 
revolution and managemem overhauling for the betterment ofUSCL. 
(E) Bharat Refract ories Ltd. (BRL) 
Recommendatjon 
The Committee is of the opmio n that in the event of steel ~ector emerging out of recession , 
if the company is able to get high suppl) order and there is positi\'e indication to the effect the 
company can revive; it may be allowed to ope rate or else the Government should have the option 
to order for the winding up of the company. The budgeta') suppon of Rs.8.50 crores. the 
Committee is of the view. ~hould be the "Last-ditch-suppon" for suf\ii\al and the approach should 
be "now or ne\er" . 
Action Taken 
The ~inistry of Steel ;., of the vic" tJ1at BRL can be rcv1ved through a package of fresh 
plan/non plan ~sistance. A proposal in thrs regard is presently under the consideration of 
Go,emment. Committee\ observation 
The Committee appreciates that the attiwde of ~tinistl') of Steel to"ards BRL IS pos1tive 
but at the same time feels that only ha' ing a posnivc ani tude is not going 10 help BRL but a timely 
step m the nght direction is the need of the hour to help BRL to reco,·er and suf\i'~ The 
Commiuce feels that the !1-l inistry of Steel should expedite the process of transfom1ing the 
proposal," h1ch is presently under the consideration of the Go"emmcnt into a viable action plan. 
(F) Birsa Stone Lime Company Ltd . (BSLC) Recommen dation 
The Commiuee recommends that the Department of Steel should objecthely assess the 
sustainabrlity of these compa n1es and at the same time explore the pOs>Jbilities of NMDC tal.mg 
over the activities of Bisra Stone L1me Company Limited (BSLC). In case it finds that it is not 
economically viable to re' ive these compa nies, may initiate steps fortheir "inding up. 
10 

Act ion Taken 
Bisra Stone Lime Compa ny Limited (BSLC) is located in the tribal belt of Orissa. Majority 
of it$ ov ~r :2000 of its employees belongs to Schedu le Caste/Scheduled Tribe categor ies. Its 
performance has been severely affected by the shrinkage of demand for its produciS i.e. Limestone 
and dolomite. The main problems are: -
( i) A generic decline in demand for its m:ain product dolomite. 
(ii) A high cost structure on account of hig h wages. 
(iii) Excess manpower. 
2. The Department of Stee l is cons tantly reviewing the matrer. Present efforts are to rationalise 
BSL's manpower through voluntary retirement and to maximise off take of its main prodLK:t 
dolomite by SAIL. Handing over the mines of BSLC to any PSU such as NMDC is not a viable 
opt ion. 
Committee's Observation and Recom mendations 
The Committee feels that Ministry of Steel is not paying due attemion for the reviva l of 
Bird Group of Companies, except the reluctam attempt of rationalisation of BSLC's manpower 
through VRS and maximising offtake of its main product i.e. dolom ite by SAIL. 
The Committee further recommends that all viable efforts should be immediately initiated 
to tum BSLC into a net profit-making company. 
(Y) SETTING UP OF GALVANISING COMPLEX IN N.E. REGION, PAR>\ 9 
Recommendation 
The Committee recommends that sanction for the setting up of the Galvanising Complex 
should be acco rded and the execution should also be done within the schedule time frame of 24 
months as origi nally envisaged . 
Action Taken 
The Hot Dip Ga lvanising Unit at Dagaon, Assam is being set up by SAIL, a PSl/ under 
Departmen t of Steel. No budgetary support is being extc"ndcd to the project by the Governme nt. 
The implementat ion of the project has been delayed due to the following reasons: 
•:• Delay in completion of works in the scope of Assam Govt.. i.e. construct ion of a two-lane 
approac h road from national highway to the site with a RCC bridge ove r river Ch~sa. T he 
work has not yet been started by Assam Gove rnment. 
•:• Due to the damage on account of noods, no site activities cou ld be carr ied o ut for three to 
four months . 
•!• Delay in finding competent contractors to work in Assam. 
Further. Assam Govt. had agreed to grant v arious fiscal concess ions for the project. The 
Tec hno-eco nomic viability of the project was based on these concessions and facilities. Union 
11 

Minister of Steel and Mmes has recently reminded Chief Mimster of Assam to expedite, the 
extension of these facilities for speeding up the implementation of the project. A fa,ourabh: 
dcc1sion has not yet been received in this regard. 
Commit1ee's Observation and Recommendation 
The Comminee wishes to highlight that development of backward region through 
industnalisation is a maner of national policy and prioroty and in this context the project oft he Hot 
Dtp Galvanismg un11 at Dagaon. Assam is a welcome step to achieve the cherished goal. The 
development of the backward region is a pre-condition for the balanced and rapid growth and 
development of naltonal economy. 
An) dela) m the projeCI of galavanising complex for the nonh-east region "ill not on!~ 
damage the regional progress but also the national overall economic de\elopmcnt. And the 
Comminee hopes that the. Depanment of Steel would play the path-breaking role in this regard 
The Commmee hopes that State govemmem should not hesitate to give cenain financial 
incentive like salcs-ta.x exemption and so. A few concession and financial incentive at the present 
stage "ould fetch a (<)( of te\enue m the times to come. 
(VI) COK.I:\G COAL. SETTL"'G t;U OF \\ASHERIF.S, ANTI-DUMPNG MEASURES 
ASD R£SF.ARCIJ & DEVELOPMENT, PARA 10 
(A) Coking Coa l 
Recommeodationsf Obsen •atioos 
The Commm~-e recommends that in order to ensure the demand of requisite quail~ of 
coking coal to steel industry and to reduce the dependence on impon of coal, the Depanmcnt of 
Steel an co-operaucn with the ~1inislr) of Coal shoold undena~e Mega Projects of e'ploratOI) and 
developmental nature (the total resources of Indian Coal as on I. I 98 has been assc,sed around 
~06 billinn tonnes b~ Geological Sunc:y <>f India). "\;fa~si~e <;un·eying Action Plan" for high 
qua ill) coal. containing low ash contents. should be taken, expeditiously \fore \\ashenes. ""h 
inno,atcd and modemi:.cd tools and techniques, should be established and pressed into scn·i<e to 
reduce the aoh·content. 
The Comminee funher recommends that the Planning Commission. the Department of !>:.:el 
and MiniStr) of Coal must prepare "a time-bound- programme· to stan. expeditious!). indigenous 
productio:~ of coal to meet the requirement of steel sector. 
Action Taken 
So far as .tCl10n regarding masstve sune;ing and exploration is concerned, \1inistl) of Coal 
have i11formed that exploration data a lread~ generated in respect of Bharat Coking Coal Limned 
command .. rca is quite adequate for planning. construction of projects upto lOth plan pcnod CIL 
had offered 4 mining blocks containing superior quality coking coal to SAfL for exploitation of 
coking .;oal a, capu'e mines. SAIL have selected one bloc~ viz. Tasra Block which was found to 
be techno-economical I) viable. It has been informed b)' MiniSll) of Coal that it would not be 
possible for BCCL and CIL to under-take rnming m remaining thr.:e projects in these deep seated 
blocl-s bec~u,e ~uch bloc~s will be highly capital intensive and there is no wa)' of moblbmg the 
12 

r~.ource requirements. In the present sce nario. SAIL as "ell linds it difficuil to nffo rd w 
undertake mega projec ts of exploratory and developmenta l nature due to financial constraints . 
Committee's Observation and Recommenc.lation 
T he Com mittee notes SAIL's problem in undertaking mega proj~cts of exploratory and 
deve lopmenta l nature due to linanc ial constraint. Mining operation is itself a capita l - intens ive 
activity and min ing of deep-seated blocks requires even larger nmount of cap ital. It is a fact. 
However . in this regard the Ministry of Steel may intensifv to d.evelop such techno logy 
wh•ch may lead to cost effective mining operation of deep seated coa l blocks. The usc of 
indigenous coal. in the long run. if the mining- operation of high qua lit} coa l is thro ugh 
technology intensive measure would reduce the depe ndency of steel plants on the impo rt tlf coa l 
and henceforth would lc~d to ~ost- reduction. 
(B) Setti ng up ofWasberies 
Recommendations/Ob~ervations 
The Committee recommends that the Department of Steel should persistent ly take up the 
matter with Ministry of Coal for the supply of low ash content cok ing coal and impress upon them 
that cok ing coal with high ash conte nt is injurious to the Steel Plants. At the same time the 
Qcpartmcnt of Steel cannot (lbdicate itse lf from the respo nsibility of sett ing up of washer ies. The 
failure on the part of Department of Steel to set up was heries is a matter of serio us concern. The 
reaso ns for not sett ing up washeries is best known to the Depart ment. If setting up of washcrics 
can be a n alte rnative to avoid import of coal and in the long run beneficial to the steel industry. the 
Oep~•rtmc n t sh . Jld not feel hesitated to ask for budgetary support. 
Action Taken 
So far as setting up of new washcries is conccmed it may he stated that-C II, has recen tly 
com missio ned 2 new coking coal washeries i.e. Ked la in CCL for medium coking coa l and 
Macthnband in BCCL for prime cok ing coal. Kedla washery has already started production. 
Mad huband washery will start production shortly. Suppl ies from these washeries would help 
reduce Stee l Plants dependence in imported coal to some extent. 
{': new exper imental washery for beneficiat ion \)f Low Vola tile Mediu m Cok ing Coa l 
(LVMC) is also being planned through joint efforts of Ministry of Coal , Ministry of St"cl & 
Departme nt of Science & Techno logy. Low Volatile Medium Coking Coa ls when washed upto 
17% ash can be used upto 10% in t he c harge coa l blend. This will improve the availab ility of 
coking coa l. There are adequate reserves of L YMC coals . The success of new coal washcr ies for 
benelicia tion of LYMC coals will help partly in reducing the dependence on im110rted cok ing coal. 
The wash abil ity charac te ristics of l.ndian Coa ls are difficult due to high percentage ,,r 
inhe re nt ash and cost of washing is also hi.gh. The washeries set up in early 60s were mea nt to 
wash good quali ty raw cok ing coal. With the depl etion of mineable reserves of such coals . the 
qua ntity of raw coal feed to the washeries has also decl ined resulting in high ash perce ntage in 
washed coal from the washcries. 
SA IL is already operat ing two washeries whic h are unde r util ised due to non-ava ilabi lity of 
suitable raw coal. The real problem thus is with availability o f raw coa l of requis ite quality and not 
of washer ies. 
13 

l 
I 
\ 
SAIL has undertaken modernisation of its s teel plants which are yielding results. Various 
cost control measure like utilisation of smaller coke fractions, maximising sinter usage in Blast 
Furnaces. increase in the Hot Blast Temperature are being resorted to reduce the coking coal 
consumption in Steel Plants. Coal Dust Injection in one Blast Furnace each at Bhilai & Bokaro has 
been started and is giving good resultS. Coa l Dust Injections are being planned to be used an other 
hlast furnaces of SAIL. 
CO M:\1ITT EE'S OBSERVA TIO:-i AND RECOMMEN DATION 
The Committee 1S happy to note that CIL has commissioned 2 new coal washeries i.e. Kedla 
in CCL for medium coking coal and Madhuband in BCCLL for prime coking coal which v.ould 
help steel plants depe ndence in imported coal. · 
The Committee extent its best wishes for setting up of new experimental washery for 
benefits of Low Volatile Medium Col.ing Coal (l.VMC) v.h.ich would also though partly reduce 
the dependence on imported coking coal 
(C) Anti-du mpin g meas ures Recom mendation 
The Committee recommends that the Department . of Steel whose one of the major 
functions is co-ordination of the growth of Iron & Steel Industry both in Public and Private 
Sectors. should not on!) play an effecti~e role as a coordinator but also tal.e up the matter with the 
Ministry of Comme rce for anti-dumping measures. 
Actio n taken: 
The Min ister of Steel has met the Commerce Minister last month and impressed upon him 
the need for having urgent policy initiatives to speed up export of steel. One of the issues 
discussed "as how to deal with the incidence of dumprng in this sector. Wo Steel & Mines, 
Department of Steel, has made certam suggestions tO check unhindered dumping by up grading 
the existmg mechanism One of the suggestion has been the possibilit> of using (Tngger Price 
Mechanism) by the Govt. of India to detect incidence o f dumping and to initiate anti-dumping 
investigations suo- moto against imports of steel v.nh a declared price of less than mmimum price 
established by the Governme nt. The Ministry is following up with the Commerce Ministry on this 
issues. 
Committee's O bservati on 
T be Com mi tt~ notes the steps taken by tbe Mini stry or Steel in the matter . 
(D): Research and Development 
Recommendatio n/Observation 
Department of Steel should lay more emphasis on R&D activity and such activity should be 
result oriented 'and beneficial to the steel plants and funds earmarked for the purpose in 9th Plan 
should be utilised prope rly. 
14 

Action tak en 
With the approval of the Cabinet, the Empowered Committee has been constituted under 
the chai rmanship of Secre tary, Department of Stee l with Members from Department of Science & 
Technology, Planning Commission, Depanment of Scientific and Industrial Research. Mam 
producers of stee l, liT. Kharagpur, Natio nal Metallurg ical laboratory, Jamshedpur, Development 
Commissioner for Iron & Steel and others with a v iew to providing overal l direction to the total 
research effon on Iron & Steel in the country and approve specific research projects placed before 
it. 
The Empowered Committee will inter alia examine all aspects of Science & Technology in 
the Iron & Steel sector; co-ordinate and monitor the on·going research programmes in the iron & 
steel sector; review the progress of Science & Tec hnology programmes of national imporrance in 
the Iron & Stee l industry periodically and advise Ministry of Steel on policies and programmes m 
developing domestic capabilities for R&D in the iron and steel sector. 
The first meeting of the Empowered Committee was held on lOth July. 1998. Committee 
appro-.ed the following R&D proposals:· 
• Energy efficiency improvement in the secondary steel sector (electric arc 
furnace/induction furnace) at a cost of Rs.60 lakhs (first phase). 
• Chemical modification of lignite based additives and its application in beneficiation of 
iron ore fines and shmes at a cost of Rs. 13.2 lakhs. First installment of Rs.4 lakhs has 
already released. However. next installment w ill be released on receipt of inspection 
repon 
• !mprove coking characterist ics of non-cock ing Chandrapura coal of Western Coal fields 
Ltd. {WCL) at a cost of Rs.8 lakhs. 
• Introduction of New Mining Methods and Techniques for Ground Control to enable 
mining of rich Manganese Ore under "Very Poor" to "Fair" Ground conditions at a cost 
ofRs.40 lakhs. 
• On line expert system for continuously cost products (billets/blooms/slabs) at a cost of 
Rs.28 lakhs. 
The abo'"e R&D project proposals will help in reduction of Energy consumptio n in Elcctrrc 
arc furnace/I nduction Furnaces in Mini steel planl removal of a a luminous gangue minerals from 
Iron ore for enrichment of iron percentage in the concentrate, extraction of rich manganese ore 
from very difficult ground conditio n, removal of hurdles in continuous steel casting techniques 
and conversion of non-coking coal by b lending w ith rice hask, bagase and coco nut fibre. These 
projects will defin itely benefit in reduction of cost of steel production. 
There is no budgetary suppon for Research & Technology Missio n in budget estimate (BE) 
for the year of 1998-99. A provision of upto Rs.l50 crores may be made annual ly for spending in 
Research & Development activities from Steel Development Fund (SDF). For the year of 1998-99, 
Rs.30.0 crores would be available for financing R&D proposals. Since no provision has been 
made in budgetary suppon for the year of 1998-99, a provision is being made in Revised Estimate 
{RE) for this year. 
15 

Cornmitccc'' Obsl'l"\ation & Recommendation 
I h<.' t"ommottee " !!l,td to note the effons made b) the Ministry of Steel m the field of 
R<.'seardt and De\(~fl>pmcnt i\ massive R&O activity " ould provide techno-economic ad1antage 
to St<.'el lndustr~ "hich '"" result into cost-cffectilc production of Steel ttcms. Increase in the 
cost,,,. product ton ha~ been one of the most mind-boggling problem faced b) Stcel·llldustl) High 
co,t <'f pr<>ducti<>n pull~ Indian Steel lndustl) to a disad1amagcous stage 11s·a· 1is international 
maJor 'teel-producers So each R&O \1i~sion in\'olvmg the d<-sirable degree of intellectual 
honest~ "ould ma~e Indian Steel lndn"l) lllternationall) much more competitile . 
The Comnuttce hope, that the proclaimed R&D \li•sion would encourage tn·house­
technolog~ experiment so that tndigenou' upgr3dation of technology may take place. 

OBSERVATION/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
AT A GLANCE 
(I) INDIAN STEEL INDUSTRY 
The Cornm1ttee observes that the Dcpanment has 'suffic ient structural bodies' to play the 
intended role and the only thing rcqu.red is application of functional behaviour which is 
mdispensable not only to justify the existence of structural set up but also to discharge the 
functions with a sense of purpose and pursuit to achieve the cherished objectives. 
Steel Exponers' Forum ma) really play a catalyst's role in the field of expon-promotion . 
The Ministry of Steel should expedite the process of formulating the prospective plan for the Iron 
& Steel Sector. 
The Committee, funher, hopes that all the Four Working Groups should play pro-active 
role in their respective fields i.e. marketing. infrastructure, finance. and inputs for better tomorro" 
of Indian StecllndustJ'). 
(II) TAX CONCESSION 
The Comm ittee appreciates the effons made by Ministry of Steel in observing the 
recommendation of this Committee regarding the rationalisation oflllx -structure and providing the 
level-playing field to all the plants m the steel sector. 
(111) MODERN ISATION OF STEEL PLA:'\'T 
(A) Du rgap ur Steel Plant 
The Comminee is not qu1te satisfied with the reply of Ministry of Steel and feels that time 
and cost over-run amounts to rni~management which is a loss to the national exchequer. The cost 
over run by almost (Rs.4870 .77- Rs.2667.56) =Rs.210321 crores and time over-run by almost a 
period of 5 years is a lapse of serious nature. 
It is a maner of severe grief to know that the CAG Repon on the financial irregulanl) of 
Durgapur Steel Plant which was tabled in both the Houses of Parliament in June'98 is sti ll hanging 
at the examination stage in the Ministry of Steel and it has not been possible to fix the 
'responsibility for the undesirable delay in the modernisation of the plants. The Comm111ee is 
constrained to express its displeasure over the procrastinating attitude of the Ministry ofSteol and 
fails to understand as to why the Depanment of Stee l is dithering to conduct an enquiry into the 
delay aspects. The Committee is of the considered view that it is only by conducting an enquiry 
the Ministry can absolve itself from apprehensions. This is all 
the more necessary because the functioning of the Government machinery is being questioned in 
various fora and there is a demand for down sizing Gove rnment Departments. 
(B) Rou rkela Steel Plant 
The Comminee finds the reasons for delay ira the modernisation of Rourke Ia Steel Plant as 
forwarded by the Ministry of Steel as superficial and many of the reasons acco unted for are due to 
inadequa te mon itoring, administr ative ineffic iency on the part of SAIL in particular Ministry of 
Steel in general resulting into undesirable delay causing cost escalation to the tune of Rs.2651 
17 

crores. The Committee feels that time and cost over-run might have seriously affected the 
profitab1 lity of the plant. 
The Committee feels that the Ministry should conduct an enquiry. within a time-frame' to 
fix the responsibility for the time & cost-over-run in the modernisation of the Rourkela Steel 
Plant The enquiry should not only fmd out the reasons for delay but also to fix the responsibility 
behind the delay, 
The Committee, further hopes that Reheating Furnace No.S at Hot Strip Mill would be 
modernised within the stipulated time frame i.~. March 2000 without any further cost escalation 
(C) Bokaro Steel Plant 
The Committee is happ) to observe that its recommendation 10 highlight the cogent reasons 
for time and cost-over-run in the Performance Budget has been noted for compliance h~ the 
Ministry of Steel in order to obviate the apprehension of financial irregularity and at the same tune 
strongly hopes that the reC<lmmendation noted for compliance would be put into practice "ith ouJ 
any excuse. 
(D) Bhilai Steel Plant 
The Committee observes thai the •etting of new Sinter Plant-lll in the Bhilai Steel Plant 
suffered the ill-luck of time and cost over-run i.e. the project which was to be completed in Sept'98 
is now likely to be completed by April, 2000. A glaring example of time over-run. 
The Committee feels it pcrtmcnt tO recommend that tbe Department of Steel should prevail 
upon the contractor(s) to Mls Mitsui and M/s Tia1.prom e:<port to complete the project withm the 
re' ised >!ipulated period othen' isc liquidated damages as well as the price escalation wo~ld be 
borne b) the contractors. The Committee further feels that the delay in completion of Sinter Plant­
Ill might have dAmaged the profitability of the plant during the delayed phase causing loss of 
physical & financial performance ofrhc plant and this obvious fact should be communicated to the 
contractor(s) by the Ministry. Ha\'ing the experience of DSP & RSP the Committees feels that 
cautious approach should be taken with regard to settmg up of Sinter Plant-Ill. 
(IV) REVIVAL OF STEEL PLANTIPSUS PARA' 8.o2 
(A} indian Iron and Steel Company (IlSCO) 
For a long spell of time USCO has been 10 a moribund stage but the Committee percei\c a 
ray of hope in liSCO's life due to efforts ofGovt . of India which culminated 1n10 the signing of a 
Protocol in the Fifth Session of Indo-Russian Inter-Governmental in November, 1998 whereupon 
it has been proposed to Govt. of Russia (a condition of Russian Govt. to approve TPE's offer to 
par1icipate 1r1 equity of liSCO. for its revival package) to use a pan of India-Rupee-Rouble Debt 
Fund in Escrow account as a contribution of the Russian side to thejcint venture company No" . 
when the ball is in the Govt of Russia's Court, the Govt. of India should make every effon to 
expedite the signing of the agreement .. 
In case the TPE's offer does not materialise, SAIL should take initiative to rcv1ve liSCO. 
As far as the accordance of BltR to the modernisation package of HSCO is concerned. the 
Cornmittee feels that BIFR should have no objection to a substantial and sustainable 
modernisation scheme of liSCO. As BIFR has to play a pro~onstructive role in the life of a ~ick 
18 

~ 
I 
I 
l 
company. sooner the modernisation package starts in the life of liSCO the bcncr it would be 
for its sustainability. otherv. ise the plant is alrea dy heading towards a point of no return 
(B) Rashtr iya lspat Nigam Ltd, (RINL) 
The Committee e>.presscs its pleasure that the Government has approved a Second Capttal 
restructuring convening Rs.l333.47 crore of Govt. loans into preferential share capital as an 
inter im meas ure but at the same time the Conunin ce desires that the Govt. should expedite 
the inter-ministerial consideration of the compre hen sive turnaround strategy. submitted b)' RI'IL 
so that the said comprehensive turnaround strategy may be put in to operation without funhcr 
delay. 
(C) Sponge Iron India Limited (SilL) 
The Comm1ttcc feels that the Ministry of Steel 1~ not bankmg on a sound decision '"th 
regard to S£JL. O n the one hand the Min istry tlf Stee l is egg ing with the idea thllt it is not prudent 
to allow fun her invc~t men t oil Spo nge Iron Plant in view of its extremely adverse financial 
situation "hich is the result of dull market for Sponge Iron and on the other hand an out Ia~ of 
Rs.26 .qO crores has been prov1dcd 10 BE 1999-2000. out of which Budgetary suppon i:, R,.I.OO 
c rores for its proposed sche me of expan sron of its installed capacity fro m 60.000 tonncs to 
1.20.000 tormes while the Mini~try of Stee l has advi~ed SliL management against the vc r ~ 
e'pansron ~cheme. J, the Minist~ of Steel not in doldrums? If the Depanmcnt of Steel find• the 
necess1t~ of an alternative package of relief from Government and other sources to make the 
SilL's opera tion fina ncia lly viab le on a long term basis it shou ld prcviiil upon the ~ Il L's 
mana!(crnent and impress upon the Government for alt emativ~ RelidPnckage . 
(D) Hindu~tan Steel Constructio n Ltd.(HSCL) 
I he Com mittee feels thai the repl)' of the Govt. bears the lack of truth on its face \a lue as 
the HSCL management is failing badl) in obtaining e'en the required Je,el of \\Ork order from 
Steel and non-steel sectors for the survi\al of HSCL. Year after years has elapsed but 
HSCL is mee ting the same dwindlrng fate and wo rkers are the worst victim of the situation "hich 
'"beyond their reach. 
rhc Committee funher opines tbat what HSCJ requires is nt>t on I) introspection but also 
prospect ive overhauling includ ing infusion of fresh funds. T he Committee rciter<Jtcs its 
earlier recommendation of nttionali>ation of man power and funher recommend> for manag~rial 
rc,oluuon and management overhauling for the benermcnt ofiiSCL 
(E) Bharat Rcfactorics Ltd. (RRL) 
The Comm1ttcc appreciate> that the attitude of Ministf) of 'it~cl to\\ards BRL i> po"ti\ ~ 
but at the same hme feels that onl:r having a posiuve attrtud~ is not S('lll& to he lp BRL bul i1 timely 
step in the rignt direc tion is the need of the h our t o help BRL to recover und survi ve. rhe 
Com mittee feels that the Ministl') of Steel should exped ite the process of transforming the 
propos~ I. \\hich is presently under the consideration of the Go,ernment into a viable action plan. 
19 

(f) Birsa Stone Lim e Com pa n)· Ltd. {BSLC ) 
The Committee feels that \iinistry of Stee l is not paying due attention for the revival of 
Bird Group of Companies, except the reluctant attempt of rationalisation of BSLC's manpower 
through VRS and maximising off take of its main product i.e. dolomite by SAil 
The Committee further recommends that all viable efforts should be tmmediately initiated 
to tum BSLC into a net profit-making company. 
M SETTI NG UP OF GALVANISING COMPLEX L"' N.E;. REGI ON 
The Commmee w1~hes to highlight th:tt dc\elopment of backward regton through 
industrialisation is a matter of national polic) and priort!) and in the context the PrOJeCt of the 
Hot Dip Galvanisrng unu at Dagaon, Assam is welcome step to achieve cherished goal The 
development of the bac~ground region is a pre..c;onditton for the balanced and rapid gr0\\1h and 
de,elopment of national ecooom). 
Any dela) in the Project of galavanistng complel\ for the Nonh...:ast region "ill not on!~ 
damage the regional progress but also the national O\erall economic development And th<' 
commonee rcpc> that the Depanment of steel would play the path-breakrng roli" in thi, regard 
lllc Comm111ec hof!<.-s that the State Government should not hesitate to gl\c certain 
linanc oal ince ntive like sales-ta;x exemption and so. A fe" concession and financial inccntl\e at 
the present state "oold fetch a lot of re\ enue in the times to come. 
(VI) COKJ'iG COAL. SETTJ!'iG LP OF WASHERIES, A."'TI-DU:I-JPJNG ~1 EASLRF.S 
\:'>0 RESEARCH & OEVELOPME~T. PARA-10 
(A) Co kin~ Coal 
The Committee notes SAIL's problem in undertakmg mega projects of explorator) and 
developments. natu re due to linanc1al constraints. Mining operatton is u~elf a capital-nucn~we 
dCii' it) and minong of deep <cated blocks requtres even larger amount of capital It is a fac1 
Howe,er. in this r~g;~rd the Mioislr) of steel ma~ intcn>i~ to de\elop such technolog) 
"hich rna) lead to cost enecti\e mining operation of deep seated coal blocl.s . The u'c: •I 
ind1genous coal. in the long run. if the mining operation of high qualtl) coal 1s through 
tcchrwlog) intensi\e measure \\Ould reduce the dcpcndc:nc> of steel plants on the import of co"l 
and henceforth "ould lead to cost· reduction . 
(B) Setting up of Washeries 
The Committi"C is happy to note that CIL has commissioned 2 new coal \\asheries i.e. Kcd1a 
in CCL for medtum co~ing coal and Madhuband in BCCLL for Prime coking co~l which " •ul 
help steel plants dependence in imported coal 
The Committee extent its be~t wishes for setting up of ne\\ experimental \\;lshcrics for 
benelit> fo• Lo" \ olatik \1edlum Cokmg Coal (LVMC) "hich "ould abo though Pan I~ reduce 
the depende nce ou imp<)ncd coking coal. 
20 

( 
I 
I 
(C) Anti-Dumping Meas ures 
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry of Steel in the matter. 
(D) Research And Developme nt 
The Committee is glad to note the efforts made by the Ministry of Steel in the field of 
Research and Development. A massive R&D activity would provide techno-economic advantage 
to Steel Industry which will result into cost-effective production of Steel items. Increase in the 
cost of production has been one of the most mind-boggling ·problem faced by Steel-industry . H•gh 
cost of production pulls Indian Steel Industry to a disadvantageous stage vi.s-a- vis mtemational 
major steel-producers So each R&D Mission involving .the desirable degree of intellectual 
honesty would make Indian Steel Industry internationally much more competitive. 
The Committee hopes that the proclaimed R&D Mission would encourage in-house· 
technology experiment so that indigenous upgradation of technology may take place. 
21 

MINUTES 
•. 
{1 
r 

~ 
1 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at3 .00 PM. on Tuesday, the II"' January, 2000 in Room No. l39, Fi,_t Floor. Parliament House Anne:o.e. New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Raghavji - Chlllrntan 
RAJYA SABHA 
.., Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
' ~ . Shri Santosh 83grodia 
4. Shri Suresh A. Keswani 
5. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
6. Shri Jibon Roy 
7. Shri Somappa R. Bomrnai 
8. Srnt.. Saroj Dubey 
9. Shri Nagendra Nnth Ojha 
10. Shri Sanjay Noruparn 
II. Shri Bhagaban Majhi 
LOK SABHA 
12. Shri Chunnilal Thakur 
13. Shri Ramanand Smgh 
14. Shri R. Basanagouda Patil 
15. Shri Anant Nayal.. 
16. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
17 Shri A. Narendra 
I 8. Shn uttarnarao Deorao Patil 
19. Shri K.P. Singh Deo 
20. Srnt Rcnuka Chowdhury 
21 . Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
22. Shri P. Rajendran 
..,, 
... J .. Shri B.S. Ramaiah 
24. Shri M. Rajaiah 
25. Kunwar Snrv Raj Singh 
26, Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe 

SEC RETARIAT 
Shr1 Satish Kumar. Additional Secretary 
Shn Tapas Das Gupta. D1rcctor 
Shri P.C Pail-ray. Under Secretary 
Shri M.R. Verma, Committee Officer 
The Chairman welcomed the newly nominated members of the Committee and requested 
them to introduce themselves. 
~ • • • The Committee also decided to take up the process of adoption and 
Presentation of the Report on the Action Taken Notes on the Comminee's 23,. Report on the 
Demands for Grants ( 1998-99) pertaming to the Depanment of SteeL 
3 
4. 
5 
• 
• 
• 
• • 
• • 
• • 
6. The Committee decided to meet at 3.00 r M on Thursday, the 27h. January, 2000. to 
• • • •consider and adopt • • • • Report on 
Actiou Note on Demands for GrantS ( 1998-99) pertaining to the Department of SteeL 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 P.M. 
... Rdatcs to other m3ttc::rs 
26 
• 
the 

n 
SECOND Ml:ET ING 
The Commirtee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 27'1' January, 2000 in Comm111ce Room 
' B', Ground Floor. Parliament House Annexc, New Delhi 
PRESENT 
I. Sh1·i Raghavji - Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki 
3 Shn Khan Ghufran lahidi 
4 Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
5 Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
6. Shri J ibon Roy 
7. Shri Somappa R. Bommai 
8. Smt. Saroj Dubey 
9. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
10. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha 
LOK SABHA 
II Shri Pon Radhakrishnan 
12 Shri Chunnilal Thakur 
13. Shri Ramanand Singh 
14 Shn R. Basanagouda Patil 
15 Shn G. Mallikarjunappa 
16. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
17 Shn Anant Nayak 
18 Shn Ram Singh Kaswan 
19 Shri A. Narendra 
20. Shri A.C. Jose 
21. Shri Urtamarao Deorao Patil 
22. Shri K.P. Singh Dco 
23. Shri Thomas Hansda 
24 Shn !\'epa! Chandra Das 
25. Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
26 Shri Sunil Khan 
27 Shri 1'. Rajendran 
28 Shri B. B. Ramaiah 
29. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
30. Shri Man jay La! 
31. Shri Anant Mahadcoappa Gudhc 
32. Shri Ram Sajivan 
33. Shri Nagmani 
34. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
27 

35. Shri Rizwan Zaheer 
36. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
SEC RETAR IAT 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P.C Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri M.R. Verma. Committee Officer 
The Chairman welcomed and best wishes to the Members on the Golde n Jubilee of 
Republic Day. The Chairman also welcomed those Memb~rs who could not attend the 
introductory meeting held on the January, 2000 and also Shri Rizwan Zaheer. M.P. and Shri K.H. 
Muniyappa, M P. \\ho were nom mated as Members of the Commonee . 
2. • • • 
3. T hereafter, the Committee took up the consideration of Draft Report on the Report of the 
Committee. Taken Note of Ministry of Steel on ~he 2J'd Report of the commince changing 
suggested by some Members in respect of the recommendations of liSCO and HSC were 
incorporated in the Report and the report was adopted for presentation in the ensuing Budget 
Session. 
·1. • • • 
5. • • • 
6. • • • 
7. The Comminee then adjourned at 3.45 P.M. 
• •• R.;hu..:-s tCl oth"r mnucrs 
28 
MG I P(PLU)MAN~5385As-5.3.2002. 