Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON INDUSTRY
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th December , )28 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th December , )28 2018
Action taken on the 287th Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants (2018-19) Pertaining to the Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Public Enterprises)
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FIRST REPORT
December, 2018/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED NINETY-FIRST REPORT
Action taken on the 287th Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants (2018-19) Pertaining to the Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Public Enterprises)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28th December , 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th December , 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-9
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Ministry............................. .............................................................. 2-3
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not
desire to pursue further in view of the Government’s replies................ 4
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Ministry and
desires the Ministry to review their replies......................................... 5-7
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee
desire further comments of the Ministr y............................................ 8-9
4. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 11-14

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Date of Constituted on 1st September, 2018)
1. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh  —    Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar
3. Shri Ram Narain Dudi
4. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
5. Shri Shwait Malik
6. Shri Sanjay Seth
7. Shri Amar Singh
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva
9. Shri T. G. Venkatesh
10. Dr. Amee Yajnik
LOK  SABHA
11. Shrimati Ranjanben Dhananjay Bhatt
12. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary
13. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi
14. Shri S. P. Muddahanume Gowda
15. Shri G. Hari
16. Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh
17. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena
18. Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
19. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
20. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao (Avanthi)
21. Shri Ramsinh Pataliyabhai Rathwa
22. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy
23. Shri Raj Kumar Saini
24. Shri Rajveer (Raju Bhaiya) Singh
25. Shri Rameswar Teli
26. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
27. Shrimati Dev (Moon Moon Sen) Varma
28. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare
*29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. V acant
(i)
*Vacancy due to demise of Shri Asrarul Haque Mohammad on 7th December, 2018.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Smt. Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J. K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja V ., Deputy Secretary
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Deputy Secretary
Shri Ajin. J. R., Under Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Divender Singh Bisht, Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having
been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred and Ninety-First Report on Action
Taken Notes furnished by the Department or Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises) on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Eighty-Seventh Report
on the Demands For Grants (2018-19) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises.
2. I, thank the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises)
for furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred
and Eighty-Seventh Report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 21
st December, 2018 considered and adopted the report.
RAM CHANDRA PRASAD SINGH
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
21st December , 2018 Department-related Parliamentary
Agrahayana  30, 1940 ( Saka) Standing Committee on Industry
Rajya Sabha
(iii)

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) on the recommendations contained
in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Eighty-Seventh Report on the Demands for Grants (2018-19)
pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Public Enterprises) in respect of the recommendations contained in the 287 th Report.
These have been categorized as follows:
Chapter I : The recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
The Committee notes that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as mentioned
in the Chapter - I of the Report.
Chapter II : The recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue further
in view of the Government’s replies.
In respect of these recommendations, the Committee is convinced with the logic and
explanation advanced by the Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue them further
for the present.
Chapter III : The recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted
replies of the Ministry and desires the Ministry to review their replies.
The Committee is not convinced with the replies of the Ministry in respect of
recommendations contained in Chapter - III and desires that the Ministry in the light of
further recommendations/observations of the Committee furnish comments/explanations
thereof.
Chapter IV : The recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee desires further
comments of the Ministry.
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished
the interim replies, therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish Action
Taken Notes in respect of recommendations categoried in Chapter-IV in detail and to the
point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
3. The details of the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry and further recommendations/observations
of the Committee thereon wherever found necessary are given in the succeeding pages.

CHAPTER -I
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee notes that compared to the year 20 I 6-17, wherein OPE got a scheme allocation
(BE) of ` 10 crore, for the next two years, i.e, in 2017-18 and 2018-19, the Department got lesser funds
for its schemes. But at the RE stage during 2016-17, funds were reduced to ` 7.24 crore owing to lack of
desired pace of expenditure, adoption of alternative system of MOU and lesser number of Voluntary
Retirement Scheme (VRS) optees in the NER under the CRR Scheme. Further, the Committee finds that
during 2016-17 the Department could only utilize ` 6.72 crore out of the already depleted RE allocation.
Coming to 2017- 18, the Committee finds that the funds for schemes of DPE was only to the tune of
` 8 crore which was slightly reduced to ` 7.67 crore at RE. The Actual Expenditure for the year as on
15.01.2018 is ` 7.29 crore which is almost all of the RE allocated for 2017-18. However, in this regard,
the committee observes that the Department has not furnished the reasons for the reduction of funds at
RE stage for 2017-18. But the Committee presumes that the lack of V oluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS)
optees in the NER under the CRR Scheme continues to be one of the reasons. Taking into account the
above the Committee appreciates the almost cent percent funds utilization achieved by DPE during
2017-18 and recommends that the Department should take measures to maintain such performance during
2018-19 also with regard to their schemes. (Para 15)
Action Taken
The Observations of the Committee have been taken note of and DPE will make all efforts for
maximum utilization of allocated funds.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee has examined the BE, RE and AE figures of the RDC scheme during the last two
years and the current year. It finds that other than in 2017-18, the two previous years. i.e., 2015-16 and
2016- I 7 saw slashing of Budget Expenditure for the scheme at Revised Estimate stage. The utilization
figure for 2015-16 and 2016-17 were almost 73% and about 93.5%, respectively. The Committee observes
that the reduction of funds at Revised Estimate (RE) stage during the previous two years has not happened
during 2017-18 and the fund utilization is about 88.60%till the second week of January, 2018. Considering
these facts, the Committee is of the opinion that the Department has been able to utilize its fund somewhat
consistently and in an equitable fashion. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that DPE should continue
to strive to shore up its activities under the RDC scheme during 2018-19 as well put in place a better
implementation plan and pace of fund utilization for future. (Para 30)
Action Taken
The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance during 2018-19) & future for
planned and shored up utilization of funds under RDC Scheme.
Recommendation/Observation
Further, the Committee is aware of the fact that the programmes conducted under the ambit of the
ROC Scheme by OPE can go a long way in positively impacting the performance of CPSEs. The orientation
2

3
session conducted for members appointed as non-official Directors as well as Government Directors of
CPSEs is one example in this regard. The Committee is sure that such moves would aid in the
professionalization of the Boards of the CPSEs concerned as well. (Para 31)
Action Taken
The observation of the Committee would continue to be followed in future by DPE.
Recommendation/Observation
As the Committee analyzed the CAPEX target and the corresponding achievement by various CPSEs,
it is found that the major leveraging of CAPEX has been done by the OIL Sector PSUs, the National
Highway Authority of India (NHAI) and Power Generation and Distribution Companies. Oil and Natural
Gas Corporation CONGC) topped the performance by achieving a target of 218.88%. The Committee
observes that such investment of capital in building the infrastructure of country will have multiplier
effect on the growth of the economy. It also observes that DPE is effectively playing their role by encouraging
CPSEs to pledge more CAPEX by making the same a MoU evaluation parameter . In this regard, the
Committee is of the opinion that the relevance of CPSEs, in the market driven economy with overwhelming
private party presence, is highlighted by the fact that when the private sector were skeptical of such
investment, it was the CPSEs whom met the need of the hour of nation building by pooling in CAPEX for
infrastructure development during the recent past. (Para 34)
Action Taken
The Observation of the Committee have been noted.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee recommends that DPE may use its good offices to sensitize CPSEs to invest their
CSR funds on activities that are gainful to the society. (Para 43)
Action Taken
The recommendation made by DRPSC has been noted. OPE has been constantly sensitizing CPSE
executives in the workshops/conclaves organized by OPE to invest their CSR funds on the assets/ activities
that arc gainful to the society as per Schedule VIJ of the Companies Act, 2013.

CHAPTER-II
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE FURTHER IN VIEW OF THE GOVEMMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation/Observation
Meanwhile, the’ Committee wants to point out that DPE has failed to furnish the reasons quoted by
the Ministry of Finance for not allocating the complete funds ( ` 10.35 crore) sought by the Department
for their schemes during 2018-19. The BE allocated to the Department for the purpose is a lesser amount
of ` 8.50 crore. The said reasons must be furnished to the Committee and it should be specified if it is
anything other than the routine apportioning of the available funds by the Ministry of Finance in the best
possible way. (Para 16)
Action Taken
The BE allocation comes under the jurisdiction of Ministry of Finance. DPE has no reason to offer
on this issue other than that it could be on account of routine apportioning of the available funds by
Ministry of Finance as per their own assessment.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee find that as the nodal Department of all CPSE, the guidelines issued by DPE
governs important aspects of CPSEs like disposal of movable and immovable assets of CPSEs identified
for closure, revival/restructuring of CPSEs, etc. in this regard, the Committee observes that CPSEs that
are approved for closure, even before the issue of the OPE guidelines on disposal of assets, have also
decided to follow the proposed revised guidelines. Here, the Committee also acknowledges the fact that
the said guidelines of the Department are currently under the consideration of Cabinet Secretariat for
approval of the revision suggested by Committee on Secretaries. The Committee desire that once the
revised guidelines on time bound closure of the sick/loss making CPSEs and disposal of movable and
immovable assets are finalized, the Committee may be apprised of the same. (Para 39)
Action Taken
The Committee will be apprised once, the revised guidelines on time bound closure of sick/loss
making CPSEs and disposal of movable and immovable assets are finalised and approved by the competent
authority.
The revised guidelines on time bound closure of sick/loss making CPSEs and disposal of movable
and immovable assets duly approved by the Cabinet has been submitted to the Committee on 22nd
June, 2018.
4

CHAPTER-III
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS
NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY AND DESIRES THE MINISTRY TO
REVIEW THEIR REPLIES
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee is aware that the realm of CPSEs has recently under gone major changes, especially,
since the Government has decided to restrict itself only to a few selected priority areas of business. Even
the CPSEs that are profitable, but not belonging to specified areas of business, are being disinvested. In
this scenario, the Committee is of the considered opinion that the CPSEs that would remain in operation,
after hiving off of the earlier said non-priority companies, would need clear guidance regarding efficient
functioning and other inputs required to sustain themselves successfully. Here, the Committee takes note
that the mandate of DPE includes the following:
‘Measures aimed at improving performance of Central Public Sector Enterprises and other capacity
building initiatives of Public Sector Enterprises.
Rendering advice relating to revival, restructuring or closure of Public Sector Enterprises including
the mechanisms therefor.”
In the opinion of the Committee, the above mentioned mandates of DPE under the Allocation of
Business Rules, entails DPE to be empowered to play a more proactive role than their current profile.
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that DPE should widen the horizon of its activities, under the
said ambit, to support and facilitate the revival! efficient functioning of CPSEs in future. To achieve
this, the Committee feels that DPE has to think beyond their current set of activities, for which they can
be well endowed with as per the business allocated to them, to actually play the role expected of a nodal
department. (Para 9)
Action Taken
As far as Department of Public Enterprises is concerned, it has issued guidelines on 29.10.2015 for
streamlining the mechanism for revival and restructuring of sick/incipient sick and weak CPSEs. These
guidelines contain provisions for taking pro-active measures for ensuring efficient functioning of the
CPSEs. These guidelines are implemented by the administrative Ministries/Departments.
In respect of proposals for revival/restructuring formulated by the administrative Ministries/
Departments, DPE gives its comments/views/suggestions, if the proposals are referred to it during inter-
ministerial consultation process.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee is constrained to point out that the reply of the Government has completely
missed the essence of the recommendation of the Committee which was for the Department of
Public Enterprises (DPE) to playa m o rc proactive role than what they currently essay. It was also
brought out in the recommendation why this WaS needed and how it could be done.
The Committee’s opinion was that in the background of the Government’s policy to continue
with only priority sector CPSEs, DPE should widen its horizon of activities to come up with more
5

6
effective and intuitive measures to guide the CPSEs (that operate in the said priority areas identified
by the Government) for their successful performance. In the absence of such support and guidance
for their efficient functioning, from the DPE, the Committee apprehends that these CPSEs which
have been identified by the Government under selected priority areas of business, would also be
ordained to meet a similar adversarial fate as their brethren CPSEs belonging to non-priority
areas of business. However, the reply of the Government completely missed this point and has
concentrated on the role of DPE on the revival/restructuring of CPSEs. The recommendation was
for DPE to think out of the box and to contribute proactively by utilizing the leverage available
for this under the current Allocation of Business for DPE. The Committee hence reiterates its
recommendation and wants a cogent reply in this regard.
Recommendation/Observation
With regard to disposal of land and other assets of CPSEs, the Committee recommends that DPE
being the nodal Department of all CPSEs should collect from the respective administrative Ministries/
Departments the relevant data and compile and maintain the same with them. (Para 40)
Action Taken
As per guidelines issued by DPE on 7.9.2016, CPSEs under closure in consultation with
administrative Ministry shall dispose of their assets (movable and immovable). The details of such disposal
will be available with the administrative Ministry.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee while noting the Government’s reply impress upon the DPE to collect the
details of the land and other assets of CPSEs as and when the same are disposed of by the respective
Administrative Ministry/Department and inform the Committee of such details.
Recommendation/Observation
Further , the Committee takes note of the information submitted by DPE as collected by them
from DIP AM about the strategic disinvestment of CPSEs and the proceeds that accrue to the Government
exchequer from sale/disinvestment of CPSES. It is found that receipts from disinvestment during 2017- 18
is expected to be around 
` 1,00,000 crore while an amount of ` 80,000 crore is supposed to accrue to
Government during 2018-19. The Committee is aware that the Government has decided to engage in
business only in a few selected areas of ‘High Priority’. However, the Committee is of the firm opinion
that while making a decision to disinvest CPSEs especially those are profit making, the Government
should give due consideration to the jobs that are supported by those CPSEs, the track record of their
contribution to the national economy, their CAPEX creation potential and also their role in balancing
the social/regional fabric. Regarding the revival/restructuring/modernization of CPSEs, the Committee
observes that timely approval of these plans, with accurate cost estimates, availability of funds with
the Government and the timely disposal of such finds are crucial factors. Accordingly, the Committee
recommends that a defined portion of the proceeds from disinvestment should be kept aside by the
Government for funding the revival/restructuring/modernization proposals of CPSEs as identified
approved by the Government. In this manner, the Government can extend a hand holding to the select
sick CPSES that have the potential to turn around and sustain itself in future.
(Para 41)

7
Action Taken
As the subject matter concerns to Department of Investment and Public Asset Management and
Department of Economic Affairs, DPE had requested them to provide information. DIAPM has replied as
under:
DIPAM has noted the recommendation of the Committee and stated that at present the receipts
from the disinvestment are credited to the National Investment Fund (NIF) and used for the following
approved purposes:
(i) Subscribing to the shares being issued by the CPSEs including PSBs and Public Sector Insurance
Companies on rights basis so as to ensure that 51% ownership of the Government in those
CPSEs /PSBs /Insurance Companies, is not diluted.
(ii) Preferential allotment of shares of the CPSE to promoters as per SEBI (Issue of Capital and
Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2009 so that Government shareholding does not go
down below 51 % in all cases where the CPSE is going to raise fresh equity to meet its Capex
programme.
(iii) Recapitalization of public sector banks and public sector insurance companies.
(iv) Investment by Government in RRBs/IIFCL/NABARD/Exim Bank;
(v) Equity infusion in various Metro projects;
(vi) Investment in Bhartiya Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Limited and Uranium Corporation of India
Ltd., and
(vii) Investment in Indian Railways towards capital expenditure.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee finds that the reply of the Government (Department of Investment and
Public Asset Management) narrates only the manner in which the receipts from disinvestment
are currently used through the National Investment Fund (NIF). The Committee is of the view
that it does not reflect any ostensible use of these receipts. The existing system, the Committee
feels is unfair towards CPSEs that have contributed to nation building at the times of requirement.
Accordingly, the Committee reiterates its recommendation that a defined portion of the proceeds
from disinvestment of CPSEs should be kept aside for funding of the revival/restructuring/
modernization proposals of CPSEs.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE DESIRE
FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee finds that there is a mismatch between the reflection of fund utilization of Schemes
in NER as reflected in the Demands (No. 45) Document relating to the Department and the figures for the
same as submitted by the Department to the Committee. In this regard, the Committee takes into account
the explanation given by the Department that from 2014-15 onwards allocation of funds in the NER was
only made under grant-in-aid. However, the Committee also finds it very unrealistic that a ‘Nil’  fund
utilization against NER in the Demands Document for the years 2015-2016 and 2016-17 has been shown
as ‘fully utilized’  by the Department in reply to a query by the Committee. The Committee wonders as to
how such gross misinterpretation of figures could take place and finds itself in a quandary as to which of
the figures ref1ecting the actual spending is to be taken as correct and genuine. The Committee accordingly,
recommends that the Department should rectify such misrepresentation of Budget figures in their Demands
Document. (Para 20)
Action Taken
The utilization of funds against allocated amount in NER during 2015-16 and 2016-17 is not reflected
in Demand of Grants document (No. 45) relating to Department of Public Enterprises (OPE). This is
because of the fact that allocation as shown against NER in DDG is ‘Parking Head’. Against this allocation,
re-appropriation from ‘Parking Head’ to ‘Functional Head’ is required to be done for incurring expenditure,
as per laid down procedure. Accordingly, funds for the amount of ` 0.51 crore and ` 0.72 crore after re-
appropriation under Functional Head has been utilized in NER in 2015-16 and 2016-17 and this has not
been ref1ected in DDG (Demand No. 45), being the Parking Head. The observation of the Committee has
also been taken note of by the Department.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee finds, as witnessed during the preceding years, the funds allocated to CRR at
the BE stage were reduced during RE for the year 2017-18 also. But the utilization of the RE amount
looks better during 2017-18 compared to 2016-17. The Department has been constantly taking the
plea that the lack of VRS optees under the scheme in the NER is the reason for incomplete utilization
of funds and the consequent surrender of funds to Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources of NER
for the year 2016-17.further, the Committee observes that although the targeted number of persons
are more or less getting trained under the scheme, and as such there is near total achievement in the
training sector, however , their redeployment hovers around 51 to 52%, only. In this regard, the Committee
is of the opinion that by utilizing the domain expertise of NSDC, The Department should further
enhance the redeployment of persons trained under the scheme for gainful employment. For this,
focused identification of the market demand for specific skills is required and training should be
conducted to cater to such requirement. In the Committee’ s opinion, considering the fact that the
VRS optees trained under the scheme are already skilled in a given profession, channelizing their
acquired skills to help find new avenues of employment wouldn’t be that difficult. Taking the above
facts into account, the Committee recommends that DPE should take steps to improve redeployment
8

9
of VRS optees trained under CRR scheme and the feedback that could be available through the
ongoing third party evaluation of the scheme, should be made use of for the purpose.
(Para 25)
Action Taken
As per Project Completion Report submitted by NSDC for the year 2016-17 redeployment during
the year stood at 56%. This includes both VRS/VSS optees as well as dependents. With inclusion of
dependents redeployment rate has improved.
Undertaking CRR training in association with NSDC following National Skill Qualification Framework
(NSQF) as per National Occupational Standard (NOS) is likely to have higher redeployment rate. The
observations of the Committee were also brought to the notice of NSDC in the meeting held with Ministry
of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship and NSDC at DPE on 21.05.2018

MINUTES

13
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 21st December, 2018 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sanjay Seth
3. Shri Tiruchi Siva
4. Shri T. G. Venkatesh
5. Dr. Amee Yajnik
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary
7. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
8. Shri Ramsinh Pataliyabhai Rathwa
9. Shri Raj Kumar Saini
10. Shri Rameswar Teli
11. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
12. Shrimati Dev (Moon Moon Sen) V arma
13. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J. K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja V ., Deputy Secretary
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Deputy Secretary
Shri Ajin. J. R., Under Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Divender Singh Bisht, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting.
The Committee, then, took up for consideration and adoption the draft 291st, 292nd, and 293rd Action
Taken Reports of the Committee based on the replies provided by the Ministry/Department to the
recommendations of the Committee as contained in its 287th, 286th and 288th Reports on Demand for
Grants (2018-19) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises, Department of Heavy Industry and Ministry
of MSME, respectively. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted the draft 291st, 292nd, and 293rd
Reports without any change.

14
2. The Committee decided to present the Reports in both the Houses of Parliament on the 28 th December,
2018 and accordingly, authorised the Chairman of the Committee to decide the names of the Members who
would present the Reports in both the Houses of  Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned at 10.25 A.M.