 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2013/Ashadha, 1935 (Saka) 
REPORT NO.  
   2 51  
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY ONE REPORT 
ON 
IMPLEMENTATION OF PRIME MINISTER’S 
EMPLOYMENT GENERATION PROGRAMME (PMEGP)  
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
      
 (PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23.07.2013)  
  (FORWARDED TO THE HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 06.08.2013) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 06.08.2013 ) 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2013/Ashadha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY ONE REPORT  
ON 
IMPLEMENTATION OF PRIME MINISTER’S 
EMPLOYMENT GENERATION PROGRAMME (PMEGP)  
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23.07.2013)  
  (FORWARDED TO THE HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 06.08.2013) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 06.08.2013 ) 
 

 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
                                                                                                             
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………………  ( i ) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………   (ii) 
 
3. REPORT ……………………………………………………………………………    
 
4. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A  
    GLANCE…………………………………………………………………………… 
 
5. MINUTES………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
           (CONSTITUTED  W.E.F.  31 ST   AUGUST,  2012) 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
1.   Shri Tiruchi Siva   — Chairman  
2. Shri Narendra Budania 
3.   Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
4.   Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
5.   Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor 
6.   Shri Basawaraj Patil 
7.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
8.   Shri Vivek Gupta 
9.   Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna 
10. Shri M.P. Achuthan   
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.   Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14. Smt. Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
16. Shri Hassan Khan 
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
18. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod 
19. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
20. Shri Somen Mitra 
21. Shri P.R. Natrajan 
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi  
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
28. Ch. Lal Singh 
29. Shri Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
30. Shri E.G. Sugavanam  
31. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.      Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3.      Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
(i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamen tary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Fifty One Report on Prime Minister Employment G eneration Programme (PMEGP) 
pertaining to Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 
2.  The Committee heard the representatives of Mini stry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises, Ministry of Finance, select Pub lic Sector Banks in Delhi and State 
Governments during its study visits.  
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on 22 
nd  July,2013 considered and adopted the 
report. 
 
 
 
 
 
TIRUCHI SIVA        
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
New Delhi,  
July, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Report  
 
“The role of the M/o MSME and its organizations is to assist the States in their effort to 
encourage entrepreneurship, employment and livelihood opportunities and enhance the 
competitiveness of MSMEs in the changed economic scenario” 
Annual Report(2012-13)of Ministry of MSME  
 
               Prime Minister’s Employment Generati on Programme (PMEGP) is an important 
instrument for achieving the aforesaid objective. T he Scheme was launched in 2008-09 after 
merging Prime Minister Rojgar Yojna (PMRY) and Rura l Employment Generation Scheme 
(REGP). The aim of the scheme is to create entrepre neurs in rural as well as urban areas by 
providing sustained self employment opportunities. It is achieved by providing 15%-35% 
Margin Money subsidy to the unemployed youth   for setting up projects in non-farm sector,   
There is a strong component of training and skill d evelopment which is built in the 
scheme.  The scheme focuses on the micro enterprise s. 
 
2.        Any individual above the 18 years of age and with education qualification of 8th 
standard, can avail of opportunities under  this scheme for setting up a new manufacturing unit 
of maximum investment of Rs. 25 lakhs and business/service enterprise with investment of Rs. 
10 lakhs. Per capita investment has been stipulated  at Rs 1 lakh and Rs. 1.5 lakh for hilly 
areas.  Self-help groups and production-based Coope rative societies too can avail of the 
benefits under the scheme provided they have not av ailed benefit under any other such 
scheme.  Under the scheme the beneficiary is requir ed to bring 10% of the cost as his/her 
contribution whereas the banks provide finance for remaining 90% of the investment.  In case 
of ST/SC/OBC/minorities/women/ex-servicemen, physically challenged/ and those from NER 
and border areas, the beneficiaries contribution is  only 5%.    In addition to the financial 
assistance, the scheme provides for entrepreneurshi p development training to the beneficiaries 
whose projects have been sanctioned. As per PMEGP guidelines, once project is sanctioned by 
Bank, before releasing the second instalment of loa n, beneficiary is required to undergo a two 
week Entrepreneurship Development Programme arrange d by KVIC through its accredited 
institutions.   
 

3.       Annual Budgetary allocation under the sche me is devolved to States based on a formula 
wherein rural population of the State, backwardness  of the State, Urban unemployment and 
past performance are taken into account. The Commit tee was also informed that based on 
SC/ST Sub plan communicated by the Ministry, KVIC h as worked out targets State-wise for 
SC and ST beneficiaries proportionate to existing population of these categories for 2013-14. 
 
4.       Annual allocation of margin money subsidy is released in two instalments of 50% each. 
The first instalment is released when the State has  used at least 50% of the allocation of 
previous year. And the second instalment is release d after 50% of the current year’s release is 
utilized. The release is made by the Ministry to KV IC which further devolves the fund to 
concerned State’s nodal bank branches. The applican t can submit application with KVIC, 
KVIB, District Industries Centers (DIC) or Banks, w hich is forwarded to District Level Task 
Force (DLTF) headed by District Magistrate. The DLT F has 10 members including the 
representatives of District Industries Center and L ead Bank. It was informed that the DLTF 
also has representation of urban local bodies and three panchayat representatives nominated by 
the District Magistrate/Deputy Commissioner. Of the  three Panchayat members one should be 
SC/ST and another should be woman. The Task Force a fter conducting screening and 
interview, forwards shortlisted applications to fin ancing bank. The financing branch further 
scrutinizes the application and sanctions the loan.  The financing branch after making first 
disbursement, submits its claim to its nodal branch . The nodal branch settles the claims and 
transfers the fund to financing branch. The financi ng branch keeps the subsidy amount in the 
name of beneficiary in his Term Deposit account, wh ich is eventually credited to the 
beneficiary’s loan account on the verification afte r two years from the date of first 
disbursement of the loan. The Committee was informe d that the Banks have been requested to 
provide margin money adjustment accounts in prescri bed format for units sanctioned during 
2008-09 and 2009-10.   
 
5.     The Committee finds that the structure of the  scheme is too complex. The 
stakeholders like KVIC, DLTF and Bankers do not coo rdinate seamlessly. The 
Committee is of the view that for efficient impleme ntation of such an important 
scheme the structure of the scheme must be simplifi ed. The Committee proposes that 
along with existing system of extending margin mone y to the entrepreneur an interest 

subvention scheme may also be considered for encour aging the youth to become self-
employed.   
6.       To give greater emphasis to the rural area s, rate of margin money subsidy for urban area 
is 15% of the project cost which is raised to 25% f or the rural areas.   
 
7.      There is a negative list of enterprises whi ch are excluded from this scheme. These are 
businesses related to production/processing or sale  of meat, intoxicant items like tobacco, 
cigarette, beedi etc., cultivation, sericulture, ho rticulture, manufacturing of polythene bangs of 
less than 20 micron or containers of recycled plast ic, rural transport, though few exceptions 
have been made for J&K, NE region and the Andaman a nd Nicobar Islands. In addition, 
trading and retail outlets have been permitted unde r PMEGP in the NE region subject to the 
condition that only 10% of the allocation made for the State, is to assigned to such projects. 
More than 450 model projects have been devised by t he KVIC for the benefit of prospective 
entrepreneurs. In addition, 150 projects have been designed by the NSIC incubation centers, 
which could be adopted by prospective entrepreneurs  for their projects.   Also the KVIC has 
accredited around 560 training centers for impartin g EDP training to the beneficiaries. 
 
8.     The KVIC is the implementing agency of PMEGP  at national level. At the State Level, 
the scheme is implemented through State Directorate s of KVIC; State Khadi and Village 
Industries Boards (KVIBs) and District Industries C entres (DIC) of State Governments at a 
ratio of 30:30:40. Regarding involvement of State K VIBs in the Scheme, it was informed that 
the KVIC assigned 30% target to respective State KV IBs. Funds under backward and forward 
linkages too are delegated to State KVIBs to organi ze exhibitions, workshops etc., .for the 
promotion of the Scheme. 
 
9.     The finance under PMEGP scheme is provided t hrough 27 Public Sector Banks, SIDBI, 
Regional Rural Banks, Cooperative Banks and Private sector Scheduled Commercial Banks, as 
approved by State Level Task Force Committee headed  by the Principal Secretary 
(Industries)/Commissioner (Industries) and the SIDB I. The Committee observed that 
Cooperative banks and Regional Rural Banks have sig nificant role in implementing this 
Scheme. They use more than 17% of the total margin money allocated under the scheme which 
is higher than any Public Sector Bank. 
 

10.  The programme is envisaged as a comprehensive scheme including backward and forward 
linkages to meet the requirements of potential entr epreneurs. It involves training,  awareness 
camps, publicity, workshops, . banker’s review meet ings and district, state and national level 
exhibitions and physical verification of the units set up, concurrent evaluations and electronic 
tracking of applications. A certain percentage of a nnual allocations for PMEGP are assigned 
for backward and forward linkages like training, publicity, marketing etc. 
11.    For improved implementation of the scheme, t he progress made under PMEGP is 
reviewed in the Ministry at regular intervals.  Reg ular review meetings by National Level 
Monitoring Committee, KVIC and others are also held.   
12.   In order to make an in-depth appraisal of the  implementation of this important scheme, 
the Committee examined the issue with different sta keholders viz. the KVIC, the State 
Governments and the Public Sector Banks during its various study tours. The Committee 
interacted with representatives of the State Govern ment of Kerala and Indian Overseas Bank, 
State Bank of Travencore, Canara Bank and Union Ban k ( February 2012) and again with 
State Bank of Mysore and State Bank of Travencore (  February 2013); State Government of 
Tamil Nadu and Indian Bank ( May 2012) and with Sta te Bank of India and Canara bank ( 
February 2013); representative of the State Governm ent of J&K and State Bank of India and 
Punjab national Bank ( June 2012), Representatives of Punjab and Sindh bank and State Bank 
of Patiala (June 2012); representatives of State Go vernment of Karnataka ,Syndicate Bank and 
Vijaya bank ( November 2012); representatives of St ate Government of Maharashtra, Bank of 
India and Bank of Baroda ( November 2012) and again  with representatives of Bank of 
Maharashtra and Central Bank of India ( July, 2013) ; representatives of State Government of 
West Bengal, UCO Bank, Allahabad Bank and United Ba nk of India ( June 2013); 
representatives of the State Government of  Nagaland and State Bank of India ( June 2013) and 
representatives of the State Government of Assam and State Bank of India ( June 2013). 
 
13.    The Committee sought to know sector-wise dis tribution of PMEGP projects. The 
Committee observed that manufacturing sector consti tuted larger component in the PMEGP 
projects. The following was placed before the Committee.  
 
                                  PMEGP - ALL INDIA % OF MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE 
 
YEAR PERCENTAGE 

Manufacturing Service Total 
2010-11     57 43 100 
2011-12     56 44 100 
 
14.   The Committee is of the view that manufacturing sec tor has greater employment 
potential, therefore it should have larger share under the Scheme. 
      15.   The Committee also sought investment-ca tegory-wise information of the PMEGP project. 
The KVIC provided the following information: 
                                            PMEGP - ALL INDIA RANGE-WISE % OF PROJECTS  
              % of Projects Range of Projects 
2010-11 2011-12 
Upto Rs.1.00 lakh   16.4   11.9 
Upto Rs.5.00 Lakhs   72.3   68.9 
Upto Rs.10.00 lakhs    86.7   82.6 
Upto Rs.25.00 lakhs    100    100 
 
   16.     The Committee observed that maximum proj ects were in the range of Rs 1lakh to Rs 5 
lakh. Also there is gradual shift towards higher end projects. 
 
   17.     The Committee also took note of the annu al performance in implementing the Scheme: 
 
                                         Year wise Performance under PMEGP 
 
          Target               Achievement YEAR 
MM 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Projects 
 MM 
(Rs.i cr.) 
No. of Projects  Achievement 
( % of MM) 
2008-09    734.80   61227   356.23   19166  48 
2009-10    559.70   46640   762.44   40918 136 
2010-11    836.00   59714   891.18   49064 107 
2011-12    800.00   57143 1057.84   55135 132 
2012-13  1238.00   53826 1080.26   57078   87 
Total 4168.50 278550 4147.95 221361 99.50 

 
18.      The Committee took note of the figures of 2012-13 as provided in the Annual 
Report of the Ministry. It is mentioned that till 3 1.12.2012, 53, 143 applications were 
recommended to the banks of which only 24,464 were sanctioned by the Banks and 
disbursement has been made only to 18,160 with marg in money assistance of Rs. 361.46 
crores. 
19.      The Committee observed that till 2011-12 d espite more than 100% utilization of 
margin money the number of projects assisted, misse d the target, whereas in 2012-13 
despite 87% utilization of margin money the achieve ment in term of projects exceeded 
the target.  This pattern of utilization is inexpli cable.  The Committee feels that the 
efficacy of this employment generation scheme shoul d be measured in terms of 
employment opportunities created and not in terms o f margin money utilized.   The 
Committee finds a distinct disjoint in utilization of funds and actual achievement of 
objectives of this scheme.   
 
20.     The Committee noted that till 31.1.13, Marg in Money of only Rs 403.35 crores 
was utilized for 20374 projects, with an achievemen t of only 33% till that date, however, 
by the end of Financial Year 2012-13, Rs. 1080.26 c rores were utilised  to finance 57078 
projects and overall utilisation was recorded at 87 %, i.e. 54% utilization in last two 
months. Significantly the annual target in terms of  project was surpassed despite lower 
utilisation of Margin Money. The Committee noted th is pattern of over spending towards 
last months of every Financial Year. In this regard , the Committee took note of the 
submission made by the Ministry that “ There is a t endency on the part of Banks to 
decide on the sanction/disbursement/settlement of c laim under PMEGP towards the end 
of financial year resulting in rush of expenditure at the fag end of the year.” 
 
21.      However, the Committee is of the opinion that such state of affairs can not be 
attributed to Banks alone. There has to be regular meetings of District Level Task 
Force as per the prescribed guidelines. Also the DL TF the DLTF should do due 
diligence while examining a proposal, so that they recommend only sound and 
viable projects and least time is wasted by the Ban ks in further scrutinizing the 
applications. The KVIC and RBI should formulate tem plates against which the 

DLTF should examine a proposal.  The Committee also noted that Banks reject 
applications approved by the DLTF. One of the major  cause of rejection is Service Area 
Norms of Banks. The Committee notes that despite KV IC’s suggestion to relax Service 
Area Norms, some Banks were in favour of retaining these norms to discourage 
unscrupulous applicants from misusing the scheme. S till, the Committee finds 
prevailing state of affairs grossly unsatisfactory,  where the KVIC has admitted that 
the number of applications exceed the annual target  and yet they are not disposed 
off within a financial year and  instead , the mone y allocated remains idle with the 
Banks. And yet, the KVIC claims to have met the tar get. The Committee recognizes 
that PMEGP has great potential for remunerative sel f employment by imparting 
skill. The Scheme will enable urban and rural unemp loyed youth to use their skills 
for earning their livelihood.  The Committee has th erefore always supported 
enhanced allocation for the PMEGP. There is however  need for greater and 
effective monitoring by the KVIC, RBI, State Govern ments and Ministry of 
Finance . 
22 .       The Committee was dismayed to note that in certain States like Tamil Nadu 
and West Bengal, no fresh applications were entertained for a year, in order to clear 
the backlog of applications pending from previous y ears.  Such instances constitute 
the  violation of mandate and intent of this Scheme .  The Committee feels that there 
should not be any embargo on submitting the applica tions, which should be 
accepted throughout the year. The DLTFs should regularly meet at least once in two 
months to examine and approve the cases. The object ive should be to expand the 
coverage of this Scheme and intent of this Scheme m ust not be diluted due to 
procedural nuances. 
 
23.   The Committee also noted that in order to avo id such year-end rush, the KVIC has 
formulated 100 days schedule for disposal of applic ations, which is as follows: 
 
           •Time limit of maximum 30 days for forwa rding applications to banks from date 
of receipt by implementing agency through DTFC. 
          •Time limit of maximum 30 days for sancti oning of PMEGP loan by banks from 
date of receipt at Financing bank. 
         •Time limit of maximum 30 days for disbursement of loan from the date of sanction 
by banks. 

         •   The above requisite formalities and re quirement should be completed so that the 
project can commence within a period of 90-100 days 
 
24 .   The Committee however, observes that the above time-line is seldom adhered to 
either by DLTF or Banks.  The Committee therefore r ecommends that the KVIC 
with elaborate process of monitoring at every level , must ensure scrupulous 
adherence to the time schedule. The Committee also recognizes that the guidelines 
provide for meeting of district level task force ev ery two months.  The Committee 
recommends this should be a mandatory provision ins tead of being a near 
guideline.  In addition, the KVIC in consultation w ith RBI should prescribe norms 
against which any application is scrutinized by the DLTF.      
25.   Notwithstanding assertions made by the KVIC r egarding meeting the annual targets 
the Committee notes that during XI Plan  for the pe riod of 2008-09 to 2011-12, 37.38 
lakh employment was proposed to be created under th e PMEGP scheme with Rs 4485 
crores as Margin Money. However, Rs 3131.65 crores budgetary support could be 
provided. Accordingly there was gross under achieve ment of target.   Despite such under 
achievement, the XII Plan projections are even more  ambitious. An enhanced outlay of 
Rs.8060 crore has been proposed  for XII Plan out o f which Rs.7800 crore would be used 
as margin money subsidy and Rs.260 crore will be sp ent for backward and forward 
linkages. It is estimated that 27.13 lakh additiona l employments would be created by 
assisting  3.30 lakh enterprises. The Committee was  informed that in the XII Plan the 
project ceiling has been enhanced from Rs.25.00 to Rs.50.00 lakhs for manufacturing and 
from Rs 10 lakh to Rs.25.00 lakhs for service secto r. Trading activities/sales outlets too 
have been included in the service sector. 
 
26.    The Committee agrees that there is a scope of scali ng up the PMEGP scheme. 
The Committee also supports higher allocation for P MEGP in view of the fact that 
with current level of allocation certain States lik e Tamil Nadu and  
West Bengal are not able to cater to growing number  of applications.  However, the 
structure of the Scheme is too complex and needs to  be streamlined. The figures and 
pattern of expenditure suggest that different agencies involved in this scheme do not 
coordinate seamlessly.  The Committee therefore recommends that there is scope for 

improving the institutional framework by closely in volving the stakeholders and 
monitoring their performance. 
27.      The Committee is pained to note the repeated cases of indifference by branch level 
bank officers towards the PMEGP applicants.  There are wide-spread complaints of delay 
in processing the applications and eventual rejecti ons without informing the applicant. 
This indifference persist despite the guidelines of  RBI, Ministry of Finance and the 
repeated assurances given to this Committee by the senior most representative of 
respective banks. The Committee is of firm opinion that such an attitude will further 
marginalize already demoralized sections of youth a nd will lead to serious social 
problems.  Instead, the Banks should hand hold the new entrepreneurs as their potential 
customers.  The Committee in this regard seriously takes note of significant number of 
rejections of applications despite being approved b y the DLTF.  In Maharashtra a senior 
State level officer informed the Committee that she  personally visited the banks and 
without disclosing her identity wanted to know the grounds on which PMEGP 
applications were rejected by those banks. On scrut inizing those applications she found 
that most of the applications were rejected because those did not contain one document or 
other. She informed the Committee that she urged th e banks not to reject the applicants 
on frivolous grounds and rather requested them to c lear the applications first and later the 
District level Task Force would accord its stamp of  approval.  Her deposition before the 
Committee proved the point that the banks need to c lear PMEGP applications at a faster 
pace. Therefore, the Committee is of the view that the pr ocessing of projects 
designed by KVIC and NSIC, should be fast tracked a nd should be decided 
favourably .  The Committee also appreciates that E-tracking s ystem has been introduced 
to track the status of applications. The Committee takes note of recent initiative in this 
respect. According to which e-tracking has been mad e mandatory by the Ministry of 
MSME from 2013-14, Therefore the Banks must ensure filling in the rele vant data in 
the e-tracking system relating to the bank’s sancti on and disbursement. Banks 
should encourage and ensure that application must b e entered in the e-tracking 
system .  As per the recent initiative by KVIC no margin m oney will be released to banks 
in respect of PMEGP applications not entered in the  e-tracking system . The Committee 
recommends that all the banks should join in e-trac king platform and that banks 
should start receiving applications online. 

28.     The Committee was informed of the initiativ es taken by the KVIC to increase 
funding linkages for the scheme. It was informed th at to step up the achievement under 
scheduled caste category for PMEGP, convergence has  been established with National 
Scheduled caste Financial Development Corporation ( NSFDC). The Committee 
recommends that similar linkages should be establis hed with North Eastern 
Development Financial Corporation (NEDFiC), propose d Women’s Bank as 
envisaged in Budget (2013-14), National Minority De velopment Finance 
Corporation (NMDFC) and other similar financial ins titutions.  
 
29.   The Committee was also informed that the sche me is included under “Priority sector 
lending ”.  The Committee is of firm view that priority sec tor must not only get easy 
access to the bank finance but also terms and condi tions and the cost of credit too 
should be affordable.  In this respect the Committe e found that the rate of interest 
charged by banks was universally high and also the banks were charging 
differential rate of interest.  The Committee recom mends that the Government 
through RBI should impose a cap on the rate of inte rest which should in any case be 
reduced for PMEGP.  As stated earlier, the Committe e also suggests that along with 
the existing system of extending margin money to th e entrepreneurs an interest 
subvention scheme may also be considered for encour aging the youths to become 
self-employed.  This in Committee's view would simp lify the procedure and 
minimize the discretion of banks in deciding on an application. In addition, all the 
loans under PMEGP should be automatically covered u nder Credit Guarantee 
Scheme and no collateral must be sought from the be neficiary. The premium for 
credit guarantee should be borne by the KVIC. The C ommittee notes that despite 
the written provision that banks would not ask for collateral for a certain amount of 
loan, in practice they ask for collateral from the beneficiaries.  The Committee finds 
this is an unacceptable situation which must be mon itored by the Banks and the 
RBI at the Branch level and remedial action taken. The Committee also recognized 
that the Ministry of Finance is represented on the Boards of the Public Sector Banks 
through their officers.  The representatives of the  Ministry should monitor the 
implementation of Government Schemes particularly e mployment generation 
Schemes like PMEGP by Banks. 
 

30.    The Committee notes that the scheme was appl icable for both rural as well as 
urban areas and suggests that KVIC should conduct a  study on the rural and urban 
spread of this scheme.  The Committee is of the vie w that the self employment 
opportunities in rural areas should be emphasized.  In this respect the Committee 
takes note of the recent study done by Institute of  Applied Manpower Research on 
informalization of labour force which suggest that unskilled and semi skilled 
manpower from villages is migrating to bigger cities and is being absorbed as casual 
labourers without much social security cover.  Simi larly the recent figures released 
by NSO (National Statistical Organisation) indicate  massive job loss and low wages 
for rural women.  In such a situation implementatio n of schemes like PMEGP  in 
rural areas will hugely benefit people in rural are as and successfully address 
poverty and unemployment situation in our villages.  However, the Committee notes 
that the negative list prescribed under the scheme includes industry and business 
connected with cultivation, sericulture, horticulture, floriculture etc. Therefore such 
a negative list seriously constricts the options of  village entrepreneurs.  The 
Committee therefore recommends that negative list s hould be reviewed in the 
context of village/rural industries and in the cont ext of region. For instance in the 
context of States of north eastern region the negat ive list must be prepared taking 
into account specificities of the States of the reg ion.    The respective State 
Governments too should be consulted while preparing State specific negative list.    
 
31.     The Committee feels that if synergized with  other similar schemes, the scope of 
PMEGP will expand and its potentiality will be real ized significantly. The Committee 
was informed that to provide employment opportuniti es under PMEGP to unemployed 
youths who have availed of skill development traini ng from NIESBUD, DCMSME, 
NSIC etc.  convergence has  been established.   In this regard the Committee also notes 
the proposal for setting up one Cluster in every di strict.  The Committee accordingly 
suggests that  PMEGP projects should be developed a s clusters with common 
facilities like training, finance and marketing.  
 
32.    The Committee also notes that there is a prominent training component built 
in the PMEGP scheme. The training institutions shou ld be spread all over the State. 

The selection of training institutions should be tr ansparent under standard terms 
and conditions. The KVIC should monitor the trainin g module and employability of 
trainees. 
33.    A certain percentage of the annual allocatio n for PMEGP scheme is meant for 
backward and forward linkages including marketing a nd publicity. The Committee 
strongly recommends that the KVIC should give wide publicity to  PMEGP Scheme 
jointly with Banks. It must be done across the coun try and  in target areas among 
potential target groups. The recommends that the ba nks must publicise PMEGP as 
a bankable scheme. The Committee appreciates that t he KVIC has developed an 
exclusive web portal to showcase and promote the pr oduct range of PMEGP units. 
This will project PMEGP products to domestic and in ternational markets. The 
Committee recommends that possibility should be exp lored for promotion of 
PMEGP products internationally as a single Brand na me. 
 
34.    The Committee also recommends that the scope of the  scheme should be 
expanded.  So far the mandate of this scheme has be en to assist the new units.  The 
Government should explore the possibility of assist ing the existing  PMEGP units 
for their expansion and for this purpose   some per centage of the allocation should 
be earmarked.    
 
35.      During its visit to North Eastern region, the Committee found that there is great 
scope for implementation of schemes  like PMEGP whi ch will enable people to employ 
their traditional skills. Implementation of  this s chemes will economically empower 
people and put an end to their alienation.  However , the implementation of this scheme 
has been hampered due to lack of network and manpow er of KVIC in this region and 
difficulty experienced in getting  access to institutional finance.  The Committee was also 
informed that the negative list of PMEGP did not al low many vocations which had great 
scope and demand in North Eastern region.  The Committee therefore recommends 
that the negative list should be reviewed consideri ng the specific requirements of 
States particularly the North Eastern region.  The Committee also recommends that 
the Government should enhance the presence of KVIC in that region and should 
undertake a special drive for the financial inclusi on of the region by 

expanding  banking network.  The Committee noted th at North Eastern 
Development Financial Corporation  has implemented Micro Finance scheme for 
the entrepreneurs.  The Committee suggest   that th e KVIC and NEDFiC should 
compliments their efforts in expanding the PMEGP in  North Eastern region. The 
Committee also suggests that Ministry should develo p PMEGP clusters in NE 
region under its Cluster development programme. The se Clusters should have 
financial, marketing and training facilities. 
 
36.     The Committee  has been informed of proposal for en gaging an agency for 
concurrent monitoring and evaluation of PMEGP. The Committee expects that the 
observations and recommendations contained in this Report will constitute 
important references for such evaluation. 
*********** 

Recommendation/observation at a glance   
 
1.     The Committee finds that the structure of the  scheme is too complex. The 
stakeholders like KVIC, DLTF and Bankers do not coo rdinate seamlessly. The 
Committee is of the view that for efficient impleme ntation of such an important 
scheme the structure of the scheme must be simplifi ed. The Committee proposes 
that along with existing system of extending margin  money to the entrepreneur an 
interest subvention scheme may also be considered f or encouraging the youth to 
become self-employed.   
(Para 5) 
2.   The Committee is of the view that manufacturing sec tor has greater employment 
potential, therefore it should have larger share under the Scheme. 
(Para 14) 
3.      However, the Committee is of the opinion that such state of affairs cannot be 
attributed to Banks alone. There has to be regular meetings of District Level Task 
Force as per the prescribed guidelines. Also the DL TF the DLTF should do due 
diligence while examining a proposal, so that they recommend only sound and 
viable projects and least time is wasted by the Ban ks in further scrutinizing the 
applications. The KVIC and RBI should formulate tem plates against which the 
DLTF should examine a proposal.  Still, the Committee finds prevailing state of 
affairs grossly unsatisfactory, where the KVIC has admitted that the number of 
applications exceed the annual target and yet they are not disposed off within a 
financial year and  instead , the money allocated r emains idle with the Banks. And 
yet, the KVIC claims to have met the target. The Co mmittee recognizes that 
PMEGP has great potential for remunerative self emp loyment by imparting skill. 
The Scheme will enable urban and rural unemployed y outh to use their skills for 
earning their livelihood.  The Committee has theref ore always supported enhanced 
allocation for the PMEGP. There is however need for  greater and effective 
monitoring by the KVIC, RBI, State Governments and Ministry of Finance . 
(Para 21) 
4.       The Committee was dismayed to note that in certain States like Tamil Nadu 
and West Bengal, no fresh applications were entertained for a year, in order to clear 

the backlog of applications pending from previous y ears.  Such instances constitute 
the  violation of mandate and intent of this Scheme .  The Committee feels that there 
should not be any embargo on submitting the applica tions, which should be 
accepted throughout the year. The DLTFs should regularly meet at least once in two 
months to examine and approve the cases. The object ive should be to expand the 
coverage of this Scheme and intent of this Scheme m ust not be diluted due to 
procedural nuances. 
(Para 22) 
5.   The Committee however, observes that the above time-line is seldom adhered to 
either by DLTF or Banks.  The Committee therefore r ecommends that the KVIC 
with elaborate process of monitoring at every level , must ensure scrupulous 
adherence to the time schedule. The Committee also recognizes that the guidelines 
provide for meeting of district level task force ev ery two months.  The Committee 
recommends this should be a mandatory provision ins tead of being a near 
guideline.  In addition, the KVIC in consultation w ith RBI should prescribe norms 
against which any application is scrutinized by the DLTF.      
(Para 24) 
6.    The Committee agrees that there is a scope of scali ng up the PMEGP scheme. 
The Committee also supports higher allocation for P MEGP in view of the fact that 
with current level of allocation certain States lik e Tamil Nadu and  
West Bengal are not able to cater to growing number  of applications.  However, the 
structure of the Scheme is too complex and needs to  be streamlined. The figures and 
pattern of expenditure suggest that different agencies involved in this scheme do not 
coordinate seamlessly.  The Committee therefore recommends that there is scope for 
improving the institutional framework by closely in volving the stakeholders and 
monitoring their performance. 
(Para 26) 
7.      Therefore, the Committee is of the view that the pr ocessing of projects 
designed by KVIC and NSIC, should be fast tracked a nd should be decided 
favourably .   Therefore the Banks must ensure filling in the rele vant data in the e-
tracking system relating to the bank’s sanction and  disbursement. Banks should 

encourage and ensure that application must be enter ed in the e-tracking system .   
The Committee recommends that all the banks should join in e-tracking platform 
and that banks should start receiving applications online. 
(Para 27) 
8.     The Committee recommends that similar linkages shou ld be established with 
North Eastern Development Financial Corporation (NE DFiC), proposed Women’s 
Bank as envisaged in Budget (2013-14), National Min ority Development Finance 
Corporation (NMDFC) and other similar financial institutions. 
(Para 28) 
9.   The Committee is of firm view that priority sector must not only get easy access 
to the bank finance but also terms and conditions a nd the cost of credit too should 
be affordable.  In this respect the Committee found  that the rate of interest charged 
by banks was universally high and also the banks we re charging differential rate of 
interest.  The Committee recommends that the Govern ment through RBI should 
impose a cap on the rate of interest which should i n any case be reduced for 
PMEGP.  As stated earlier, the Committee also sugge sts that along with the existing 
system of extending margin money to the entrepreneu rs an interest subvention 
scheme may also be considered for encouraging the youths to become self-employed.  
This in Committee's view would simplify the procedu re and minimize the discretion 
of banks in deciding on an application. In addition , all the loans under PMEGP 
should be automatically covered under Credit Guaran tee Scheme and no collateral 
must be sought from the beneficiary. The premium fo r credit guarantee should be 
borne by the KVIC. The Committee notes that despite  the written provision that 
banks would not ask for collateral for a certain am ount of loan, in practice they ask 
for collateral from the beneficiaries.  The Committ ee finds this is an unacceptable 
situation which must be monitored by the Banks and the RBI at the Branch level 
and remedial action taken. The Committee also recog nized that the Ministry of 
Finance is represented on the Boards of the Public Sector Banks through their 
officers.  The representatives of the Ministry shou ld monitor the implementation of 
Government Schemes particularly employment generation Schemes like PMEGP by 
Banks. 
 

(Para 29) 
10.    The Committee notes that the scheme was appl icable for both rural as well as 
urban areas and suggests that KVIC should conduct a  study on the rural and urban 
spread of this scheme.  The Committee is of the vie w that the self employment 
opportunities in rural areas should be emphasized.  In this respect the Committee 
takes note of the recent study done by Institute of  Applied Manpower Research on 
informalization of labour force which suggest that unskilled and semi skilled 
manpower from villages is migrating to bigger cities and is being absorbed as casual 
labourers without much social security cover.  Simi larly the recent figures released 
by NSO (National Statistical Organisation) indicate  massive job loss and low wages 
for rural women.  In such a situation implementatio n of schemes like PMEGP  in 
rural areas will hugely benefit people in rural are as and successfully address 
poverty and unemployment situation in our villages.  However, the Committee notes 
that the negative list prescribed under the scheme includes industry and business 
connected with cultivation, sericulture, horticulture, floriculture etc. Therefore such 
a negative list seriously constricts the options of  village entrepreneurs.  The 
Committee therefore recommends that negative list s hould be reviewed in the 
context of village/rural industries and in the cont ext of region. For instance in the 
context of States of north eastern region the negat ive list must be prepared taking 
into account specificities of the States of the reg ion.    The respective State 
Governments too should be consulted while preparing State specific negative list.    
(Para 30) 
 
11.    The Committee accordingly suggests that  PMEGP proj ects should be 
developed as clusters with common facilities like t raining, finance and marketing.  
 
(Para 31) 
12.    The Committee also notes that there is a prominent training component built 
in the PMEGP scheme. The training institutions shou ld be spread all over the State. 
The selection of training institutions should be tr ansparent under standard terms 
and conditions. The KVIC should monitor the trainin g module and employability of 
trainees. 

(Para 32) 
13.   The Committee strongly recommends that the KVIC should give wide publicity 
to  PMEGP Scheme jointly with Banks. It must be don e across the country and  in 
target areas among potential target groups. The rec ommends that the banks must 
publicise PMEGP as a bankable scheme. The Committee  appreciates that the KVIC 
has developed an exclusive web portal to showcase a nd promote the product range 
of PMEGP units. This will project PMEGP products to  domestic and international 
markets. The Committee recommends that possibility should be explored for 
promotion of PMEGP products internationally as a single Brand name. 
(Para 33) 
14.    The Committee also recommends that the scope of the  scheme should be 
expanded.  So far the mandate of this scheme has be en to assist the new units.  The 
Government should explore the possibility of assist ing the existing  PMEGP units 
for their expansion and for this purpose   some per centage of the allocation should 
be earmarked.    
(Para 34) 
15.      The Committee therefore recommends that the negativ e list should be 
reviewed considering the specific requirements of S tates particularly the North 
Eastern region.  The Committee also recommends that  the Government should 
enhance the presence of KVIC in that region and sho uld undertake a special drive 
for the financial inclusion of the region by expand ing  banking network.  The 
Committee noted that North Eastern Development Fina ncial Corporation  has 
implemented Micro Finance scheme for the entreprene urs.  The Committee 
suggest   that the KVIC and NEDFiC should complimen ts their efforts in expanding 
the PMEGP in North Eastern region. The Committee al so suggests that Ministry 
should develop PMEGP clusters in NE region under it s Cluster development 
programme. These Clusters should have financial, ma rketing and training facilities. 
 
(Para 35) 
16.     The Committee has been informed of proposal for eng aging an agency for 
concurrent monitoring and evaluation of PMEGP. The Committee expects that the 

observations and recommendations contained in this Report will constitute 
important references for such evaluation. 
(Para 36) 
*********  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat  
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry  
 
XXIII 
 
Twenty-third Meeting  
 
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M on Monday, the 22 
nd  July, 2013 in Committee 
Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present  
 
     Shri Tiruchi Siva  — Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
1.   Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
2.   Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
3.   Shri Basawaraj Patil 
4.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
5.   Shri Vivek Gupta 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
6.     Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala  
7.     Shri Hassan Khan 
8.     Shri. Kaushalendra Kumar 
9. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
10.   Shri Somen Mitra 
11.   Shri P. R. Natarajan 
12. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
13.   Ch. Lal Singh 
14. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
15.   Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
 
Secretariat  
 
1. Shri. S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3. Shri. Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
 
 
   Contd…………..2/ 
 
 
 
 

-2- 
 
 At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welco med the Members and briefed 
them that the agenda of the meeting, was to conside r and adopt the Draft 246 
th  report on 
Revival of Nagaland Pulp & Paper Company Ltd pertai ning to the Department of Heavy 
Industry, M/o Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises , 249 th report on Revival and 
Restructuring of the Fertilizers and Chemicals Trav ancore Ltd pertaining to the 
Department of Fertilizers, M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers, 250 th  and 251 st  reports on Impact 
of Foreign Direct Investment in Multi Brand Retail on MSME Sector and Implementation 
of Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme  (PMEGP), pertaining to the 
M/o Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises, respectively, of the Committee.  
 
2.  Thereafter, the Committee took up the reports f or consideration and after some 
discussion, affected few changes and unanimously ad opted the Draft 246 th , 249th, 250 th  
& 251 st  Reports.  
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to pr esent the 245 th , 246 th , 247 th , 
248 th , 249 th , 250 th  & 251 st  reports to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha since  the House 
was in recess and the term of the Chairman of the C ommittee was ending on 24 th  July, 
2013. 
 
4.   The Committee also decided to present/ lay its  245 th , 246 th , 247 th , 248 th , 249 th , 250 th  
& 251 st  reports in both the Houses of Parliament during th e coming Monsoon Session. 
The Committee authorized Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu , Member, Rajya Sabha and in 
his absence, Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel, Member, Rajya Sabha, and in the absence of both  
Contd…………..3/ 
 
 
 

 
 
-3- 
 
Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu and Prof. S. P. Singh Ba ghel, Shri Vivek Gupta, Member, 
Rajya Sabha to present the 245 
th , 246 th , 247 th , 248 th , 249 th , 250 th  & 251 st  reports in the 
Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized Dr. Ratt an Singh Ajnala and in his absence 
Shri P. R. Natarajan, Members, Lok Sabha to lay copies of all the Reports on the Table of 
the Lok Sabha.  
 
4. Thereafter, the Members expressed their apprecia tion on the functioning and 
performance of the Committee under the leadership of the Chairman.  The Chairman then 
thanked everyone for their cooperation.  
 
The meeting adjourned at 1.45 P.M 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                                          Roshan Lal  
22 
nd  July, 2013                                                                                              Joint Director 
 
 
 
 
To  
The Chairman and Members of the  
Department –Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 