 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
         RAJYA SABHA                  
                                                                                                                                               
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
THE REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING  
OF 
HINDUSTAN MACHINES TOOLS LIMITED   
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY) 
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA 3rd   AUGUST,2011) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON3rd   AUGUST,2011) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
3
rd  AUGUST, 2011/ SRAVANA, 1933 (SAKA) 
225  

 
 
                      
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
  
  
  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
THE REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING  
OF 
HINDUSTAN MACHINES TOOLS LIMITED   
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY) 
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA 3rd  AUGUST, 2011) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 3rd   AUGUST, 2011) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
3
rd  AUGUST, 2011/SRAVANA, 1933 (SAKA) 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………(i)  
 
 
2. INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………..  (ii) 
 
 
3. REPORT            
 
 
 
 4.     MINUTES ………………………………………………………………………………. 
                  
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 31 st  August , 2010)  
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
    
 1.   Shri Tiruchi Siva                —                Chairman  
2. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
5. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
6.   Shri Natuji H. Thakor 
7. Shri S.P. Singh Baghel 
8. Shri  Nandamuri Harikrishna 
9. Dr. Vijay Mallya  
10. Vacant 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.   Shri Suvendu Adhikari 
12.   Shri Badruddin Ajmal 
13.   Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14.   Shri Bansagopal Chowdhury 
15.   Shri Sabbam Hari 
16.   Smt. Poonam Veljibhai Jat 
17.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
18.   Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
19.   Shri Pakauri Lal 
20.   Smt. Ingrid Mcleod 
21.   Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
22.   Shri Devendra Nagpal 
23.   Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
24.   Shri Kishanbhai V. Patel 
25.   Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
26.   Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
27.   Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
28.   Shri Raju Shetti  
29.   Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware 
30.   Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
31.   Smt. Putul Kumari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director 
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director  
 
 
  
(i) 
 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred and 
Twenty Fifth Report on the Revival and Restructurin g of Hindustan Machines Tools Ltd. 
pertaining to Ministry of Heavy Industries and Publ ic Enterprises (Department of Heavy 
Industry).  
 
2. The Committee held detailed discussion with the Management of Hindustan Machines 
Tools Ltd and received inputs for this Report.   
 
3. I thank the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Pub lic Enterprises (Department of Heavy 
Industry) for furnishing the valuable inputs during the meetings.  
 
4. The Committee in its meeting held on 29 
th  July, 2011 considered and adopted the report. 
 
  
 
  
Tiruchi Siva 
Chairman                                                                                   
                          Department -related Parliamentary  
                                                                                                  Standing Committee   on    Industry  
 
New Delhi 
29 
th  July, 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 REPORT  
 
 
Establishment of Hindustan Machine Tools in 1950s constituted a giant step to regenerate 
our economy by ensuring accelerated supply of quali ty machines to different segments of 
industry.  A well acclaimed public sector unit the HMT set the trend for efficient management 
and proven capability for greater productivity.  Be ing part of the structure of mixed economy, it 
was seen as a role model of excellence, dynamism an d business efficiency.  Our first Prime 
Minister Jawaharlal Nehru during whose tenure the H MT was established cited the example of 
HMT to underline the success of public sector enter prises and drive home the point that the 
public enterprises had to be run with greater efficiency and profit.   
 
2. Our national leadership had comprehensive unders tanding that machine making assumed 
centrality in augmenting our economic and industria l strength.  As the private sector during the 
formative period of independence lacked expertise, economic resources and necessary 
infrastructure to engage itself in the mammoth task  of nation building, the founding fathers of 
our country conceived the scheme for providing lead ership role to the public sector in creating 
conditions for our growth and development.  The set ting up of HMT represented that grand 
vision to transform India along modern lines and cr eate machine building capability for 
economic renaissance and industrial progress of our country.   
 
3. The vitality of the public sector for the reviva l of our economy and taking it forward has 
been glowingly acknowledged.  The doyens of private  sector recognized that the strength and 
capability of Indian economy so carefully nurtured by the public sector enterprises enabled them 
to scale new heights of economic efficiency and pro gress.  It is in this broader historical 
perspective that the role of public sector enterpri ses in general and HMT in particular has to be 
understood.   
 
4. There was a time when HMT commanded the admirati on of the entire nation.  The 
watches produced by the HMT made deep impact on pop ular imagination and a countrywide 
craze for such watches made them popular and well-accepted.  The HMT products very well  
1 

 
 
represented the slogan ‘Be Indian buy Indian’.  The  late Prime Minister of India Smt. Indira 
Gandhi described Hindustan Machine Tools as one of the outstanding industrial enterprises of 
our country and referred to it as a model of dynami c management not only in the public sector 
but also in the public and private sectors combined .  Diversifying from the core activity of 
manufacturing of machine tools the HMT expanded its  scope by proving its worth in many 
sectors.  The wide variety of its products be it ma chine tools, tractors, watches and capital goods 
were extensively used in many areas of our economy including the defence sector.  It had the 
record of declaring highest dividend in any public sector during 1960-61 and registering its net 
profit on a year to year basis.  As a flagship publ ic sector enterprise, it scored enviable prestige 
and esteem and was looked upon by people with admiration.   
 
5. The inevitable onset of economic reforms in our country unleashed entrepreneurial 
potential of our economy in a more deregulated and competitive atmosphere.  The HMT as a 
public sector enterprise found it hard to cope up w ith the challenges of a reformed economy 
which mandated greater efficiency, prudent use of h uman resources, primacy of competition and 
buoyancy of business activity.  In such a new econo mic setting which required deployment of 
more skills and high degree of competition, the HMT  found itself wanting.  It started declining 
from its much acclaimed position as a profit making company to a loss making enterprise.   
 
6. The Department-related Parliament Standing Commi ttee on Industry studied the HMT 
Ltd. during its visit to Bangalore in January, 2011  and interacted with representatives entrusted 
with the responsibility of running this enterprise.   The Committee was pained to know that the 
HMT which soared high as a public sector enterprise  had to come to such a sorry state of affairs 
due to several factors which include the callous mi smanagement of its affairs and the 
indifference of the Government to accelerate its revival.   
 
7. The vision of the HMT Ltd. sets the target to em erge as an engineering company of 
repute, providing best of products and services wit h contemporary technologies, to suit customer 
needs.  As far as its mission is concerned, it has set itself the goal to serve the country’s strategi c 
sector through development of high technology produ cts and to achieve sustained growth and 
profitability.   
2 

 
 
8. Most of the subsidiaries of the HMT are far from  the aforementioned vision and mission.  
The HMT holding company and its subsidiaries are in  such a sorry state of affairs.  It is now in 
an unenviable position of being referred to Bureau for Reconstruction of Public Sector 
Enterprises.  The Government of India approved a pl an in July 2000 for its turn around by 
restructuring the HMT Ltd. and converting into five  separate subsidiary companies.  The HMT 
Ltd. was considered as a holding company with tract or manufacturing as its core activity.  The 
other subsidiaries are HMT Machine Tools Ltd., HMT Watches Ltd., HMT Chinar Watches Ltd, 
HMT Bearing Ltd. and HMT International Ltd.  The Go vernment holding in the company is 
98.88 per cent.   
 
9. It has got two joint ventures, namely, SUDMO HMT  Process Engineers (I) Ltd. and 
Nigeria Machine Tools Ltd. with the equity particip ation of 50 per cent and 15 per cent, 
respectively.   
 
10. The Committee was given to understand that the HMT suffered decline due to numerous 
factors which include the vertical integration of p lants and assembly ancillaries.  Other reasons 
for its recurrent loss are increasing social overhe ad cost and ageing plant & machinery.  Its net 
worth eroded considerably.  According to the study conducted by Center for Monitoring Indian 
Economy its return on net worth declined from -4.42 in March 2008 to -4.94 in March 2010.   
 
11. The Committee is extremely pained to know that the Government of India adopted 
a casual attitude in not taking measures for modernization of plant and machinery of HMT 
to face the increasingly competitive market.  The C ommittee feels that the management of 
HMT will have to be held accountable for not keepin g the company technologically and 
economically viable.  There are many public sector enterprises which have successfully 
adjusted to a highly commercialized business enviro nment and registered profit.  A 
company like HMT which is engaged in machine tool s ector has a wider market for 
supplying machines which are in growing demand across the economic segment.   
 
 
3 
 

 
 
12. India has a vast and expanding market for machi ne tools.  Its volume is estimated to 
be approximately Rs.8000 crore out of which the HMT  Machine Tools is able to capture 
Rs.200 crore only and rest of its is shared by priv ate players and import from foreign 
countries. 
  
13. Our economy is growing at a reasonably higher r ate.  It is also expanding and 
diversifying.  Therefore, the demand for machine to ols is bound to grow up.  It is in this 
context that concerted efforts have to be made to t ap this vast market by manufacturing 
such tools within our country.  HMT Machine Tools h as to show greater dynamism and 
business competence to increase its share of market for its products.  
 
14. It can be done by employing better skills and m arket management.  The 
Department of Heavy Industry referred the loss maki ng HMT Machine Tools Ltd. and 
HMT Bearings Ltd. to the BIFR.  At a time when the Government of India is 
acknowledging the resilience of public sector enterprises as a major factor for withstanding 
the financial crisis and at a time when the Governm ent is reasonably happy with the 
performance of the PSEs, it is important that speci al and focused attention be given to the 
revival of HMT which can be made robust and forward looking.   
 
15. The summary record of the proceedings of hearing held on 12 June 2008 before the BIFR 
bench consisting of Shri A.K. Goswami, Chairman, BI FR and Shri K. Cherian Varghese, 
Member throw light on the scheme for the revival of  the Hindustan Machine Tools.  The Bench 
while taking note of the general consensus in respe ct of the revival scheme observed the 
following:  
  
 “… there is general consensus in respect of the re habilitation scheme.  … attrition of 
employees on account of unrevised and low salary le vels is an issue which deserves the attention 
of the Government of India.  The Board recognizes t hat the company is not able to afford a wage 
revision with its present financial position but th e issue of competent and technically qualified 
employees leaving the company will make the company less competitive.  The company has to  
4 

 
 
improve its productivity and earn more to pay more.   Banks charged interest rates up to 5% 
above BPLR on the plea that the company was not dec lared sick.  The purpose of the Reserve 
Bank of India guidelines to charge interest at BPLR only from sick companies is to provide relief 
to such units.  Because of the provision of SICA, t he newly formed company could file its 
reference-only after 5 years of its incorporation a lthough the net worth was negative from the 
beginning and consequently the company was sick.  A  very technical and narrow interpretation 
of a sick company under RBI guidelines from the dat e of reference to BIFR and charging high 
rate of interest by banks may not be in the interes t of revival of the company.  The company has 
been honouring the commitments to banks in spite of  its tight financial position by borrowing 
from Government of India.  GOI has made much sacrif ice in respect of the dues of the company.  
In these circumstances the Bench is inclined to ret ain the stipulation in the rehabilitation scheme 
requiring banks to charge interest at BPLR rate only from 1.4.2000.”  
 
16. The Committee noted the following reasons for t he sickness of HMT Machine Tools in 
particular and HMT as a whole.   
• Working capital constraints 
• High interest burden 
• Old plant & machinery not upgraded 
• High costs due to vertical integration  
• Compression of demand since 1996-97 
• High competition from imports due to liberalization 
• Used machines allowed for imports 
• Non-availability of level playing field 
• Surplus manpower in non core areas 
• Non induction of fresh technical talent  
 
17. The Committee takes note of the fact that the r evival package for HMT Ltd. was `880.80 
crore.  The BIFR observed that the revival plan proposals of the Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd. is 
viable.   
 
18.  It is observed that a part time Chairman and acting  Managing Director of the HMT 
Machine Tools Ltd. has been appointed on 1 January 2011 onwards.    
 
5 

 
 
19. With the appointment of a part time Chairman an d acting Managing Director, the 
Machine Tools unit has registered improved performa nce which is certainly heartening.  The 
Committee understands that the following steps have  been taken to bring about a transformation 
in the working culture of the Hindustan Machine Tools.  These are: 
 
I. Change of mindset and attitude of the employees 
II. Aggressive marketing and customer responsiveness 
III. Enforcing financial discipline 
IV. Inculcating Team Spirit 
V. Making the team believe that HMT-MTL can be turned around   
 
20. Out of the five factors outlined above, three o f these concerning change of mindset and 
attitude of the employees, inculcating team spirit and making the team believe that HMT-MTL 
can be turned around are intangibles which are as i mportant as tangible factors such as 
technology, financial discipline and marketing stra tegy.  The fact that some improvement has 
taken place by suitably employing both tangible and  intangible factors prove the point that a lot 
can be done by strategic decision making and guaran teeing independence and autonomy to the 
people entrusted with the responsibility of making viable and profitable.    
 
21. The Committee could see the hopeful trends in t he Order Book position for the Machine 
Tools for the period 2009-10 and 2010-11.   
 
Order Booking 
 
    Rs `Crores      
    2009-10    2010-11 
April-December 102 147 
January-March 64 89 
Total for the year  166 236 
 
22. The figures in the above table are self explana tory. The Order Booking position has 
registered significant increase from `166 crore in 2009 to `236 crore in 2010-11. The Committee 
has been informed through a separate communication that the order booking of the company in  
6 

 
 
the month of March 2011 alone has been `58 crore which, it is said to be, “an all time high  till 
this date”.   
 
23. Similarly, the sales of the Company has been in creasing. While the figure for sales for 
January-March 2009-10 was `49 crore, it was `69 crore for the same period during 2010-11.  
 
24. This increasing trend of high order booking and  sales has generated confidence in those 
who run the Company to pitch for higher annual gros s sales of `340 crores which possibly would 
fetch marginal profit.  
 
25. The Committee warmly welcomes the measures take n by the HMT Machine Tools 
Limited to revitalize it. The hope nursed by the ma nagement of the Company that it would 
achieve a positive turn around due to higher order booking and higher sales augurs well for its 
future. In fact with the growth and expansion of In dian economy there is going to be greater 
demand for machinery. Such demand assumes critical significance in the context of India 
emerging as a global manufacturing hub. The origina l purpose behind the foundation of the 
HMT Machine Ltd. was to provide machines to the div erse sectors of our economy which have a 
great potential to grow. Now that our growth rate i s impressive and manufacturing sector 
substantially contributes to our onward march as a major economic player in the world, it is 
important for the HMT Machine Tools Limited to tap the expanding market.  
 
26. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends t he Government for supporting 
the HMT Machine Tools in every way for its commerci al viability and profitability. It  
compliments  its top management for changing the at titude of the personnel of the 
Company  and inculcating among them the much needed  team spirit and understanding 
that they can once again make it commercially attractive, financially sound, technologically 
up to date and profitable.  The recent initiatives ushered in by the management , it is 
hoped, will go a long way in creating a work cultur e which will help the Company to stand 
on its own strength and make a name for itself thro ugh its quality product and high levels 
of customer satisfaction.  
7 

 
 
27. The Committee after careful perusal of the pape rs submitted to it has understood that the 
subsidiaries of HMT are not able to function with e fficiency and effectiveness due to lack of 
independence and autonomy which are key to the succ ess of any company in the highly 
competitive and globalised environment of our time.   
 
28. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the subsi diaries must be given due 
independence and autonomy.  If all the time these s ubsidiaries remained dependent on 
holding company, their own progress would be retarded by virtue of the fact that these will 
not be able to take faster decision for manufacturing products and doing business.   
 
29. The Committee recommends that the changes that have taken place after the 
appointment of the part time Chairman and acting Ma naging Director must be taken note 
of by the Department of Heavy Industry.  
 
30. The Committee is of the view that one person we ll acclaimed for his or her expertise 
in engineering and technological fields and with ad equate experience of administering 
enterprises may be appointed as CMD for the HMT and  its subsidiaries as a whole.  He 
must be given full responsibility and independence to make decisions for making the HMT 
Machine Tools and other units more competitive and commercially relevant.   
 
31. Except the HMT International, all other subsidi aries of the HMT have not been doing 
well in the field of business and as a result have suffered losses.   
 
32. The Committee was informed that the HMT suffere d sub-optimal performance due to 
following reasons:- 
• 6500 employees were given Voluntary Retirement Sche me during 2000-02 by raising 
`469 crores through external borrowings as 10 year GoIG Bonds resulting in: 
• Interest outgo of `186 crores leading to erosion of working capital.  
• Retention of talent & attraction of new talent cont inues to be a constraint due to non 
revision of pay scales. 
 
8 

 
 
• Investments were not made for upgradation of manufa cturing facilities & product 
technology. 
• Further, in 2003, the age of superannuation was red uced to 58 years resulting in 
accelerated separation of several senior and key executives.  
 
33. However, the Company prepared a plan for turnin g around its performance in 1998.  It 
included restructuring of manpower, organization an d of course restructuring of its debt on 
financial liabilities.  By perusing the literature provided to the Committee, it was understood that 
the turn around of the Company could not be made du e to shortage of working capital, enormous 
liabilities amounting to `374 crores and failure to dispose of non-performing  assets.  Apart from 
these reasons, the Company failed to take up issues  such as product development/diversification, 
technological upgradation and plant modernization o wing to shortage of resources.  In spite of 
the measures taken to revive the Company, its perfo rmance level plummeted.  It is rather painful 
to note that the Company which was doing so well be fore the advent of economic reforms had to 
come to such a sorry state of affairs resulting in its downfall.  One of the predominant factors 
behind the failure of the Company is the absence of  modern technology and machinery.  As a 
public sector enterprise, it had to function within  certain rules and regulations.  In fact, there are  
many PSEs which have proved their worth in spite of  the constraints faced by them.  The 
Committee feels that the utter failure of the HMT to come to terms with the liberalized economic 
environment arrested its productivity and contribut ed to its decline.  The apathy of the 
Government in responding slowly to its problems further compounded its economic woes.   
 
34. The Committee takes heart from the revival plan  which aim at addressing the challenges 
faced by the HMT.  The background paper made availa ble to the Committee outlines the key 
features of the revival plan which include: 
• Upgradation/renewal/modernization of plant and machinery 
• Introduction of new products/processes/technology in line with market requirements 
• Settlement of Overdue long term liabilities on acco unt of the funds borrowed for 
Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) separations along with the interest burden 
 
9 

 
 
• Reduce the large scale attrition of professionals a nd skilled force through implementation 
of revised pay-scales 
• Recruit fresh talent through payment of attractive salaries on par with other PSUs as most 
of the persons recruited had resigned within a year or two on account of low salaries 
• Rationalize manpower, increase outsourcing, vendor development, etc. 
 
35. The Committee understands that the common refra in of all the subsidiaries of the HMT 
are early approval of revival plans by the Governme nt, permission to implement 1997 Pay Scale 
wages and timely payment of salaries to the employe es.  Without going into the details of the 
statistics concerning net worth, profit after tax, turnover and other basic factors which determine 
the resilience of a company in a business environme nt, the Committee strongly feels that most of 
the subsidiaries can be revived and their economic viability assured by giving the leadership role 
of the HMT to a visionary technocrat who can combin e both business acumen and social 
purpose.  It is recommended that in case of HMT Ltd. which ma nufactures tractors the 
possibility of establishing joint ventures for this  purpose may be explored.  In case of HMT 
Bearings Ltd. it is recommended that a strategic pa rtner may be tapped to carry forward 
its business and expand it.  It is also proposed th at infusion of more finance to it may be 
examined.     
 
36. It is rather sad to note that the employees of most  of the subsidiaries are getting pay 
scales which were determined in early 90s.  It is a ll the more shocking to know that Senior 
Managers of the Company are drawing salaries which are less than that of the workers 
who due to accumulation of their annual increments get more salaries than the officers at 
the managerial position.  This is an anomaly which demotivates those who are asked to 
play leadership role in the Company.  The Committee  understand that there are some 
sections of employees who did not draw their pay fo r several years.  They pathetically 
pleaded before the Committee for payment of their s alaries so that at least they would feed 
their families.  In fact, the long pending pay/wage  revision has to be put on fast track 
without which both the Company and employees would face hardships.  In the absence of 
attractive pay scales the Company has lost valuable  human resources to other private 
players.   
10 

 
 
37. The Committee was told that the pay revision co uld not be affected in 1997 except in 
case of the HMT (International) due to the huge los s suffered by all the HMT Companies.  The 
Committee strongly recommends the Government to look into this problem and take measures to 
address it.   
 
38. The Committee also takes note of the fact that the retirement age for the employees of the 
Company is 58 years whereas in many other PSEs it i s 60 years.  Due to the fixation of 
retirement age at 58 years, the Company is in a dis advantageous position to retain its skilled 
work force and Managers beyond that age.  This prob lem has been further compounded by the 
absence of fresh recruitment of new personnel.  All  these issues require serious and focused 
attention from the Department of Heavy Industry and  Government of India.  It is recommended 
that the retirement age may be increased to 60 years.    
 
39. It is painful to note that revival plan is under th e consideration of the Government 
of India for almost half a decade.  The slow pace a t which the Government tries to consider 
the revival plan is indicative of its mindset in ma king our public sector undertakings viable 
from the point of view of business proposition.  Th e Government’s commitment to 
strengthen public sector enterprises does not sound  convincing the way it is treating the 
revival plan of the HMT group of companies.   
 
40. During its presentation before the Committee, t he HMT provided a road map on 
strategies to achieve its targets.  While the HMT ( International) which is a profit making 
subsidiary requested the Government to make it a no dal agency for projects of the 
Ministry of External Affairs, it wanted to appoint representatives in more countries to 
pursue its business activities.  It also desires to  scale up its business two hundred crores in 
two years and focus attention on high value machine  tools/turn key projects.  The 
Committee feels that its future road map and strate gies are achievable.  The success of the 
HMT (International) is indicative of the fact that range of the products of the HMT 
Companies such as machine tools, watches, tractors, bearings, general engineering  
 
11 

 
 
products, industrial commodities software, etc., ha ve a market outside the country.  This 
means if the subsidiaries are made viable and profi table it can get more business abroad.  
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends for th e revival of the HMT and its 
subsidiaries.   
 
41. The Committee feels that it is worth focusing a ttention on HMT Watches Ltd. which had 
manufacturing units in Bangalore, Tunkur and Ranibagh.  There is yet another subsidiaries HMT 
Chinar Watches, which is located in Srinagar.  Thes e two subsidiaries, HMT Watches and HMT 
Chinar Watches, are engaged in producing mechanical  and Quartz Watches both for ladies and 
gents.  These two subsidiaries also are manufacturi ng special and souvenir watches.  It is rather 
sad to note that most of the products of these Comp anies are sold in CSD canteens and through 
other institutional arrangements.  The public enter prises survey analyze the performance of the 
HMT watches and stated the following:- 
“The Company registered an increase `5.70 crore in total income during 2009-10 which 
went up to `18.27 crore in 2009-10 from `12.57 crore during 2008-09.  The net loss of the 
company increased to `168.35 crore, an increase of `4.29 crore over the previous year’s loss due 
to absence of trade channel, higher interest burden , broken supply chain and also due to 
truncated cash cycle.  Institutional sales contributed 35 per cent of total sales.”  
 
42. In a fiercely competitive market where private players are offering attractive watches to 
the consumers, it is very difficult to promote HMT watches which once enjoyed the confidence 
of the customers across the country.  It has been p roposed that in the present day economic 
environment watch making is no more considered as a  viable proposition as small scale 
industries find it cheaper to get imports from abroad at a lesser cost than the one manufactured in 
India.  The management of HMT Watches Ltd. is of th e opinion that HMT watches still has a 
brand value in the market.  It is hoping that by ma nufacturing only quartz watches it can take 
advantage of the brand image of HMT watches still p ersisting in the mind of the consumer.  The 
Committee cautiously welcomes the hopeful propositi on of the management of the HMT 
watches Ltd .  It, therefore, recommends for the examination of this hopeful proposition and  
 
12 

 
 
accordingly see if HMT watches can be made economic ally viable and attractive for the 
customers in the present day globalised market situ ation.   One possible option is to tap the 
customers in the villages of India by adopting inno vative marketing strategies.  This would mean 
reaching out to them through many other agencies su ch as post offices or some of the public 
sector banks which may display HMT watches in remot e areas through their branches and take a 
commission for doing so.  This would be quite a dif ferent approach in relation to the approach 
involving establishment of showrooms in urban areas  and cities.  Usually it would be very 
difficult to compete with private players who have catered to the customers in towns and cities 
by providing them with new models of watches.   
 
43. The revival and restructuring of the sick publi c sector units receive priority attention of 
the Government.  However, the Committee notes with concern that the inordinate delay on 
the part of the Government in taking up the revival  package will further sink the loss 
making PSEs to a pitiable state of affairs.   The public sector undertakings have to remain 
tuned to the new market situation.  On 27 June 1961 , in a Letter to the Chief Ministers, first 
Prime Minister Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, who describ ed the public sector enterprises as the 
commanding heights of economy, had written that, “T he old idea that profit making is a private 
concern and not a public concern has to be discarde d completely.  Our public enterprises have to 
be run with the greatest efficiency and the greates t profit.”  He made those insightful comments 
in the context of the remarkable success achieved by the Hindustan Machine Tools of Bangalore.  
The Department of Heavy Industry, the HMT as a whol e and the Government of India has a 
historic responsibility to once again revive the HM T to its past glory.  All concerned must 
respond to the call of duty to achieve that goal. The Committee recommends that the 
Government of India must expedite the revival proce ss of HMT taking serious note of the 
special concern for the industry and employees on the whole. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
13 
 

 
 
       
 
 