PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY-THIRD REPORT
Action Taken on the 282nd Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2017-18)
Pertaining to The Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Public Enterprises)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2017 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2017/Shravana, 1939 (Saka)
283
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY-THIRD REPORT
Action Taken on the 282nd Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2017-18)
Pertaining to The Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Public Enterprises)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August,  2017 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2017/Shravana, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-14
(i) Chapter-I : Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by
the Ministry................................................................................................... 2-4
(ii) Chapter-II : Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Ministry's replies............................................. 5
(iii) Chapter-III :  Recommendations/Observations in r espect of which the Committee
has either not accepted the replies of the Ministry  or  has asked the Ministry
to review its replies........................................................................................ 6-10
(iv) Chapter - IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Ministry have not been received................................................. 1 1-14
4. M INUTES ................................................................................................................ 15-18

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September , 2016)
1. Shri Sharad Yadav  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Narendra Budania
3. Shri Ram Narain Dudi
4. Shri Vivek Gupta
5. Shri Shwait Malik
6. Shri K.K.Ragesh
7. Shri Vivek K.Tankha
8. Shri Pramod Tiwari
9. Shri T.G. Venkatesh
10. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Ranjanben Bhatt
12. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary
13. Shri S.P. Muddahanume Gowda
14. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
15. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
16. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
17. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
18. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani
19. Shri Tapas Paul
20. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao
21. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa
22. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy
23. Shri Raj Kumar Saini

(ii)
24. Shri G. Hari
25. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya)
26. Shri Y . V . Subbareddy
27. Shri Rameshwar Teli
28. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
29. Shrimati Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen)
30. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare
31. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J.K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja .V, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Divender Singh Bisht, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having
been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred Eighty-Third Report on Action
Taken Notes furnished by the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises) on the recommendations contained in the Committee's Two Hundred Eighty-Second Report
on the Demands For Grants (2017-18) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises.
2. I, thank the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises)
for furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the Committee's Two
Hundred Eighty-Second Report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 8th August, 2017 considered and adopted the report.
N
EW D ELHI; SHARAD YADA V
8th August, 2017 Chairman,
Shravana 17, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry
Rajya Sabha

REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) on the recommendations contained
in the Committee's Two Hundred Eighty-Second Report on the Demands for Grants (2017-18) pertaining
to Department of Public Enterprises.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Public Enterprises) in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been categorized as follows:
Chapter-I : The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
The Committee observes that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as mentioned
in the Chapter - I of the Report.
Chapter-II : The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government's replies.
In respect of recommendations contained in Chapter II of the Report, the Committee is
convinced with the explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore does not want
to pursue them for the present.
Chapter-III : The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted
replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its reply.
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-acceptance of recommendations
contained in Chapter - III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanations
therefor.
Chapter-IV : The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have
not been received.
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished the interim
replies or couched its language in vague terms. Therefore; the Committee desires that the Ministry should
furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV as per the
intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee notes that during 2015-16, the total number of CPSEs stood at 320, which was a
significant increase of 22 CPSEs, compared to 2014-15 when the total number was 298. At the same
time, the number of operating CPSEs rose only by 8 during the said period. Further, the Paid-Up
Capital, Capital Employed, Investment and Reserve & Surplus by the CPSEs rose steadily during the
XIIth Plan period. Similarly, the dividend paid and the contributions made to the exchequer also saw
an increase during the Plan period. The indicator that decreased the most in the XIIth Plan period was
the foreign exchange earnings by the CPSEs. Another factor that is obvious is the decline in the number
of people employed. As submitted by DPE, due to the decline in the number of permanent employees
over the years, CPSEs are now hiring employees on contract basis. (Para 5)
Action Taken
Due to increase in the total number of CPSEs and number of operating CPSEs the Paid-Up Capital,
Capital Employed, Investment and Reserves and Surplus, Dividend paid and contributions made to
exchequer has increased during the XIIth Plan period. Exports of goods & merchandise are the major
source of foreign exchange earnings of CPSEs. Its share in total foreign exchange earnings, decreased
from 81.60% in 2012-13 to 76.62% in 2015-16. With the advancement of technology and superannuation
etc., the numbers of permanent employees have declined over the years.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee considers the fact that the role of CPSEs in India has undergone a lot of metamorphosis
since the beginning of planned mixed economy. After playing their part in nation building in a protected
environment till the advent of the New Economic Policy of 1991, the era of economic liberalization
dawned upon them. Now, the Government has done away with planned economy and has set priority areas
wherein it would continue to be engaged in business through CPSEs. In the remaining spheres, only
CPSEs who keep themselves afloat by being profitable are encouraged while closure or strategic
disinvestment, as decided by the NITI Aayog, is being used by the Government to exit loss-incurring
CPSEs in non-priority areas. This approach is expected to free up capital for investment in the social
and infrastructure sectors. In this regard, the Committee observes that one of the causes for which CPSEs
were envisaged, i.e., for equitable economic and social development - is still relevant to our country and
has to be kept in mind along with financial and business prudence while deciding the closure or strategic
disinvestment of CPSEs. The Committee is of the considered opinion that employment generation is one
factor that CPSEs can facilitate for some more time especially, in areas suffering from regional imbalances,
besides the North-Eastern Region. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that CPSEs should be
encouraged to provide permanent employment to people and may be desisted from hiring personnel on
contract basis. (Para 6)
2

3
Action Taken
The CPSEs operate in a competitive environment and the recruitment of employees below board
level is done as per the HR policy of CPSEs taking into account their business plans. Generally, only
the non-core activities would be outsourced or undertaken through contractual staff by CPSEs. As per
latest PE Survey 2015-16, the total number of workforce in 320 CPSEs is 15.21 lakh employees. Out
of these, 81% i.e., 12.34 lakh are regular employees and only about 19% are contractual or casual
worker employees. This indicates that CPSEs largely function through regular workforce and it would
only be the non-core activities in which the contractual or outsourced manpower is deployed.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee had a detailed deliberation on the Guidelines regarding the utilization of CSR funds
by CPSEs. In this context, it was brought before the Committee that there were certain activities like the
construction of toilets which were undertaken as part of the Swachh Bharat activities, but funds/efforts
were not spared for their upkeep or maintenance. The Committee notes that in many areas where such
constructions were taking place were remote in nature and lack of upkeep rendered them useless and most
unhygienic within a short span of time. (Para 15)
Action Taken
The suggestions of the Committee regarding upkeep or maintenance of assets and construction of
toilets as Swachh Bharat activities under CSR have been noted. CPSEs have been sensitized about the
need for including provisions for maintenance of the assets created under CSR, including upkeep or
maintenance of toilets as part of Swachh Bharat activity.
Recommendation/ Observation
While going through the performances of the schemes of DPE during the XII Plan period, the
Committee finds that CRR and the SDP have underachieved in terms of funds, utilised roughly by 50%.
The spending for the NER has also been seriously below par. The only scheme that has utilized fund
effectively, even beyond the initial allocation, is the RDC scheme. This scenario has pulled down the
total fund utilization of the Department to only around 61% during the Plan period. Though the
Committee is aware of some of the reasons quoted by the DPE, during the earlier years, for
underperformance of the schemes, it observes that constant underperformance during a Five-Year Plan
period only points to deficient proactive measures in scheme management and restructuring. The Committee
reiterates that mid-term reviews of the schemes should be undertaken in a timely and planned manner
so as to ensure that funds allocated are utilized optimally. (Para 19)
Action Taken
Suggestions of the Committee have been noted and it would be endeavoured that in 2017-18, the
utilization of funds under CRR and RDC Scheme is to maximum possible extent as per the Budget
Estimates.

4
Recommendation/Observation
Regarding the revival/ restructuring or closure decisions of CPSEs, the Committee is of the considered
view that along with financial and business considerations, social obligations of the Government should
also be given equal weightage. The Committee holds this view owing to its assessment that stark regional
economic and developmental imbalances exist in our country even now. CPSEs can still play a relevant
remedial role in rectifying such imbalances. Having opined so, the Committee is clear that in this process
CPSEs should not be allowed to grow into white elephants eating into the very vitals of valuable
resources of the nation taking recourse to the plea that their existence is necessary for addressing social
causes. With respect to the disposal of land of CPSEs identified for closure or strategic disinvestment,
the Committee has always held the view that such landed property should remain with the Government
be it the Central, State or other Government agencies, to the extent possible. It should be ensured that
the land does not change hands to private entities without a properly assessed remunerative value
accruing to the public exchequer. The Committee reiterates this view and wants this to be followed in
letter and spirit. (Para 54)
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee are noted. The Government's primary objective in recommending
the revival, restructuring or closure decision of the CPSEs has been to recommend strategies for more
efficient and effective use of resources that the CPSEs already control and the likely additional resources
the government may need to pump in, if effective corrective measures are not taken in a speedy manner.
This principle is tempered by the consideration that some of these CPSEs serve social goals/objectives
which take precedence over profitability alone.
All efforts are being made to ensure that the land of the CPSEs, identified for closure, stay with
the Central Government, State Government or their bodies. The Department of Public Enterprises has
on 7th September 2016, issued guidelines on time bound closure of sick/loss making CPSEs and the
disposal of their movable & immovable assets after extensive consultation with other ministries. Efforts
are first made to transfer the assets to the holding company/administrative ministry for its own use at
book value. Next the freehold land is offered for sale at the current circle rates or the prevalent
acquisition cost (excluding the R&R cost) to the Central Government, Central Government bodies/
CPSEs, State Departments and State Government bodies/ State PSEs (in that order of priority). Only in
case no offer is received from the above organizations within six months, can the land be auctioned in
an open and transparent manner to a private entity.

5
CHAPTER-II
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY’S REPLIES
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee finds that the Department managed around 95% of fund utilization during
2015-16. The utilization figure for the current year stands at 81.26% as on January, 2017. These are
appreciable figures compared to the respective Revised Estimates. The allocation for 2017-18, has seen
only a slight increase to the tune of Rs.1.34 crore compared to the last year's RE. In this regard, for
the year 2017-18, the Committee notes that the Department sought Rs.23.85 cr . But, DPE has not
provided as to under which Head the increased allocation had been sought and the reasons stated by the
Ministry of Finance for the reduced allocation, even though this was sought by the Committee. Accordingly,
the Committee fails to take cognizance of the scenario and has to refrain from making effective
observations. (Para 22)
Action Taken
Enhancement in budget allocation in 2017-18 is attributed to enhanced expenditure under "Secretariat
Eco Services" due to the implementation of 7th Central Pay Commission and also due to enhancement
in likely expenditure on account of outsourced services such as Consultants, Data Entry Operators,
MTS, etc.
5

6
CHAPTER-III
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE
HAS OTHER NOT OR ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAS ASKED
THE MINISTRY TO REVIEW ITS REPLIES
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee notes that during the oral evidence, while making a presentation to the Committee,
the Department submitted as part of the 'CPSE highlights 2015-16" that the total number of CPSEs in
the country to be 320, out of which 244 are operating and the remaining 76 are under construction. In
the ensuing discussion, attention was drawn to the General Performance of CPSEs and the areas wherein
CPSEs have excelled and the areas where they have failed. It was pointed out that the sectors where the
top ten profit making CPSEs of the country operating currently were in the spheres where CPSEs can
deliver and where they should venture more into by the Government. Likewise, when the top ten loss-
incurring CPSEs were analysed except BHEL, it was not difficult to find that they are operating in areas
where technological changes are frequent and the market fluctuation were rampant due to varying
factors. (Para 10)
Action Taken
The decision on setting up of CPSEs is taken by concerned administrative Ministry/ Departments
after due inter-Ministerial consultations. Various techno-economic and social considerations are taken into
account while making the above decision.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee notes the reply of the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE). However, the
Committee wants its opinion to be conveyed to the relevant decision-making Ministries/
Departments and other agencies. DPE as the coordinating nodal department with regard to
CPSEs has to take the necessary initiative in this regard.
Recommendation/Observation
In view of the above, the Committee while observing the data relating to the profit making and
loss incurring CPSEs, finds that there are certain captive sectors in the industry which are conductive
for the Government to set up CPSEs in a profitable manner. In the opinion of the Committee, general
parameters of such areas might include stable technology, steady market, capital intensive nature and
judicious utilization of public assets, etc. The Government can keep these broad principles in mind while
identifying and setting up of CPSEs in the future in strategic and priority areas. Besides this, the
principles of social responsibilities of the Government should also be intertwined with the business
considerations. (Para 11)
6

7
Action Taken
The decision on setting up of CPSEs is taken by concerned administrative Ministry/Departments
based on the techno-economic, social considerations and in the interest of balanced regional development
in the country.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee notes the reply of the DPE. However, the Committee wants its opinion, with
regard to more amenable spheres of operationalism for future CPSEs, to be conveyed to the
relevant decision-making Ministries/ Departments and other agencies who would be involved in
their setting up. DPE as the coordinating nodal department with regard to CPSEs has to take the
necessary initiative in this regard.
Further, the Committee also wants to have the data regarding new CPSEs incorporated/
constructed or/ under construction of the Government, since the last five years indicating their
areas of operation and details of the specific socio-economic and regional considerations that
have gone into the decision- making that has culminated in setting up of these CPSEs.
Recommendation/Observation
Accordingly, as a preparatory step in this direction, the Committee recommends that DPE being the
body in charge of the General Policy Framework for CPSEs, should conduct a well-organized
comprehensive research study to identify the areas of business wherein CPSEs can successfully/profitably
operate and grow. A policy of public investment in CPSEs can be based on the findings of such a
scientific study. This, in the opinion of the Committee should help to ensure that the 76 CPSEs that are
being newly set up by the Government operate in a profitable environment and are not doomed to be
shut due to extraneous factors like in case of their predecessors. (Para 12)
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee are noted. However, it may be mentioned that the public
investment policy of the government is shaped largely by the Ministry of Finance, NITI Aayog and the
concerned line ministries handling specific sectors of the economy. Based on an analysis of the ground
level realities and the emerging economic scenario, public investment decisions are taken by these
ministries.
As regards the 76 CPSEs that are in 'under construction' (UC)'stage, the concerned administrative
Ministries/Departments monitor the progress for their operationalisation/ commissioning keeping all
parameters under consideration.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee recognizes that the Ministry of Finance (MoF) and the NITI Aayog have the
final say in case of the Public Investment Policy of the Government. However, the fact that DPE
is the coordinating nodal body in the realm of CPSEs in the country cannot be denied. Accordingly,

8
in the opinion of the Committee, DPE will be well within its mandate to carry out a study, may
be as part of its Research, Development and Consultancies (RDC) on Generic issues related to
Public Sector Enterprises Scheme regarding the area of business which have favorable attributes
for CPSEs to venture into and prosper. Such a study conducted by DPE, the cumulative domain
expert, can come up handy to MoF, NITI Aayog and the administrative ministries concerned in
their decision making regarding setting up of CPSEs. Similar involvements by DPE, right from
the inception stage of a CPSE would also give a more meaningful role for the Department in the
various aspects of CPSEs as well.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee take note that DPE's latest advisory on CSR activities mentions only transparency,
selection and implementation of activities under CSR by CPSEs. However, based on the facts brought
before the Committee, it finds that there are activities under CSR that become redundant in the absence
of provisions for their maintenance by utilizing CSR funds. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that
DPE guidelines/ advisories on CSR should contain provisions/ instructions to ensure the maintenance of
constructed toilets and their related facilities under Swachh Bharat activities. This will also be in
synchronization with the similar provisions as contained in Swachh Bharat Kosh guidelines.
(Para 16)
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Committee on maintenance of facilities under Swachh Bharat have
been noted. As per Guidelines of M/o Corporate Affairs, maintenance of assets created under CSR is the
responsibility of the local community. As per these guidelines, this should form an integral part of the
project design and project cost of the company.
Further Recommendations/Observations
It is understood that as per the existing provisions of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR),
maintenance of assets is the responsibility of the local community. But the Committee, from the
facts brought before it, is of the opinion that the inefficiency of the said provision is already
resulting frequently in the toilets built under CSR activities being rendered useless owing to lack
of up keeping. Further, it is the considered opinion of the Committee, that if the existing
provision does not allow proper maintenance of assets, it is time those are revisited in the light
of ground reality. Maintenance provisions could be introduced on specific, defined conditions
attached with clauses for fixing responsibility for non- maintenance followed by appropriate
punitive provisions. The Committee also recommends that DPE may include in its guidelines on
CSR, the provision that CPSEs should build toilets in consultation with District Administration,
Municipalities, Panchayat Raj Institutions, Schools, Hospitals, Railways and Transport authorities,
etc. and maintenance of toilets should be left to these institutions. DPE could set in motion such
initiatives in the CSR activities of CPSEs through its guidelines, paving way for Ministry of
Corporate Affairs to extend the same to the entire corporate world.

9
Recommendation/Observation
Regarding the operation of the CRR Scheme, the Committee has consistently taken the stand that
the scheme needs thorough refurbishing and constant review for fine tuning. The Committee is aware that
the Department has taken steps in this direction during 2007 by widening the scope of the scheme and
had made another attempt in 2012-13 by evaluating the Scheme through National Institute of
Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development (NIESBUD). However, the results have not been
encouraging, so far. Now it has been decided to run the scheme through NSDC to further augment it and
make it more effective through better training and certification thereby increasing the employment ratio.
Due to the fact that the Department has now decided to implement the scheme through the NSDC it has
been submitted that the actual training for the year has started only in February 2017. But, the
Committee also takes note that the Department is planning to have a further relook at the Scheme even
before the major steps taken in September 2016 to engage NSDC as facilitator, has begun to yield results.
The Committee observes that it would be better to wait to assess the effectiveness of the measures taken
by the Department for the CRR scheme till next year. As per the Committee's view, the single most
important indicator of the success of the new arrangement will be a marked improvement of redeployment
ratio under the scheme which has never touched the half way mark till now. To improve the redeployment
ratio, the Committee again reiterates that the nodal agencies under the CRR scheme may be asked to
identify works skills in demand in the local area in terms of employability and provide training to people
in such identified skills. This is especially needed in area such as the NER, where the Department has
claimed that there is non-availability of VRS/VSS optees resulting in funds earmarked for CRR in the
NER to be transferred to Non-Lapsable pool. Further the Committee recommends that DPE may explore
possibilities of using the funds from the pool for benefits of CPSEs in NER, who are in need of funds
for their revival. (Para 30)
Action Taken
The CRR scheme is being implemented from 2016-17 onwards through NSDC which will act as
facilitator for conducting skill training as per Qualification Pack (QP)/ National Occupational Standard
(NOS). The revised scheme also includes a provision for incentive to training providers for achieving
70% or more redeployment. Besides, a provision is also there for additional support to beneficiary in
special areas like North East & special groups like women, SC, ST, etc. All these measures would help
in achieving higher rate of redeployment under the Scheme.
Regarding use of funds from the Non-Lapsable Pool of NER for benefit of CPSEs in NER for their
revival, it is submitted that CPSEs are not under the administrative control of DPE, the revival of CPSEs
through use of funds from non-lapsable pool of NER is not under the mandate of this Department.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee appreciates the measures taken under the Counselling, Retraining/
Redeployment (CRR) Scheme during 2016-17 by the Department to improve redeployment under
the scheme. Further, the Committee is optimistic that the result may be evident in the budget

10
figures for the ensuing year. However, the Committee finds that the reply of the Government
does not mention anything about further relook at the scheme, DPE plans to undertake. On the
benefits of the scheme, the Committee recommends that DPE should ensure that ground reality
checks are conducted on the results projected as part of the scheme.
Regarding the use of funds from the Non-Lapsable Pool for benefit of CPSEs in NER for
their revival, it has come to the notice of the Committee that CPSEs located in the NER can
benefit from the Non-Lapsable Pool of NER. Under such conditions, considering that most of the
CPSEs or their units located in NER are facing persistent losses, sickness, the Department
should try and play the role of a facilitator in reviving and restructuring the beleaguered CPSEs,
struggling for their very survival. Many CPSEs are setting up their projects in North East and
are looking for skilled technician, DPE may try and convince Ministry of DoNER to utilize the
unutilized funds to impart skill to the local manpower as well.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee finds that the Government has set up a well-defined time bound institutional and
procedural mechanism for the revival / restructuring and closure of CPSEs in the Country. While the role
of DPE in the process is restricted to the issue of general facilitative guidelines to be followed by
administrative Ministries/ Departments in this regard, the NITI Aayog has a decisive role in giving the
final recommendation on the revival/ restructuring or closure of CPSEs. The administrative Ministries/
Departments have been entrusted with the responsibility of the execution of the decision after the
approval of CCEA. (Para 53)
Action Taken
Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations
In reply to Committee's observations in para 23, the Department sought to justify higher
allocation for Secretariat Economic Services on the grounds that it provided advice on revival,
restructuring or closure of CPSEs. However, its reply to Para 53, suggests that DPE is in
agreement to the Committee's observation that it has only a limited role of issuing general
facilities guidelines in cases of revival, restructuring or closure of CPSEs. There is blatant
contradiction in these two replies of DPE.

11
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
Recommendation/Observation
While examining the Head wise budgetary provisions for 2017-18, it is seen that the Head that has
attracted the largest allocation is 'Secretariat Economic Services'. Out of the total allocated funds of
Rs.19.38 crore to the Department, Rs.10.98 cr has been given to this non-scheme Head. The scheme
allocation is only Rs.8.00 cr. In view of this, the Committee observes that the expenditure to maintain
the establishment exceeds the schemes that it administers. (Para 23)
Action Taken
Besides, implementation of the two Plan Schemes, there are numerous other important activities
undertaken by Department, the expenditure in respect of which is required to be incurred from Non-
Scheme allocation side. These include Permanent Machinery of Arbitration (PMA), formulation of Wage
and other general policy guidelines of CPSEs, categorization of CPSEs including conferring Ratna Status,
rendering advise on revival, restructuring or closure of CPSEs, monitoring of capital expenditure projects
of CPSEs etc. Hence, the establishment cost of the Department has to cater to the above-mentioned
functions also which do not fall under the ambit of the two Plan Schemes.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee would like the Department to provide the breakup of Non schemes allocation
for Secretariat Economic Services for last 3 years.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee notes that the RDC scheme introduced in 2007-08 has been plagued by under-
utilisation of funds over the years. However, it is understood that the scheme has gone revision in
February 2016 to make it more comprehensive and need based. The activities have been designed to be
spread out better. Also, some schemes have been merged into the RDC scheme during the year at the
instance of MoF . The Committee expects that these remedial measures would help the scheme to be more
effective and facilitate fund utilisation more effectively. Having observed this, the Committee also
observes the fact that the utilisation during 2016-017 is around 70% with two months remaining in the
year . (Para 37)
Action Taken
Observations of the Committee with regard to proper utilisation of funds under the RDC scheme
have been duly noted.
11

12
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee would like to be apprised of the total utilization of funds under RDC scheme
for the year 2016-17.
Recommendation/Observation
As regards to the activities conducted under the Scheme, the Committee finds that awareness and
other related training activities about mandatory/regulatory/legal requirements of CPSEs like CSR, Corporate
Governance, MoU, etc. are covered therein. The Committee is appreciative of this fact and wants DPE
to persist with such programmes as it will help the employees of CPSEs to keep abreast of the operational
features of the said requirements. In this regard, the Committee recommends the inclusion of awareness
programmes relating to the statutory provisions made under the Public Procurement Policy issued by
Ministry of MSME prescribing 20% procurement from SMEs and Vendor Development within the ambit
of the RDC scheme. (Para 38)
Action Taken
The recommendation made by the Committee regarding inclusion of awareness programmes relating
to statutory provisions made under the Public Procurement Policy issued by Ministry of Micro, Small
& Medium Enterprises prescribing 20% procurement from SMEs and Vendor development has been
noted for compliance. DPE has conducted a full day Workshop on "Capacity Building of CPSEs on
procurement policy of M/o MSME" in collaboration with the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises on 15th March, 2017 in Delhi for CPSEs and the Administrative Ministries / Departments to
sensitize them about the procurement policy issued by Ministry of MSME. The workshop was attended
by senior officers from Administrative Ministries / Departments and Board level officers from CPSEs.
The workshop was organized under the RDC Scheme of DPE.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee notes the reply, however, would like DPE to conduct more such workshops
and monitor the effect of such sensitization in procurement from SMEs as per the Procurement
Policy and update the same to the Committee.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee further takes note that under the Scheme, a provision of Rs. 1 crore has been made
towards subscription to the annual ICPE contribution of the country. In its earlier DFG reports (2015-
16), the Committee had recommended the Department to review this allocation. Accordingly, the Committee
reiterates its earlier recommendation on the issues and wants DPE to look into the possibilities of
exploring indigenous alternatives for the courses offered by ICPE, Ljubljana, Slovenia for addressing
the needs of the CPSE employees. The Committee may be informed of the rationale of continuing costly
subscription of ICPE when domestic alternatives are available in the country (Para 39)
Action Taken
India is a founder member of ICPE, Slovenia and has been attending its Council and Assembly
Sessions regularly. The amount of US$ 1, 50,000 (equivalent to Rs. 1.00 crore approx.) payable towards

13
Govt. of India's Membership to ICPE has been decided with the approval of Department of Expenditure,
M/o Finance.
Regarding training needs of executives of Indian public sector enterprises, it is mentioned that
CPSEs design their own human resource development programmes to upgrade skills and knowledge of
middle and senior level executives by giving them training through their own management institutes or
outsourcing their training needs to premier management training institutions in the country and abroad.
Recently, DPE has organized a meeting with the Indian institutes which have been sponsoring
candidates for training courses to ICPE, Slovenia, to learn about the utility of continuing such programmes.
Based on their feedback and a review of the financial health of ICPE, including their infrastructure
facilities, a suitable decision will be taken in consultation with MEA, whether to continue these training
programmes or not.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the meeting of DPE with the
Indian institutes and the follow up decision taken/proposed to be taken in consultation with MEA
regarding the utility of continuing programmes like training at ICPE.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee notes that DPE has initiated measures aimed at carrying out the responsibilities
under its new mandate of monitoring CAPEX by CPSEs. The Committee observes that if the Department
continues this important monitoring activity it can help encourage CPSEs to utilize their locked up
capital towards their own business expansion, modernisation and diversification which in turn would
contribute to the overall economic development of the nation. (Para 41)
Action Taken
Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations
The Committee would like to be furnished with the feedback obtained by DPE regarding
CAPEX by CPSEs from the time, the Department started monitoring this parameter.
Recommendation/Observation
MoU is seen by the Committee as an instrument to assess the financial and physical performance
and social obligations of CPSEs in the Country. Evaluation of CPSEs through the MoU system is one
of the core responsibilities of DPE. During the last year and the current year, the Committee finds that
the targeted number of MoUs to be signed could not be met. Further, regarding the mechanism of MoU,
the Committee takes into account that during 2016-17 there have been some notable changes in the
system. Introduction of result oriented parameters and increased weightage for CAPEX are some of them.
The Parameters recently set forth by the Department for MoU evaluation like CSR and 20% Public
Procurement Policy compliance and CAPEX are socially and economically very relevant. Accordingly,

14
the Committee is of the opinion that MoU, currently being the single mechanism under DPE to monitor
such relevant and crucial factors, should be effective to act as a deterrent for deviant CPSEs in matters
of compliance. Therefore, the Committee recommends that DPE should strive to evolve the instrument
of MoU to help calibrate the functioning of CPSEs to be in unison with the priorities of the nation.
The Committee also recommends that all out efforts be made by the Department to ensure that the
targeted numbers of MoUs to be signed are met. (Para 46)
Action Taken
Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations.
The specific measures adopted by DPE during the current fiscal year in tune with the
recommendations of the Committee may be submitted. Also, the details of CPSEs with whom
MoU have been signed may be furnished to the Committee.

15
MINUTES

XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 8th August, 2017 in Committee Room "D". Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
 1. Shri Sharad Yadav  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Narendra Budania
3. Shri Ram Narain Dudi
4. Shri K. K. Ragesh
5. Shri Vivek K. Tankha
6. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary
8. Shri S. P. Muddahanume Gowda
9. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
10. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani
11. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao
12. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa
13. Shri Y .V . Subba Reddy
14. Shri Rameshwar Teli
15. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
16. Shrimati Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shrimati Sreeja. V , Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Divender Singh Bisht, Committee Officer
17

18
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the members of the Committee and briefed
them that the agenda of the meeting was to consider and adopt the draft 283rd report of the Committee
on Action Taken on the 282nd report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2017-180 pertaining
to the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises) as furnished
by the Department.
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up the Draft 283rd report for consideration and unanimously
adopted the same.
3. The Committee then decided to present/lay its 283rd report in both the Houses of Parliament on
10th August. 2017. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence, Shri Narendra Budania,
Member, Rajya Sabha, Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav, Member, Rajya Sabha to present the 283rd report
on the Table of Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary, Member,
Lok Sabha and in his absence Shri S.P. Muddahanume Gowda, Member, Lok Sabha to lay the said report
on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. Thereafter, the Committee considered the letter received from Central Bank of India for re-scheduling
the proposed study visit of the Committee to Mumbai in view of the forthcoming Ganesh Chathurthi
festival in the State of Maharashtra from 24th August to 5th September. 2017 and decided to revise the
tour programme. The Committee accordingly decided to assemble at Mumbai on 21st August, 2017
instead of at Ahmedabad as decided earlier and to disperse at Ahmedabad on 25th August, 2017.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.20 
P.M.