 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
         December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
 
 ACTION TAKEN ON THE 242 nd  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14) 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
 (DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10 th  December,, 2013)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 th  December , 2013 ) 
 REPORT NO.  
252 
 
 REPORT NO.  
252 
 
 REPORT NO.  
252 
 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
         December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
 
 ACTION TAKEN ON THE 242 nd  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14) 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES  
(DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10 th  December, 2013 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 th  December , 2013 ) 

C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………….. (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………  (ii) 
 
3. REPORT …………………………………………………………………………………..(iii) 
 
(i)  CHAPTER – I 
 Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the              
Ministry ………………………………………………………………………… ……. 
 
(ii)  CHAPTER–II 
  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
  view of the Government's replies……………………………………………………… 
 
(iii)  CHAPTER–III 
   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has either not                        
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its                
replies…………………………………………………… ………………………… 
 
(iv)  CHAPTER – IV 
  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
  have not been  received…………………………………………………………….. 
 
4. * Minutes……………………………………………………………………………..     ……   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
* to be appended at printing stage. 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 31 st  August, 2013)  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
     
 1.  Shri K.C. Tyagi —       Chairman  
       2.  Shri M.P. Achuthan  
 3.  Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel  
 4.  Shri Narendra Budania 
    5.  Shri Vivek Gupta  
 6.  Dr. V. Maitreyan   
 7.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar  
 8.  Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
 9.  Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
10. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor  
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.   Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
16. Shri Hassan Khan 
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
18. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod  
19. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
20. Shri Somen Mitra 
21. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26.    Shri Ramsinh Rathwa  
27.    Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
28.    Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
29.    Ch. Lal Singh 
30.    Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
31.    Shri E.G.Sugavanam 
 
Secretariat  
 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3.      Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 (i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamen tary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Fifty-second Report on Action Taken Notes furni shed by the Department of Public 
Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Publi c Enterprises) on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hu ndred and Forty-second Report 
on the Demands For Grants (2013-14) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises. 
 
2.  I, thank the Department of Public Enterprises ( Ministry of Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises) for furnishing the Action Taken  Notes on the recommendations 
contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and forty-second Report. 
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on the 30 
th  October, 2013 considered and 
adopted the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri K.C. Tyagi 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
New Delhi 
October, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises  (Department of Public Enterprises) 
on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s  Two hundred and Forty- second 
Report on the Demands For Grants (2013-14) pertaini ng to Department of Public 
Enterprises. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterp rises) in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter I -  The recommendations/observations, which have bee n accepted by the 
Ministry. 
 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter -II -  The recommendations/observations which the Commi ttee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic 
and explanations advanced by the Ministry and there fore do not want to pursue them for 
the present. 
 
Chapter -III -  The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has 
not accepted replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry should furnish 
logical explanations thereof. 
 
Chapter -IV - The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received. 
 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its langua ge in vague terms therefore; the 
Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of 
recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention 
and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER – I 
 
The Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee regrets that non-plan funds have bee n increased and the plan 
funds have been reduced. The implication of this tr end is that loans, salaries, interest 
payments, etc, are getting more funds and schemes/p rojects/programmes which are 
central to the functioning of the PSEs are not gett ing adequate budgetary allocation. It is 
even more discouraging to find that only 50% of the curtailed allocation under plan funds 
could be utilized by the Department with only a mon th remaining in the financial year. 
Analyzing the broader picture, the Committee feels that the utilization figures of DPE 
under the plan head could have been done with visio n and foresight. In the Demands for 
Grant Report of the Committee 2012-13 the Committee  had observed that, “The 
Department must spend the money put under the plan head to achieve the desired 
results.” It is rather unfortunate that the funds e armarked for the plan category have not 
been utilized in spite of the recommendation of the  Committee to do so. 
                                       
                                                                                                                 Para No. 11 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
 The recommendation of the Committee to utilize the  plan funds to achieve the 
desired results shall be the guiding force in DPE’s  endeavours during the current year i.e. 
2013-14. 
 
 For the maximum utilization of plan funds during 2 013-14, action plans has been 
drawn for holding workshops / seminars / publicatio n of SLPE Survey etc. Two State 
Level meetings / workshops have been already conduc ted in Delhi and Goa during May 
2013 in respect of SLPEs.  
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that the money earmarked for an y scheme for the North 
Eastern Region does not lapse. However, non-utiliza tion of such money is a poor 
reflection on the ability and expertise of the Depa rtment. The North Eastern part of India 
has always been given special attention for its dev elopment and progress. Any scheme 
meant for that region has to be seen in this broade r context. While it is true that funds 
meant for schemes of the North Eastern Region would  be carried forward, it is equally 
important that determined efforts need to be taken to use the funds allotted for a 
particular year. The unutilized funds cannot be treated as ‘saving’. Rather, the Committee 
feels that such unutilized funds are indicative of lack of seriousness of purpose and action 
on the part of the Department. In case of money whi ch remains unspent after meeting the 
objectives of a scheme that money, in true sense of  the term, can be called as savings. 

Accordingly, it is recommended that the Ministry ma y use terms which should be exact 
in terms of nomenclature and terminology. 
                                                                                                                       Para No. 13 
Action Taken Replies 
 
 Noted. Special efforts to utilize funds earmarked for North Eastern Region have 
been made. The Department approached CPSEs located in N.E. Region to furnish 
comprehensive list of VRS optees. Based on this inf ormation, further action has been 
initiated for setting up Employees Assistance Centr es (EACs) by implementing agencies 
to train VRS optees of NE Region under CRR during 2013-14. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that the CRR scheme has been an  important initiative for 
the welfare of the VRS optees of CPSEs. However, it  is apparent that the scheme in its 
present form is not serving the purpose for which i t was created. The Committee is aware 
that the DPE intends to reinvent the scheme by iden tifying fresh pockets of beneficiaries, 
revision of course curriculum, national level certi fication of training, etc. The Committee 
recommends an objective assessment of the scheme mu st be made. The Committee also 
recommends that the Department must ensure that the  VRS beneficiaries are properly 
redeployed. In this context, it is strongly recomme nds to monitor the scheme and submit 
a report to the Committee. 
Para No. 22 
Action Taken Replies 
 
 For having an objective assessment of the CRR sche me, this Department had 
engaged National Institute for Entrepreneurship and  Small Business Development 
(NIESBUD), an autonomous body under the Ministry of  Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises (MSME) for evaluation of the CRR scheme  and a copy of action taken on 
their report is enclosed at Annexure A.  
 DPE is continuously monitoring the CRR scheme not only by way of obtaining 
progress reports and Utilisation Certificates from the implementing agencies but also 
through inspections by officers of DPE and Third Pa rty Assessing Agencies (TPAA), 
from time to time. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that the implementation of the scheme in the North Eastern 
part of India is highly unsatisfactory. Year after year, the funds meant for the North 
Eastern part are not utilized for implementation of the scheme and these are transferred to 
the non lapsable pool without producing any signifi cant results. This is not at all a 
heartening development. The Department officials mu st be more sensitive to the North 

Eastern Region. In this context, the Committee reco mmends that the revamped CRR 
Scheme must be more effective in the North Eastern Region of our country. 
Para No. 23 
Action Taken Replies  
 It is submitted that CRR scheme is demand driven a nd to that extent, this 
Department’s ability to fully utilise the earmarked  funds depends on the availability of 
VRS optees from the units located in NE Region. The refore, the Department approached 
CPSEs in that region to furnish comprehensive list of VRS optees. Based on this 
information, further action has been initiated for setting up Employees Assistance Centres 
(EACs) by implementing agencies to train VRS optees  of NE region under CRR during 
2013-14. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 In this regard, the Committee notes that the scheme  which was proposed on 2009 
could be finally approved only in January, 2013.It is also being observed that the 
Department would do well to avoid any further delay  in the implementation of the 
scheme. The Committee also observes that the feedba ck of respective State Governments 
and State Level Public Sector Enterprises must be t aken to further fine tune the scheme. 
Stress should be laid for time bound implementation  of the scheme and it should be 
reflected in the Result-Framework Document (RFD) of the Ministry / Department.  
Para No. 27 
Action Taken Replies 
 
 For the time bound implementation of scheme the ta rgets will be set under Skill 
Development / Training programmes of Executives of SLPEs as per the 
recommendations of the Screening Committee / Oversi ght Committee as constituted, for 
this Plan Scheme. 
 The meeting of the Standing Committee of State Lev el Secretaries was also held 
in Delhi during May 2012 and May 2013 to fine tune the scheme. The Department of 
Public Enterprises (DPE) is conducting regular meet ings of State Secretaries of all the 
States / UTs and the same is being attended by many  State Secretaries and there is a 
continuous flow of ideas and information from Centr e to State. Even the Result-
Framework Document (RFD) targets of DPE for the yea r 2013-14 include adoption of 
MoU System in SLPEs (States already implementing Mo U system & those agreeing in 
principle) as the target. 
  
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee takes note of the fact that opportuni ties are now being created for 
effective utilization of funds by the North Eastern  Region. However, it regrets that the 
failure on the part of the DPE to stick to standard  budgetary proposal such as placing it 
under the proper head, labelling the nature of sche me, etc., led to non-utilization of the 

funds for such a long period. In this context, the Committee would like to observe that 
development of the North Eastern Region must not su ffer due to non adherence to 
standard budgetary process. The Committee, therefor e, recommends that the Department 
must take measure to comply with such procedures an d the proposals received from the 
state of Assam and Sikkim must be taken up on a priority basis. 
Para No. 33 
Action Taken Replies  
 Since the capacity to spend the entire amount earm arked for NE Region under the 
CRR Scheme is limited, it is now felt that efforts may be made to take up components 
covered under the other two Plan schemes viz. Resea rch, Development and Consultancy 
(RDC) and Skill Development Programme (SDP) schemes  also, in the NE Region. 
Accordingly, action has been initiated for creation  of Sub-heads for RDC and SDP 
schemes under Major Head-2552 for NE Region. 
Recommendation/ observation 
 In the opinion of the Committee, it is imperative that the status of action taken by 
the administrative Ministries or Departments on the  recommendations of the search 
Committee needs to be invariably monitored. In this  regard, it is recommended that DPE, 
being the nodal Department and policy formulator responsible for the general functioning 
of CPSEs, should be empowered to follow up the stat us of implementation of the 
recommendation of the Search Committee for the appo intment of the Non-Official 
Directors (NODs). It is also advisable that in the MoU signed by the concerned CPSEs 
must reflect the action taken by the administrative  Ministry in appointing NODs. The 
Government must also be held accountable in filling up such vacancies. 
                                                                                          Para No. 45 
Action Taken Replies 
 
DPE accepts the above recommendation and as recomme nded by the Department 
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industr y, DPE proposes to take necessary 
steps to maintain complete information relating to selection and appointment of non-
official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs including  monitoring of recommendations of 
Search Committee. DPE proposes to set up NOD Cell to undertake the above task. 
 
DPE also accepts the recommendation relating to act ion taken by the 
administrative Ministry in appointing NODs being reflected in the MoUs being signed by 
concerned CPSEs. The MoUs include a Section ‘Assistance from the Government’ and in 
order to implement this recommendation, DPE proposes to make it mandatory that MoUs 
of all CPSEs from next year i.e. 2014-15, would con tain the provision that the concerned 
administrative Ministry would take timely action fo r filling up positions of non-official 
Directors on the Board of concerned CPSE which woul d be mentioned in the Section 
‘Assistance from the Government’. 
 
 

CHAPTER–II 
The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Dep artment of Public Enterprises 
has paid heed to its recommendation to include R&D issue in the mission of the DPE and 
accordingly the issue of R&D finds in an appropriat e place in the mission statement of 
the Department.                                                         
                                                                                   Para No. 6 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee notes that the Department could get only 68.98% of the Plan fund 
sought for the 12 
th  Plan period. Other than the flagship schemes of CR R, DPE has 
relatively two new schemes such as skill Developmen t/ Training Programme of 
Executives of State  Level Public Enterprises and S cheme for Research, Development 
and Consultancy (RDC) on Generic issues concerning CPSEs & SLPEs which have been 
approved. The Committee notes that the DPE is going  to review the scheme of CRR 
because of its poor implementation. The Committee n otes that the issue of skill 
development must be given top priority. It is, ther efore, important that paucity of funds 
should not come on the way of effective achievement  of targets fixed for the 12 th  Plan 
period. 
Para No. 15 
Action Taken Replies  
 As of now sufficient funds are available for plan schemes for RDC and Skill 
Development / Training programmes of Executives of SLPEs for the year 2013-14. 
 
 The Committee’s advice that paucity of funds shoul d not hinder effective 
achievement of targets fixed for the 12th Plan peri od has been noted. An amount of 
Rs.5.00 crore has been allocated for implementation  of the scheme “Skill Development/ 
Training programme of Executives of State Level Pub lic Enterprises” during the 12th 
Plan. Based on the progress of the scheme during th e course of its implementation during 
the 12th Plan, additional funds can be sought, if needed. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER–III 
The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted 
the replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its replies 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee finds from the above table that since  the beginning of the scheme 
in 2008-09, there have been huge gaps between alloc ation and expenditure. However, the 
Department maintained that they have been saving lo t of funds allocated for the scheme. 
The Committee notes that the Department intends to have a comprehensive re-look at the 
scheme. The scheme has lot of potential which needs  to be tapped for deriving maximum 
benefit. In light of the above, it is recommended t hat a comprehensive reassessment of 
the scheme has to be done on a priority basis and t he efforts for publication of SLPEs 
survey has to be given importance. 
Para No. 30 
Action Taken Replies 
 
 The targets set under “RDC” Scheme are workshops / seminars, thematic 
consultancies and studies on generic issues of CPSE s and SLPEs, meeting of State 
Secretaries on SLPEs and preparation of annual surv ey of SLPEs. Through the 
workshops / seminars and meeting of State Secretari es there is a continuous flow of ideas 
and information from Centre to State. 
  
 The work on the preparation of the 3 rd   National Survey on SLPEs covering two 
years of 2008-09 & 2009-10 is in progress. The publ ication of survey depends upon the 
submission / confirmation of data from States / UTs. 
 
 
Further Recommendations 
 
 
The Committee notes that the reply broadly brings o ut the results of the 
RDC Scheme.  This information was also furnished mo re elaborately in the further 
Action Taken Replies to the 241 st  Report of the Committee on Industry on the 
Demands for Grant (2012-13).  However, the Committe e feels that replies does not 
address the issue of gap between allocation and exp enditure of funds under the 
scheme.  It is impressive to note that the scheme i s delivering effective results.  But 
the Committee is of the opinion that since the avai lability of fund is more than what 
is being expended under the scheme, DPE could do be tter by recalibrating the 
potential of RDC Scheme. Inclusion of more componen ts may be considered for the 
scheme as part of this process. 
 
 
 
 

Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee while analysis the working of the Mo U system understood that 
policies followed by the Government impact the performance of CPSEs. For instance, the 
import policy of the Government allows import of ca pital goods and equipment to our 
country in a more liberal manner with hardly any du ty on the imported item. As a result, 
the capacities of the domestic industry which inclu des the PSEs remain underutilized. 
Such policies of the Government adversely affect th e MoU performance of the PSEs. As 
a result, the concerned PSEs get a poor rating for no fault of theirs. Accordingly, the 
Committee recommends that while rating a PSE under a MoU regime the Government 
policy should be included as a measurable parameter . In other words, the Government 
policies must be factored in the process of evaluation of the MoU performance. 
Para No. 35 
Action Taken Replies 
 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) is a negotiated a greement between the 
Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) and the G overnment Department/ 
Administrative Ministry to fix the financial and no n-financial targets for next financial 
year and evaluate the same at end of the financial year against the target set, through 
MoU division of DPE as a nodal body.  
 
As per present MoU guidelines, targets fixed should  not be conditional or 
provisional. The CPSE, while proposing targets, tak es into account all concerned factors; 
internal and external. This is negotiated at the le vel of Task Force, where CPSE and 
Administrative Ministry are represented. It is set as potential achievable under the given 
and anticipated circumstances. 
 
During evaluation, for happenings beyond the contro l of the CPSE (force majeure 
type situation), if communicated by CPSEs through i ts administrative ministries to DPE, 
offset may be permitted. Thus, post negotiation, if  Government policies beyond the 
control of CPSEs are affecting MoU performance, the n CPSE through administrative 
ministry can communicate to DPE. The Task Force bas ed on merits can further decide 
whether to accept the contention of CPSE or not. Th is provision takes care of those 
developments which are post negotiation and ensures  that CPSE is not penalised for 
matters beyond their control. 
 
MoU is a tool to measure the performance of the CPS E. The parameters taken in 
MoU are those, which are related to and important i n indicating the performance of 
CPSE. No doubt while fixing the target of a paramet er, all related factors which are 
influencing this parameter are factored in. 
 
Thus, it is clear that the MoU regime provides for factoring in of Government 
policy while setting the target of parameter and at  the time of evaluation. This ensures 
that a CPSE is not unduly penalized or benefited by  the Government Policy. Adding a 
parameter in MoU of a CPSE indicating the impact of  a Government Policy will not add 
value to the MoU regime. 

The parameter based on Government Policy affecting the CPSE will not be 
helpful in performance measurement of CPSE. The imp act of Government Policy is also 
factored in, if applicable at the time of target setting of a CPSE. 
 
Further Recommendations  
 
The Committee reminds the DPE of its guidelines on MoU for years 2006-07, 
2007-08 and 2008-09 which clearly mentions that Governments obligations that have 
a direct bearing on the performance of enterprises and their effect on the 
performance should be quantified. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that 
DPE should consider spelling out the procedure/ mod alities to be followed by the 
CPSEs in the event of introduction of a new policy or change in the existing policy of 
the Government related to them.  
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee while taking note of the mechanism a vailable for revival and 
restructuring of CPSEs in India found that there is  inordinate delay in getting approval 
from the Government which is effecting revival prop osals after receipts of 
recommendations for revival from the BRPSE. In this  regard, the Committee is of the 
firm opinion that this state of affairs defeats the  very purpose of revival. Delayed action 
by the Government exceeding period upto 6 years can  render the financial packages 
redundant. The highly dynamic market environment in  which the CPSEs operate also 
makes delayed revival attempts meaningless. Accordi ngly, the Committee recommends 
that DPE should take initiative to establish an appropriate time line for the Government to 
take action on the revival recommendations of a sick CPSE. 
                                                                  Para No. 42 
Action Taken Replies 
 
 It is the responsibility of the concerned administ rative Ministries/Departments of 
the CPSEs to formulate proposals for revival/ rehab ilitation of sick companies on a case-
to-case basis and refer them to BRPSE through Depar tment of Public Enterprises for its 
recommendations and thereafter for approval of the Government. 
 
 BRPSE has so far given its recommendations for rev ival of 59 CPSEs and closure 
of 3 CPSEs to the Government. Based on the recommen dations of BRPSE, Government 
has so far approved revival of 45 CPSEs and closure  of 2 CPSEs. In case of 2 sick 
CPSEs, namely, Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. and Hindusta n Organic Chemicals Ltd the 
revival plans are under implementation. 
 
 D/o Public Enterprises (DPE) has advised the admin istrative 
ministries/departments from time to time to expedit e action for the revival of sick CPSEs 
in accordance with the recommendations of BRPSE in a given timeframe. DPE has vide 
its O.M. dated 06.07.2005 requested the administrat ive Ministries / Departments to 
process the recommendations of BRPSE and obtain the  approval of the competent 

authority within 8 weeks of the receipt of the reco mmendations of BRPSE. DPE again 
reviewed the procedure to speed-up the revival proc ess and issued guidelines on 
30.09.2011. Accordingly, the Administrative Ministr ies/Departments are required to 
process the recommendations of BRPSE and obtain the  approval of the competent 
authority within a time schedule of 8 weeks as sugg ested by DPE. In case the 
administrative Ministry/ Department fails to do so within the upper time line of 4 months, 
the concerned Ministry/ Department would have to su bmit a Note to the Cabinet/ CCEA, 
citing reasons for delay, and seek extension of time for submission of its proposal. 
Further Recommendations   
 
 No action taken by DPE after the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER – IV 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
have not been  received 
 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee regrets to note that only 78 CPSEs h ave furnished ACRs till now. 
The Committee observes that the efforts of DPE till  now have failed to generate the 
desired response from CPSEs. It is strongly felt th at DPE should make all efforts to 
secure the Annual Compliance Report regarding imple mentation of DPEs guidelines 
from all CPSEs in the country.       
Para No. 38 
Action Taken Replies 
 
 In compliance with the directions of the Hon’ble C ommittee, DPE intensified its 
efforts to obtain Annual Compliance Reports for the  year 2011-12 from CPSEs which 
had not submitted their reports earlier. As a resul t of persistent follow up Annual 
Compliance Reports of 180 CPSEs out of 225 have so far been received. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Public Enterprises Selection Board is part of the Department of Personnel and 
Training. Last year the Committee had observed that  such a scheme came into existence 
when there was no Department of Public Enterprises.  Now, that a full-fledged 
Department of Public Enterprises is there in the Go vernment it is important that the 
Public Enterprises Selection Board must be made part of the Department. The Committee 
would like to reiterate the recommendation which it  made last year. The Committee 
strongly recommends that such a change must take fo r the purpose of streamlining and 
quickening the process of succession planning in the PSEs. Apart from the PSEs and their 
administrative Ministry, the domain knowledge concerning the functioning of the PSEs is 
with the DPE. It finalizes their MoUs and sets thei r targets both in the financial and non-
financial sectors. It is, therefore, appropriate th at PESB must function under the 
jurisdiction of DPE. At a time when the Government of India is emphasizing on the need 
to reform the functioning the Central Public Sector  Enterprises, it is extremely important 
to include within the reform process the decision to transfer the PESB from the control of 
DoPT to DPE. Realizing the importance of the recomm endation it must be done 
irrespective of any resistance from any quarter.  
                                                                               Para No. 46 
Action Taken Replies 
 
 This issue was taken up at highest level in the Mi nistry of HI & PE with the 
highest level in the Government, for consideration of the matter of transfer of Public 

Enterprises Selection Board (PESB) from Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT) to 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE). The matter was duly examined at the highest 
level in consultation with the concerned stakeholde rs. It has been conveyed that no 
change in the existing allocation of business in respect of PESB is considered necessary. 
 
 In view of the observation of the Department Relat ed Parliamentary Standing 
Committee, DPE has requested DoPT vide  O.M.No.A-42011/4/2012-Admn. Dated 
04.07.2013 (copy enclosed at Annexure B)  to revisit the matter for appropriate decision 
regarding transfer of Administrative Jurisdiction o f Public Enterprises Selection Board 
(PESB) from Department of Personnel & Training (DoP T) to Ministry of Heavy 
Industries & Public Enterprises, Department of Public Enterprises,. 
 
Further Recommendations/ observations 
 
 
 The Committee finds that in the further Action Take n Replies to the 241 
st  
Report of the Committee on Demand for Grants 2012-1 3, it was informed that 
DoPT was working on a proposal to convert the PESB into a statutory body. It was 
also informed that the DPE was in agreement with th is proposal. In view of this, the 
Committee recommends that measures should be taken to have appropriate 
representation of DPE in the proposed statutory bod y and all existing lacunae 
resulting in problems like delay in filling up of v acancies in CPSEs should be ironed 
out. Also, the Committee expects to be informed of the progress made in this 
direction with in six months. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee regrets to note that some of largest  CPSEs in India are not 
utilizing the funds earmarked for CSR activities. T his can be viewed as an unhealthy 
trend having a direct bearing on the commitment of the CPSEs towards India’s social and 
environmental wellbeing. It is even more dishearten ing to note that this situation exists 
despite 5 % weightage being accorded to CPSEs for C SR activities in their MoU 
evaluation. Therefore, the Committee observes that the Department of Public Enterprises 
has to take cognizance of this aspect and keep a tab in the future efforts of these CPSEs to 
improve their performance in this area. It is expec ted that the Sustainability Fund would 
evolve as a handy tool in this process.  
                                                                                  Para No. 51 
Action Taken Replies 
 
 The suggestions made by the Committee are well tak en. The responsibility for 
ensuring compliance with DPE Guidelines vests with the Administrative Ministries / 
Departments. As far as DPE is concerned, this Depar tment has been repeatedly exhorting 
CPSEs to spend the budget earmarked for CSR and Sustainability activities/projects. DPE 
has also organized several conferences/workshops/se minars to sensitize CPSE executives 
on the need to sincerely discharge their corporate social responsibility and to comply with 
the DPE guidelines in this regard. DPE has also iss ued instructions vide  OM dated 1 st  

November, 2011 asking CPSEs to move towards the hig her end of their budgetary slabs 
for CSR spending. This is also reiterated in the ne w Guidelines on ‘CSR and 
Sustainability’ issued by DPE in December 2012 (eff ective from 1 st  April 2013). As per 
new guidelines the unutilized budget for CSR activi ties planned for a year will not lapse 
and will, instead, be carried forward to the next y ear. CPSEs will have to disclose the 
reasons for not fully utilising the budget allocate d for CSR and Sustainability activities 
planned for each year. The unspent amount will have  to be spent within the next two 
financial years, failing which; it would be transfe rred to a ‘Sustainability Fund’ to be 
created separately for CSR and Sustainability activ ities. The new guidelines on CSR and 
Sustainability issued by DPE provide that all profi t making CPSEs have to mandatorily 
take up two projects; one, in any one backward dist rict of the country as identified by the 
Planning Commission in its Backward Region Grand Fu nd (BGRF) Scheme, and the 
other project in environment sustainability. The Ma haratana CPSEs have to mandatorily 
take up one more CSR & Sustainability project besid es the two mentioned above. 
Further, the performance of CPSEs in their CSR and Sustainability work is evaluated 
through the MoU system in vogue, and a weightage of  8 % is earmarked for ‘CSR & 
Sustainability’ activities.”  
 
Further Recommendations/ observations 
 
 DPE may provide information on impact of recent Co mpanies Act, on CPSE 
in respect of CSR. 
 
 
 
 
*************** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 