PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
ONE HUNDRED  EIGHTY FOURTH  REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE COMMITTEE’S 172ND REPORT ON 
REQUIREMENT OF COIR INDUSTRIES FOR ITS PROMOTION 
AND PROLIFERATION (MINISTRY OF AGRO AND RURAL 
INDUSTRIES). 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON    22ND MAY, 2006) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  22ND MAY, 2006) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MAY  ,  2006/VAISAKHA, 1928 (SAKA) 
CONTENTS 
  
1.COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE                                                    
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                        
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
                                                                 
4.OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
                
 5.MINUTES                                                                                                                           
REPORT 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Agro
and Rural  Industries on the Recomm endations contained in the  172 nd      Report (of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Co mmittee on Industry) on  Requireme nt of Coir Industries  for its
Promotion And Proliferation  .  The Report was presented /laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lo k
Sabha on  the 12th  May, 2005. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been recei ved from the Ministry of Agro a nd Rural Industries  in respect o f
the   recommendations contained in the Report.   These have been categorized as follows: 
Chapter - I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry :- Paras : 
4.2 ,  4.5,  5.8, 7.2 , 7.3, 15.1, 17.1, 18.2, 18.3, 19.2, 21.1, 22.3, 24.3.2, 24.5.2, 24.5.4, 24.6.5, 24.6.7 and  
24.6.11.     
   The Committee is pleased to observe that  the   Ministry  has accepted its  recommendations as  
mentioned in Chapter –I of the  Report.   
Chapter - II- The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government's replies: - Paras :- 18.4   and 20.02  
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is  convinced  with the logic and explanation  
Page 1 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm

advocated by the Ministry  and therefore   does not want to  pursue them   further.   
Chapter - III- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted 
replies of the Ministry: -  Paras:- 1.8, 2.2, 23.3, 24.2.4, 24.4.5, 24.6.2, 24.6.9 and 24.8.3 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation  of recommendations contained in  
Chapter-III  and desires that the Ministry should furnish  logical  explanations  in respect of these 
recommendations.    
Chapter - IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which  final replies of the  Ministry have 
not been received.  Paras:-  :- 14.2, 16.2, 24.1.2, 24.1.4 24.7.4, 24.9.4, 24.10.2 and 24.11. 2. 
In respect  of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has  either   furnished the interim 
replies or couched its language in  vague terms like  noted for compliance/guidance, therefore, the 
Committee desires  that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in  respects of 
recommendations categorized   in Chapter-IV  in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of 
the recommendations of the Committee. 
3.The Details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages. 
CHAPTER - I 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
  
Recommendation 
  
1.0       Cost reduction of coir products 
  
1.1       The Committee takes note of the basic characteristics and problem of coir industries and the 
action taken or be envisaged to be taken by the  Coir Board and the Ministry of ARI. The Committee is 
of the view  that with massive efforts and implementation of financial assistance  scheme to encourage 
setting up of new units would result into higher utilisation of husk from the present level of thirty seven 
percent. The  Committee recommends that the Ministry of ARI and Coir Board to undertake cost 
management programme in the coir manufacturing units with the assistance of Research Institute like 
Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India, Ahmedabad and others.  Due impetus may also be 
given to cluster development activities and consortium approach to reduce the cost of production. 
(Para. 4.2) 
1.1.1    The Committee understands that Coir Industries is a labour intensive industry and major 
components of the labour force are the women. Therefore, promotion and furtherance of coir industries 
would lead to empowerment of women besides enhancing  the economic prosperity of the States. Action 
Plan may be chalked out for enhancing the economy of scale so that cost of production may come down 
and avenues of employment generation may further be explored. 
(Para. 4.5) 
Action Taken 
1.1.2    Observations of the Committee on financial assistance, cost reduction, women empowerment , 
economies of scale, etc., serve as guidelines to the Ministry of ARI and Coir Board  for formulation of 
future schemes and policies for development of the  coir industry. The Coir Board has been trying to 
involve financial  institutions  in funding the  coir industry. The Board has been arranging meetings of 
lead bank officers, State Industries Department officials and entrepreneurs in all coir producing States  
to facilitate  flow of adequate funds to the coir sector. As 80% of the work force in the coir industry 
consists women, they will benefit the most from future developments. Cost reduction by encouraging 
economies of scale  is feasible through cluster based development. This is one of the objectives of the 
SFURTI ( Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of Traditional Industries).  
  
Recommendations  
1.2       Coir industr
y as export oriented industry
Page 2 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm

  
1.2.1    The Committee understands that coir exporters face competition in markets abroad from other 
natural products like Chinese Grass Mats, Rubber, Sisal and coir products being exported by Sri Lanka, 
Taiwan, Philippines etc. Synthetic products manufactured using improved technology and supported by 
publicity also pose great threat to the coir exports.  The Coir  geo-textiles  are  facing competition from 
Sri Lanka and  synthetic geo-textiles materials which dominate the market. Therefore, the Committee 
feels that the Government should provide assistance by reimbursing  a portion of the expenditure 
incurred on brand based publicity  abroad projecting the eco-friendly nature of the coir geo-textiles to 
meet this competition.  
( Para. 5.8) 
Action Taken   
1.2.2    To promote the export of coir products, including geotextiles, the Government extends assistance 
under the scheme of Export Market Promotion for various activities like participation in exhibitions, 
conduct of market study, sponsoring delegations, release of product specific advertisements in foreign 
trade magazines, etc. 
Recommendation  
1.3       Marketing Strategy 
1.3.1    The Committee is of the view that steps being contemplated by the Coir Board to promote the 
marketing and sales of coir products in the domestic market  which inter-alia include intensification of 
promotional measures like publicity through print and electronic media;  increased  participation in trade 
fairs and exhibitions; organisation of Buyer Seller Meets  in potential regions;  organisastion of special 
sales campaign and festival discount offer to promote sales;  organising collective participation of 
manufactures in selected trade fairs and exhibitions;  popularization of new products like coir geo-
textiles, garden articles, coir pith based  products through awareness creation programmes etc would go 
a long way in the promotion and furtherance of the Coir Industries in India and would inject competitive 
resilience to face the global competition wherein China is becoming a great threat to the India’s 
monopoly in  the Coir Industries.  (Para. 7.2) 
Action Taken 
1.3.2    Participation in trade fairs, exhibitions buyer-seller meets, etc.,  is organised by   the Board  both 
within the country and abroad for popularisation of coir products. Almost all coir products and their 
applications are displayed at these exhibitions. Coir Board participated in 61 domestic exhibitions  
during 2004-2005.        Participation in the specialised  international exhibition is another scheme 
implemented by the Coir Board to expand the export market for coir products. During 2004-2005,  the 
Board participated in  four different specialised exhibitions at New Delhi. 
1.3.3    The Board also participated in  4 exhibitions abroad, alongwith the exporters, during  2004-2005. 
One of these exhibitions  was the Domotex International Trade Fair, Hannover, Germany. From coir 
sector ,22 exporters participated in the fair on their own and 5 exporters attended the fair by availing of 
government assistance through the Coir Board. The Coir Board also participated  in the product 
promotion programme coinciding with the Formex  Fair at Stockholm,  Sweden by arranging an 
attractive display of coir products and literature on coir.  
1.3.4    Catalogue shows are also a useful way of exposing the innovative products which generate new 
trade leads, enrich existing trade and also help establish fresh business contacts. Coir Board participated 
in six catalogue shows during 2004-2005 in countries like Algeria, Germany, Greece, Mangolia, South 
Africa and Vietnam.  The Board also released advertisements  projecting the bio-degradable, 
environment friendly aspects and  varied end use applications of Indian coir products in nine foreign 
magazines during 2004-2005. 
Recommendation  
1.4       Modifications in products 
1.4.1    The Committee is of the  opinion  that in the liberalized and globalisation market structure since 
the consumer is the king, all marketing and sales strategy should be based on the plank of the actual 
need and taste of the consumer therefore, the marketing should be conducted accordingly and efforts 
Page 3 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm

should be made for introducing modifications in products. This would lead to widening of product range 
and suitably meeting the demand of the consumer as per specification. Popularisation  of value products 
through buyer seller meet and seminar would definitely lead to product promotion, co-operative coir 
marketing strategy, and public private partnership would lead to encouragement to coir industries.  
( Para. 7.3) 
                                                                                                         
Action Taken 
1.4.2    The research and development wing of the Coir Board has been making use of the  feedback 
received  from the  Coir Board’s 31 show rooms in the country, participation in the foreign exhibitions 
and contributions of various R & D Institutes, Universities, private manufacturers, etc., in developing 
new products/ modifications to existing products and new user areas. The private sector also contributes 
to the development of new products, processing technologies, etc., and exploring new export markets. 
1.4.3    A recent attempt of the Coir Board has been to develop furnishing materials by mixing coir fibre 
with locally available fibre, using local technologies and methods. The Board has also been attempting 
to identify new areas where coir products can be applied. Its efforts in this direction have resulted in the 
development of “coir geo-textiles” a geo-fabric used for soil erosion control and reforestation, “coir 
ply”  a wood substitute for saving the depleting forest cover,  “pith plus”  a fungi that helps to convert 
the problematic coir pith  into environment friendly  manure, etc. As a result of efforts of the Coir 
Board, coir geo-textiles are now being used for soil stabilisation in many parts of the country.  
 Recommendations 
1.5       Creation of Utility Demand    
1.5.1    There is a lack of initative in the part of exporters   for undertaking   promotional efforts  such as 
direct publicity, brand promotion , efforts to  enter new market etc , this is due to poor nature of the 
industry. The Committee feels that Coir Board should undertake promotional campaigns in markets 
abroad projecting the eco friendly nature of coir products for which advance proposals will be given by 
the Coir Board and necessary approval should be  accorded by the Government even at the beginning of 
the financial year itself.  
(Para. 15.1) 
Action Taken 
             
1.5.2    Participation in trade fairs, exhibitions buyer-seller meets, etc., is organised by   the Coir Board  
both within the country and abroad for popularisation of coir products. Almost all coir products and their 
applications are displayed in these exhibitions. Coir Board participated in 4 exhibitions abroad 
alongwith exporters during 2004-2005. 
1.5.2    At the beginning of each financial year, proposals of participation of the Coir Board in various 
trade fairs/exhibitions abroad are decided.  
Recommendation 
1.6       Capturing new markets through delegation, Market missions , publicity etc. 
  
1.6.1    The Committee is of the opinion that apart from participation in exhibitions, it is also necessary 
to undertake delegations and Marketing Missions to USA and EU countries to give market education. 
Release of advertisements in leading magazines should also be resorted to regularly.(Para. 17.2) 
Action Taken 
1.6.2    The recommendation of the Committee to send delegations and marketing missions to USA and 
EU  countries has been noted. Generic publicity in reputed foreign trade magazines is one of the 
activities of the Board. Through these advertisements the Board projected the varied end-uses and 
environment - friendly qualities of coir. During 2004-05, the Board gave advertisements in nine 
magazines / specialised publications.  
 Recommendation 
  
1.7       Product diversification, quality improvement through technology development 
Page 4 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm

1.7.1    The Committee is of the view that Coir Board should come out with course of action required to 
be undertaken for the product diversification through technology development and forward the same to 
Ministry for executing the project.   
( Para. 18.2) 
1.7.2    The Committee is also of the view that the technology up gradation /automation/quality control 
etc have to be achieved to ensure high volume production of quality products to be competitive .in the 
export field. It is, therefore, necessary to extend assistance to the trade for export production, quality 
design, development and product diversification.      
(Para. 18.3) 
Action Taken 
1.7.3    The Coir Board has already undertaken several R & D projects on product diversification and 
quality upgradation  in association with other  R & D institutions, universities, etc., in the country. 
1.7.4    The Coir Board has identified that the structure of coir fibre has to be modified suitably to 
attempt diversification of product. Hence, it is proposed to undertake a project in collaboration with the 
Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkatta on chemical characteristic  of coir fibre  and modification 
of coir fibre for enhanced longevity. The project undertaken by the Coir Board in collaboration with RV 
TIFAC  Composite Design Centre for the development of coir composite products is also in line  with 
the recommendations of the Committee. The products developed are ready for launching.  
1.7.5    Another project undertaken by the Coir Board with the Konkan Railway Corporation relates to 
uses of composite boards in the construction of rail over bridges.  
1.7.6    At the export-oriented production centres, the Coir Board is making  concerted efforts to 
 develop suitable technology for softening and bleaching of coir fibre, using enzymes in a cost effective 
manner. A project has been undertaken in association with the Indian Association of Cultivation 
Science, Kolkata.  
1.7.7    As for dyeing of coir, so far chemical dyestuff was used by the industry  so as  to encourage the 
use of natural materials like turmeric, henna,  coffee, etc., in coloring the coir fibre, the Coir Board 
undertook a project with Indian Institute of Technology (IIT)  and developed 16 novel shades. As a 
second phase of the project, it is proposed to set up a pilot plant at Central Coir Research Institute for 
extraction of natural dyes. 
Recommendation 
1.8       Market Survey 
1.8.1    The Committee is of the considered view that in a competitive market economy market 
survey/study is indispensable for exploring new avenues/ horizon of market, therefore, the Coir Board 
should undertake measures for exploring new market in Africa, Latin America and Third world 
countries. 
(Para. 19.2) 
Action Taken 
1.8.2    Coir is an export oriented industry. The Board proposes to conduct market study/ survey in 
established markets to explore the possibilities of expanding the existing market and introducing coir 
products in non-traditional markets . The programme can be  implemented in close co-operation with the 
Indian Missions in the respective countries. It would be possible to assess the market size, 
characteristics, trends, level of competition, tariff and non tariff barriers etc. through these studies. Coir 
Board also proposes to sponsor coir delegations/ marketing missions to selected countries. The Coir 
Board would take necessary steps to explore the potential of marketing coir in Africa, Latin America 
and Third World countries, as recommended by the Committee.  
Recommendation 
Creation of a Guidance Cell 
1.9.1    The Committee desires that there should be a Guidance Cell responsible to collect, compile and 
disseminate information on quality standards for entering into external markets, technology available for 
import, close linkage between manufacturers, exporters and Consortiums requirement of packaging and 
labeling, import duties, sanitary and phytosanitary requirement, testing facilities, trade enquiries etc. 
Page 5 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm

This cell may also be responsible for guidance in the matters relating to WTO  
   (Para. 21.1) 
Action Taken  
1.9.2    At present, the Coir Board has a section for promotion of export of coir and coir products. The 
section provides some of the types of assistance (as recommended  by the Committee) to entrepreneurs 
in a limited way. On trade information to exporters, the Coir Trade Information Centre at the Board’s 
head office,. Kochi has been providing regular feedback . 
  
Recommendation 
  
1.10     The Committee feels that the Inter Governmental Group meeting of the FAO and the AGM of 
the International Erosion Control Association(IECA)  being held regularly  Coir Board may be allowed 
to participate on regular basis and get benefited out come of the Conference. 
(Para. 22.3) 
Action Taken 
1.10.1  The Coir Board has participated in the  37th Annual Conference of the International Erosion 
Control Association (IECA) held at Long Beach, California, USA during 20-24 February, 2006. 
  
Recommendation 
1.11     Development of Versatile Spinning machine 
1.11.1  The Coir Industry requires a versatile spinning machine compatible for production of different 
varieties of  coir yarn with higher productivity, less strain and capable of undertaking commercial 
production(Para. 24.3.2) 
Action  Taken 
1.11.2  Based on the recommendation of the Committee and also demand of the trade, the Coir Board, 
through its research institutes, has been making concerted  efforts for development of a versatile 
machine. Apart from the continuing research activities under the “Development of Coir Machinery” 
with a view to securing private sector participation, the  Coir Board has instituted  a cash award of Rs. 5 
lakh for development of  versatile machine. In the meanwhile, the Coir Board has undertaken a 
collaborative project with SITRA, Coimbatore for development of a spinning system for blending coir 
with jute fibre and spinning yarn. The project is in concluding stages of implementation. The  Coir 
Board also proposes to procure one mini jute spinning machine so as to improvise it for spinning coir 
yarn without core thread. Simultaneously, the  Coir Board has also submitted a project proposal to the 
FAO for funding support of the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC) for the development of a 
versatile spinning machine . The project is under active consideration of the CFC.  
  
Recommendation 
1.12     Popularisation of Coir-ret and Pith plus 
  
1.12.1  The Committee desires that the Coir Board should take adequate research activities and field 
demonstration on the use of coirret for faster rating and thus improving the quality and strength of coir 
fibre.(Para. 24.5.2) 
Action Taken 
1.12.2  The Coir Board is undertaking activities in popularization of Coirret and Pithplus in the major 
coir production centres by organizing field demonstrations on the treatment of green husk fibre using 
Coirret and conversion of Coir Pith in Organic Manure using Pithplus. In the continuing programme of 
work, the  Coir Board was able to change the solid formulation of Coirret into liquid formation so as to 
make the handling  of  the Coirret easier. and to change to a vegetable base from animal base so as to 
avoid the foul smell. Similarly, in the case of Pithplus, the period of composting has been reduced to 21 
days from 30 days. A technology has also been developed for composting coir pith in hillocks using 
perforated pipes facilitating aeration.  
Page 6 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm

Recommendation 
  
1.13     The Committee is in agreement with the Coir Board that the intervention of coir producing State 
Governments in popularising pith based organic manure through their agriculture Departments and 
horticultural societies would result in setting up of new pith processing units and generating  a ready 
domestic market product. Conversion of coir pith into an organic manure could be made a gainful 
economic activity to generate additional rural employment, particularly in coir producing regions. 
Therefore, the committee desired that the Ministry of ARI should take up the issue with coir producing 
State Government. (Para. 24.5.4) 
Action Taken 
  
1.13.1  The State Governments are being pursued to take up the conversion of coir pith into Organic 
Manure using pithplus as a commercial activity for gainful employment generation for women workers 
in their respective states.  
Recommendation   
1.14     Extension of  Market facilities in the country 
1.14.1  The functioning of Coir Board showrooms and sales depots are to be strengthened through 
appointment of dealers /Commission Agents , opening of mini sales depots  etc. to make coir product 
accessible to the rural and urban consumer public through the country in a better way. Further, the 
marketing assistance be extended to the manufacturer of non traditional products like pith based 
products, garden articles, coir polymer composites also by bringing those products too under the product 
range of the Coir Board  Showrooms and Sales Depots. This is required as an effort complimentary to 
promote coir products in the domestic market.  (Para 24.6.5)   
  
1.14.2  The Committee is of the opinion that in order to  counter the increasing threat due to unleashing 
liberalization and globliasation  process and thereby to sustain and  enlarge the domestic market the 
promotional efforts have to be undertaken through intensification of the existing efforts and observation 
of special promotion/ sales campaigns   (Para  24.6.7)  
Action Taken  
1.14.3  As suggested by the Committee, the Coir Board is planning to empanel sales agents on an 
experimental basis in 10 showrooms  including 4 metro and 6 other cities  Opening Mini sales depots in 
metropolitan cities  and possibility of arranging display stands for coir products in super markets are 
also being examined as ways to boost up the sales of coir products in domestic market. The Board has 
started to market products  like coirply, garden articles, coir pith based products, etc., developed through 
its research  and development efforts, through its showrooms and sales depots.  
Recommendation 
1.15     The Committee is of the view that Ministry of ARI Should take up the issue of the Government 
share of the Market Development Assistance (MDA)  with the Ministry of Finance for allocation as per 
requirement.  The Government share of Market Development Assistance is now disbursed through 
appropriation of funds earmarked for Domestic Market Development under Plan scheme of the Coir 
Board. Allocation of adequate funds specifically for disbursement of MDA in the Annual Plan allocation 
to the Coir Board to meet the entire claim from State Government would benefit units in the cooperative 
and public sector, who are committed to promotion of minimum wages and other obligatory benefits to 
the coir workers.   
 (Para. 24.6.11) 
Action Taken 
  
1.15.1  As regards Market Development Assistance, an additional provision has been made in the 
Revised Estimates for 2005-2006 of the Coir Board for the purpose. 
CHAPTER - II 
  
Page 7 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm

THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
2.0       Recommendation 
2.1       The Committee feels that Government may grant the Coir Board the status of an approved 
agency for quality inspection of coir product which would enable the buyers to utilise the services of 
Coir Board  for quality certification. 
(Para. 18.4) 
Action Taken 
2.1.1    The Coir Board has been extending facilities to the exporters to get their shipment inspected and 
certificate issued at the instance of the shippers. 
Recommendation 
2.2       Encouraging SSI Coir Exporters to obtain ISO Certification 
2.2.1    The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry of ARI may examine the issue of empowering 
the Coir Board to implement the progamme of incentive for adoption of ISO standards by the SSI Coir 
Manufacturing exports.(Para. 20.02) 
Action Taken 
2.2.2    To encourage technological upgradation and quality improvement in SSI sector, the Ministry of 
Small Scale Industries (SSI) has been implementing an incentive scheme for SSIs to acquire ISO-
9000/ISO-140001 certification. Coir units which qualify as per the definition of SSIs are eligible to avail 
of the incentives available under this scheme. 
Chapter - III 
  
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS 
NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT OR THE COMMITTEE WANTS TO MAKE 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
  
ROLE OF COIR BOARD IN THE OVERALL DEVELOPMENT OF COIR INDUSTRY 
  
Recommendation 
  
 3.0      Role of Coir Board 
3.1       The Committee appreciates the role of Coir Board in the overall development of coir industry in 
India characterised by increased production, increased consumption, export and employment in rural 
sector. Development of Coir Industries in India has led to Women Empowerment and welfare of 
workers. The role of the Coir Board in the field of R&D  in coir sector has strengthened new products 
like coir ply, packaging material and geo-textiles. Coir Board as a national organisation has been 
committed to the sustainable development. The Committee hopes that the Coir Board would continue to 
make its lasting contribution in the promotion and proliferation of Coir Industries not only in the coir 
producing States but the non traditional zones also. 
(Para. 1.8) 
Action Taken   
  
3.1.1    Steps taken to promote the coir industry in the non -traditional States and Union Territories like 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Goa, Maharashtra, Assam, Tripura, Pondicherry, Lakshadweep, West 
Bengal and Jharkhand include (i) exte nsion of financial assistance fo r setting up new coir units and 
renovation of the existing units, (i i) conducting entrepre neur development programmes and quality 
improvement programmes for entrep reneurs, (iii) organi sing exposure tour of  entrepreneurs to 
traditional coir producing areas to acquaint them with the latest developments, (i v) technical assistance 
in setting up coir units, (v) field demonstrat ion on applications of latest technology, etc. As a result of 
the combined efforts of Coir Board, Coir producing States and the entreprene urs, now coir products 
have started to be exported from several non-traditional areas as well.  
Page 8 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm

FURTHER RECOMMENDATION  
  
3.1.2    The Committee appreciates th e continued effort s of the Coir Board in the promotion of coir 
industries in the coir producing states and pr oliferation of the coir Industries in the non -traditional 
zones, however, the Committee woul d like to be apprised of the empi rical facts and figures pertaining 
to increment in the production, c onsumption, exports of coir products  and the consequent employment 
generation as result of the efforts of Coir Board.     
Recommendation  
  
3.2       SWOT analysis of coir industries 
  
3.2.1    The Committee recommends that the Coir Board would make a seri ous assessment of SWOT 
analysis of Coir Industries. Stre ngth of Coir Industries must be cap italised and the opportunities ahead 
must be availed of. Similarly, strategy should be ch alked out to combat the threat and overcome the 
weaknesses of the coir industries . The Committee has commended cont ribution of Coir  Board in its 
141st Report to chalk out action plan for promotion and proliferation of  coir industries in West Bengal 
and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Si milar action plan may be chalked out for other states on the local 
logistics. 
(Para. 2.2) 
 Action Taken 
3.2.2    The Coir Board has chalked out action plans for promotion and proliferation of coir industries in 
the States of Goa, Orissa, Ka rnataka, Tamil Nadu, and UTs of Lakshadweep and Pondicherry. The 
action plan do take into account the factors   recommended by the Committee. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
3.2.3    The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of action plans for promotion and 
proliferation of coir Industries in  the states of Goa, Orissa, Ka rrnataka, Tamil Nadu and UTs of  
Lakshadwaeep  and Pondicherry, therefore, the Mi nistry of ARI may furnish a  detailed note on the 
actions plans, budgetary support required to execute  the Plan and the implem entation and monitoring – 
mechanism to oversee the execution and  implementation of acti on plan in the stated  select States and 
UTs.   
Recommendation 
3.3       Participation in Exhibition/ Fairs Abroad. 
3.3.1    The Coir Board may concentrate on capturing new markets as well as expansion of existing 
market. It is also necessary  that  the existing market are not lost to  the competing products. Coir Board 
may participate in exhibitions de pending upon the markets and targeti ng specified regions. Coir Board 
may also organisse exhibitions like India International Coir Fair  and Coir India. 
(Para. 23.3) 
Action Taken  
3.3.2    Important international fairs and exhibitions offer opportunities for dissemination of information 
about the end uses of coir products and display of new coir products. The entrepreneurs participating in 
the exhibitions are also able to canvass business and establish new contacts. it  also helps to assess 
market preferences and requirements as well. In additi on to foreign fairs, the Bo ard also participates in 
important exhibitions, catalogue s hows and product promoti on programmes held in India. The  Coir 
Board prioritizes and selects only exhibitions both within and outside the country which are capable of  
conveying our message to the intended target group/ region.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
3.3.3    The Committee reiterates  that the coir Board should con centrate in capturing new markets as -
well-as make efforts to expand the ex isting market so that the market share of the Coir products is 
enhanced to considerable level. 
Recommendation 
3.4       Technology upgradation ( R & D) effort 
Page 9 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm

3.4.1    The Committee is of the opi nion that concerted efforts have  to be made towards technology  
improvement in coir sector through research and development. Im provement of infrastructural facilities 
and strengthening of manpower availabl e in research institute of the Coir Board is  necessary to address 
the situation. Further, efforts towa rds area specific colla borative research with due prioritisation based 
on industry needs,  their better pa rticipation and that of nationally reputed R& D organization, is called 
for. (Para. 24.2.4) 
Action Taken 
3.4.2    Constant improvement in the existing technology , and development of new technology are vital 
for development of the coir industry. The  Coir Bo ard has been persuading various segments of the 
industry to adopt mechanisation. There exists consid erable scope for mechanis ation and modernisation 
in all the segments of the industr y. The Coir Board has been able  to lay the founda tion for further 
development of technology in almost all the important areas like extrac tion of coir fibre from coconut 
husk, bleaching, dyeing, manufactur ing, finishing operations, trea tment of effluents and  by -products, 
etc. Further efforts would be made for the developm ent of technologies in as sociation with nationally 
reputed Research Organizations.  
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
3.4.3    The Committee is in agreem ent with the views of the Minist ry of ARI that there  exists 
considerable scope for mechanizat ion and modernization of technology in all the segment of the Coir 
Industry, the Committee ther efore,  recommends that the Coir Board should renew  its efforts for 
introducing the appropriate technology in the identified  areas of Coir Industry in association  with 
concerned research organization.    
Recommendation 
3.5       Popularisation of Eco friendly dyeing effluent treatment Plant 
3.5.1    The Committee recommends that the Ministry of ARI should extend  all possible help to Coir 
Board in envisaging strategy for popularisation of eco - friendly dyeing and Effl uent Treatment Plant 
either through in-house experiment or transfer/acquisition of required technology. (Para. 24.4.5) 
Action Taken 
  
3.5.2    The Coir Board has taken up the transfer of technology already developed by  the research 
institute. The Board has signed an MOU with the National Research De velopment Corporation 
(NRDC), New Delhi for transfer of some technologies developed by the CCRI like Coirret, Pithplus,  
Effluent Treatment Plant, Coco lawn, etc. The NRDC has been successful in transferring the 
technologies to a few parties, including a multi national company. Regarding other technologies 
developed by the Coir Board, it is proposed to organise  a Workshop on Technology Transfer shortly to 
create awareness among the end users on the availabi lity of novel technologies  developed by the Coir 
Board in areas from fibre processing to manufacture of products. The proposal is to transfer technology  
to at least one nodel agency in each coconut producing State and a ssist it in creating adequate 
infrastructure facilities for implementing the technologi es in the respective Stat es. The  Coir Board has 
been undertaking incubation facilities for the manufacturers  by extending technical support.  
  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.5.3    The Committee is in agreem ent with the proposal of Coir Bo ard to transfer technology starting 
from fibre - processing to manufacturing of  products to at least one model agency in each coconut 
producing states and providing adequate infrastructure facilities for implementing the technologies, , the 
Committee however, desires that the intended technology should be passed on  in stipulated time- frame 
and the Committee be accordingly apprised of.   
  
Recommendation 
  
Page 10 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm

3.6       Popularization of coir composites
  
3.61     The Committee is of the view that the Co ir Board should encourage and invite  the private 
sector units in the producti on of coir composites to enhance the potential of production capacity from 
the present level of 15000 mm Sqr. mt r. To 4.5 lakh mm Sq mtr.  per da y. Setting up of such units will 
have to be encouraged through provi sion of capital investment subsidy. therefore, the Ministry of ARI 
should undertake appropriate step in this regard.(Para 24.6.2) 
Action Taken 
3.6.2    The Coir Board has already entere d into  a collaborative project with RV -TIFAC Composite 
Design Centre, Bangalore for the de velopment of coir composites sa ndwich materials and products for 
industrial and socio- economic applications. The project has already been co mpleted and it is proposed 
to launch  the project and transfer the technology shortly.   
Further Recommendation 
3.6.3    The Committee is pleased to know that the Coir Board has initated action to invite private sector 
units e.g. with RV-TIFAC Composite Design Centre, Bangalore for the development of coir composites 
sandwich materials and products for industrial and socio - economic applications.  ,  The Committee 
however, desire that the Coir Board should further encourage and invite the participation of private 
sector units for enhanced promotion and proliferation of Coir Industries. 
Recommendation 
3.7       Encouraging Consumption of Coir Products for Institutional Segments 
3.7.1    The Committee is of the view that requesting Government Department s and public sector 
undertakings of various Ministri es to go in for eco friendly co ir products for their furnishing 
requirements will encourage consum ption of coir products for institu tional segments. Therefore, the 
Ministry of ARI may assist the Co ir Board in various Department/Min istry by advocati ng the case of 
Coir Board through Governmental inter Governmental Departmental  Co-operation. (Para 24.6.9) 
Action Taken 
3.7.2    The Coir Board has requested  various Ministri es to persuade  their de partments to use coir and 
coir products in their offices and other establishments under them. The Ministry of Railways was 
requested to use coir produ cts as seat cushioning in the coaches a nd coir  carpets in place of synthetic 
carpets  in AC coaches. The Minist ry of Defence has also  been requested to pur chase coir products as 
far as possible. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
3.7.3    The Committee would like to know the respons e of each Department/Min istry to the request of 
the Coir Board for popularizati on of the use of Coir and Co ir Products in the respective 
Department/Ministry. 
Recommendation 
3.8       Formation of manufacturers Consortia and the setting up of Common Facility Centre (CFC)  
3.8.1    The Committee feels that th e formation of manufacturers Consor tia and the setting up of the  
Common Facility Centres (CFC) would prove instrumental in launching and promoting co -operative 
society in the industry(Para. 24.8.3) 
Action Taken 
3.8.2    Noted for guidance.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION 
3.8.3    The Committee while reiterating its recommendation that the formation of Manufacturers 
Consortia and the setting up of the  Common Faci lity Centres (CFC) would prove instrumental in 
launching and promoting co -operative society in the industry, desire s that the Ministry of ARI and the 
Coir Board should make concrete efforts in this regard. 
CHAPTER - IV 
  
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE  MINISTRY OF AGRO AND RURAL INDUSTRIES    HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
Page 11 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm

  
Recommendation  
  
4.0       Restructuring the coir industry 
  
4.1       The Committee understands that the Low productivity of traditional technology, age old looms 
and equipments, slow phase of mode rnisation , absence of systematic collection of raw materials, lack 
of adequate  credit  availability, low le vel of capacity building, inadequa te infrastructural facilities, 
limited marketing skills , lack of  working capital are the bane of  this industry.  The Committee 
therefore, feels that it is necessary  to put in place an integrated a nd complimentary set of measures to 
encourage and support coir industry so that they  become more productiv e and competitive and 
development and expenditure take place in a  sustainable manner. 
(Para. 14.2) 
Action Taken 
  
4.1.1    The Coir Board has been attempting to a ddress these problems thr ough its Plan schemes and 
programmes. In addition, schemes ha ve been approved for clusters ba sed development of coir industry. 
Recently, under the Industrial Infras tructure Upgradation Sc heme  of the Minist ry of Commerce and 
Industry, Government has approved and launched Alappuzha Coir Clus ter Development Project at a 
total cost of Rs. 56.8 crore -75% (42.6 crore) by way of  grant under the IIUS a nd the balance by way of 
equity and stakeholders contribut ions This scheme includes improve ment of husk coll ection, extension 
of defibreing units, modernisation of spinning sector , establishmen t of common facili ty centre and 
common effluent treatment pl ant, etc. Similar cluster -based development schemes for self -employment 
generation through village le vel units will be repli cated in coir producing States like Tamil Nadu, 
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa  , Lakshadweep, etc., with fundi ng support under II US and SGSY  
The States like Tamil Nadu and Karnataka have already formulated propos als for assistance under 
Industrial Infrastructure  Upgradation Scheme (IIUS). 
  
4.1.2    For regeneration of tradi tional industries like coir , khadi and village industries the Central 
Government has also approved the “ Scheme of Fund for Regenerati on of Traditional Industries 
( SFURTI)”.   
Recommendations 
4.2       Modernization Fund 
  
4.2.1    The Committee is of the strong opinion that  a modernisation fund may be created for extending 
one time financial assistance to the exporter s for modernisation of pr oduction, importing necessary 
machinery and equipments including packaging and labeling machineries and also for setting up of R& 
D facilities. This would enhance production and quality and  would act as a means to meet 
competition.    (Para. 16.2)           
Action Taken 
  
4.2.2    Recommendations of the Committee have been noted and follow up action would be taken 
during the formulation of the 11th Plan.  
  
Recommendation 
  
4.3       Measures Required for Promotion and Proliferation of the Coir Industry 
  
4.3.1    The Committee understands the need for e nhancing the harnessing of  coconut husk for coir 
production from existing level of thirty seven percent. With a view to mobilize  husk available in plenty 
in coconut producing states and to increase the percenta ge of utilization of coc onut husk, the collection 
Page 12 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm

mechanism will have to be streamlined with the active partic ipation of NGOs Se lf Help Groups 
( SHGs) etc. through introduction of an appropriate scheme. It would pave wa y for level utilization 
reaching 50% thereby facilitating pr oduction unhindered and to increase  output of coir fibre in the 
country. 
(Para. 24.1.2) 
  
Action Taken 
  
4.3.2    Coir Board has prepared a Millennium De velopment Mission document, for development of 
coir industry in India. The Mi ssion document envisages a total fina ncial outlay of Rs . 3000 crore to 
increase investment on producti on units from tiny to sm all and medium scale sect or and facilitate flow 
of credit by the order of Rs. 2000 cr ore, and Rs. 1000 crore being by wa y of Plan support in the next 
Five Year Plan. Under this programme, State -wise Action Plans have to be prepared, based on the 
development need of the coir producing districts of the State concerned. The document envisages an 
increase in export performance by 25%  each year so as to achieve a total export worth Rs. 1000 crore 
by 2008-2009 . The Mission envisages generation of add itional employment to half a million workers 
over five years. Appropriate schemes can be formulated to enhance husk collection under the Mission. 
  
4.3.3    Under the Industrial Infrastructure Upgradat ion Scheme (IIUS) of th e Ministry Commerce and 
Industry, the Government of India has approved the project titled “Development of Coir 
Clusters in the Alleppe y District of Kerala ” with an outlay of Rs.56.8 crore with Central 
grant of 75 per cent of the total outlay, i.e., Rs.42.6 crore.  T he husk collection  
mechanism is slated to be one of the main action  points of  the scheme. 
  
Recommendation 
4.4       Constitution of Raw Material Bank 
4.4.1    The Committee is in agreem ent with the Coir Board in regard  to Constitution of Raw Material 
Bank in the coir sector to assist  the Small Scale manufacturers in th e private as well as cooperative 
sector. That is essential becaus e access to quality raw material at reasonable price assumes great 
significance in the development of enterprises in the organised/ informal sector.  
(Para. 24.1.4) 
Action Taken 
  
4.4.2    A proposal for setting up of a Raw Material Bank is under the active consideration of the Coir 
Board. 
  
Recommendation 
  
4.5       Promotion of Export 
  
4.5.1    The Committee is of the considered view that  major emphasis is to be given to the promotional 
efforts by way of publicity and participation in tr ade fairs and exhibitions and adoption of innovative 
promotional programmes. The Small and newcomers in the export fr ont should be encouraged to 
participate in the international trade fairs and exhibitions alongwith the Coir Board by providing Export 
Market Development Assistance  and all professional support , efforts should be made  for building a 
brand image  for Indian coir in the domestic and international market, participation  in  product specific  
international trade fairs and exhibi tions and organsing buyer seller me et in potential and new market, 
promotion of non traditional products  like coir pith, coir geo -textiles , garden articles coir composites 
etc. in potential regions through various export promoti on measures and buildi ng up of a new market 
oriented data base and market intelligence to provide continuous feedback to the trade.  
  
Page 13 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm

4.5.2    The Committee recommends that in order to  promote export exporters of various products of 
coir may be granted Export Market Assistance at produc t specific rate as in the case of jute industry.  
(Para. 24.7.4) 
Action Taken 
4.5.3    In addition to various programmes outlined  therein Coir Board propos es to undertake Market 
Study / Survey in selected important market of coir abroad like the USA, UK, Australia  and some of 
the west European countries to asse ss the present market situation with  reference to competition  from 
substitute products and to know the general trends in the market.  Th is would be done in association  
with the Indian Trade Missions abroad.  
4.5.4    Realising the need for providing export market  assistance as in the case of jute industry, a 
proposal received from the Coir Board is being examined in consultation with the Ministries of Textiles 
and Ministry of Commerce & Industry.  
Recommendation 
  
4.6       Development of Production Infrastructure 
  
4.6.1    The Committee feels that the units in the coir sector are encouraged for the development of base 
level infrastructure for constructi on of loom shed, retrof itting of the existing traditional ratt by motor 
attachment , replacement of the defective parts of  the mat/matting loom etc. (Para. 24.9.4) 
Action Taken 
4.6.2    The Coir Board has been asked to submit a revised proposal to this Ministry. 
Recommendation 
4.7       Development of Cluster 
4.7.1    The Committee feels that upgr adation in the coir industry at desired level could be achieved 
only if small scale manufacturers tiny units comes together and forms clusters as already experimented  
and succeeded in the coir sector as well as other industrial sectors. (Para. 24.10.2) 
Action Taken 
4.7.2    The Government has approved a Central Sector Scheme, titled Scheme of Fund for Regeneration
of Traditional industries (SFURTI) , for khadi, coir and village indu stries. The program me, inter alia,
envisages holistic development of  25 coir clusters. 
Recommendation 
4.8       Industrial Infrastructure Upgradation  Scheme (IIUS) 
  
4.8.1    The Committee feels that cluster based coir sector development programme for self employment 
generation through village leve l tiny sector units  have to be replicated in othe r coir producing states  
like Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhr a Pradesh, Orissa, Lakshadweep etc. with funding support under 
IIUS and SGFSY. Therefore, the Mi nistry of ARI should take up the issue with the concerned State 
Governments which would identify specific cluster locations. (Para. 14.11.2) 
Action Taken 
4.8.2    While the IIUS scheme is  operated by the Ministry of Co mmerce and Industry, the Government
has approved a central sector scheme titled “ Scheme of Fund for Rege neration of Traditional Industries
( SFURTI), for khadi, coir and village industries. The programme , inter alia, envisages holistic
development of  25 coir clusters. 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT 
A GLANCE 
ROLE OF COIR BOARD IN THE OVERALL DEVELOPMENT OF COIR INDUSTRY 
  
 3.1.2   The Committee appreciates the continued efforts of the coir Board in the promotion of coir 
Industries in the coir producing states and proliferation of the coir Industries in the non-traditional 
zones, however, the Committee would like to be apprised of the empirical facts and figures pertaining to 
Page 14 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm

increment in the production, consumption, exports of coir products and the consequent employment 
generation as result of the efforts of Coir Board.     
(Para. 3.1.2) 
SWOT analysis of coir industries 
  
            The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of Action Plans for promotion and 
proliferation of coir Industries in the states of Goa, Orissa, Karrnataka, Tamil Nadu and UTs of  
Lakshadwaeep  and Pondicherry, therefore, the Ministry of ARI may furnish a  detailed note on the 
Actions Plans, Budgetary support required to execute the Plan and the implementation and monitoring – 
mechanism to oversee the execution and  implementation of Action Plan in the stated select states and 
UTs.   
(Para 3.2.3) 
Participation in Exhibition/ Fairs Abroad. 
The Committee reiterates  that the coir Board should concentrate in capturing new markets as-well-as 
make efforts to expand the existing market so that the market share of the coir Board is enhanced to 
considerable level.(Para. 3.3.3) 
Technology upgradation ( R & D) effort 
  
The Committee is in agreement with the views of the Ministry of ARI that there  exists considerable 
scope for mechanization and modernization of technology in all the segment of the Coir Industry, 
therefore, the Committee recommends that the Coir Board should renew  its efforts for introducing the 
appropriate technology in the identified areas of Coir Industry in association  with concerned research 
organization.    
(Para. 3.4.3) 
Popularisation of Eco friendly dyeing effluent treatment Plant 
  
The Committee is in agreement with the proposal of Coir Board to transfer technology starting from 
fibre- processing to manufacturing of products to at least one model agency in each coconut producing 
states and providing adequate infrastructure facilities for implementing the technologies, however, the 
Committee  desires that the intended technology should be done in stipulated time- frame and the 
Committee be accordingly apprised of.  (Para. 3.5.3) 
  
Popularization of coir composites 
 The Committee is pleased to know that the Coir Board has initated action to invite private sector units 
e.g. with RV-TIFAC Composite Design Centre, Bangalore for the development of coir composites 
sandwich materials and products for industrial and socio- economic applications, however,  the 
Committee desire that the Coir Board should further encourage and invite the participation of private 
sector units for enhanced promotion and proliferation of Coir Industries.(Para. 3.6.3) 
  
Encouraging Consumption of Coir Products for Institutional Segments 
The Committee would like to know the response of each Department/Ministry to the request of the Coir 
Board for popularization of the use of Coir and Coir Products in the respective Department/Ministry. 
(Para. 3.7.3) 
Formation of manufacturers Consortia and the setting up of Common Facility Centre (CFC)  
  
The Committee while reiterating its recommendation that the formation of manufacturers Consortia and 
the setting up of the  Common Facility Centres (CFC) would prove instrumental in launching and 
promoting co-operative society in the industry, desires that the Ministry of ARI and the Coir Board 
should make concrete efforts in this regard.(Para. 3.8.3) 
Minutes of the Meeting 
  
Page 15 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 16th May, 2006  in the Committee Room  ‘A’  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
Shri Santosh Bagrodia              —        Chairman 
      
Rajya Sabha 
  
Shri Surendra Lath 
Suresh Bhardaj 
Dr. K. Malaisamy 
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
Lok Sabha 
  
Shri  Guharam Ajgalle 
Shri Rajnarayan 
Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
Smt. Susmita Bauri 
Shri Suraj Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary  
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary  
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Committee Officer 
  
2.         The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members of the Committee.  
3.         The Committee then took up the following reports for   consideration and adoption:- 
  
(i) One Hundred Seventy-ninth Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations 
contained in Committee's One Hundred Sixty-eighth  Report on Demands for Grants             (2005-06) 
of the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
 (ii) One Hundred Eightieth  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations 
contained in One Hundred Sixty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of 
Heavy Industries  (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
 (iii) One Hundred Eighty- first  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations 
contained in One Hundred Seventy-first  Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)  of the Ministry of  
Small Scale Industries; 
  (iv) One Hundred Eighty- second Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Sixtieth Report on  the Tax Proposals affecting various 
segments of industries  of  the Ministry of Small Scale Industries; 
      (v) One Hundred Eighty- third  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Seventieth  Report  on  the Demands for Grants 
                ( 2005-06) of the Ministry of  Agro and Rural Industries;  
   (vi) One Hundred Eighty- fourth  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred  Seventy- second Report on Demands for Grants          
 (2005-06) of the Ministry of  Agro and Rural Industries ; 
      (vii)  One Hundred Eighty- fifth  Report  on Action Taken by the Government  on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Seventy-third Report on Inter-Sectoral  Strategic Co-
operation to Promote Small Scale Industries of the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries;   
    (viii) One Hundred Eighty- sixth   Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Seventy-fourth   Report on  Operational Effectiveness 
Page 16 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm

of PMRY, REGP and KVI  Schemes  in Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Maharastra of the Ministry 
of  Agro and Rural Industries ; 
    (ix) One Hundred Eighty-seventh Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Seventy-fifth Report on Key concern areas  of SSI in 
select states of the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries; 
(x) One Hundred Eighty-eighth Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07)   Ministry of Agro and Rural 
Industries; 
(xi) One Hundred Eighty-ninth   Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07)  Ministry of Small Scale 
Industries. 
(xii) One Hundred Ninetieth  Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of  Department of Heavy 
Industries ( Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);  and 
(xiii)  One Hundred Ninety - first Report on   Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of Public 
Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises). 
4.         The Committee, after a brief discussion, adopted all the above reports without any modification. 
  
  5.       The Committee authorized Shri Surendra Lath  and in his absence Dr. Malaisamy  to present the 
Report in Rajya Sabha and Shri Ram Singh Kaswan and in his absence Shri  Guharam Ajgalle to ley a 
copy of the Report in Lok Sabha.  
  6. The meeting was adjourned at 4.25 pm. 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
New Delhi 
16th May, 2006 
  
  
K.P. Singh
 Under Secretary 
Page 17 of 17184th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/184threport.htm