 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA                       
 
                                                                                                                                      
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY- FIRST REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 216TH  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON  
DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) 
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)  
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8th  MARCH, 2011) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 7 th  MARCH, 2011) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
MARCH, 2011 PHALGHUN, 1932 SAKA) 
221 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
                                                                                                                                      
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY- FIRST REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 216TH  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON  
DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) 
 
PERTAINING TO 
 
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)  
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8th  MARCH, 2011) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 7 th  MARCH, 2011) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
MARCH, 2011 PHALGHUN, 1932 SAKA) 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………….. (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………  (ii) 
 
3. REPORT …………………………………………………………………………………..(iii) 
 
(i)  CHAPTER – I 
 Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the              
Ministry ………………………………………………………………………… 1-7 
 
(ii)  CHAPTER–II 
  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
  view of the Government's replies………………………………………………8-9 
 
(iii)  CHAPTER–III 
   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has either not                        
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its                
replies…………………………………………………… …………………….10 
 
(iv)  CHAPTER – IV 
  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
  have not been  received………………………………………………………..11-13 
 
4. Minutes……………………………………………………………………………..     ……   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 31 st  August , 2010)  
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
   1.   Shri Tiruchi Siva                —                Chairman  
2.  Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
3.  Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4.  Shri Ashk Ali tak 
5.  Shri K.B. Shanappa 
6. Shri Natuji H. Thakor 
7.  Shri S.P. Singh Baghel 
8.  Shri K.V. Ramalingam 
9.  Shri  Nandamuri Harikrishna 
       10. Dr. Vijay Mallya  
 
LOK SABHA 
11.   Shri Suvendu Adhikari 
12.   Shri Badruddin Ajmal 
13.   Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14.    Shri Bansagopal Chowdhury 
15.    Shri Sabbam Hari 
16.    Smt. Poonam Veljibhai Jat 
17.    Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
18.    Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
19.    Shri Pakauri Lal 
20.    Smt. Ingrid Mcleod 
21.    Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
22.    Shri Devendra Nagpal 
23.    Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
24.   Shri Kishanbhai V. Patel 
25.   Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
26   Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
27   Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
28   Shri Raju Shetti  
29   Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware 
30   Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
31   Smt Putul Kumari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director 
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director 
 
 (i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Twenty- First Report on Action taken Notes furn ished by the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Pu blic Enterprises) on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hu ndred and Sixteenth Report on 
the Demands For Grants (2010-11) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises. 
 
2.  I thank the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Pu blic Enterprises (Department of 
Public Enterprises) for furnishing the Action Taken  Notes on the recommendations 
contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Sixteenth Report. 
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on the 3 
rd  March, 2011 considered and adopted 
the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA        
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
New Delhi 
3
rd  March, 2011  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises  (Department of Public Enterprises) 
on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s  Two hundred and Sixteenth 
Report on the Demands For Grants (2010-11) pertaini ng to Department of Public 
Enterprises. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) in respect of the recommendations 
contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter -I-  The recommendations/observations, which have bee n accepted by the 
Ministry. 
 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter -II -  The recommendation/observations which the Commit tee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic 
and explanations advanced by the Ministry and there fore does not want to pursue them 
for the present. 
 
Chapter -III -  The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has 
either not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry should furnish 
logical explanations thereof. 
 
Chapter -IV - The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received. 
 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its langua ge in vague terms therefore, the 
Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of 
recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention 
and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3.  The details of the ATR is being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
(iii) 
 

CHAPTER – I 
 
The Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
1. The Committee desires that in order to play a me aningful and effective role in 
getting the policies and guidelines implemented by the PSEs the Department of Public 
Enterprises should ask for the compliance report from the PSEs about the implementation 
of the policies and guidelines formulated by it fro m time to time and separate paragraph 
thereon may be incorporated in the Annual Report of the Ministry. 
Para (4) 
Action Taken Note 
 
 This Department has issued a guideline vide O.M. d ated 29.07.2010 (Copy 
enclosed) for reporting of compliance of DPE guidel ines by the concerned 
Administrative Ministries/ Departments, in respect of CPSEs under their administrative 
control for inclusion of the same in the Annual Report of this Department. 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2. The Committee observes that the actual expenditure for both Planned and Non-
Planned, have been less than the RE for the year 20 08-09 in various heads. The 
Committee desires to know from the Department of Pu blic Enterprises regarding 
expenditure indicated by the DPE for the year 2009- 10 upto 31.03.2010 for both Planned 
and Non-Planned expenditure. The Committee is of th e considered view that Department 
can do much better if it can anticipate the needs a nd requirements of future and have an 
eye on past development while making budgetary allo cation for various schemes and 
programmes being run by it  . 
Para (14) 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 The expenditure for the year 2009-10 upto 31.03.20 10 for Plan & Non Plan 
is, as under:-  
(Rs. in Crores) 
BE 2009-10 RE 2009-10 Actuals 2009-10 
P NP Tot 
al 
P NP Total P NP Total 
10.0 
0 
7.2 
0 
17. 
20 
8.0 
0 
6.0 
8 
14.08 7.6 
2 
6.07 13.69 
 
 
 
1 

Plan 
[  
 The expenditure was less in 1 st  and 2 nd  quarter, due to procedural delay in 
release of Plan funds, which resulted in reduction for the rest of the  of the year’s 
allocation, further, the number of PSEs and VRS opt ees are comparatively less in 
the NE Region. However, the    unspent   funds   in    respect of NE Region were 
transferred to their non-lapsable pool.  
 
Non Plan 
 
 There was no expenditure in respect of Internation al Centre for Promotion 
of Enterprises (ICPE), Slovenia in the first two qu arters of 2009-10 due to Non 
receipt of invoice from ICPE.  Additionally, due to  austerity measures there was a 
cut in the Non Plan BE at the RE stage.  
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
3. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Depart ment should ensure full 
utilisation of funds allocated and efforts should a lso be made that it is evenly distributed 
in different quarters. This will result in effective implementation of the various schemes 
Para (15) 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 Advice of the Hon’ble Committee is noted 
 
 
 Board for Reconstruction of Public Service enterprises (BRPSE)  
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4. The Committee observes that most of the PSEs for  which revival has been 
recommended by the BRPSE and assistance recommended  from GOI belong to the 
capital goods sector under Department of Heavy Indu stry. The Committee expresses its 
serious concern over the costly revivals that large ly entail waivers and conversions of the 
secured loans and interest dues towards Government of India. The Committee desires to 
know from the DPE about fresh cash infusions for mo dernisation and technology 
upgradation of the sick PSEs and how much would be in the form of secured loans, 
unsecured equity and grants respectively, PSE-wise.  The Committee also seeks 
information regarding the steps taken to secure the  Government loans and interest 
thereon.  
Para (17) 
 
 
2 
 
 

Action Taken Note 
 
 Out of the total cash support of Rs.2920.71 crores from Government of India 
approved for revival of 37 CPSEs, a sum of Rs.548.0 1 crores was for modernization and 
technology up-gradation of the sick PSEs. The CPSE wise details are given below:- 
List of CPSEs where Government approved cash assistance for modernization and 
technology up-gradation 
  
   (Rs. In crores) 
Sl. 
No. 
 
Name of the CPSE Loan  Equity share 
capital 
Total  
1. Hindustan Salts Ld. --  4.28  4.28  
2. Bridge & Roof Co. (India) 
Ltd. 
30.00  30.00  60.00  
3. HMT Bearings Ltd. --  7.40  7.40  
4. Praga Tools Ltd. --  5.00  5.00  
5. Heavy Engineering 
Corporation Ltd. 
102.0 
0 
 
--  102.00  
6. Cement Corporation of India 
Ltd. 
15.34  15.33  30.67  
7. Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd. 5.00 
 
--  5.00  
8. Bengal Chemicals & 
Pharmaceuticals Ltd.  
90  55.00 
 
145.00  
9. HMT Machine Tools Ltd. --  175.00 
 
175.00  
10. Bharat Wagon &Engineering 
Company Ltd. 
6.83 
 
6.83 
 
13.66  
 Total 249.1 
7 
298.84  548.01  
 
    The administrative Ministry/Department are resp onsible for preparing a package for 
revival/rehabilitation of loss making CPSEs after d ue consultations with all the stake 
holders. The CPSEs, after implementation of the rev ival package, are expected to turn 
around and post net profit which is derived after m eeting the interest liabilities on all 
loans taken by the CPSE and other expenditure. The loans are to be repaid by the CPSE 
as per revival package approved. The administrative  ministries take appropriate steps for 
securing Government loans and interest thereon.  
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
5. The Committee recommends that once a revival pac kage is approved by the 
competent authority, the responsibility of justifyi ng the revival package should be on the 
administrative Ministries. The BRPSE should suggest  measures to secure Government’s 
investments in the form of unsecured equity. 
Para (18) 
3 

Action Taken Note 
 
 As per the Resolution of the BRPSE, the responsibi lity of preparation & 
monitoring of the revival package & its implementat ion lies with concerned 
Administrative Ministry of the sick CPSEs. In case slippages occur in the performance of 
the CPSEs, against the targets submitted in the rev ival plan, corrective action should be 
taken by the Administrative Ministry including fixa tion of the responsibility and 
accountability at appropriate levels so as to secur e the Government’s investments in the 
form of unsecured equity 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
6. The Committee is of the view that BRPSE should e xplore the feasibility of 
entrusting the task of looking after sick organizat ion to a healthy organisation for its 
turnaround as has been done in the case of BHPV, Eastern Coalfields etc. 
Para (23) 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 The Board explores all options for revival/restruct uring of sick CPSEs including 
revival through merger/takeover of sick CPSEs by he althy CPSEs, wherever there is 
synergy in operations. The BRPSE has already recomm ended revival of Bharat Pumps & 
Compressors Ltd. with support of BHEL, ONGC; Merger /taken over of Bharat 
Refractories Ltd. by SAIL; Bharat Wagon & Engineeri ng Company Ltd. by M/o 
Railways; Burn Standard Company Ltd. by SAIL & M/o Railways. The Board has noted 
the advice of the Committee. 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
7. The Committee feels that there should be sense o f urgency in dealing with revival 
cases and definite time frame should be fixed and adhered to . 
Para (24) 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 The administrative Ministries/Departments are resp onsible to prepare a 
comprehensive package for revival/rehabilitation /c losure of loss making PSEs after due 
consultations with all stakeholders. All the concer ned administrative Ministries 
/Departments are requested regularly to submit revi val proposals in respect of sick PSEs, 
under their administrative control for the consider ation of BRPSE. BRPSE makes its 
recommendations after the receipt of complete propo sal from the administrative 
Ministries/Departments within its two months deadline. 
  
 
4 
 

Recommendations/Observations 
 
8. The Committee once again recommends that BRPSE s hould try its best to give 
timely recommendations either for revival or closur e but the issue should not linger on 
indefinitely. 
Para (25) 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 Proposals in respect of 66 CPSEs have been referre d to BRPSE for its 
consideration by various administrative ministries /Department. BRPSE has timely 
considered all the 66 cases and given recommendatio ns for revival of 58 CPSEs and 
closure of 3 CPSEs. The balance 5 cases were remitt ed to the administrative 
ministry/departments.  
 
 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
9. The Committee observes that though numbers of PS Es signing the MoU is 
increasing and it is highest (197) in the year 2009 -10 and evaluated rating ‘Excellent’ in 
2007-08 was 55 only which decreased to 47 in 2008-0 9. The Committee would like to 
have the comments of DPE on this development of exc ellent rating going down. The 
Committee recommends that the Department may persua de remaining PSUs to sign 
MoU.  
Para (36) 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 Due to global recession, financial parameters of g ross margin, turnover/sales and 
related management ratios of CPSEs were adversely a ffected. Therefore, some CPSEs 
could not achieve the MoU targets.  Hence, the decr ease in the number of CPSEs whose 
MoU performance has been evaluated as Excellent. 14  CPSEs did not sign the MoUs in 
2009-10, while in 2010-11, 10 CPSEs did not sign th e MoUs. Cabinet Secretary as the 
Chairman of the High Power Committee on MoU, has wr itten to the Secretaries of the 
concerned Ministries /Departments to direct the def aulting CPSEs  to subscribe to the 
discipline of MoU and submit draft MoUs to DPE.  
 
Counselling, Retraining and Redepoyment (CRR) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
10. The Committee observes the variations of VRS op tees in each year, and notes that 
the Plan outlay has been curtailed due to lesser av ailability of VRS optees in CPSEs. 
However, the Committee feels that the details of nu mber of the trainees covered under 
CRR Scheme and number of trainees redeployed is to be provided to the Committee for 
appraisal. The Committee  hopes that  the  DPE  would  furnish the  updated details to the  
5 

 Committee in this regard. 
Para (46) 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 CRR Scheme is under implementation by DPE from 2001 -02. Year wise number 
of VRS optees trained and redeployed is shown below:- 
Year VRS Optees Trained VRS Optees Redeployed 
2001-02 8064 2660 
2002-03 12066 4705 
2003-04 12134 5732 
2004-05 28003 11917 
2005-06 32158 15488 
2006-07  34398 15621 
 2007-08 9728 4423 
2008-09 9772 4620 
2009-10 8505 4318 
Total 154828 69484 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
11. The Committee finds that VRS is being implement ed not only by the sick and loss 
making PSEs but also by the profit making PSEs in o rder to rationalise and  reduce their 
manpower in the hope that it will turn around the P SE or further increase its profits 
substantially. But neither the concerned PSE nor th e Government i.e. the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment, Department of Public Enterpr ises or the Ministry under whose 
jurisdiction the concerned PSE falls bother for the future of the employee opting for VRS 
or in many cases are forced to opt for VRS because after some time for various reasons 
the money received by optees is finished and no sou rce for living is left with them. They 
are forced to live a pathetic life with all sorts o f miseries. To avoid this Counselling, 
Retraining and Redeployment (CRR) scheme assumes im portance. The Committee 
desires that more and more employees of PSEs should be retained and their redeployment 
should be ensured in other PSEs as per their demand  because skilled manpower is very 
much in demand. VRS should be the last option. The Committee also desires that a 
survey may be conducted to know the condition of VR S optees of various PSEs and 
welfare measures are extended to them. 
Para (49) 
 
6 

Action Taken Note 
 
 VRS policy aims at rationalization of workforce in  both sick and loss making as 
well as profit making CPSEs.  As per VRS policy, se parated employees of CPSEs are not 
entitled for re-deployment in any other CPSE.  To o vercome the hardship / sufferings of 
VRS optees, as a social safety measure, the Scheme of Counselling, Retraining and 
Redeployment (CRR) is being implemented by DPE from  2001-2002.  Under this 
Scheme, separated employees of CPSEs opting VRS are  imparted short duration training 
to upgrade their skill/expertise which, in turn, would enable them to take up, mainly, self-
employment activities. Redeployment of trained VRS optees, in the first place, depends 
on willingness of the trained VRS optees towards re deployment. From 2001-02 to 2009-
10, in all 1,54,828 VRS optees have been imparted t raining and 69,484 have been 
redeployed so far under CRR Scheme. Advice of the Committee has been noted. 
 
 
 
Standing Conference of Public Enterprises (SCOPE)  
Recommendations/Observations 
 
12. The Committee also finds that various posts of SCs/STs/OBC are lying vacant in 
PSUs since quite long and directs that DPE should t ake appropriate measures to fill them 
soon as per the guidelines of GOI in this regard. 
Para (63) 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 Department of Public Enterprises vide OM dated 25 th  February, 2009 had 
extended Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT) instructions for launching fresh 
“Special Recruitment Drive” to fill up backlog rese rved vacancies of SCs/STs and OBCs 
in direct recruitment and of SCs/STs and OBCs in pr omotion quota existing as on 
1.1.2008 to the administrative Ministries/Departmen ts concerned with CPSEs to issue 
direction, if not already done, to the CPSEs under their administrative control in a time 
bound manner.  A number of such vacancies have been  filled during the Special 
Recruitment Drive.  The implementation of Drive is monitored by the DoPT. 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
13. The Committee hopes that its recommendations wi ll be well taken up by the 
Department of Public Enterprises in view of the rec ent scenario of the industrial sector of 
the country. 
 Para (64) 
Action Taken Note 
[ 
Advice of Hon’ble Committee has been noted.  DPE is  taking all policy  measures to  
strengthen CPSEs and  promote their growth and efficiency through delegation of powers 
to their Boards of Directors, while ensuring compli ance of   Corporate Governance, 
Professionalization of Boards and  incorporating a robust MoU system,  etc.  
7 

CHAPTER–II 
 
The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies  
 
 
Counselling, Retraining and Redepoyment (CRR) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
1. The Committee desires that DPE should ensure tha t funds earmarked under CRR 
Scheme and Research, Development and Consultancy on  Generic issue related to CPSEs 
must be utilized equally in each quarter. 
. Para (47) 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 Implementing nodal agencies, in various parts of t he country,  chalk out batch 
wise and module wise training programmes as per the ir schedule of 30/45/60 days; as 
these modules may not be equally distributed quarte r wise, equal release and utilization 
of funds on quarterly basis is not feasible.  
 
 Under the Scheme of Research, Development and Cons ultancy on Generic Issues 
of CPSEs, studies, evaluation, workshops, conferenc es etc. are undertaken. The 
periodicities of events undertaken under this Schem e are not evenly distributed in all the 
quarters of the year and hence equal utlisation of funds in each quarter may not be 
applicable. Advice of the Committee has been noted . 
 
 
Standing Conference of Public Enterprises (SCOPE) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2. The Committee has noted and appreciates the view s of the SCOPE. 
Para (56) 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
3. The Committee noted the retention of Rs. 1.00 cr ore for North-Eastern Region. 
The Committee, recommends that the Department should make efforts to utilise the funds 
instead of simply let them transfer to non-lapsable pool. 
 Para (59) 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 In NE Region, non-availability of sufficient VRS o ptees is a constraint.  
 
8 

 VRS is not very sizable in the units located in NE  region. However, DPE has made 
consistent efforts to have more coverage of VRS opt ees in NE Region under CRR 
Scheme. In 2009-10, for the first time 500 VRS opte es were trained under CRR in NE 
region and Rs. 0.43 crore was spent on this account. 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.  The Committee further recommends that selection  of CMDs of various PSUs 
should be done quickly by Public Enterprises Selection Board without any delay and with 
transparency. It is quite surprising that the Depar tment of Public Enterprises and Public 
Enterprises Selection Board do not play any role in  selecting and appointing the CMDs 
and EDs and Directors in the Boards of Public Sector Banks. 
 Para (62) 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 Since, this recommendation pertains to Public Ente rprises Selection Board 
(PESB), which is under the administrative jurisdict ion of Department of Personnel & 
Training (DOPT), advice of Hon’ble Committee has be en conveyed to DOPT/PESB for 
further necessary action 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 

CHAPTER–III 
 
The Recommendations/Observations in respect of whic h the Committee has either not      
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its replies  
 
Standing Conference of Public Enterprises (SCOPE) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
1. The Committee has discussed the issue of profess ionalization of Boards of PSUs 
many times in the recent past and has also made recommendations with regard thereto but 
expresses its concern that its recommendations have  not been implemented in letter and 
spirit. In the name of independent Directors only r etired bureaucrats are being 
accommodated in the Board. There is no compulsory i nduction of Directors from the 
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and OBC and wom en categories to take care of at 
least the employees of these categories of the PSUs . Even the former Members of 
Parliament are not appointed as Directors to have t he benefit of their vast public life 
experience. So is the case of vast majority of shar eholders of the CPSEs. The present 
norms of professionalization of Boards are certainl y not satisfactory. The Committee 
desires that Department of Public Enterprises may c ome out with a proposal for 
amending the guidelines in this regard so that the Directors representing the SCs, STs, 
OBCs and ex-MPs and a public share holder can get t he opportunity to become 
independent Directors. For this purpose educational  qualification and experience should 
be prescribed. 
Para (60) 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 The Government has already laid down criteria in t erms of educational 
qualifications, age and experience for persons to b e considered for appointment as non-
official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs. These gu idelines do not preclude the 
appointment of SCs/STs/OBCs/Ex-MPs as non-official Director on the Board of CPSEs, 
provided they fulfil the laid down criteria, their names are proposed by the concerned 
Administrative Ministry and are recommended by the Search Committee. Thus, 
opportunity is already available to SCs/STs/OBCs/Ex -MPs for becoming non-official 
Directors on the Boards of CPSEs. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
The Committee has taken into account the fact that the Government has laid down 
certain criteria for the 
appointment of non-official Directors on the Boards  of CPSEs. 
But what the Committee would like to reiterate is that if persons from the categories  
of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and OBC and wom en categories come 
forward with the above mentioned criteria, they sho uld be given preference. There 
by the Committee wants to re-emphasis the need for representation of these 
categories in the Board of CPSEs.  
 
 
10 

CHAPTER – IV 
 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
have not been  received  
 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)  
Recommendations/ Observations  
 
1. The Committee notes that the performance of CPSE s is evaluated on the basis of 
achievement against the MoU targets. The committee observes that there is a decreasing 
trend in the `Excellent’ rating in the year 2008-09  as compared to the year 2007-08. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that this decreasi ng trend should be dispelled by 
creating suitable atmosphere for CPSEs by the concerned administrative Ministries. 
Para (35) 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 Advice of Parliamentary Standing Committee has bee n brought to the notice of all 
concerned Administrative Ministries / Departments v ide DPE’s O.M. dated 19 
th  August, 
2010. Action is to be taken by the respective Admin istrative Ministry, to monitor and 
review the performance of CPSEs and give them necessary assistance/support. 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2. The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the DPE and desires that it 
should be apprised of the responses of the performa nce of sick and loss making PSEs 
during 2004-05 to 2008-09. The Committee also desir es that DPE should study the 
reasons of sickness of PSEs and find out their revival strategies, in right earnest. 
Para (37) 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 The Government set up a Board for Reconstruction o f Public Sector Enterprises 
(BRPSE) in December, 2004 to advise the Government,  inter alia, on measures to be 
taken to restructure / revive sick CPSEs. The conce rned administrative ministries / 
departments of the sick CPSEs prepare proposals for revival of sick companies on case to 
case basis and refer them to BRPSE for its recommendations and thereafter seek approval 
of the Government. 
     The Board has, till May, 2010, given its recom mendations for revival of 58 CPSEs 
upon reference. Based on the recommendations of BRP SE, Government, till May, 2010, 
have  approved revival of 37 CPSEs  envisaging tota l fund/non-fund based assistance of 
Rs. 15253 crores (cash assistance of Rs. 2920 crore s and non-cash assistance of Rs. 
12333 crores) from Govt. of India. 
     
11 

  Out of the 37 CPSEs approved for revival, 20 CPSE s have posted profit in 2007-
08, 20 CPSEs have posted profit in 2008-09 and 15 C PSEs have posted profit in 2007-08 
& 2008-09 and 11 CPSEs have posted profit consecuti vely in 2006-07, 2007-08 and 
2008-09. 
      Further, signing of MoU has been made mandato ry for all sick and loss making 
CPSEs also. A separate Syndicate Group has been for med for “sick and loss making 
CPSEs” for the year 2011-12 to suggest the MoU format, parameters, inter se, weightage, 
etc. 
 
 
Counselling, Retraining and Redepoyment (CRR) 
 
Recommendations/ Observations 
 
3. The Committee finds that no information has been  provided regarding the 
expenditure incurred for the training modules since  last three years. The Committee 
desires that year-wise detail of expenditure incurr ed on each training modules shall be 
provided to it at the earliest. 
Para (48) 
 
Action Taken Note 
 
 Out of total expenditure incurred by implementing agencies under CRR scheme, 
module wise expenditure by the agencies for last th ree years is being collected separately 
from implementing nodal agencies.  
 
 
State Level Public Sector Enterprises (SLPSEs) 
 
Recommendations/ Observations 
 
4. The Committee recommends that DPE should issue g uidelines to the SLPSEs 
asking them to furnish the information on their per formance well in time for preparing 
the next Annual Survey of SLPSEs and also take up t he matter with State Governments 
to nominate one Department as the Nodal Department for data compilation on SLPSEs. 
Para (52) 
 
Action Taken Note 
  
 This Department (DPE) vide its D.O. letter dated 2 4.5.2010 has requested all the 
Chief Secretaries of State Governments/UTs to nomin ate one Department as the Nodal 
Department for data compilation on State Level Public Enterprises (SLPEs). 
       In response to the above request of DPE, 10 States and 3 Union Territories (UTs) 
have already nominated one Department as the Nodal Department for data compilation 
on SLPEs in their respective States / UTs. 
       
12 

 In addition, 10 States  already have one coordinat ing department (Department of 
Public Enterprises (DPE) / Department of Finance / Industry Department) as the nodal 
Department.   
      In respect of the remaining 13 States / UTs, the information is yet to be received. 
      With a view to solicit information from State s / UTs for preparing the next 
National Survey on SLPEs, Zonal Workshops on SLPEs have been organized in 
Guwahati on 5 
th  March 2009, in Kolkata on 20-21 January 2010, in B engaluru on 16-17 
April 2010 and in Dehradun on 15-16 July 2010. Simi lar Workshops are proposed to be 
held in the remaining regions of the country.  
      The Department has supplied  all the States /  UTs an Input Sheet (Schedule) in 
three parts (on performance of the Enterprise) to be filled-in by their respective SLPEs 
 
Recommendations/ Observations  
 
5. The Committee finds that the problems faced by S LPSEs such as absence of 
Board of Directors, short tenure of CMDs and lack o f both operational and strategic 
autonomy (for making investment) are due to lack of  coordination between the State 
Government and SLPSEs and recommends that DPE shoul d prepare a well articulated 
model MoU to be signed between State Government and  SLPSEs for improving the 
performance of SLPSEs. 
Para (53) 
Action Taken Note 
 
 The Model MoU for State Level Public Enterprises,  prepared in the Department 
of Public Enterprises (Govt. of India), has been ci rculated to all the States / UTs for their 
consideration / adoption.  
 
 
Standing Conference of Public Enterprises (SCOPE)  
Recommendations/ Observations  
 
6. At the same time the Committee recommends that i n order to play a meaningful 
role in the affairs of CPSEs the Department of Publ ic Enterprises should not remain a 
mere interface between the administrative Ministrie s and the CPSEs and therefore the 
Department should be entrusted with the power of no minating one non official and 
knowledgeable person as Director in the Board of every CPSE. 
Para (61) 
Action Taken Note 
 
 Presently, the proposals for appointment of non-of ficial Directors are initiated by 
the concerned Administrative Ministries. DPE does n ot have the powers to suo-moto 
initiate the proposals in this regard. 
A proposal for empowering DPE to suo-moto initiate the proposals for 
appointment of non-official Directors, in case prop osals are not received from the 
concerned Administrative Ministries in time, has be en submitted for the approval of 
competent authority.  
13 
******** 