REPORT NO. 
255  
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
         December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY FIFTH REPORT 
ON  
 
ACTION TAKEN ON THE 249th  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
          ON  
 
REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING OF  
THE FERTILIZERS AND CHEMICALS TRAVANCORE LTD 
 
 ( Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10 th  December, 2013)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 th  December, 2013 ) 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
         December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY FIFTH REPORT 
ON  
 
ACTION TAKEN ON THE 249th  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
          ON  
 
REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING OF  
THE FERTILIZERS AND CHEMICALS TRAVANCORE LTD 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10 
th  December, 2013)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 th  December, 2013 ) 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………………………..      (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………        (ii) 
 
3. REPORT ……………………………………………………………………………………….  
 
(i)  CHAPTER – I 
 Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry ………   .  
 
(ii)  CHAPTER–II 
  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
  of the Government's replies…………………………………………………………     
 
(iii)  CHAPTER–III 
   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  the Committee has not                        
accepted the replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its                
replies…………………………………………………… …………………………….. 
 
(iv)  CHAPTER – IV 
  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have 
not been received…………………………………………………………………….. 
 
4. * Minutes……………………………………………………………………………..     ……   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
* to be appended at printing stage. 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 31 st  August, 2013)  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
     
 1.  Shri K.C. Tyagi —       Chairman  
       2.  Shri M.P. Achuthan  
 3.  Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel  
 4.  Shri Narendra Budania 
    5.  Shri Vivek Gupta  
 6.  Dr. V. Maitreyan   
 7.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar  
 8.  Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
 9.  Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
10. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor  
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.   Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
16. Shri Hassan Khan 
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
18. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod  
19. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
20. Shri Somen Mitra 
21. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26.    Shri Ramsinh Rathwa  
27.    Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
28.    Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
29.    Ch. Lal Singh 
30.    Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
31.    Shri E.G.Sugavanam 
 
Secretariat  
 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3.      Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4.      Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 (i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Fifty-fifth Report on Action Taken Notes furnis hed by the Department of Fertilizers, 
Ministry of Chemicals and  Fertilizers on the recommendations contained in the  
Committee’s Two Hundred and Forty-ninth Report on t he Revival and Restructuring of 
The Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Ltd.  
 
2.  I, thank the Department of Fertilizers (Ministr y of Chemicals and Fertilizers) & 
Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy  Industries and Public Enterprises) 
for furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recomm endations contained in the 
Committee’s Two Hundred and Forty-ninth Report. 
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on the 20 
th  November, 2013 considered and 
adopted the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri K.C. Tyagi 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
New Delhi 
November, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

REPORT 
 
 The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals wit h the Action Taken by the 
Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals an d Fertilizers on the recommendations 
contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Forty-  ninth Report on the Revival and 
Restructuring of The Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Ltd 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Fertilizers, 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers in respect of  the recommendations contained in the 
Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
 
Chapter I -  The recommendations/observations which have been  accepted by the 
Ministry. 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
 
Chapter -II -  The recommendations/observations which the Commi ttee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic 
and explanations advanced by the Ministry and there fore do not want to pursue them for 
the present. 
 
 
Chapter -III -  The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has 
not accepted replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry should furnish 
logical explanations thereof. 
 
 
Chapter -IV - The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received. 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its langua ge in vague terms therefore; the 
Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of 
recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention 
and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER – I 
 
The Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee is happy to note that many measures h ave been taken to address 
the problems including the appointment of a Chairma n cum Managing Director who has 
prepared a practical and hands on plan to revive th e Company and make it financially 
sound and profitable. The Committee strongly recommends that the management must go 
beyond core activity of the Company and consolidate , strengthen and augment its 
subsidiaries, the FACT Design and Engineering Organ ization (FEDO) and FACT 
Engineering Works (FEW) which can fetch profits and  greatly add to its financial health. 
In doing so the Company can be made a vibrant and profitable Company.   
                                                                                                                                  (Para 6) 
 
Action Taken Reply 
In order to strengthen FEDO (FACT Engineering & Des ign Organization), FACT 
is considering re-organization of FEDO for converti ng it in to a separate profit center. 
Further, efforts are on to immediately set up busin ess development offices of FEDO in 
Mumbai & Delhi, which would help FEDO to strengthen  its activities in other places 
also.  Also, discussion is on with cash rich compan ies like ONGC, EIL etc for making 
joint ventures (JVs) for the future projects of FACT, which will help FEDO to fetch more 
works related to Engineering & Consultancy. 
 
 The proposal for converting FEW (FACT Engineering Works) into a separate 
profit centre will be taken up after the FEDO exercise is through. 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
The Committee strongly recommends for the revival o f the  Company so that the 
plan envisaged by the new CMD for a turnover of  Rs .7,000 crore and a profit after tax of 
Rs.300 crore by 2020, can be  achieved by raising f ertilizer production to 20 lakh tonnes 
and fertilizer  trading to 10 lakh tonnes.                                                                 
                  (Para 14) 
 
Action Taken Reply 
 The revival proposal submitted by the Company has adopted a strategy as under: 
 
a) The improvement of  the  balance  sheet in view  of  the  substantial  
accumulated  losses  and  erosion  of  net worth. 
b) Infusion  of  additional  funds  in order  to  over come  working 
capital  constraints  for  un interrupted  operations 
c) Addressing  policy  anomalies  in  terms  of  higher  input  costs  of  
Naphtha / LNG  by  the  Government. 

d) Taking up various  projects identified  as a  part  of  its  12 th   plan  
for  medium  term  to long term  sustenance  for  w hich  support  of  GoI  is  
requested. 
 
The relief package will bring the company back on t he track of sustained operations 
and help the company generate a reasonable profit.  The package is backed up by both 
medium term and long term plans which aim to put th e company on a path of continual 
improvement in physical and financial performance. 
 
It  can  be  seen  that company  has been  making   losses mainly due to  the  inability  
to  achieve  optimal  production levels  due to  ra w material  shortage,  working capital  
limitations, high interest  burden  and inadequate  naphtha  compensation. Once these 
problems are addressed, drastic improvements in the  financial performance of the 
company are guaranteed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER–II 
The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies 
Recommendation/ observation 
The Committee recommends that the above stated prob lems must be resolved by 
the Government of India for the purpose of reviving  the Company and making it 
profitable.                                                                                                                  
                    (Para 9) 
 
Action Taken Reply 
 The high cost of production is basically due to no n adequate compensation 
provided to the company on account of costly input naphtha, furnace oil and high interest 
burden on loan alongwith working capital shortage.  The Company has taken steps to 
convert its plants for the use of LNG. The hook up for conversion to LNG has been 
completed in the Ammonia plant of FACT and the plan t is under start up  utilizing LNG 
from the Petronet LNG Terminal at Kochi, which is n ow available at a landed price of 
US$ 19.5 per MMBTU. 
 The Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) rates are common f or all 
complex fertilizers manufacturers, and the selling prices of all similar NPK fertilizers will 
remain almost same due to the effect of market forc es. While declaring the subsidy rates 
for 2012-13, Department of Fertilizers had indicated its intension to mop up subsidy from 
companies having access to cheap natural gas.  Whil e doing so, government is 
considering that the companies who are exposed to h igher cost LNG on account of the 
location disadvantage are compensated by a suitable mechanism.     
 
For working capital and reduction of interest burde n, FACT has submitted a 
proposal for Financial restructuring of company to Department of Fertilizers. The 
Financial relief package sought for the company con sists of write off of the principal of 
the Government of India loans Rs. 282.73 crore and interest Rs. 159.17 crore accrued 
upto 31.3.2013. Besides waiver of loan and interest , company requires fresh infusion of 
fund of Rs. 300 crore as interest free loan repayab le in 10 years with a 2 year 
moratorium. The proposal for financial restructuring of FACT is now under consideration 
of Department of Fertilizers. 
 
The relief package will bring the company back on t he track of sustained 
operations and help the company generate a reasonab le profit.  The package is backed up 
by both medium term and long term plans which aim t o put the company on a path of 
improvement in physical and financial performance. These measures are included in the 
Road map for sustainability.  
 
The scheme for the revival of FACT can be categoriz ed as short term, medium term 
and long term plans. The brief details of these plans are summarized below: 
 

1) Short Term Plan- 
a) Sanctioning of the financial restructuring proposal  to prevent 
erosion of its net worth, reduce interest and ease the working capital strain. 
b) Providing a level playing field for LNG pricing by allocation of 
domestic gas or implementation of a price support mechanism. 
c) Plan fund support for essential renewals, replaceme nts & other 
schemes. 
d) Finalisation of an adequate compensation for Naphth a from 2010, 
which takes into account the increase in the price of Naphtha and furnace oil 
in place of the adhoc compensation already sanctioned. 
 
2) Medium Term Plan-  with a  focus  to ensure availab ility of raw materials and 
removal of imbalances in Intermediates  and  enhanc ing  NP  production  
capacity :- 
 
a)  Revamping the capacity of captive phosphoric acid production 
facility at Cochin division from 360 TPD to 500 TPD.  
b)  Setting up a 2000 TPD Sulphuric acid plant to redu ce imbalance in 
availability of sulphuric acid 
c)  NP expansion at Cochin division 
d)  Setting up a 3000 TPD NP Plant at Udyogamandel to replace the 
two low capacity plants presently in operation. 
e)  Setting up a 2000 TPD sulphuric acid plant at Udyo gamandel 
catering to the requirement of sulphuric acid, oleum and sulphur dioxide in the 
complex. 
 
3) Long term plans-  
 Ammonia-Urea complex at Cochin Division 
 
The combination of the relief package and the measu res highlighted in the Road map 
will ensure that the company will sustain on its ow n without external support and will 
never again tread the path of financial sickness.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER–III 
The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not 
accepted the replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry to review its replies. 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER – IV 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
have not been  received 
 
Recommendation/ observation 
 The Committee strongly recommends that necessary s teps must be taken by 
the Government of Kerala to give land to the CWC fo r the construction of the Container 
Freight Station which will help the FACT to restore its financial and commercial viability 
and make it a profit making company.                                                                 
             (Para 11) 
 
Action Taken Reply 
 
The 25 acres of land identified for establishment o f Container Freight 
Station in association with Central Warehousing Cor poration is a portion 
of the land acquired by the Government of Kerala un der Land Acquisition 
Act and handed over to FACT for its expansion activ ities.  FACT has paid 
compensation as well as enhanced compensation in re spect of this land. 
However, as per the Title Deed/Patta issued by the Government of Kerala, 
this land can be alienated (in this case leasing to  CWC) only with the 
permission of Government of Kerala. 
 
 FACT has approached the Government of Kerala for p ermission to lease 25 acres 
of land to CWC for establishment of Container Freig ht Station. FACT has not received 
the permission from Government of Kerala as request ed. Hence, FACT has decided to 
keep the proposal of CFS with CWC in abeyance. 
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 The Committee expects to be informed of the progres s made in case of 
leasing of land to CWC by the Government of Kerala.   
 
Recommendation/ observation 
The Committee recommends that the request of the Co mpany for naphtha subsidy 
may be acceded to.                                                                                                
                  (Para 13) 
 
Action Taken Reply 
FACT is a manufacturer of the complex fertilizer gr ade NP 20:20:0:13 known by 
the trade name Factamfos and Ammonium sulphate. Und er the Nutrient Based Subsidy 
(NBS) scheme, FACT has been receiving a fixed subsi dy as per the annually notified 
rates for the nutrients N, P & S. Under the regime of floating MRP, FACT has been 
fixing the selling prices of its products in unison with other fertilizer manufacturers. 
 

FACT depends on liquid feedstock Naphtha for its pr oduction activities in the 
absence of gas availability in the region. Naphtha is a costly feedstock compared to 
natural gas. 
  
Under the NBS, in addition to the normal subsidy, t he company has been 
receiving an additional adhoc compensation for use of costly Naphtha. This 
compensation was fixed provisionally at Rs 3121 per  MT of NP & Rs 3658 per MT of 
Ammonium sulphate in the year 2010. The price of Naphtha when this compensation was 
fixed was only Rs 36000 per MT. The prices of Naphtha have continuously risen over the 
years and are above Rs 65000 per MT at present. The  finalization of the final rate of 
additional compensation for the period 2009 to 2013 for Naphtha is under process.  
 
 
Further Recommendation/ observation 
 
 
 The Committee expects to be informed of the progres s made in the 
finalization of the final rate for naphtha subsidy.  The Committee may also be 
informed that in view of rise in Naphtha prices, wh ether there is a proposal of 
converting the plants into gas based plants  and if , the prices of gas are likely to 
remain competitive vis- a-vis naphtha. 
 
**************** 
 