119th REPORT ON COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/119threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:05]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
HUNDRED-NINETEENTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2003-04) PERTAINING TO THE 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES (MINISTRY OF 
HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8TH MAY, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 8TH MAY, 2003)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2003/VAISAKHA, 1925 (SAKA)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE       
INTRODUCTION
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
MINUTES
                                   COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
   1.  Shri P.C. Alexander  —  Chairman
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal

119th REPORT ON COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/119threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:05]
   3.  Shri Jayantilal Barot
   4.  Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
   5.  Dr. M.N. Das
   6.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey
   7.  Shri Faguni Ram
   8.  Shri Lajpat Rai
   9.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
10.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
11.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
12.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
13.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
14.  Shrimati Sushree Devi
16.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
        LOK  SABHA
16.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Shri Ajay Chakraborty
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
20.  Shri K. Francis George
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque
23.  Shri A.C. Jose
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
26.  Shri Sunil Khan
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar
28.  Shri Manjay Lal
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.  Shri P. Rajendran
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
41.  Shri V. Vetriselvan
42.  Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
43.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh
44.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh
45.  Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary

119th REPORT ON COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/119threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:05]
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
        I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised
by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred-nineteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (2003-04) pertaining
to the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
2.     The Committee heard the Secretary and representatives of Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises on
28th April, 2003. The Committee also examined the relevant documents and budget papers furnished by the Ministry.
The Committee wishes to thank the representatives of the Ministry for making available the replies to questionnaire in
time and satisfactory reply to the Member's queries in the course of deliberations.
3.     The Committee at its meeting held on 6th May, 2003 considered and adopted the Report.
NEW DELHI;              
                               
6th  May, 2003
DR.  P.  C.  ALEXANDER
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
REPORT
 
        The Department of Public Enterprises acts as a nodal agency for all PSEs and assists in policy formulation
pertaining to the policy guidelines on performance improvement and evaluation, financial accounting, personnel
management and in related areas. It also collects, evaluates and maintains information on several areas in respect of
PSEs. In fulfilling its roles, it associated itself with other Ministries and Organizations.
1.1   The important role and tasks of the Department of Public Enterprises are :
          (i)    General policy relating to Public Sector Enterprises;
          (ii)   Matters relating to issue of Presidential Directives and Guidelines to Public Sector Enterprises;
          (iii)  Formulation of Policy Guidelines pertaining to Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs) in areas like performance
improvement and evaluation, financial management, personnel management, board structures, wage
settlement, training, industrial relation, vigilance, performance appraisal, etc.;
          (iv)  Counselling, training and rehabilitation of employees in Central PSEs under VRS;
          (v)   Matters relating to reservation of posts in PSEs to certain classes of citizens;
          (vi)  All matters relating to Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Public Sector Enterprises and the
Administrative Ministries/Departments;
          (vii)Matters relating to the delegation of powers to the Board of Directors;
          (viii)To undertake in-depth studies in respect of significant areas of functioning of Central PSEs;
          (ix)  Matters relating to International Centre for Promotion of Enterprises (ICPE);
          (x)   Matters relating to Standing Conference of Public Enterprises (SCOPE);
          (xi)  To monitor and evaluate the performance of PSEs and to act as a repository of data and to bring out an
Annual Survey for the Parliament;
          (xii)Permanent Machinery of Arbitrators for settlement of disputes among Public Sector Enterprises and
Government Departments except disputes relating to tax matters;

119th REPORT ON COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/119threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:05]
          (xiii)The Financial Policy Division comprises the Public Enterprises Survey Unit, the Policy Planning Unit,
Counselling, Re-training and Re-development Unit and the Wage Policy Unit;
          (xiv)  The Management Policy Division comprises the Personnel Policy Unit, Training Unit, Performance
Indicator and Work Norms Unit (PIWNU) and SC and ST Cell;
          (xv)The MoU Division comprises MoU Unit, Data Bank and Computer Cell;
          (xvi)  Administration and Coordination Division comprises the Administration, Library, Parliament and
Coordination Wings and Hindi Cell; and
          (xvii)The Permanent Machinery of Arbitration (PMA) provides a forum for settlement of commercial disputes
between two or more PSEs as well as between a Government Department and PSEs.
BUDGET  ALLOCATION
        Allocation for Department of Public Enterprises in BE 2003-04 (Demand No. 50) is given below :
DEMAND  NO.  50
DEPARTMENT  OF  PUBLIC  ENTERPRISES
(Rs. in crore)
Major Head Budget 2002-03 Revised 2002-03 Budget 2003-04
 Plan Non-
Plan
Total Plan Non-
Plan
Total Plan Non-
Plan
Total
Revenue 10.00 2.63 12.63 10.00 2.58 12.58 10.00 2.61 12.61
Capital ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
TOTAL : 10.00 2.63 12.63 10.00 2.58 12.58 10.00 2.61 12.61
        The break-up of the Demand No. 50 scheme-wise is as under :
Secretariat-
Economic Services
3451 – 2.24 2.24 – 2.19 2.19 – 2.22 2.22
Project Monitoring 3451 0.50 – 0.50 0.50 – 0.50 – – –
Contribution to
International Centre
for Public
Enterprises
2852 – 0.39 0.39 – 0.39 0.39 – 0.39 0.39
Retaining and
Redeployment of
rationalized workers
of CPUs
2852 8.50 – 8.50 8.50 – 8.50 9.00 – 9.00
Lumpsum provision
for projects/
schemes for North
Eastern
areas and Sikkim
2552 1.00 – 1.00 1.00 – 1.00 1.00 – 1.00
GRAND TOTAL :  10.00 2.63 12.63 10.00 2.58 12.58 10.00 2.61 12.61
2.     In Demand No. 50, a budgetary allocation of Rs. 12.61 crore has been made for the financial year 2003-04. Under
the Demand, the Plan and Non-Plan allocations are Rs. 10.00 crore and Rs. 2.61 crore respectively.
Plant Outlay

119th REPORT ON COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/119threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:05]
2.1   The break up of Plan outlay is as under :
           (i)  Rs. 8.57 crore for the plan expenditure in respect of counselling, retraining and redeployment (CRR) of
rationalized workers of CPSEs;
           (ii)Rs. 1.00 crore for the projects/schemes for the benefits of North Eastern Region including Sikkim; and
           (iii)  Rs. 43 lakhs have been provided for project monitoring.
COUNSELLING RETRAINING AND REDPLOYMENT SCHEME
3.     The Scheme for Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment was introduced by Department of Public Enterprises
from the year 2001-02, and has been carried out continuously for the year 2002-03. The Scheme inter alia aims at
providing an opportunity of short duration orientation programme to the rationalised employees of Central PSEs. As per
the recent trends, on an average around 45,000 employees are being released under VRS/VSS every year. Further the
nodal training agencies selected for carrying out the CRR programme have also projected higher targets for the
coverage. However, considering the availability of the fund and in order to maximize the utilization of the resources,
targets are distributed among the agencies considering their capacity, potential to train and support the redeployment
drive. For carrying out the CRR programme, 17 nodal agencies were selected out of which 16 agencies were functional
during 2001-02. The number of nodal agencies have been increased from 17 to 25 during 2002-03. During 2001-02
selected nodal agencies were allowed to operate through 40 Employee Assistance Centres (EACs). The number of
EACs has increased to 80 during 2002-03.
3.1   The Department of Public Enterprises has apprised that considering the need to have flexibility and also economy
of the scale, the training has been distributed in 20 days/30 days/40 days module depending upon trade/skill being opted
by the rationalized employees. The projection under the CRR programme is made on year-to-year basis. For the year
2001-02, against a projection of 8000 employees to be trained, 8423 persons were trained. For the year 2002-03, there is
a projection to train 10,000 persons and it is likely to meet the target as per available trends being received from the
agencies. For the year 2003-04, it is projected to meet a target of Rs. 11,000 person. The Expenditure Norms per person
are separate for 20 days/30 days/40 days modules of training. Similarly, a separate element of sensitization programme
for providing 3 days counselling camp in the vicinity of the PSU has been made available under the CRR programme so
as to provide the basic inputs, counsel the employees prior to their release from the organizations and to assess the
training needs so as to enable  them to rejoin the productive process once they part with the CPSU.
3.2   With regard to monitoring mechanism, agencies have been asked to submit the batchwise information for the
training undertaken, the progress on redeployment of the persons so trained etc. Besides, the officials of CRR Cell, DPE
also inspects the site of the training, inter-act with the participants. In order to support the mechanism, endeavour has
also been made to set up the Coordination Committees consisting of Members of Central PSEs in the vicinity, lead bank
managers and the nodal agencies carrying out the programme so that some of the basic issues could be discussed locally
and the CRR programme could be monitored at the local level by the said Committee.
3.3   Out of the total plan allocation of Rs. 10.00 crores in BE 2003-04, the major part of it i.e. 9.00 crores is for
Retraining and Redeployment of rationalized workers of CPUs. The Ministry has apprised that the Plan allocation of Rs.
8.50 crore was made in 2002-03 (RE) and in B.E. 2003-04, Rs. 9 crores has been allocated for the implementation of the
Scheme for Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment of rationalised employees of CPSUs.
3.4   The Committee finds that there has been constant increase in the plan allocation of CRR Scheme over the
earlier years. As against Rs. 6.75 crores allocated in RE 2001-02, an allocation of Rs. 8.50 crores was made in BE
2002-03 for CRR which was taken up by DPE since 1st April, 2001. Earlier it was dealt by the Department of
Industrial Policy and Promotion. In BE 2003-04, the amount has been increased to Rs. 9.00 crores. This is the
third year since the scheme commenced. The Committee recommends that in view of the increasing trends in the
plan allocation for CRR scheme and time factor, a suitable mechanism for appraisal of the scheme should be
evolved by DPE so as to evaluate the results in this regard and assess the desired impact of the scheme.
3.5   During the year 2003-04, the Plan allocation is of Rs. 10 crore of which 10% has been earmarked for North East
(NE) Region and the balance i.e. Rs. 9 crore is for the CRR programme for other regions inclusive of project monitoring
element. The allocations for the year 2001-02 was Rs. 8 crore. Of this, 10% i.e. Rs. 0.80 crore was earmarked for NE
Region and the balance of Rs. 7.20 crore for CRR programme for other regions including project monitoring. For

119th REPORT ON COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/119threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:05]
carrying out the activities, besides, Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship, Guwahati, one more agency viz., National
Productivity Council has also been authorized to open Employee Assistance Centre at Guwahati for imparting the
training to VR optees of that region.
3.6   The Committee observes that North Eastern Area and Sikkim comprising of seven states i.e. Arunachal
Pradesh, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Assam, Tripura, Manipur and Mizoram, is an economically and industrially
backward area. The allocation of Rs. 1.00 crore for the area for CRR scheme is not enough considering the vast
area to be covered under the scheme. If the area has to be developed, entrepreneurship has to be given a fillip.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the plan allocation for North Eastern area and Sikkim should be
further increased so as to open more training centres in these areas to impart training to the persons and have a
wider coverage of 
the scheme.
3.7   The Ministry has further apprised that the CRR programme is voluntary in nature. Ex-employees who have availed
of VRS and who are willing and eligible being within 58 years of age are selected by the Nodal Agencies after a
thorough counselling and within the target set for these agencies based on the availability of the fund. The trainees
themselves decide the area of training. Nodal agencies help them in identifying the areas having potential to set up new
ventures. The ex-employees of those PSEs, which are located in and around the location of the training centres, are
invited for the programme. Department of Public Enterprises is in the process of preparation of the list of the trainees,
PSE-wise.
3.8   The Committee in its 73rd report on Demands for Grants (2002-03) also dealt with the CRR scheme and observed
as under :
        "The Committee, however, observes that there may be cases where V.R.S. optees are in the age group of 50-57 and
by human nature they stop learning any new trade and imparting training to them would only result in waste of
time and Government money. The Committee, therefore, recommends that provision may be made for giving
training to the sons/daughters of such persons and that too before they are retired."
        The Ministry in their action taken note stated as under :
        "The recommendations of the Committee in regard to providing the facilities under the CRR programme to the
sons/daughters of the VRS optees who are in the age group of 50-57 have been noted. Considering the human
angle, as recommended by the Hon'ble Members, the matter would be taken up for consideration appropriately."
        The issue was again raised by the Chairman in the course of deliberation with the Secretary, Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises. The Secretary stated the following :
        "As far as wards part is concerned, we have this suggestion with us. It is under examination. We will certainly
come back to you sooner than later whether we can include the wards in the training part, where the separated
employee is not able to undertake the training. This is under active consideration of the Ministry."
3.9   The Committee observes that the issue has been under consideration of the Ministry for the last one year
and a decision is yet to be taken. By that time, about 20,000 employees would have completed training. This
lukewarm approach needs to be put into the right perspective. The Committee, therefore, recommends that an
early decision may be expedited in the matter for the benefit of VRS optees.
3.10The counselling and training programmes is planned in order to equip VRS optees with skills and orientation to
engage themselves in self-employment activities and rejoin the productive process even after their separation from the
CPSUs. The aim is to provide alternative employment opportunities to the VRS/VSS opted employees of the PSEs.
However, the skill they possess is of the different nature i.e. they have the experience of working under the PSU of a
Heavy Industry where the employment opportunity has ceased to exist. However, on retirement they would need the
skill of different name for setting up their own venture a small scale business. In order to overcome this gap, DPE
should co-ordinate with the Ministry of SSI to offer them training. The Committee also feels the need of adequate funds
for such employees to start there own vocation. Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises in course
of his deliberation before the Committee on 20th March, 2003 stated that under this scheme, which started last year, an
allocation of Rs. 8.5 crores was made. This year an allocation of Rs. 10 crores has been made. This allocation falls short
of the demand as far as this scheme is concerned. One of the problems faced by the workers who have been separated is

119th REPORT ON COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/119threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:05]
that they are not getting the institutional finance from the banks. Banks are not very sure whether these people will be
able to repay or whether they will be able to absorb themselves. The mind of the bankers has to be reconditioned vis-a-
vis, this particular group. The Committee may issue a directive to the Ministry of Finance, Department of Insurance and
Banking that they should take into account the need of the separated employees so that they can settle in their life.
Otherwise, they will become frustrated after having been trained and not getting the institutional finance, and not getting
proper resettlement in the process.
3.11The Committee, therefore, recommends that training for VRS optee employees should be organized in such a
way that they can create self-employment in the small scale sector and avail the benefit of the schemes like
PMRY, REGP etc. in the small and tiny sector. Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment (CRR) scheme has
now taken roots. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to increase its spread to cover at least 40,000
workers per annum in addition to covering a backlog of about 1 lakh workers. In this context, the Committee
recommends that steps are urgently required for allocation of funds for the scheme which needs to be at least
doubled. Ministry of Heavy Industries should also ensure that PSEs shall clear all their dues before relieving
them from the organization so that they can plan their future course of action in earning livelihood in the new
environment. Ministry of Finance should issue direction that banks honour their financial requirements in the
aftermath of VRS/VSS to avail of the small sector employment schemes. The workers separated on VRS should
be entitled to borrowing from commercial banks under the priority sector lending dispensation.
3.12The Committee came to know that currently workers separated on VRS instantly loses the medical cover granted to
him under ESI Scheme. In case of natural superannuation, however, workers get an opportunity to continue the medical
benefits at their option and on requisite payment. The Committee strongly recommends that medical cover should
be granted to the workers being separated on VRS/VSS at least for a period of five years or till the date of
natural superannuation whichever is earlier. Ministry of Heavy Industries should devise a scheme in this regard
in consultation with all stakeholders.
IMPLEMENTATION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
4.     An amount of Rs. 20 lakhs was allocated for the Department of Heavy Industry for annual plan (2002-2003), out of
which Rs. 10 lakhs has been kept for Department of Public Enterprises and remaining Rs. 10 lakhs for Department of
Heavy Industry. This amount is meant to implement the 'Information-Technology Plan'. This amount has been included
in the Demands for Grants of Department of Heavy Industry. Department of Public Enterprises will monitor the
progress of this scheme with the help of NIC.
4.1   Further, an amount of Rs. 10 lakh has been allocated under BE 2003-04 for information technology. The
Department of Public Enterprises apprised that the money is meant for purchase of Computers, Printers, Laptops etc.
under Head IT and also to incur expenditure on maintenance of computers so far purchased by this Department. All the
Divisions of DPE have been connected to Internet facilities. Survey data base has been made available on the website.
DPE guidelines have been put on the website and circulars for training abroad for PSEs executives have also been put
on website. As a result flow of information from PSEs has increased. Computers have immensely helped this
Department particularly the Survey unit in obtaining data from PSUs, compiling it and for presenting a critical analysis.
As a result the Department of Public Enterprises has been facilitated to present Public Enterprises Survey in time.
4.2   The Committee observes that input received from the connectivity of PSEs by computers is of immense help
for present and future projections of the Department of Public Enterprises and the efforts of the Department of
Public Enterprises in presentation of the Public Enterprises survey in time is laudable.
4.3   The Committee, recommends that Department of Public Enterprises should make the optimum utilization of
the computer connectivity for Public Enterprises. The Committee further recommends that the budget allocation
on this count could be enhanced, if need be.
NON-PLAN OUTLAY
5.     The details of the Non-Plan outlay is as under :
           (i)  Rs. 2.22 crore has been provided for Secretariat Economic Service.
           (ii)Rs. 39 lakhs has been allocated for contribution for ICPE.

119th REPORT ON COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/119threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:05]
5.1   The Department of Public Enterprises has apprised that the increase in actual expenditure (non-plan) during the
year 2001-02 as compared to 2000-01 was due to meeting the expenditure relating to publication of Annual Survey
Report and MoU Booklets and to clear the pending bills of Government of India Press. Further, the increase in BE
2003-04 as compared to RE 2002-03 is due to the reasons that some posts are likely to be filled during the year 2003-04.
SECRETARIAT ECONOMIC SERVICES
6.     A non-plan outlay of Rs. 2.24 crores for Secretariat Economic Services was made in BE 2002-03. However, only
Rs. 2.19 crores were projected for the purpose in RE of the same year. In the BE 2003-04, a provision of Rs. 2.22 crores
has been made. The Department has five constituent Divisions, viz., the Financial Policy Division, the Management
Policy Division, the MoU Division, the Administration & Coordination Division and Permanent Machinery of
Arbitration. The Financial Policy Division comprises the Public Enterprises Survey Unit, the Policy Planning Unit and
the Wage Policy Unit. The Management Policy Division comprises the Personnel Policy Unit, Training Unit,
Performance Indicator and Work Norms Unit (PIWN Unit) and SC and ST Cell. The MoU Division comprises MoU
Unit, Data Bank and Computer Cell. The Administration & Coordination Division comprises the Administration,
Library, Parliament and Coordination Wings and Hindi Cell. The Permanent Machinery of Arbitration (PMA) provides
a forum for settlement of commercial disputes between two or more PSEs as well as between a Government Department
and PSEs.
6.1   Main activities of DPE are limited to CRR and MoU. Expenditure Reforms Commission recommended winding up
of Department of Public Enterprises. The recommendations of Expenditure Reforms Commission are as under :
           (a)  The task of preparing MoUs can be left to the concerned Administrative Ministries, which can take recourse
to outside expertise as the DPE is now doing through the mechanism of ATF.
           (b)  Areas like performance appraisal of top executives, training and skill development of executives constituting
Search Committees for selecting panels of non-official directors etc. may be left to the Administrative
Ministries.
           (c)  In matters of restructuring of sick undertakings as well as joint  venture formation or disinvestment, the
Administrative Ministries can deal directly with Department of Disinvestment.
           (d)  Preparation of the Annual Survey can be entrusted to SCOPE, an organization of which all PSEs are
Members.
           (e)  In arbitration cases, the pre and post-arbitration support may be extended by the concerned Administrative
Ministries and in such an arrangement, the Arbitrators can be located in Law Ministry.
           (f)  It will be sufficient if the DPE is vested with the task of monitoring compliance with (decreasing number of)
guidelines and some functions like Wage Policy, including Pay Revision at Board level and below Board
level.
           (g)  For the tasks mentioned in (f) above, a small unit consisting of Joint Secretary, supported by a Director (F)
and 2 Deputy Directors with necessary support staff should be sufficient.
           (h)  Other positions in the Finance Division, the Management Division, MoU Division and Administration &
Coordination Division can be abolished.
           (i)  The small unit headed by the Joint Secretary can be made a part of the DHI and DPE may be abolished.
6.2   When asked to apprise the role and relevance of DPE in the light of recommendations of ERC, DPE had stated that
based on the recommendations of ERC, the matter was taken up with SCOPE for taking over the work of PE Survey.
SCOPE has, however, expressed its inability to undertake the survey work. Ministry of Law had also refused to take the
work of PMA. With regard to MoU work, it was stated that this was an instrument by which Government evolve a
uniform objective and transparent method of evaluation of performance of PSEs operating in different sectors.
Department is of the view that transfer of MoU work to the concerned administrative ministry would defeat the very
purpose of signing MoUs between administrative ministries and PSEs, since it would adversely affect the objectivity
and impartiality of MoU System. Role of DPE as a nodal Department for all CPSEs, should continue. Meanwhile,
additional work of Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment of Rationalised employees of CPSEs has been assigned

119th REPORT ON COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/119threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:05]
to DPE. The Ministry informed that consequent to ERC recommendation 15 vacant posts of DPE have been abolished.
6.3   The Committee in its 62nd Report on 'Action taken by the Govt. on the Recommendation contained in the 48th
Report of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry on Demands, for Grants (2001-02)
pertaining to the Department of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises recommended for
strengthening of Department of Public Enterprises. The recommendation is as under :
        "The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the proposal of abolishing MoU Division may be shelved.
As the country is now on the threshold of making PSEs more vibrant, productive and essential that the MoU
Division should be further strengthened instead of being abolished. Strengthening of MoU Division would go a
long way in making PSEs profitable and responsive to competitiveness."
6.4   The Committee, therefore, again recommends that the Department of Public Enterprises should be
strengthened so as to make it more responsive.
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
7.     MoU is a freely negotiated agreement between the public enterprise and the administrative ministry. Under the
agreement the enterprises undertake to achieve the targets set in the agreement at the beginning of the year. The MoU
covers both financial performance as well as non-financial performance. Under this system performance of the
Company is categorized into five categories namely : excellent, very good, good, fair, and poor.
7.1   All PSEs that have not been referred to the BIFR and are not insignificant in size are expected to sign an MoU. The
objectives of the MoU system are to :
        l   Improve the performance of public enterprises by increasing autonomy and accountability of the management.
        l   Remove the fuzziness in the goals and objectives the enterprise is to pursue through clearly laid down
performance targets at the beginning of the year in an MoU entered into between Chief Executive and
Secretary of the Administrative Ministry.
7.2   The MoU system has grown at a steady rate and from 4 MoUs signed in the year 1987-88, 107 MoUs were signed
for the year 2000-2001. In fact many of these 107 PSEs are the holding Companies and if their subsidiaries are also
included then the total No. of PSEs covered under MoU system works out to be as 163. The number of MoUs
signed/finalised since the inception of the MoU system are as follows :
Year No. of MoUs
signed/finalised
Year No. of MoUs
signed/finalized
1987-88 4 1994-95 100
1988-89 11 1995-96 104
1989-90 18 1996-97 110
1990-91 23 1997-88 108
1991-92 72 1998-99 108
1992-93 98 1999-2000 108
1993-94 101 2000-2001 107
  2001-2002 105
7.3   Asked as to the effectiveness of the MoU system, the Department of Public enterprises has stated as 
below :
        l   Since the focus, under the MoU system, has shifted to achievement of results, Ministries have begun to
withdraw from their tendency to control by procedures, MoU has thus increased the operational autonomy of
the enterprises.
        l   Operational autonomy has also been increased by delegating more financial and administrative powers to the

119th REPORT ON COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/119threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:05]
MoU signing PSEs.
        l   By laying stress on marketing effort and comparing with private sector enterprises MoU are helping PSEs to
face competition.
        l    The quarterly performance review (QPR) meetings have become more focussed since the introduction of
MoUs. Discussion is confined to overall achievement as outlined in the MoUs. This has lead to higher
quality of debate about PSE's performance.
        l   By making a distinction between enterprise performance and managerial performance, MoUs have improved
the quality of debate and made the judgements on PSE managements much more fair. This has been very
good for the morale of the employees who know that gross generalisation about public sector is unfair.
7.4   The summary performance of MoUs signing PSEs as reflected in their MoU rating during the last four years has
been as follows :
Rating                                                                  No. of Public Sector Enterprises
 1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 2000-2001 (Prov.)
Excellent 46 45 44 49 49
Very Good 28 25 30 29 26
Good 18 13 13 09 12
Fair 11 22 19 16 12
Poor 07 03 02 03 07
Excluded – – – 02 01
TOTAL : 110 108 108 108 107
7.5   Department of Public Enterprises has further informed that there has been an impressive improvement in the
financial performance of the MoU signing PSEs which is reflected in their improved Gross Margin. For the year 2000-
2001, the Aggregate Gross Margin of the MoU signing PSEs was around 15.5% more than that of previous year and
around 12.8% more than the target set for them.
7.6   The Committee recommends that DPE should reorient and reorganize its activities as far as signing of MoU
is concerned. The signing of MoUs should not be a mere formal exercise. DPE needs to reassess and revaluate its
role in so far as MoU is concerned. The Committee further recommends that the signing of MoU should continue
to be with DPE with a view to have uniform method of evaluation of CPSEs.
7.7   The Committee also recommends that Department of Public Enterprises should analyze the factor critical in
the MoU parameters while grading their performance and suggests to the Administrative Ministries in
appropriate manner how their performance can be improved otherwise MoU signing merely becomes a ritual
which has nothing to offer for improvement of PSEs.
7.8   The Committee observes that at present there are 240 Central Public Sector Enterprises. If the percentage
figure of MoU signed PSEs is taken, it is less than 50% now. Sick PSEs are debarred from signing MoU. The
Committee would have appreciated if DPE would provide necessary logistical support like technical assistance to
sick PSEs to revive and rejuvenate them.
7.9   All the MoU signing PSEs are eligible to exercise certain financial and administrative autonomy so that they are
able to carry out their day to day operations more efficiently. At present there is no proposal under consideration to
grant full functional autonomy to the Boards of the PSEs. The Department of Public Enterprises would continue to act
as nodal Department to coordinate general policy framework relating to public sector enterprises.
7.10The Task Force on MoU system which is a body of experts helps the Department of Public Enterprises in the
process of finalising the MoUs of different PSEs operating in different areas by way of providing technical
expertise/inputs. The Task Force consists of retired Secretaries to Government of India, retired Chief Executives,

119th REPORT ON COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/119threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:05]
Professionals, and Academicians. In order to meet the requirements of technical inputs the Task Force has been
reconstituted by inducting professionals/academicians from the reputed institutions.
7.11The following steps have been taken by Department of Public Enterprises to make the MoU system more effective.
        (i)  Instead of confining the scope of MoU system to the traditional approach of arriving at certain figures under the
static parameters, the PSEs are advised to pay adequate attention to the dynamic parameters like
productivity, customer satisfaction, HRD, quality improvement and R&D to be included as prominent
performance indicators.
        (ii)The parameter on project implementation with suitable weight is required to be included in the draft MoUs.
        (iii)     It has also been emphasized to pay more attention on the strategic issues which are very crucial for the
growth of the PSEs over a long period of time and PSEs had been asked to prepare their strategic plans in
consultation with the Administrative Ministries.
        (iv)Efforts have been made to finalize all MoUs before the commencement of the next financial year, so that the
targets are known to the managements of MoU signing PSEs in advance and they are able to develop
coherent strategies to achieve those targets.
        (v)  In order to make the MoU negotiation meetings more meaningful and effective, it is ensured that the
participation from the Administrative Ministries/Departments is at a senior (Additional/Joint Secretary)
level.
7.12Some of the measures of financial and operational autonomy delegated to Boards of MoU signing PSEs are as
follows :
        1.   Capital Expenditure : MoU signing PSEs having Gross Block of over Rs. 200 crores can incur expenditure of
Rs. 50 crores on additions, modifications and new investments and Rs. 100 crores on replacement, renewal
of assets without prior approval of the Government provided they meet certain conditions.
        2.   Wage Revision : MoU signing PSEs can finalize wage revisions within broad guidelines laid down by DPE.
        3.   Incentive Scheme : MoU signing PSEs can evolve incentive schemes within the broad guidelines laid down by
DPE subject to the condition that the total of bonus and incentive shall not exceed to the 35% of the wages.
        4.   Transfer of Functional Directors : MoU signing PSEs have powers to transfer functional directors from one
charge to another in consultation with the Secretary of the Administrative Ministry and with the prior
approval of the Minister.
7.13The Committee observes that the investment decisions to create public sector units were based on social cost
benefit analysis. Moreover most of the public sector enterprises were not expected to maximize profits. However,
the social cause no longer being a vogue, and market forces replacing the old economy with the ushering in of
liberalization, the performance of PSEs has to be evaluated on their economic performance. The Public Sector
Enterprises's performance, therefore, should be evaluated based on their financial profit.
7.14MoU should have relation to financial well being of a PSEs. Financial parameters are must to evaluate the
state of health of a PSE. However, the Committee observes that PSEs which are even under performing are
graded as good, very good or excellent depending upon the level of their achievements under the MoU target.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that financial performance of PSEs should be the main criteria for
rating their achievement.
7.15The evaluation of the MoU signing enterprises is done at the end of the year by the Ad hoc Task Force on the basis
of actual achievement vis-a-vis the MoU targets. Where the performance exceeds the target by the predetermined
stipulated level the enterprise is ranked as 'excellent' and when the target is just met, the enterprise is ranked as 'very
good'. In other cases, where the targets are not met the enterprise is ranked either 'good' or 'fair' or 'poor'. Ranking
depends on how the performance has been as compared to MoU targets.
7.16The Committee appreciates the efforts of DPE to make the MoU system more effective. Still much more has
to be done in this direction. It is more important that dynamic parameters like productivity, customer
satisfaction, HRD, quality improvement and R&D are taken into account. Department of Public Enterprises

119th REPORT ON COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/119threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:05]
should constantly endeavour to make MoU system as an instrument of improvement.
NON-OFFICIAL DIRECTORS IN BOARDS OF PSEs
8.     Part-time non-official Directors are individuals of repute having experience in different fields. On their
appointment as Directors the Boards of these PSEs get the benefit of their guidance and advice in the management of
the Company. Their appointment has helped in introducing transparent and effective systems of internal monitoring
through Audit Committees. The performance of PSEs depends upon a number of other critical factors such as its
competitive strength, organisational structure, the changes in its business environment, etc. Thus, it would be very
difficult to correctly quantify the improvement in performance of PSEs due to the delegation of powers mentioned
above. But enhanced autonomy to the PSEs certainly helps the managements to take quick decisions which are very
essential to meet the challenges of business especially under the emerging competitive economic environment.
8.1   Instructions have been issued by the Department of Public Enterprises to induct non-official part-time Directors on
the Boards of PSEs. The non-official Directors are drawn from public men, technocrats, management experts and
consultants, and professional managers in industry and trade with high degree of proven ability. The number of such
Directors should be at one-third of the actual strength of the Board. In the cases of listed Companies headed by
Executive Chairman, the number of non-official (Independent) Directors should be half of the Board.
8.2   The Navratna and Miniratna PSEs can exercise the enhanced powers only after their Boards and professionalised
by inducting adequate number of non-official Directors. A Search Committee consisting of Chairman Public Enterprises
Selection Board (PSEB), Secretary (DPE), Secretary of the Administrative Ministry concerned and eminent persons
from outside has been set up for selection of non-official Directors for the Navratna and Miniratna PSEs. The Search
Committee has been meeting frequently to make selections of non-official Directors.
8.3   Enhanced operational and financial powers are delegated to Navratna PSEs and Miniratnas. The enhanced power
enables these PSEs to take decisions in investment and operational matters without having to seek the approval of the
Government apart from cutting down delay in decision making, the efficiency as well as accountability of the Boards of
Directors have increased due to delegations of these powers. The enhanced powers are not available to sick PSEs.
8.4   The Committee observes that non-official part-time directors are drawn from various segments of society
i.e. public men, technocrats, management experts etc. However, they discharge their duties for no monetary gain.
Committee has the apprehension that this may play down on their accountability to the Board of PSE of which
they are members. DPE should look into this aspect.
PURCHASE  PREFERENCE  POLICY
9.     The Purchase reference Policy has been extended upto 31.3.2004. The Committee had earlier recommended that
Department of Public Enterprises should apprise the Committee about non-implementation of the policy, if any, by any
PSE. But Department of Public Enterprises have not so far complied with the recommendation. The Committee
understands that certain PSEs are not adhering to the Policy. Violation of the Policy by PSEs makes mockery of the
Policy which have been notified with the cabinet approval.
9.1   The Committee recommends that Department of Public Enterprises should apprise the Committee about the
non-implementation of the Policy for the last one year.
VOLUNTARY  RETIREMENT  SCHEME
10.   In the present system, funds are allocated to the central PSEs at 17.5% rate of interest per annum in case of
working capital loans including funds for VRS and at 13.5% rate of interest for other loans. In the falling interest rate
regime, transfer of such high cost funds severely impacts the balance sheet position of each PSE precipitating financial
crises. The Committee feels such high rate of interest attached to VRS funds have an adverse effect on the balance sheet
of the companies and it should be corrected.
10.1The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should revert to the old system of permitting VRS funds
as grants. It would be a much needed relief as loss making and marginally profit making companies are in urgent
need of shedding their oversized manpower.

119th REPORT ON COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/119threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:05]
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
        The Committee finds that there has been constant increase in the plan allocation of CRR scheme over the earlier
years. As against Rs. 6.75 crores allocated in RE 2001-02, an allocation of Rs. 8.50 crores was made in BE 2002-03 for
CRR which was taken up by DPE since 1st April, 2001. Earlier it was dealt by the Department of Industrial Policy and
Promotion. In BE 2003-04, the amount has been increased to Rs. 9.00 crores. This is the third year since the scheme
commenced. The Committee recommends that in view of the increasing trends in the plan allocation for CRR scheme
and time factor, a suitable mechanism for appraisal of the scheme should be evolved by DPE so as to evaluate the
results in this regard and assess the desired impact of the scheme.(Para 3.4)
        The Committee observes that North Eastern Area and Sikkim comprising of seven States i.e. Arunachal Pradesh,
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Assam, Tripura, Manipur and Mizoram, is an economically and industrially backward area. The
allocation of Rs. 1.00 crore for the area for CRR scheme is not enough considering the vast area to be covered under the
scheme. If the area has to be developed, entrepreneurship has to be given a fillip. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the plan allocation for North Eastern area should be further increased so as to open more training
centres in these areas to impart training to the persons and have a wider coverage of the scheme.                                   
(Para 3.6)
        The Committee observes that the issue has been under consideration of the Ministry for the last one year and a
decision is yet to be taken. By that time, about 20,000 employees would have completed training. This lukewarm
approach needs to be put into the right perspective. The Committee, therefore, recommends that an early decision may
be expedited in the matter for the benefit of VRS optees.                 (Para 3.9)
        The Committee, therefore, recommends that training for VRS optee employees should be organized in such a way
as they can create self-employment in the small scale sector and avail the benefit of the schemes like PMRY, REGP etc.
in the small and tiny sector. Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment (CRR) scheme has now taken roots. The
Committee feels that there is an urgent need to increase its spread to cover at least 40,000 workers per annum in
addition to covering a backlog of about 1 lakh workers. In this context, the Committee recommends that steps are
urgently required for allocation of funds for the scheme which needs to be at least doubled. Ministry of Heavy Industries
should also ensure that PSEs shall clear all their dues before relieving them from the organization so that they can plan
their future course of action in earning  livelihood in the new environment. Ministry of Finance should issue direction
that banks honour their financial requirements in the aftermath of VRS/VSS to avail of the small sector employment
schemes. The workers separated on VRS should be entitled to borrowing from commercial banks under the priority
sector lending dispensation.(Para 3.11)
        The Committee strongly recommends that medical cover should be granted to the workers being separated on
VRS/VSS at least for a period of five years or till the date of natural superannuation whichever is earlier. Ministry of
Heavy Industries should devise a scheme in this regard in consultation with all stakeholders.                                             
(Para 3.12)
        The Committee observes that input received from the connectivity of PSEs by computers is of immense help for
present and future projections of the Department of Public Enterprises and the efforts of the Department of Public
Enterprises in presentation of the Public Enterprises survey in time is laudable.                    (Para 4.2)
        The Committee, recommends that Department of Public Enterprises should make the optimum utilization of the
computer connectivity for Public Enterprises. The Committee further recommends that the budget allocation on this
count could be enhanced, if need be.        (Para 4.3)
        The Committee, therefore, again recommends that the Department of Public Enterprises should be strengthened so
as to make it more responsive.(Para 6.4)
        The Committee recommends that DPE should reorient and reorganize its activities as far as signing of MoU is
concerned. The signing of MoUs should not be a mere formal exercise. DPE needs to reassess and revaluate its role in
so far as MoU is concerned. The Committee further recommends that the signing of MoU should continue to be with
DPE with a view to have uniform method of evaluation of CPSEs.    (Para 7.6)
        The Committee recommends that Department of Public Enterprises should analyze the factor critical in the MoU
parameters while grading their performance and suggests to the administrative Ministries in appropriate manner how

119th REPORT ON COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/119threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:05]
their performance can be improved otherwise MoU signing merely becomes a ritual which has nothing to offer for
improvement of PSEs.                                                                    (Para 7.7)
        The Committee observes that at present there are 240 Central Public Sector Enterprises. If the percentage figure of
MoU signed PSEs is taken, it is less than 50% now. Sick PSEs are debarred from signing MoU. The Committee would
have appreciated if DPE would provide necessary logistical support like technical assistance to sick PSEs to revive and
rejuvenate them.                                                       (Para 7.8)
        The Committee observes that the investment decisions to create public sector units were based on social cost
benefit analysis. Moreover most of the public sector enterprises were not expected to maximize profits. However, the
social cause no longer being a vogue, and market forces replacing the old economy with the ushering in of
liberalization, the performance of PSEs has to be evaluated on their economic performance. The Public Sector
Enterprises's performance, therefore, should be evaluated based on their financial
profit.                                                                                            (Para 7.13)
        MoU should have relation to financial well being of a PSEs. Financial parameters are must to evaluate the state of
health of a PSE. However, the Committee observes that PSEs which are even under performing are graded as good, very
good or excellent depending upon the level of their achievements under the MoU target the Committee, therefore,
recommends that financial performance of PSEs should be the main criteria for rating their
achievement.                                                                                                        (Para 7.14)
        The Committee appreciates the efforts of DPE to make the MoU system more effective. Still much more has to be
done in this direction. It is more important that dynamic parameters like productivity, customer satisfaction, HRD,
quality improvement and R&D are taken into account. Department of Public Enterprises should constantly endeavour to
make MoU system as an instrument of improvement.(Para 7.16)
        The Committee observes that non-official part-time directors are drawn from various segments of society i.e.
public men, technocrats, management experts etc. However, they discharge their duties for no monetary gain.
Committee has the apprehension that this may play down on their accountability to the Board of PSE of which they are
members. DPE should look into this aspect.                                                          (Para 8.4)
        The Committee recommends that Department of Public Enterprises should apprise the Committee about the non-
implementation of the Policy for the last one year.  (Para 9.1)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should revert to the old system of permitting VRS funds as
grants. It would be a much needed relief as loss making and marginally profit making companies are in urgent need of
shedding their oversized manpower.(Para10.1)
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE MEETING
TENTH  MEETING
        The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 6th May, 2003 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
   1.  Shri P.C. Alexander  —  Chairman
        RAJYA  SABHA
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Dr. M.N. Das
   4.  Shri Faguni Ram
   5.  Shri Lajpat Rai
   6.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   7.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari

119th REPORT ON COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/119threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:28:05]
   8.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
   9.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
10.  Shri K. Chandran Pillai
        LOK  SABHA
11.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
12.  Shri K. Francis George
13.  Shri A.C. Jose
14.  Shri Manjay Lal
15.  Shri A. Narendra
16.  Shri Ananta Nayak
17.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
18.  Shri V. Vertiselvan
19.  Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Shri Ramesh Naithani, Committee Officer
2.     At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee.
3.            The Committee then took up the following draft Reports for its consideration
        *                              *                              *
*** Related to other matters.
4.     The Chairman requested the Members to give any suggestion or change in the Report, if required. After a brief
discussion the Reports were adopted.
5.     The Chairman nominated Prof. M.M. Aggarwal and in his absence Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi, Members Rajya
Sabha to present these reports to the Rajya Sabha. He also nominated Dr. B.B. Ramaiah and in his absence Shri A.C.
Jose, Members Lok Sabha to present these reports in the Lok Sabha on 8th May, 2003.
6.     The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.