B.0 .2193 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON 
INDUSTRY 
SECOND REPORT 
(ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF 
MINISTRY OF STEEL FOR 1993-94) 
Presented on 5th May, 1993 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
May_, 1993/Va isukha, 1915 (Saka) 

CON T ENTS 
PAGES 
1. Composition of the Committee ................................................................ . 
2. Report........................ ................... ...................................................... 1-3 
3. ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the meetings of the Committee .................................................. ' 4--7 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Ani! Kumar 
4. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
5. Shri J.P. Javali 
6. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
7. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
8. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
,9. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
10. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
11. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
12. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
LOK SABHA 
13. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
14. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
15. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
16. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
17. Shri Ram a Krishna Konathala 
18. Slui K. Ramamurthy 
19. Shri Balin Kuli 
20. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
21. Shri Vishvcshwar Bhagat 
22. Shri Chiranji La! Sharma 
23. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
24. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
25. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
26. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantya 
27. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
28. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
29. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
30. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
31. Shri Ramdew Ram 
32. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katharia 
33. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
34. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
35. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
36. Shri Manjay Lal 
37. Shri Rasheed Masood 
38. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
39. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
40. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
41. Shri P.G. Narayanan 
42. Shri Bolla Bulli Ram aiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy' Secretary 
2. Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Shamsher Singh , Committee Officer 

SECOND REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
I, the Chairman, Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Second Report of the 
Committee on the Demands for Grants for 1993-94 of the Ministry of Steel. 
2. In pursuance of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Rajya Sabha pertaining to 
Department Related Standing Committees, Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha and Hon'ble Speaker. 
Lok Sabha nominated 42 members of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha to the Committee on Industry for 
/ 
the functions assigned to it under the Rules. Further Chairman, Rajya Sabha and Speaker, Lok Sabha 
decided that all the provisions of Rule 270 of the Rules relating to the functions of the Committee 
shall become operative with effect from 30th March, 1993. 
3. 'The Committee on Industry deals with the subjects falling in the jurisdiction of the Ministry of 
Industry, Ministry of Steel and Ministry of Mines. · 
4. The Committee accordingly held its first meeting on the 22nd April, 1993 and considered 
relevant documents and papers received from the Ministry of Steel on the Demands for Grants for 
the year 1993-94. 
5. The Committee also heard the oral evidence of the Secretary of the Ministry of Steel on the 
performance budget in. the context of Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Steel. 
6. The Committee considered the Demands for Grants of the Ministry in three sittings and 
considered and adopted the Report at its sitting held on 4th May, 1993. 
7. Demands for Grants as presente _d are as under: 
Detailed Demands for Grants No. 74 
i) Total Charged - Rs. 5 lakhs 
ii) Total Voted - Rs. 463.34 crores 
8. The Committee had no time to consider in depth and analys~ the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry and the other documents. The Commit!ec is conscious of the fact that the Demands for 
Grants of various Ministries and Department are to be put for vote of the Lok Sabha on the 4th May. 
1993. We, therefore, offer general comments only. We propose to consider the detailed expenditure 
at a later stage and will present our views in subsequent reports so as to enable the Government to 
recaste their expenditure priorities in the revised estimates. 
9. Taken into account the documents and other material made available to it, the Committee 
co;~:u;::l~:n:n::::getary allocation and Steel Development fund: Demand No. 74 of the Ministry ,...~\ 
Steel has a total allocation of Rs. 463.39 crores in the Budget Estimates for 1993-94. The Committee , 
has noted that in the revised estimates for 1992-93 the total allocation was 402.00 · crores while for i\ 
1991-92 it was Rs. 498.10 crores. The Committee looked back to the revised estimates for the year 
1990-91 wherein a total of Rs. 783.89 crores was made and in the year 1989-.90, the amount was . 
Rs. 829.73 crores. It will, therefore, be seen that the Budgetary allocation of the Ministry is declinin~ 
year after year duri~g the last 5 years. One of the reasons may be the creation of~ccl~ 
~lup.ment.-Eun.<Lw_t!J.e __ Y!:~! _1._978 !_o _ !!Eance Capital Schemes and other expenditure tor-" 
inodernisation. etc., of industries in the iron and steel sector and also for compensation to major stee l 
producers for increase in the cost of production. One of the objectives of the Steel Development ! 
Fund is to reimburse the rebate allowed by the main producers of steel for concessional supplies to / ( 
SSI Corporation. The Committee examined the receipts and disbursement statement of the Steel I 
_:P_$.Y.elopmen! ..fun.9 from Ju_~e, 1978 to December, 1992. A sum of Rs~571._~4 ~~~r~~a? _Q~o_!> it qi_ ; 
_ip. the Fund during the period and a sum of Rs. 554 ~.69 crores was disbursed during that period. · 

The Committee notes that disbursement was pri marily among the main producers of Steel, i. c., 
4204.51 crores to SAIL. 44.68 crores to liSCO, 15 crores to VIZAG, 806.67 crores to TISCO. The 
Committee understa 'nds that for the administra tion of the Fund, a Managing Committee is functioning 
in the Ministry under the chairmanship of the Secretary. The Committee appreciates that the creation 
of the Fund has lessened the dependence on the Budgetary support and substantial internal resources 
have been generated with the creation of the Fund. The Committee, however. recommends that a 
separate chapter on the Steel Developmen t F und dealing with each item of receipt and expenditure 
specially the recovery progress of the loans may be included in the Performance Budget of the 
Ministry for better appraisal of the administra tion of the Fund for this vital sector of our economic 
development. 
9.2 Sponge Iron: Sponge iron is a metallic prod uct produced by direct reduction of high grade iron 
ore pelle ts in the solid state, i.e .. withou t the material going into the liquid phase a~ in the blast 
furnace. It is also known as Direct Reduced (DRI ) or H ot Briquetted Iron (RB I). Sponge iron 
industry was de-licensed in March. 1985 subject to certain locational restrictions for MRTP 
companies. Units were only required to obtain "registration''. Even this requirement of registration 
has Qeen dispensed with after the liberalisa tio n of the indus trial policy announced in 1991. 
E ntrepreneurs are now merely required to file a memorandum with the Government. Sponge iron is 
also included in the list of "High Priority In dustri es'' in the new policy. The Committee finds that 
only 1.25 crorcs ttas been allocated to Spo nge Iron India Limi ted in the Budget Estimates for the year 
1993-94 while in the revised est imates fo r 1992-93, the a lloca tion was to the tunc of Rs. 3.89 crores. 
The Committee understands that Sponge Iron i s a substitute for steel melting scrap. In order to 
reduce the dependence of the secondary stee l sec tor on imported scrap, the production of Sponge 
Iron in the country has to be augmented. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommends that sponge iron 
production has to be stepped up so as to red uce the import of this important component of steel 
production and accordingly higher Budgetary suppor t is to be given. 
9.3 Import a nd Export of Iron and Steel: Th e po licy for import and export of iron and steel 
materials has undergone sweeping changes with the liberal isation of trade policy. Import of iron and 
steel materials and ferrous scrap have since bee n .deca nalised and made freely importable. The 
Development Commissioner for Iron and Steel is no longer required to clear requests for imports 
from indigenous angle. The advance licensing scheme for import of duty-free raw materials. 
components. intermediates and consumables etc. for purpose of export promotion continues. The 
advance licensing scheme has been made more flexib le particularly with the introduction of value ­
based advance licence. None of the iron & steel items or their raw materials arc no longer prohibited 
for exports. Ferrous scrap, pig iron and certa in roinerals/ores which were hitherto banned for exports 
are now permissible subject to licensing. Exports of iron ore. chrome ore. manganese ore and 
concentrates and pellets of iron ore are made through designated canalising agencies. The Committee 
notes that the Performance Budget of the Mi nistry docs not indicate the amount of money involv7d in 
the export/import of iron steel materials, year -wise, toge ther with other relevant details. The 
Committee, therefore. recommends that, in order to appreciate the achievement made in terms of 
foreign exchange earnings as a result of the liberalisation of the import and export policy in iron and 
steel sector a separate chapter with req uired s~a tisti cal data may be incorporated in the Performance 
Budget of the Ministry. 
9.4 Impa ct of incre ase in the excise dut y on the steel produ ct and decrease in the imp ort duty on 
steel: The Committee has noted with concern that mini steel plants in the country have been badly 
affected on account of the increase in the excise duty o n the basic raw-material and increase in the 
custom duty of its end-products. The increase in the excise duty ranges from 10% to 15% on steel 
melting scrap and the increase in the custom duty on its end product ranges between Rs. 920 to 
Rs. 1000 per tonne . In addition the Government has also reduced import duty on billets/bars and 
rods from 45% to 30% and from 105% to 85% resulting in neutralising benefits granted to mini steel 
industry earlier through the reduction of import duty from 35% to 10%. It has also come to the 
notice of the Committee that international prices of imported scrap has increased from $ 135 per mt. 
tonne to around U .S. S 155 per mt. tonne during the last 6 months and on the contrary. the local 
prices of billets and bars have been showing declining trend during the last few months on account of 
the recession in demand. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that mini steel plants in 
different parts of the country have either been closed or on the verg e o f the closur e. The Committee 

finds that the Performance Budget of the Ministry docs not reflect on these developments and 
difficulties face~ by the mini steel industry in the context of the reduction in the import duty ~nd 
increase in the excise duty. It is all the more necessary in view of the fact that dccentralised steel 
industry would create more employment to the unemployed as well as encouragement to the small 
enterprises. · The Committee, therefore. recommends that the matter may be taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance to bring about suitab le restructuring of the levies b.oth import levies and excise 
levies , so as to provide immediate relief to the mini steel industry in the country. 
9.5 The Committee understands ·that for meeting the stee l requirements of the country, new plant s \ 
are not envisaged in the public sector which accounts for 56% of tot~! production of steel. 44% of the 
requirement of steel has, therefore, to be met from the Private Sector. The Demands for . Grants of V 
the Ministry are silent on the subject. There !s no clear-cut indication in the Budget proposals about a I 
methodology of meeting the requirements of steel through private or other sources: ~ The Committee, \ 
therefore, recommends that clear perception on the policy for meeting the requirement of steel should , 
reflect in the Budget proposals and in the perspective planning of the Ministry. 
9.6 The Committee finds that for the modernisation of the Rashtriya Ispat Nigam, required funds 
have not been provided leaving a balance of Rs. 165 crores to be met from extra Budgetary 
resources. The Committee recommends that the required funds may be made available to Rashtriya . 
!spat Nigam .. 
9.7 The Committee trusts that its observations and recommendations as mentioned above will 
receive serious consideration for implementation. 
New Delhi; 
May 4, I993 
MOTURU HANUMANTHA RAO · 
CHAIRMAN , 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY . 

ANNEXURE 
MINUTES OF THE MEETI NGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 5.30 P.M. on Thursday the 22nd April. 1993 in Committee Roo m No. 63 
First Floor , Parliam ent House , New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu H anumantha Rao-Chai rman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri J . P. Javali 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Raje ndra Prasad Mody 
5. Shri V . R ajeshwar Rao 
6. Shri Santosh Kum ar Sahu 
7. Shri Ish D utt Yadav 
8. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
LOK SABRA 
9. Shri K. H . Muniyappa 
10. Shri Gt!rudas Kamat 
11. Sbrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
12. Shri Balin Kuli 
13. Shri Manoranjan Bha kta 
14. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
15. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
16. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
17. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantya 
18. Shri S. N. Vekaria 
19. Shri Prabhu Daya l K atharia 
20. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
21. Shri Naval Kisho re Rai 
22. Shrimati Suscela Gopalan 
23. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
24. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
25. Shri P. G. Naraya nan 
26. Shri Bolla B ulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. 
Shri G. K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta , Under Secretary 
Shri Shamsh er Singh , Committee Officer 
*** ••• **"' 
2. The Committ ee held a general discussion on the Demands for Grant s of the Ministry of Steel. 
A verbatim reco rd of the discussion was kept. 
•· •Relates to some other matters. 

3. The Com111ittee thereafter considered its programme of sittings and decided to hear the oral 
evidence of ** • the Secretary of the Ministry of Steel on the 23rd April, 1993 on the Performance 
Budget of the Ministry *** *** *** 
4. The Committee further decided to meet on the 26th and 27th April , 1993 *** to have general 
discussion on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry ** * of Steel * ** and give guidelines for the 
Report . *** 
5 .••• ••• ••• 
6. The Committ ee then adjourned at 8.00 P.M. to meet again at 2.00 P.M. o n the 23rd April. 1993. 
••• Relates to some other matters. 
Note: Second and Fourth meeungs of the Committee related to other Mini srru:~ . 

III 
THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 8.00 P.M. on Monday, the 26th April. 1993 in Committee Room No. 63. 
First Floor, Parliament House. New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJY A S.ABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
5. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
7. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
8. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
9. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantya 
10. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
11. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
12. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
13. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
14. Shri Naval Kisbore Rai 
15. Shri Manjay LaJ· 
SECRET ARlAT 
Shri G. K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri. Tapas Das Gupta, Under Secretary 
Shri Shamsher Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Steel: 
1. Shri V. Krishnan, Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Basu , Joint Secretary 
3. Shri J. Khattar, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri S. Nautiyal. Joint Secretary 
Representatives of the Ministry of Mines: 
1. Shri I. J. Jhingran, .Secretary 
2. Shri Gopalakrishna, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri M. L. Mazumdar, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Diwakar Deo , Joint Secretary 
·' 
2. The Committee heard the oral evide nce of the above mentioned witnesses on the Performance 
Budgets relating to their respective Ministries in the context of the Demands for Grants of each 
Ministry . 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. *** *** *** 
4. The Committee then adjourn ed at 10.15 P.M. to meet again at 5.30 P.M. on the 27th April. 1993. 
·••• Relaces co scme other matters . 

v 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 4th May. 1993 in Committee Room No. 63, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri J.P . Javali 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4! Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri K.H , Muniyappa 
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
7. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
8. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
9. Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat 
10. Shri Chiranji La! Sharma 
11. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
12. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu 
13. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
14. Shri Sa tyanarayan J atiya 
15. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
16. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
17. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
18. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
19. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
Zantya 
Shri G .K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Under Sec;retary 
Shri Shamsher Singh, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the draft of the *** "''"* Second Report on the Demands 
for Grants of *** *"* , Ministry of Steel *** *** 
3. The Commit tee decided to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on the 5th 
May, 1993 and authorised the Chairman of the Committee and S / Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita and J.P. 
Javali to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha and S I Shri Manoranjan Bhakta, V. Dha~:wnj.aya 
Kumar, Mohan Singh (Deoria) and Shrimati Suseela Gopalan to present the Reports to the Lok 
Sabha on its behalf. 
4. The Committee fur ther decided that the documents and other materials received from the 
concerned Ministries and the evidence tendered before the Committee need nor be appended to the 
Reports and may be kept with the Secretariat as records of the Committee. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 P.M. 
•u Relates to some other matter s. 