97th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/97threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
 
NINETY-SEVENTH REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 74TH REPORT
OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2002-03)
PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF AGRO AND RURAL INDUSTRIES
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2002)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2002/AGRAHAYANA, 1924 (SAKA)
Website:http//rajyasabha.nic.in
E.mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
CONTENTS
 1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 2. INTRODUCTION
 3. REPORT
 (i) Chapter --- I
 Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government
 (ii) Chapter --- II
 Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government's Replies
 (iii) Chapter --- III
 Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee
 (iv) Chapter --- IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final Replies of the Government have not been

97th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/97threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
 received
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE  
5. MINUTES  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
    *1.   Dr. P.C. Alexander           -----      Chairman
           RAJYA  SABHA
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.   Dr. Abrar Ahmed
     4.   Shri Jayantilal Barot
     5.   Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
     6.   Shrimati Saroj Dubey
     7.   Dr. Faguni Ram
     8.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
     9.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari
    10.   Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
    11.   Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
    12.   Shri S. Sivasubramanian
    13.   Shrimati Sushree Devi
    14.   Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
           LOK  SABHA
    15.   Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
    16.   Kumari Mamata Banerjee
    17.   Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
    18.   Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
    19.   Shri Nepal Chandra Das
    20.   Shri Deepak Kumar
    21.   Shri Thomas Hansda
    22.   Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
    23.   Shri A. C. Jose
    24.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
    25.   Shri Brijlal Khabri
    26.   Shri Sunil Khan
    27.   Shri Manjay Lal
    28.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
    29.   Shri A. Narendra
    30.   Shri Ananta Nayak
    31.   Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
    32.   Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
    33.   Shri Uttamrao Patil
    34.   Shri Malyala Rajaiah
    35.   Shri P. Rajendran
    36.   Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
    37.   Shri Tarachand Sahu
    38.   Shri Ramanand Singh
    39.   Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
    40.   Chowdhary Talib Hussain
    41.   Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
    42.   Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
    43.   Shri Beni Prasad Verma
           SECRETARIAT
           Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary

97th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/97threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
           Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
           Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
           Shri D. P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
           Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised by the
Committee, hereby present this Ninety-seventh Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
74th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry on Demands for Grants for (2002-03) pertaining to
the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries.
2.      The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry considered and adopted the Draft report at its meeting held
on the 11th December, 2002.
3.      The 74th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid
on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 14th May, 2002.
11 December, 2002
NEW DELHI;
Dr.  P.C. ALEXANDER
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
REPORT
        The Ninety-seventh Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the 74th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry on the Demands for Grants (2002-03)
pertaining to the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries which was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the
14th May, 2002.
2.     Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. They have
been categorized as follows:
(i)    Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government:- Paras: 3.24, 3.27, 3.28, 3.30, 3.32, 3.35, 3.36,
3.41, 4.2, 4.3, 5.5, 5.6, 5.9, 5.11, 6.9, 6.10, 6.12, 6.13, 6.14, 6.15 (Chapter-I).
(ii)    Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies: - Paras :
1.2, 3.2, 3.37, 6.1, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5 (Chapter - II).
(iii)   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Government: - Paras: 3.9,
3.10, 3.12, 3.15, 6.6, 6.7, 7.5 (Chapter - III).
(iv)   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government have not been received: - Paras: 3.13,
3.20, 3.21, 3.22, 3.42, 6.16, 6.17 (Chapter - IV).
(v)   Observations/Recommendations at a Glance (Chapter - V).
3.     The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries has accepted its recommendations as mentioned
in Chapter-I of the Report.
4.     In respect of the recommendations made in Chapter-II the Committee is convinced with the logic and explanation advocated by the
Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries and therefore does not want to pursue further.
5.     The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementations of Recommendations contained in Chapter-III and therefore the
Committee desires that the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries would furnish logical explanation in respect of these recommendations.
6.     In respect of Recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries has either furnished the interim
replies or couched its language in vague terms like the Ministry's views have been conveyed to concerned agencies, therefore, the
Committee desires that the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries would furnish Action Taken Note in respects of recommendations
categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
7.     The details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
CHAPTER - I

97th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/97threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
Internal Resource Generation by KVIC
Para 3.24
        The Committee, therefore, recommends that KVIC should take steps to generate internal resources on its own so as to reduce the
dependence on budgetary resources of the Government as far as possible, by evolving suitable mechanisms like revamping of KVIC
staff, aggressive marketing of KVI products, brand building and other measures so that it becomes self-sufficient and self-reliant. A long-
term strategy for suitable positioning of Khadi for the next 5-10 years needs to be prepared, otherwise the very survival of KVIC as an
institution would be in doubt.
Comments
        The suggestions made have been noted and communicated to the KVIC for taking further necessary action.
Unspent Balance of KVIC
Para 3.27
        The Committee views with concern that KVIC had an unspent balance of Rs. 147.51 crore as on 31st March, 2001. This is not a
healthy trend, as non-utilisation of money earmarked for a specific purpose does not augur well for the premier institution. The money
should have been put to better use.
Comments
        The point suggested has been noted and communicated to the KVIC for strict compliance.
Budget Management by KVIC
Para 3.28
        The Committee recommends that in cases where lapses had been continuing over the years, responsibility should be fixed and better
budget management undertaken. This would be a major step forward. The Committee recommends further that expenditure framework
needs to be strengthened. This would involve identifying current and future financial requirements, and deviations from the prescribed
procedure should not be allowed under any circumstances.
Comments
        Suggestions made have been noted and communicated to the KVIC for strict compliance.
Non-Plan Expenditure of KVIC
Para 3.30
        The Committee finds that non-plan allocation for Khadi and Village Industries shows an increasing trend. It is also not managed
efficiently while KVIC is over-staffed. The Committee recommends that KVIC should undertake trimming exercise for reducing surplus
staff by extending VRS in order to curtail non-plan expenditure and to make the institution economically viable.
Comments:
        The suggestions made has been noted and communicated to the KVIC for further necessary action However, it may be clarified that
the expenditure under non-plan has increased to meet expenditure against salary and wages for which adequate provision did not exist
earlier. The expenditure earlier was being met through diversion of other funds/earnings.
Report of Arther Andersen on KVIC
Para 3.32
        The Committee observes that the report of Arthur Andersen was submitted in September, 2000 and is still under examination by the
KVIC. The Committee recommends that the examination of the report be expedited and a final view be taken without further delay.
Comments
        The direction has been noted.
Inventory
Paras 3.35 and 3.36

97th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/97threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
3.35 The Committee expresses serious concern that the stocks of goods worth several hundred crores are lying locked and unused.
Perhaps this is why, KVIC has been experiencing working capital difficulties. If this state of affairs continues, KVIC will not only be
faced with resource crunch as the money remains locked up and stocks lying unsold but also lose customer base as there will be no takers
for the old stocks.
Comments
        The continuous efforts are being made to liquidate stocks which have reduced from Rs. 658 crores approximately in March, 2001 to
Rs. 579 crores in March, 2002.
3.36 The Committee recommends that KVIC should dispose of the old stock as early as possible even by providing heavy discounts and
recover money. KVIC may utilize the revenue earned on fresh inventory and recycle the money. KVIC should keep fresh inventory as
old inventory would not fetch much money.
Comments
        Rebate policy for the year 2002-03 has been announced. KVIC has been directed to take urgent remedial action to see that old stock
lying in the various godowns of KVIC and that of Khadi Institutions is reduced to minimum.
Review of stock build-up
Para 3.41
        The Committee recommends that CCPC should henceforth undertake periodical review of the stock build-up before approving the
quantities to be purchased. Further, responsibility for the lapses for allocating of funds and excess stocking of cotton on the part of
officials/non-officials should be fixed.
Comments
        The suggestion of the Committee has been noted and has already been communicated to KVIC for taking further necessary action.
Ministry has already asked KVIC to fix the responsibility for the lapses for allocating of funds and excess stocking of cotton on the
defaulting officials.
Interest Subsidy Eligibility Certificate (ISEC)
Paras 4.2 & 4.3
4.2   The Committee observes that in spite of KVIC's repeated request over the years, funds flow to KVI institutions from banks under
ISEC is not up to the desired level. Analysis of ISECs issued by KVIC and actual funds made available by banks against the ISEC
indicates that in the recent past the gap in the ISEC value vis-a-vis fund provided by banks goes to be extent of 50%.
Comments
        The Ministry is in agreement with the observations of the Committee. Necessary action is being taken in this matter.
4.3   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government of India/RBI may take appropriate policy decision so that banks are
bound to honour the ISECs issued by the KVIC to its full extent.
Comments
        The matter has been taken up with the banks by the Ministry so that the recommendations of the Committee will be implemented by
KVIC and banks.
EXIM Policy - 2002
Para 5.5
        The five year EXIM policy announced on 1st April, 2002 seeks to enable Indian artisans, Cottage and Small Industries to venture
out overseas and adopt the world as their market. The new policy makes exports free, easy and possibly rewarding. This assumes special
significance especially when India ranks low in global competition given global slowdown and domestic recession. The EXIM policy is
comprehensive, encompassing agro sector, cottage and handicrafts and small scale sectors thus taking care of more than 80% of the
population living in rural areas.
Comments
        A draft scheme for export promotion of KVI products under the EXIM policy has been formulated which has been sent for vetting to
Finance Wing. It will be implemented very shortly.
Coir Products

97th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/97threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
Para 5.6
        The Committee therefore, recommends that in view of the importance of this sector, diversified forms of coir products and product
mix should be attempted. Research programmes should be undertaken by the Coir Board for improving the quality of the coir fibre, for
enhancing the export of coir products such as the green husk fibre produced in non traditional coir producing areas using "coirret". The
Committee also notes that the market for coir pith, a waste material of the coir industry converted into one of major export items in the
list of coir products, remains untapped and the potential for the export of coir pith is excellent. The Committee therefore, recommends
that all out efforts should be made to make pith export achieve its fullest potential.
Comments
        The recommendations have been noted for further action. However, in this connection it is stated that under the UNDP assisted
project, the Coir Board has entered into a collaborative project with the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad for stratetgic Design
Intervention and product development for diversification of coir industry. As a part of this project blending coir with other natural fibres
like sisal, jute, banana, rami etc. and spin finer count yarn for making innovative products like vertical blinds, curtain materials etc. has
been undertaken. The Coir Board has already conducted workshops for training the representatives of the trade for blending coir fibre
with other natural fibres and to manufacture value added products out of it. For diversification of coir products, a project has been
undertaken in association with Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai for developing package material using coir fibre.
        As recommended by the Committee, the Board is taking efforts in association with the private sector for promoting export of coir
pith. Besides, the Coir Board has developed a fungal spawn viz. Pith Plus for converting coir pith into organic manure. The technology
for production of Coir Pith Organic Manure (C-POM) using Pith Plus is being popularized in the trade by organizing field demonstrations
in the selected coir production centers as a continuing plan programme. The Coir Board extends financial assistance to the entrepreneurs
for setting up coir pith processing units for which assistance to the tune of 25% of the capital investment on work shed and equipment
would be provided by the Coir Board subject to a ceiling of Rs. 1,00,000/-. These programmes are proposed to be continued during the
Tenth Plan period also.
Allocation Offund for Coir
Para 5.9
        The Committee observes that coir sector employs 5 lakh people and it has the potential of expanding its activities. Although the
funds allocation for the sector has been doubled in the Ninth Five Year Plan from what it was in the Eighth Five Year Plan, (Rs. 31 crores
during the Eighth Five Year Plan and Rs. 60 crores during the Ninth Five Year Plan), this sector is still under budgeted. There is further
scope for absorbing funds in this sector particularly in the non-traditional areas such as Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh,
Orissa, West Bengal, Andaman and Nicobar Islands where new products could be developed. The Committee therefore recommends that
the allocation for the coir industry should be revised so that attention can be focused on providing more employment opportunities in this
sector.
Comments
        Against the Plan allocation of Rs.31.00 crores during the Eighth Five Year Plan and Rs.60 crores during the Ninth Five Year Plan, a
higher allocation of Rs.115 crores has been made for the coir sector during the Tenth Five Year Plan.
Welfare Measures in Coir Industry
Para 5.11
        The Committee appreciates the measure for welfare for the people, especially women, engaged in the coir industry which remains
unorganized to a great extent. The Committee hopes that more such initiatives would be taken in near future for the benefit of large
number of people engaged in the industry.
Comments
        The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future guidance.
Recovery Under PMRY
Para 6.9
        The Committee observes that the crux of the problem lies in the recovery scenario under PMRY which has been showing a
decreasing trend. If this sort of thing continues, there will be less funds available year by year to channelise for future schemes as the
money will be in short supply. A stage may come that the scheme may have to be closed down due to non-availability of funds. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that recovery of loans, which is a grey area in the present scenario, should be given more attention
and loopholes in this regard should be plugged so that the scheme may not be scuttled for want of funds in future and recycling of funds
may continue. The Chairman/Managing Directors - All India Scheduled Commercial Banks may be suitably advised by the RBI to

97th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/97threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
improve their recovery performance to recycle the funds and constitute recovery cells at Regional/Zonal Office level.
Comments
        The Chairman/Managing Directors, all Indian Scheduled Commercial Banks have been suitably advised by the RBI to improve the
recovery performance to re-cycle the funds and constitute 'Recovery Cell' and Regional/controlling office level, to improve further by
their Circular No. RPCD.SP.BC. 13/09.04.01/2000-01 dated 04.09.2000. On the advice of the RBI, Union Bank of India, Central Bank of
India, Dena Bank and Bank of India have constituted 'Recovery Cells' at Regional/Zonal Office levels. The RBI has further advised
banks to keep a close watch on the recovery of loan through better post-disbursement credit supervision vide  their Letter No.
RPCD.SP.BC. 34/09.04.01/2001-02 dated 19.10.2001. As per the report received from the RBI, the recovery for half year ending Sept.,
2001 has slightly improved and is 28.8 for the half year ending Sept., 2001. However, the observation of the Committee under Para 6.9
have again been communicated to the RBI for taking further necessary action vide Letter No. PMRY-P/PC/10(1)/2002 deted 16.07.02.
Achievement of Target under PMRY
Paras 6.10, 6.11, 6.12, and 6.13
6.10 The Committee futher observes that though the Government achieved in some measure quantitative target of the PMRY, no efforts
were made either by the Government or by other agencies to evaluate the qualitative achievement of the scheme. The beneficiaries
experienced difficulties in starting and running the venture. The major problem in starting the unit was in getting the loan. 50% of the
beneficiaries were affected by the delay in disbursement of the loan. This forced them to take loan from moneylenders at a very high rate
of interest and this had an adverse effect on their business. The beneficiaries reported that because of the financial delay they could not
reach their expectations. The beneficiaries of the category made default in payment of loan.
6.11 The Committee finds that shortage of funds for working capital is hindering the PMRY beneficiaries. They could not execute their
orders in time due to shortage of funds and for marketing capital requirements, they resort to private money lenders at a high rate of
interest resulting in the increased cost of production and short fall in profit margin.
6.12 The high cost of operation is another problem where 20% of the industries were affected by this and they could not compete in the
local market. Increase in the cost of spare parts are the main cost accelerating items and entrepreneurs could not repay the interest in time.
The entrepreneurs could not adjust themselves to the demand and supply mechanism of the market.
6.13 As regards the undue delay in giving loans by banks, the Committee impresses upon banks to avoid undue delay. The Committee
recommends that implementing banks should be advised by the RBI to sanction the applications within the prescribed time frame and
speedily dispose off the same to ensure that there is no inordinate gap between the sanction and disbursement of loan. DICs should play a
pro-active role in this regard. RBI's guidelines for disposing of applications under PMRY within the time period of thirty days must be
adhered to by banks.
Comments
        Banks have been advised by the RBI to dispose off applications upto a credit limit of Rs.25,000 within a fortnight and those for over
Rs.25,000/- within a 8-9 weeks vide  their Letter No. RPCD.SP.BC.303/09.04.01/1994-95 dated 1.8.94. The implementing banks have
been advised by the RBI to sanction the application within the prescribed time frame and speedily dispose off the same to ensure that
there is no inordinate gap between sanction and disbursement of loan vide  their Letter No. RPCD.SP.BC.34/09.04.01/1994-45 dated
19.10.01. The recommendations of the Committee as contained in its 74th Report have also been communicated to the RBI and to the
States/UTs vide Letter No. PMRY-P-PC/10(1)/2002 dated 16.07.02.
Power Connection under PMRY
Para 6.14
        Delay in getting power connection affected 30% of them in terms of production and marketing. Delay in getting delivery of assets
forced them to postpone the launch of their project eventually leading to addition to cost of the project. This upsets the success of the
project and may lead to more defaulters in future. Delay in power connection/power cut also affected their production and resulted in the
increased cost of production.
6.15 As regards, the delay in getting power connection, the Committee desires that Government should take suitable action in the matter
and impress upon the State Governments to deal such cases on priority basis.
Comments
        The observations of the Committee have been communicated to States/UTs vide this Office Letter No. PMRY-P/PC/10(1)/2002
dated 17.7.02
CHAPTER - II

97th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/97threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF
THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries
Para 1.2
        The Committee welcomes the formation of the new Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries. It has satisfied the long-felt need for the
creation of a new Ministry which would look exclusively after the needs of this sector. This is expected to give a boost to the sector,
especially when our industries now face competition from global companies and find it hard to survive.
Comments
        No comments are required.
Constitution of KVIC
Para 3.2
        The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry in its 49th Report on Demands for Grants (2002-03)
pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro and Rural Industries had expressed its concern at the inordinate delay in
reconstituting the Khadi and Village Industries Commission. The term of the previous Khadi and Village Industries Commission expired
in September, 1999 and since then the Commission had been non-existent which adversely affected the working of Khadi and Village
Industries. The Committee has been informed that the Commission has been reconstituted w.e.f. 2nd October, 2001. The Committee
welcomes the reconstitution of the Commission and hopes that the new Commission will be able to take care of the requirements of the
Khadi sector to make it self sustaining and vibrant.
Comments
        No comments are required.
Poor Quality and Design of Khadi Products
Para 3.37
        The Committee observes that poor quality and poor designs have resulted in poor sales and accumulation of large inventories. The
working cycle of production sales-cash-realization for Khadi is long and substantial funds are blocked as working capital for Khadi
institutions. This has adversely affected performance.
Comments
        The slump in Khadi performance was mainly attributed to the production of goods, which are not as per demand and taste of the
market. It was a fact that most of the Khadi producing institutions located in rural areas could not cope up with fast changing consumer
tastes particularly in cotton textile materials. This has to a large extent, resulted in the accumulation of inventory. One of the important
requirements in the above backdrop is the improvement in the quality and design of Khadi products. The Government of India is
implementing the Khadi package for Khadi and Village Industries programme which envisages better design development, quality
assurance standards etc. On implementation of such measures it is expected that the performance of Khadi sector would improve
considerably.
Employment Generation Under PMRY
Para 6.1
        The PMRY has emerged as a major Central Sector Scheme for employment generation among the educated unemployed youth, by
providing financial and other entrepreneurial development assistance in establishing self-employment ventures. Significant progress has
been achieved in the implementation of the scheme and as reported by the RBI, 7.748 lakh persons have been sanctioned loans under
PMRY, since its inception during the 8th Five Year Plan. The scheme is continuing in the 9th Five Year Plan. During the years 1997-98,
1998-99, 1999-2000 and 2000-01 loans have been sanctioned to 10.20 lakh persons. Further, 0.48 lakh persons have been sanctioned
loans during 2001-02 upto November, 2001. The anticipated target PMRY for 2002-03 is 2.2 lakh beneficiaries. The entrepreneurs
sanctioned loan under the scheme are provided stipendiary entrepreneurship, development training by various training institutions. The
period of training for industry sector is 5-20 working days and for service/business sector 7 to 10 working days. The training expenditure
admissible including stipend for industry sector is upto Rs.1,000/- per trainee and for service/business sector upto Rs.500/- per trainee.
The Central Government provides funds for training of beneficiaries and other entrepreneurial development activities in the form of
subsidy @ 5 per cent of project cost subject to a ceiling of Rs.15,000/- per beneficiary in respect of North Easterm States and Rs.7,500/-
per beneficiary for rest of the country. Besides this, funds are provided to the States/UTs for scheme operation.
Comments

97th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/97threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
        Due to the revision in the progress report and some typographical mistakes, para 6.1 may be read as follows:
        The PMRY has emerged as a major Central Sector Scheme for employment generation amongst the educated unemployed youth, by
providing financial and other entrepreneurial development assistance in establishing self-employment ventures. Significant progress has
been achieved in the implementation of the scheme and as reported by the RBI, 7.748 lakh persons have been senctioned loans under
PMRY, since its inception during the 8th Five Year Plan. The scheme is continuing in the 9th Five Year Plan. During the years 1997-98,
1999-2000 and 2000-01 loans have been sanctioned to 10.28 lakh persons. Further, 2.30 lakh persons have been sanctioned loans during
2001-02. The anticipated target under PMRY for 2002-03 is 2.2 lakh beneficiaries. The entrepreneurs sanctioned loan under the scheme
are provided stipendiary entrepreneurship, development training by various training institutions. The period of training for industry sector
is 15-20 working days and for service/business sectors 7 to 10 working days. The training expenditure admissible including stipend for
industry sector is upto Rs.1,000/- per trainee and for service/business sector upto Rs.500/- per trainee. The Central Government provides
funds for training of beneficiaries and other entrepreneurial development. The Central Government also provides funds for subsidy @ 15
per cent of project cost subject to a ceiling of Rs.15,000/- per beneficiary in respect of North Eastern States and Rs.7,500/- per
beneficiary for rest of the country. Besides this, funds are provided to the States/UTs for scheme operation.
Target Under PMRY
Para 6.3 and 6.4
6.3   The Plan target for the year 2002-03 remains to be Rs. 2.20 lakhs as was in the year 2001-02. There has been no reduction in this
target. Hence, the total proposed outlay i.e. BE for 2002-03 for PMRY was estimated at Rs.180.00 crores. Against this proposed outlay,
the plan allocation for the year 2002-03 under the scheme is Rs.152.10 crores. This would leave an uncovered/spill over liability of
Rs.27.50 crores which would have to be provided in the budget provision i.e. BE of the 2003-04. Based on the above, the outlay for
subsidy was proposed at Rs.165.50 crores and the estimated outlay for Entrepreneurial Development, training, etc. was proposed at
Rs.14.50 crores for the year 2002-03. The Plan targets and achievements (sanctions) for the year 2001-02 based on the RBI reports is as
follows:
Year Plan Target Sanctioned % age
  (No. in lakhs)  
2001-02 2.20 0.73 33
(upto Dec., 2001)    
2002-03 2.20 - -
6.4   The Committee observes that only a third of the target could be achieved in the case of PMRY during the year 2001-02 (upto
December, 2001). It is inconceivable how the two third of the target could be achieved during the remaining three months of the year.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that setting of the targets should go along with achieving of the same in a phased manner. If need
be, efforts should be made for achieving of the target percentage-wise within a stipulated time frame.
Comments
i.      As per the latest progress report for the year 2001-02 received from the RBI the achievement for the year 2001-02 as on 29.07.02 is
as under:
Year Plan Target Sanctioned % age
  (No. in lakhs)  
2001-02 2.20 2.31 105
2002-03 2.20 - -
ii.     Every year while communicating annual targets to States/UTs and banks a quarterly schedule for achievement for sponsoring,
sanctioning and disbursement of applications is also prescribed.
iii.    The PMRY Scheme is under implementation throughout the country by the DICs and the bank branches. The consolidation of
progress report from Districts to Blocks to Regional Office to Headquarter Office of the Bank and from there to RPCD, RBI, Mumbai
take some time. Hence, the progress report as was reported by the RBI upto December, 2001 for the year 2001-02 was based on the
reports received upto that period from the implementing banks.
Disbursal Under PMRY
Para 6.5
        As stated the Plan target for the year 2002-03 remains at 2.20 lakhs and the number of cases disbursed are 36,663 (upto December,
2001) for the year 2001-02 under PMRY.

97th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/97threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
Comments
        As per the progress report received from the RBI for the year 2001-02, the number of cases disbursed by banks are 1,35,627 as on
29.07.02. The number of cases disbursed may go up, as the cut off date for completion of disbursement for the cases sanctioned for the
programme year 2001-02 is 30.09.02.
CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Wardha Institute
Para 3.9
        The Committee welcomes this move as it aught to provide a great fillip to the sector. Simultaneously, the Committee notes that there
is no specific provision in the Budget for the required funds to implement the announcement of upgrading the Wardha Institute as a
National Institute named after Mahatma Gandhi. The Committee is of the opinion that there is a need for additional provision of at least
Rs.100 crores for the Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Rural Industrialisation, Wardha. This provision may be spread over a period of three
years.
Comments
        The Khadi and Village Industries Commission, Mumbai (KVIC), a statutory body under the administrative control of the Ministry of
Agro and Rural Industries has entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) and the IIT, Delhi in April, 2001 to implement a
three-year Project for revamping of the existing Jamnalal Bajaj Central Research Institute (JBCRI), Wardha and convert it into Mahatma
Gandhi Institute for Rural Industrialisation (MGIRI). The duration of the Project is 3 years (May-2001 - April-2004). The total allocation
for the project is Rs. 8.35 crores. A total of Rs. 5.70 crores has so far been released to the KVIC under S&T including funds for the
implementation of this Project and the balance will be released in due course during the project period. It is hoped that the project will be
completed during the stipulated time-frame and within the total project outlay. There has not been any project cost revision-requiring
provision of Rs.100 crores. The project implementation is constantly under review to ensure that there are no slippages in the completion
of the project.
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
        Since this is an important national project, the Committee feels that it should be completed by April, 2004. The Committee
impresses upon the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries to keep on vigil on the progress of the project.
R&D for KVIC
Para 3.10
        The Committee observes that R&D is the need of the hour if industries are to compete globally and growth in the sector is to be
stimulated. The Committee, therefore, recommends that allocation for Research and Development for KVIC requires be increased. If
need be, joint collaboration with foreign firms may to be taken up.
Comments
        The Ministry is alive to the significance of R&D to promote global competitiveness of the indigenous industries. Therefore,
Government in its effort to strengthen Village Industries (VIs) for production of quality marketable goods, has been making substantial
funding to help organizations and entrepreneurs to promote their existing sphere of activities. But very little investment has gone into
research and development of support services infrastructure to promote and disseminate improved technology to increase productivity
and quality standards of goods produced in rural areas by the Village Industries.
        The inputs of S&T for Technology Upgradation, transfer of appropriate technology, quality assessment of associated inputs, Quality
Control/Assurance Mechanism of final products are some of the important areas where organizations like Khadi and Village Industries
Commission (KVIC), Mumbai under this Ministry, could play an important role either through its own infrastructure or using
infrastructure available elsewhere for the strengthening of Rural Industrialisation.
        In order to provide such inputs to the Village Industries sector in the country, Government has approved the following as part of the
Khadi Package announced in May, 2001:-
A.    Strengthening of the existing S&T/R&D infrastructure of the KVIC.
B.     To establish technical inter faces with the technical establishments in the country.
C.    Networking of Quality Testing/Certifying laboratories/Institutions in the country.
        Institutions have been selected by the Government for upgrading R&D facilities. As per the package announced by the Government

97th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/97threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
of India, funds allotted under sector specific R&D will be utilized to the tune of Rs. 1550 lakhs over a three years period.
        Similarly, Technical Back-up Units (TBUs/Interfaces) covering the entire country at some S&T institutes will be set up. All these
units will form a network. The proposed Mahatma Gandhi Institute for Rural Industrialisation at Wardha will be the main node of this
network.
        In order to strengthen the quality assurance labs, the KVIC will enter into MoUs with existing laboratories recognized by the
National Accredition Board for Laboratories (NABL) which will cover both the public sector as well as private sector. KVIC products
will be standard sized according to BIS/AGMARK/FPO/ etc. Adequate budget provision will be made for strengthening of the quality
control laboratories.
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
        The strengthening of the existing S&T/R&D infrastructure of the KVIC was announced in May, 2001 but not much progress
has been made in the matter. The Committee recommends that this project should be completed in a definite time-frame.
JPRGY
Para 3.12
        While appreciating this initiative, the Committee expresses its concern that JPRGY should not meet the fate of NPRI (National
Programme for Rural Industrialisation as announced in the Budget for the financial year 1999-2000. The allocation of Rs.40 lakhs was
kept for the NPRI scheme in the BE 2001-02 which was reduced to nominal amount of Rs.1.00 lakh in the RE of that year. The scheme is
yet to take off. However, in the BE  2002-03 a provision of Rs. 90 lakhs has been made. The Committee, therefore impresses upon the
Ministry to review the progress of NPRI so that the earlier mistakes are not repeated by the administration.
Comments
        The scheme on NPRI was announced in the year 1999-2000 with a mission to set up 100 rural clusters every year. Office of the DC
(SSI) was made the coordinating agency of the programme. KVIC, SIDBI and NABARD are the major implementing agencies. No fund
was provided separately for the programme and it was felt that various Ministries/Departments were having their own programmes in this
area which could be coordinated and their synergies exploited for better impact.
        Efforts were made to firm up the scheme at the initial stage. A number of meetings were called in which all the agencies involved in
rural industrialization participated. A national level Steering Committee was constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary (SSI &
ARI) to guide, implement and monitor the programme. Consequently, KVIC identified 50 clusters for development for each year, SIDBI
25 and NABARD 50 for a period of 5 years. So far, KVIC has launched the programme in 20 clusters, NABARD in 14 and SIDBI in 13.
The other clusters are also under consideration and preliminary/diagnostic studies are being conducted of these clusters. It was, however,
felt that some fund was required for certain gap filling exercises towards cluster intervention. Therefore, the Office of the DC (SSI)
launched a scheme on NPRI in the year 2001-02 to supplement the efforts of the various agencies. The amount provided in the scheme is
only Rs.5 lakhs per cluster. The purpose of financial assistance is to fill certain gaps in the development of clusters, and it does not
constitute the entire amount required for such development. As the scheme has been approved in the year 2001-02, it is expected to yield
results in the coming years.
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
        The Committee fails to understand as to why a scheme is announced by the Government without any budgetary provision. Ministry's
reply that no fund was provided separately for the programme and it was felt that various Ministries/Departments were having their own
programmes in this area which could be coordinated and their synergy exploited for their impact does not appear to be sound because this
Committee has its own experience that coordination among Central Ministries and Departments is a difficult preposition to achieve. The
Committee now expects that with the provision of funds the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries would implement the programme.
Increasing the Sales of Khadi
Para 3.15
        The Committee feels that for increasing sales of Khadi and providing greater and better rural employment opportunities in this
sector, it is necessary to provide and offer products that match consumer preferences.
Comments
        The Ministry is in total agreement with the observations of the Committee.
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
        The Committee feels that action oriented proposals should be mooted by the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries in this
regard.
Static Target Under PMRY
Para 6.6 and 6.7

97th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/97threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
        The details of the targets for the years 1999-2000, 2001-02 and 2002-03 are as under:
Year Plan Target
1999-2000 2.20 lakhs
2000-2001 2.20 lakhs
2001-2002 2.20 lakhs
2002-2003 2.20 lakhs (Proposed)
        The projected requirement of funds for the year 2002-03 was Rs.180.00 crores.
        The Committee finds that target under PMRY set by the Ministry has remained static during the last four years as shown above. The
Committee had hoped that with the creation of new Ministry, the target and allocation for the scheme would be increased, but the
Committee finds that the target set during the last four  years of PMRY has remain unchanged i.e. 2.20 lakhs. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that taking into consideration the importance of the scheme for employment generation, the target for PMRY should be
increased at the RE stage and consequently the allocation may be enhanced for the purpose.
Comments
        To achieve the plan target of 2.20 lakhs, the States/UTs are allocated additional targets over and above the basic targets e.g. during
the year 2000-01 the States/UTs were allocated a total target of 360050 inclusive of plan target of 2.20 lakhs. Similarly, during 2001-02,
the States/UTs were allocated a total target of 347135 inclusive of plan target of 2.20 lakhs. Despite this, number of cases disbursed
during the year 2000-01 was only 1.81 and 1.36 during 2001-02 (as on 29.07.02). Efforts are being made through Review Meetings to
impress upon the States/UTs and the banks and through other measures to achieve the plan target of 2.20 lakhs for the year 2001-02 and
also for the year 2002-03.
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
        The Committee wishes to know the reasons for not achieving the target of 2.20 lakhs. The Committee stresses that Ministry of Agro
and Rural Industries should make vigorous efforts to achieve the target.
REGP
Para 7.5
        The Committee welcomes the increase in the allocation for creating additional employment opportunities under REGP. The
programme can prove to be a major instrument in bringing about self-sufficiency for rural populace and in getting rid of unemployment
problems in a big way, if implemented by State KVI Boards in an effective manner. In order to implement the REGP/Margin Money
Scheme, KVIC has also placed Margin Money Grant with State/UT/KVI Boards in advance, so that the programme can be implemented
without any delay. However, the Committee observes that due to weak infrastructure facilities some of the State/UT/KVI Boards are not
in a position to utilize such grants made available to them even after a lapse of considerable time. The Committee therefore recommends
that KVIC should impress upon State Governments to strengthen State KVI Boards by providing adequate technical experts and other
necessary infrastructure facilities like training, R&D etc. so that REGP scheme may be implemented successfully.
Comments
        The position of utilization under REGP has improved considerably during the past 2 years. For instance margin money utilization by
bank has gone up from Rs. 53.34 crores in 1999-2000 to Rs.149.84 crores in 2001-02. Similarly margin money utilization by KVIBs has
gone up from Rs.24.39 crores to Rs.40.41 crores during same period. However suggestion of the Committee for strengthening State
KVIBs is noted and will be communicated to the State Governments.
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
        The Committee recommends that KVIC should help State KVIs to build adequate infrastructure to implement more projects as State
KVICs find themselves helpless in implementing of projects in the absence of adequate infrastructure.
CHAPTER - IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN RECEIVED.
TASK FORCE ON EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES
Para 3.13
        The Committee is also unhappy to note that there is no concrete progress at all on the front of "Task Force on Employment
Opportunities" constituted in 1998. The Committee hopes that the Report of "Special Group on 50 million new job opportunities" will be

97th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/97threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
given due importance and properly implemented during the Tenth Five Year Plan period.
Comments
        The point suggested has been noted for doing the needful.
Khadi Package
Para 3.20
        The Committee recommends that KVIC should take immediate and concrete steps to take full advantage of the concessions offered
in the Khadi Package to it.
Comments
        The point suggested has been noted for doing the needful.
Brand Promotion
Para 3.21
        The Committee welcomes the brand promotion by KVC like 'Khadi' and 'Sarvodaya'. The Committee observes that although brand
building has traditionally been the forte of consumer products, high technology companies too have resorted to aggressive brand building
especially the technology sector like Microsoft, etc. Advances in technology, specifically, the internet, will give further impetus to the
creation of global brands.
Comments
        The points suggested have been noted for doing the needful.
Marketing of KVI Products
Para 3.22
        The Committee, therefore, recommends that KVIC should find out (albeit through research) the products that hold promise of
creating value to the customers and should have focused projection of these brands for better marketing of KVI products. The KVIC
should propagate these to reach out to the various customers throughout the entire country. The Committee hopes that brand name to
various products under KVI sector will bring required changes in the marketing area of KVI products in the near future. Further more, to
make their produce acceptable, the KVIC should improve and upgrade packaging particularly bottled products.
Comments
        The suggestions made have been noted and communicated to the KVIC for taking further necessary action.
Policy Support Measures
Para 3.42
        The Committee, recommends that the following policy support measures should be extended to Khadi and Village Industries to give
it further boost:-
        Most of the States have given sales tax exemption to KVI products, however, value added tax is to come into force w.e.f. 1.4.2003.
KVI Sector should be exempted from value added tax, octroi, entry tax etc.
        Existing labour laws, by and large exit to safeguard the interest of organized labour in large and medium industries. High Power
Committee headed by the then Prime Minister Shri Narasimha Rao recommended exemption of KVI sector from the existing labour laws
as artisans are mostly self-employed. A policy decision in the matter should be taken at the earliest.
        Financial institutions have started playing important role from mid 1990s after introduction of REGP. But still now the investment is
very low compared to other areas in priority sector. Special earmarking of KVI sector is felt necessary.
        Preferential purchase support as is available to certain sector is not there for KVI sector. The policy decision for State and Central
Governments to purchase a minumum percentage of utility articles from KVI sector will give boost to the sector.
        Declaration of KVIC as Export Promotion Council for KVI products will promote export of KVI goods and create potential for
exports.
Comments:
        The above suggestions of the Committee have been noted and the matter is being taken up with the concerned Ministries.
Subsidy Under PMRY

97th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/97threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
Para 6.16 and 6.17
6.16 The Committee in its 52nd Report on the working of REGP and PMRY recommended that practice of subsidy ceiling which was
Rs.7500/- may be dispensed with and instead 15 per cent subsidy may be made admissible for all quantum of loan amount. The Ministry
stated that the rate of subsidy has since been revised for the NE States. It was @ 15 per cent of the project cost subject to a ceiling of
Rs.15000/-per beneficiary and issue of raising the ceiling for weaker sections i.e. SCs/STs, Ex-servicemen, physically disabled persons
and women was also under consideration for the States/UTs.
6.17 The Committee observes that the matter is still under consideration of the Government and a Review Committee has been set up to
review the over all implementation of the PMRY Scheme. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation as made in its 52nd
Report that subsidy component on PMRY may be extended throughout country. Early decision by the Government is called far.
Comments
            The Review Committee constituted to review the implementation of the PMRY has submitted its recommendation including those
on the ceiling on subsidy to the Governmenrt The recommendations of the Committee are under consideration of the Government.
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS   AT   A   GLANCE
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
        Since this is an important national project, the Committee feels that it should be completed by April, 2004. The Committee
impresses upon the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries to keep on vigil on the progress of the project.
(Para 3.9)
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
        The strengthening of the exists S&T/R&D infrastructure of the KVIC was announced in May, 2001 but not much progress has been
made in the matter. The Committee recommends that this project should be completed in a definite time-frame.
(Para 3.10)
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
        The Committee fails to understand as to why a scheme is announced by the Government without any budgetary provision. Ministry's
reply that no fund was provided separately for the programme and it was felt that various Ministries/Departments were having their own
programme in this area which could be coordinated and their synergy exploited for their impact does not appear to be sound because this
Committee has its own experience that coordination among Central Ministries and Departments is a difficult preposition to achieve. The
Committee now expects that with the provision of funds the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries would implement the programme.
(Para 3.12)
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
        The Committee feels that action oriented proposals should be mooted by the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries in this regard.
(Para 3.15)
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
        The Committee wishes to know the reasons for not achieving the target of 2.20 lakhs. The Committee stresses that Ministry of Agro
and Rural Industries should make vigorous efforts to achieve the target.
(Para 6.6 & 6.7)
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
        The Committee recommends that KVIC should help State KVIs to build adequate infrastructure to implement more projects as State
KVICs find themselves helpless in implementing of projects in the absence of adequate infrastructure.
(Para 7.5)
MINUTES
 
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
        The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 11th December, 2002 in Room No.62, First Floor Parliament House, New
Delhi.
     1.   Dr. P.C. Alexander           -----      Chairman

97th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/97threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:21:53]
           RAJYA  SABHA
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.   Shirimati Sumitra Mahajan
     4.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari
           LOK  SABHA
     5.   Shri Nepal Chandra Das
     6.   Shri A. C. Jose
     7.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
     8.   Shri A. Narendra
     9.   Shri Ananta Nayak
    10.   Shri Malyala Rajaiah
    11.   Shri P. Rajendran
    12.   Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
    13.   Shri Tarachand Sahu
    14.   Chowdhary Talib Hussain
           SECRETARIAT
           Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
           Shri D.P Ahuja, Under Secretary
           Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
2.     At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them of agenda for the meeting of the day.
3.    *                                                   *                                                        *
3.1  *                                                   *                                                        *
3.2  *                                                   *                                                        *
3.3  *                                                   *                                                        *
4.     The Committee, thereafter, took up the following draft reports for consideration :-
(i)    92nd Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee's 73rd Report on Demands for Grants
(2002-03) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(ii)    93rd Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee's 75th Report on Demands for Grants
(2002-03) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
(iii)   94th Draft Report on MoU system in the Chemical Sectors PSEs of the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises);
(iv)   96th Draft Report on Inter PSU Cooperation in Engineering and Construction Sectors, the Department of Public Enterprises
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(v)   97th Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee's 74th Report on Demands for Grants
(2002-03) pertaining to Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries;
(vi)   98th Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee's 70th Report on Demands for Grants
(2002-03) pertaining to Ministry of Steel;
(vii)  99th Draft Report on recommendations contained in Committee's 71st Report on Demands for Grants (2002-03) pertaining to
Department of Mines (Ministry of Coal and Mines);
(viii) 101st Draft Report on recommendations contained in Committee's 72nd Report on Demands for Grants (2002-03) pertaining
to the Department of Heavy Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(ix)   102nd Draft Report on MoU system in the Fertilizers Sectors PSEs on the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
4.1   After a brief discussion all the Reports were adopted unanimously without any modification.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 P.M.