PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
                                               
                                                                                                                         
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
                
TWO HUNDRED AND   SEVENTY FIFTH REPORT
 
ON
 
KEY CONCERN AREAS OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRAIES IN SELECT STATES
(MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRAIES)
                                        
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON    12.05.2005   )
   (LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON  12.05.2005 )
 
 
 
            RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
           NEW DELHI
 
            MAY, 2005/ VAISAKHA, 1927 (SAKA)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
         
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
                                         ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIFTH REPORT
 
ON
 
KEY CONCERN AREAS OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES IN SELECT STATES
 
MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES)
                                                   ____________________________________________________________________________
 
( PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 12.05.2005.  )
 
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 12.05.2005 )
 
 
 
          RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
           NEW DELHI
 
 
         MAY, 2008/ VAISAKHA, 1927 (SAKA)
 
C O N T E N T S
 
        PAGES
      
 1.       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                            ( i ) -(ii)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
 2.        INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
 3.        REPORT  OF THE COMMITTEE                                                   (iii)
            CHAPTER – I 
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND
            RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                          
 
 
 
         
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
         
               Shri Santosh Bagrodia                -           Chairman
   
     RAJYA SABHA
2.       Prof. M.M. Agaarwal
3.       Shri Surendra Lath      
4.       Shri Suresh Bhardwaj  
5.       Dr. K. Malaisamy
6.       Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
7.       Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
8.       Dr. Vijay Mallya
9.       Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
10.   Smt. Vanga Geetha
                   
                           LOK SABHA
 
11.   Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.   Shri Kailash Baitha
13.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty      
14.   Shri Subhash Deshmukh          
15.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan                      
16.   Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
17.   Shri Sunil Khan           
18.   Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato        
19.   Shri Prakash Paranjpe                                     
20.   Shri Kishanbhai V.  Patel
21.   Shri Rajnarayan          
22.   Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna
23.   Shri  Sarvey Sathyanarayana
24.   Smt. Rubab Sayeda
25.   Shri Gurjeet Singh Rana
26.   Shri Manvendra Singh             
27.   Shri Ganesh Singh                   
28.   Shri Suraj Singh                      
29.   Shri Chandramani Tripathi
30.   Shri Girdhari Yadav
31.   Shri Bapu Hario Chaure
      SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
  
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been  authorized   by the Committee, hereby present this  One
Hundred Seventy Fifth Report on Key Concern Areas of Small Scale Industries in Select States (Ministry of Small Scale Industries).
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
2.         The Committee visited Banglore, Hyderabad, Ranchi, Patna and Kolkata from 26 th September to 6 th October, 2004 and interacted with the representatives of
respective State Government, State Chamber of Commerce, Industrial Federations/Associations and Banks on problems and prospects of Small Scale Industries in the
respective States.  The Committee further undertook study visit to Bhubaneshwar and Ahmedabad on 21 st and 23 rd January, 2005 respectively to interact with the
representatives of the Government of Orissa and the Government of Gujarat to take stock of ground realities regarding the problems being faced by Small Scale Industries in
the Orissa and Gujarat.
3.         The Sub-Committee for the Ministry of Small Scale Industries undertook study visit to Lucknow and Mumbai from 2 nd to 4th November, 2004 to interact with the
representatives of the State Government of Uttar Pradesh and the Government of Maharashtra , Associations and Banks on the issue of problems being faced Small and
Medium Enterprises in Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra.
4.         The Report has been prepared on the basis of the information provided by the Government, SSI associations and banks and the feed back received during the
interaction with the representatives of select State Government, banks and Associations.  Chapter-I of the report deals with the Micro Analysis of Problems and Prospects of
SSI in the select states viz. along with the strategy for combating the problems.  Views/ suggestions of the SSI Associations/Federations have been given due importance
with the hope that the Ministry of SSI would examine and consider those issues in detail.   Chapter-II of the report deals the the Functional aspects of the
Schemes/Programmes undertaken by the Ministry of SSI to promote and proliferate Small Scale Industries in the country and their actual working in the select states.  Both
the chapters contain specific and general recommendations.   The Committee desires that the Ministry of SSI should peruse with the concerned Ministries/Departments for
implementations of observations/recommendations pertaining to them.
5.         The Committee in its meeting held on 09.05.2005 considered and adopted the Report.
 
3          I thank the Department of Public Enterprises for providing valuable inputs to the Committee. 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                                                                                                              SANTOSH BAGRODIA
9
th May    , 2005                                                                                                                                                                    Chairman                                      
                                                                                                                                                                              Department -related Parliamentary
                                                                                                                                          Standing Committee on Industry
 
 
REPORT
 
CHAPTER – I
 
MICRO ANALYSIS OF PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS OF SSI
 
(A)              ORISSA
 
Orissa is endowed with mineral resources like manganese, coal, iron ore, bauxite etc. Besides it has a vast coastline which provides the potential for harnessing marine
resources. Yet the state represents a paradoxical picture of poverty amidst plenty. The quick estimate of Net State Domestic Product (NSDP) the State suggest that primary
sector constitutes nearly 38% of NSDP followed by Service sector (28%). Secondary sector (17%) and Tertiary sector (17%) in other words the rate of shift from agrarian
economy to industrial one is quite marginal for the State.
 
1.1 Liberalization and Globalization has changed the face of state economy and has thrown great challenge for SSI and they no longer operate under protected  environment,
but have to face harshness of competition both from within the country and outside. Such change requires technology up gradation, modernization, backward and forward
integration, skill development and better marketing. This requires funds for fixed capital and working capital need and the shortage of these funds seriously affects the SSIs
of Orissa leading to sickness.
 
1.1.1 The committee was apprised that Super Cyclone occurred in Orissa during the 1999 also greatly affected the SSI Units of Orissa. SISI, Cuttock  has undertaken a study
to diagnose the factors responsible for sickness in Orissa by taking some samples of sick S SI units which were identified for revival. The major reason for inadequate
working capital is the poor equity limit, lack of financial strength of landing institution and high interest rate. The major reasons for sickness of SSI units in the states are :-
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
(i)         Shortage of working capital & timely availability of working capital
(ii)        Immature/unplanned marketing strategy
(iii)       Non-availability of right type of raw materials at a reasonable price, the SSI units           are       not able to provide continuously the similar type of product with
same         cost.
(iv)       Sick units commonly faced the problem of cost over run of the project. thereby             delayed commercial production.
(v)        Low capital utilisation
(vi)       Use of inappropriate or obsolete technology by SSI units
(vii)      Shortage or irregular supply of power, changes of industrial policies, delay in      getting payment labour problem, natural calamities etc. also inhibit the SSI units   in
showing healthy trends of growth in Orissa.
 
1.1.2 The Committee interacted with the representatives of Orissa Industries Association and Orissa Young Entrepreneurs Association in the presence of representatives of
Ministry of SSI, Government of Orissa and the Banks, The Committee came across that Orissa is having only 2% of SSI units in India and the share of Orissa in total Bank
finance to SSI units is only to the tune of 1.08 %. The associations pointed our following solutions for improving SSI sector in the state :-
 
(i)         The rehabilitation package should be implemented promptly within a time frame to revive the unit. It is fact that inadequate finance and untimely finance by the
banks whether term loan or working capital is responsible for sickness of SSI steps should be taken to strengthen the forum of SLIIC and the promotional agencies and the
financial institution to do pro-active role to overcome the difficulties faced by the units.
 
(ii)        As SSI units in Orissa were affected badly due to super cyclone, a special liberal package to the affected units by extending all types of concession, and also
extending the period of repayment should be drawn in consultation with Reserve Bank of India.
 
(iii)       Priority should be given by Nationalized Banks to finance potential SSI unit in a particular area.
 
(iv)       Compromised settlement of NPA: As the response from SSI unit in Orissa for NPA settlement is encouraging. So more time should be given to cover more number
of NPA units.
 
(v)        Different financial linked schemes like CGTSI, CLCSS, NEF, Composite Loan scheme, SME find of SIDBI Should be popularized in Orissa as most of the
entrepreneurs are not aware of these schemes.
 
(vi)       The innovative financing like venture capital, factoring services etc. should be popularized which will improve the position of the unit to get finance easily.
 
(vii)      Orissa State Financial Corporation which is the chief term loan provider to SSI unit in Orissa is in urgent need of financial restructuring, so as to clean up their
balance sheet. The mechanism of state government, SIDBI and the IDBI have to play a proactive role in this.
 
(viii)      There should be a liberalised OTS Policy by Financial Institutions for sick SSI.
 
(ix)       The forum of State Level Inter Institutional Committee i.e. SLIIC should be made more effective. The decision of the SLIIC should be made compulsory
implementation by other agencies concerned with revitalization of their units.
 
1.1.3 The Committee was informed by the representative of Orissa State Financial Corporation Employee’s Union that following relief an concession may be granted to the
state :-
 
(i)         Impress upon the SIDBIJIDBIICommercial Bank to waive the entire interest that has accrued on Financial Assistance to OSFC w.e.f. 1.11.99 to 30. 06. 2004.
(ii)        The interest payment of Rs.160.53 crores already made by OSFC to TDBIJSIDBI/ Banks may be adjusted against principal liabilities of these institutions after such
waiver of interest.
 
(iii)       To impress upon SIDBI to continue with refinancing under SMEs Fund, which is already made available to SIDBI by the Union Government.
 
(iv)       Development strategy for promotion of SSI units in economically backward district like Bolangir and Koraput, Kalahandi and extension of income tax and central
Excise exemption on the lines of North East and Uttranchal and Himachal Pradesh.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
1.1.4    The Committee observes that Orissa demonstrates a paradoxical picture of poverty amidst plenty as the state, despite having mineral and marine resources, has been
bereft of sustainable industrial growth and economic development. The Committee finds that the cherished Charter of the Planning Commission which was “to combine a
rapid rise in the Standard of living of the people by efficient exploitation of the resources of the country, increasing production and offering opportunities to all for
employment in the service of the community”, has not seen the light of the day in the state. The state has been devoid of planned development giving rise to the
economically backward district like Bolangir, Koraput and above all the Kalahandi.
 
1.1.5      No major efforts have been made to put the state on the industrial development track, and therefore there is the lack of ancialirisation of industries in the Small and
Medium sectors. Besides, the general problems like lack of Infrastructural development and marketing assistance and shortage of timely and adequate credit flow etc., the
state has also been the victim of natural calamities like super cyclone in 1999 which have actually devastated the Small scale industrial set up and thus arrested the industrial
growth and promotion and proliferation of small and medium enterprises in the state.
 
1.1.6    The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the financial institutions should come forward for providing timely and adequate credit flow to the entrepreneurs for
accelerated industrial growth and promotion of SMEs in the state. The Committee recommends that concerted efforts must be undertaken for popularization of venture
capital, factoring services and other financial linked schemes like CGYTSI, CLCSS, NEF and SME Fund of SIDBI.
 
1.1.7      The Committee further recommends that following key areas must be selected for effective action:
 
(i)        Strengthening the functional aspects of state level inter-institutional Committee (SLIIC) and promotidnal agencies;
 
(ii)    Financial restructuring of Orissa State Financial co-operation by seriously considering the proposal of adjustment of interest payment to the tune of Rs. 160.33 crore
against principle liabilities besides wavering of the interest;
(iii)        Extension of income tax and central excise exemption for setting up of SMEs in economically backward districts like Bolangir , Koraput and Kalahandi on NER,
Uttranchal and Himachal Pradesh line;
 
(iv)     Special liberal package to super cyclone effected SSI units like rehabilitation package and one time settlement (OTS).
 
(B) GUJARAT
 
1.2        Small Scale Industry in Gujarat has witnessed impressive development. There are
over 10,000 SSI registrations granted every year during last decade. As per 3rd Census,
Gujarat accounts for 11.2% of working SSI units in the country. The performance of S
industry in Gujarat, therefore, has been very impressive. The State Government has introduced various schemes to provide support to SSI as part of Gujarat Industrial Policy
2003. Providing interest subsidy @ 5% to new as well as existing SSI units for undertaking.  The small scale industry is facing difficulties with regard to credit flow from
financial institutions. The Committee was informed as under:
 
(i)         The investment in small scale sector is over Rs.450 crore. The credit flow from nationalised  banks does not match with investment taking place in SSI. Against the
total turn-overn of over Rs. 12,000 crore per annum by SSIs in Gujarat, the credit flow is hardly Rs. 1500 cr. The industry, therefore, suffers from inadequate credit flow.
 
(ii)        Higher rate of interest on term loan prevents availability of funds, as higher rate of interest, about 13% interest per annum is charged.
 
(iii)       Credit Guarantee Scheme for SSI has not become popular with banks and SSIs continue to face difficulties in providing collateral guarantee.
 
(iv)       Credit  Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for Technology Upgradation  of SS1s take off of this scheme has been negligible in Gujarat . The banks are not providing
assistance under the scheme, thereby depriving SSI units of the scheme introduced by Government of India.
 
(v)        Assistance for Cluster Development in Gujarat, there are 83 product clusters in small scale sector e.g. Rajkot for diesel engine; Jamnagar for brass parts industry;
Morbi for ceramic industry; Surat for power loom industry. Accounting for over 43% of investment, 48% of production and 47% of employment in overall figures of SSIs.
However, only one cluster has been taken up for assistance by Government of India under the scheme. There is a need to cover clusters in the state.
 
(vi)       Raw material shortage the small scale industry, especially the engineering industry, has been facing problem of availability of steel. The SSI requires about 2,70,000
MT of steel, 40,000 MT of rounds and 50,000 MT of wire rods problems of availability of steel.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
 
1.2.1    The Committee interacted with the representative of Ahmedabad Foundry Cluster,
Morbi Chamber of Commerce & Industry, Wadhwan Industries Association, The Gujarat
Dyestuffs Manufacturers’ Association and Gujarat Chamber of Commerce & Industry. The SSI Associations, as a whole suggested for improving the status of SSI units with
the
following strategy : -
 
(i)         Rate of interest being charged by lending institutionals/banks to SSI be fixed at Bank Rate plus 2.0% for term loan and 4.0% for working capital.
 
(ii)        Moratorium on repayment of term loans provided to SSI units should be at least two years from the date of first disbursement and repayment should be spread over a
period of 6 to 8 years.
 
(iii)       One Bank Branch in every District catering exclusively to SSI.
 
(iv)       Operation of the Technology Development Modernisation fund scheme administered by SIDBI be extended to five years instead of three years.
 
(v)        National Equity fund of SIDBI covers projects upto Rs.25 lakhs. It is proposed that this limit be raised to Rs. 1.0 crore.
 
(vi)       The one time Settlement scheme should be extended for period of another 3 years with simplified norms i.e. installment for payment of dues should be extended to
36 months.
 
(vii)      Non Performing Assets (NPA) is considered on 90 days non payment of Interest/ instalment should be raised to 180 days as most of the SSI units are realising  their
proceeds after a period of 5 to 6 months.
 
(viii)      Revival of Co-operative Banking Sector.
 
(ix)       Exit Policy for the entrepreneurs of SSI Sector which provide.
 
(x)        Exit from the business. Provisions of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Act as of the developed world.
 
(xi)       One time settlement scheme which expired on 31 ‘ December, 2004 should be extended for another two years and 10% down payment should be asked instead of
25% from the entrepreneurs taking benefit of scheme.
 
(xii)      Restoration of S.S.I. Exemption on small scale ceramic to stand erect in cutthroat competition by large-scale industries.
 
(xiii)      The small Scale Unit, desiring modernisation by importing machineries form abroad shoud be given exemption from payment Custom Duty.
 
(xiv)     Grant loans at lower rate of interest for modernisation of S. S .1. Ceramic Unit and
 
(xv)      A passenger train from New Bhuj to Bareily via Morbi.
 
1.2.2    While the Committee is pleased to note the impressive development of Small Scale Industries in Gujrat, as almost ten thousand new SSI units are registered each
year, however, the Committee feels that the Ministry of SSI should act promptly in co-ordinating  activities with state Government, Banking division and steel sector for
combating the problems of inadequate credit flow, lack of infrastructure development and inadequate supply of steel in the engineering segment. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry of SSI should invite from the state Government proposal under Integrated Infrastructural Development (LID) Scheme. Adequate impetus may
also be given for covering more cases under cluster development approach in the state. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of SSI should co-ordinate with
the steel units in public and private sector for ensuring timely availability of steel raw material to SSI units in the state.
 
1.2.3      The Committee desires that the proposal of extending the operational period of Technology Development Fund Scheme from 3 to 5 years may be suitably
examined.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
(C) KARNATAKA
 
1.3       Karnataka has been pioneer in industry. In recent times, Karnataka has emerged as the knowledge and technology capital of the cQuntry making rapid strides in the
economy of the sate. IT and related industries, biotechnology and strong research and development institutions have given Karnataka a pride of place in the global market.
Growth of small-scale industries in Karnataka has been very rapid since 1982-83. As on 3 1’ March, 2003, 2,98,218 small scale industrial units have been registered with the
Directorate of Industries and Commerce. It is estimated that the investment is to the order of Rs.616374 lakhs providing employment for about 17,22,190 persons. Largest
concentration of small scale industries is in Bangalore Urban District, which is 53,665 followed by 27,084 units in Belgaum  District, 18149 units in Mysore district and
17,615 units in Tumkur district. Koppal has 3,451 in small-scale industries.
 
1.3.1 Problem being faced by SSI Sectors in Karnataka
 
(i)         Inadequate quality power supply,Lack of transportation in rural areas, lack of assured marketing facilities and huge domestic market still lie untapped,
 
(ii)        Raising inputs cost as compared to price of finished goods resulting into stagnant SSI sector;
 
(iii)       Lack of strong processing and mining technology back-up and poor technology and slow pace of technology upgradation due to poor R&D facilities.
 
(iv)       Vast scope for setting up of Electronic Units, Software, Hardware and Biotechnology in SSI field.
 
(v)        Delay in approval of Agree export zones at Chitradurga, Kolar, Bangalore, Tumkur and Bijapur.
 
            The Committee was apprised that the five Year “Perspective Plans” have been prepared by all the 27 Districts Industries Centres in the State highlighting mineral,
agro and human resource potential of the Districts. Keeping in view the needs of the industry,the following statregy may be adopted for promotion of SSI units :-
 
(1)        Financial assistance from Govt. of India towards industrial infrastructure projects, up gradation of surface transport infrastructure, augmentation of railway network
and connectivity to ports, upgradation of New Mangalore Port and assistance for expansion of Karwar Port (under Govt. of Karnataka).
 
(ii)        There is a backlog of Rs.429 crore of State Investment Subsidy payable to SSI units in the State. Government of Karnataka.  Suitable ways and means
advance/interest
free loan from Govt. of India to liquidate this arears preferably in one or two installments.
 
(iii)       Early approval of Govt. of India for the industrial clusters proposed.
 
(iv)       Early approval of Govt. of India to locate the Automotive Testing Facility in Bangalore/Dharwad of Karnataka.
 
(v)        Special Economic Zones Development Bill 2003 may be expedited;
 
(vi)       In addition to manufacturing exports, software and services exports from the State also be considered for the purpose of determination of quantum of financial
assistance to States under ASIDE scheme!
 
(vii)      Indian Institute of Technology (ITT) at Dharwad may be favorably considered.
 
(viii)      Central assistance for setting up of minor airports in uncovered destinations like Mysore, Bellary, Bijapur, Hassan, Karwar, Hampi, etc. would facilitate both
industrialization of backward areas as well as tourism sector.
 
1.3.2    The Committee observes that Karnataka is becoming the hub for proliferation of sun rise Small and Medium Enterprises units in the field of Bio-technology,
Electronic, Soft ware, the Committee, therefore, recommends that the State should be given top priority for encouraging investment in specific sectors in those select sectors
viz. Pharma, Automobile and Auto components, Textile, Garments, iT, ITES, Sugar, Food Processing, Engineering and Metallurgy (fron & Steel and Cement) with greater
R&D impetus for accelerating modernization and up-gradation of mining processing technology.
 
1.3.3    The Committee desires that the outstanding dues to the tune of Rs. 429 crore at state investment subsidy must be reimbursed to the state SSI units at the earliest.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
 
1.3.4    The Committee is of the view that the concerted efforts should be made for appraisal of Agree Exports zones at Chitradurga, Kolar, Bangalore, Tumkur and Bijapur.
The Union Ministry of SSI should also undertake promotion of Industrial Development through Cluster approach in select districts. Action Plan should also be chalked out
and effectively implemented for industrialization of backward areas for balanced industrial development in the state.
 
1.3.5    The Committee feels that Union Government in tandem with the state government should give due emphasis on implementation of industrial infrastructure projects,
up- gradation of surface transport infrastructure, augmentation of railway network and connectivity to ports and up-gradation and expansion of Mangalore and Karwar ports.
(D) Bihar
 
1.4       After the partition Bihar, the development activities became un-organised and ultimately the entire Industrial activity shifted to Jharkhand state and Bihar remained
confined to agriculture and cottage Industries. Therefore, there should be a long term plan to develop the agriculture sector as well Industrialization in the State. On the line
of provisions and facilities provided to the North East States, Bihar should also be provided the economic and development package. The Central assistance should be
enhanced reasonably for the establishment growth centres. Under the integrated industrial development projects, there should be a change in financial assistance package in
which the ratio of Government of India and CIDB may be at 4:5 instead of 2:3. There is a need to make the growth centres/I.I.Dflndustrial  estates etc. tax free for a
considerable period of time for the consolidation of the Small and Medium Enterprises. For the development of agriculture based industries, the centre should provide
sufficient find separately for basic Infrastructural support.
 
1.4.1    As regards the institutional arrangements, the Committee desires that a branch of National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) be opened in the state. There is
further need to establish one centre in each commissionery which will prepare technology based project report for Industries based on Agriculture products. The Central
Government should open a centre in Bihar for export related enquiry, assistance and cooperation. For the marketing of handicraft products in International market, a centre
should be opened in Patna. As per the policy of RBI, CD ratio should be fixed a 70% for the Capital investment in the State. At present the raw material of Bihar is sent to
other states and the same is procured by the entrepreneurs of Bihar from such States. Therefore, the Committee desires that an inter-ministerial task force should be
established which may be coordinated by the Ministry of Small Scale Industry.
 
1.4.2    The Committee has been apprised that state has the potential for Agro based industries, fruits and vegetables. During the year 1999-2000, 95,48,800 tonnes of
vegetable was produced in 6.62.00 hectares of land in rest of the Bihar which was 10% of total cultivation in productive area. In this way 38,40,000 tonnes of fruits were
products in 3,09,000 hectare of state which was 8% of total cultivation and productivity for total area of nation. According ot its statistics of production of vegetable data is
as under:-
 
Name of District
 
% of cultivation
 
Main produce
 
Nalanda
 
6.19
 
Potato, Tomato, Onion,
Lady Finger
 
Vaishali 6.00
 
CaulifLower, Tomato, Onion
 
Muzaffarpur
 
5.83
 
Cauliflower, Tomato,
Onion, Potato
 
Katihar
 
5.20
 
-do
 
Patna
 
4.59
 
-do-
 
 
            Data related to fruits are as under:
 
Name of District
 
% of cultivation
 
Main produce
 
Muzaffarpur
 
8.3
 
Mango, Guava, Litchi,
Lemon,

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
Banana
Bhagalpur
 
7.14
 
Mango, Guava, Banana
 
Darbhanga
 
6.22
 
Mango, Lemon, Banana
 
Vaishali
 
6.10
 
Mango, Guava, Litchi,
Lemon,
Banana
 
Samastipur
 
5.46
 
Mango, Guava, Litchi,
Lemon,
Banana
 
East Champaran
 
5.38
 
Mango, Guava, Litchi,
Lemon, I Banana
 
 
West Champaran 4.45 Mango, Guava, Litchi,
Lemon,
Banana
 
 Apart from Fruits and Vegetable, data for food grains in state is given below:
 
Name of Crops
 
Production(in MT)
 
 
Potentiality of Food based
Industries on Food grains.
 
Paddy
 
528
 
Rice Mill
 
Wheat
 
438
 
Ata Mill
 
Maize
 
156
 
Cattle feed and starch Mill
 
Pulse
Oil Seed
56
13
 
Dal Mill
Oil Mill
 
Sugar Cane
 
582
 
Sugar Mill, Khandsari
Industry
 
 
1.4.3    The above data clearly reflects that there is a good potentiality for the development of Vegetable, Fruits and related industry in the State. Therefore, there is vast
potentiality of food grains based industry in the state.
 
1.4.4    State Government has started Agro-Export Zones for litchi production focussing Muzaffarpur as Central point. In addition of this following areas can be developed as
centres of food processing Industries and agro export zone in state:
 
Name of Products
 
Potentiality of Agro export zone
 
Mango Bhagalpur
 
Pin apple purnea

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
  
Guava
 
Champaran
 
Lady finger
 
Vaishali
 
Tomato
 
Muzaffarpur
 
Potato
 
Nalanda
 
Rice
 
Rohtas
 
 
1.4.5    The Committee is of the view that basic infrastructure like Cold storage Chain, Research Development, Manpower Development, Improvement in quality of
products, Packaging, Improvement in logistic, Ware House, Quality and Testing Lab are required for achieving proposed Food Processing Industry . Reasonable central
subsidy for the development of basic infrastructure for food processing industry in the state may be provided. The Committee impress upon the Ministry of SSI to take up the
matter with Ministry of Food Processing Industry for promotion of the industry.
 
1.4.6    The Committee is pleased to note that Bihar has the potential for Agro based
industries, fruits and vegetables, therefore, the Central Government should open Food
Park in the potentially identified districts of Bihar and a Nodal Agency for promoting
SMEs in these areas should be set up for regulating food processing units and undertaking research and development activities. Opening of a branch each of Central Food
Rese Institute, Agriculture Science Centres with advanced technology and APIDA would prove paramount in the promotion and furtherance of SMEs in the state.
 
1.4.7    The Committee has been apprised the vast potential of handicrafts in the state, therefore, an all out efforts should be made for the encouragement and furtherance to
the handicrafts in the state. A detailed strategy should be chalked out for promoting handicrafts as per the availability of raw material / opportunities viz. Madhubani Painting
in Darbhanga and Madhubani; Store Chipping in Gaya and Aurangabad; brass and bell metal in Nalanda, Gaya and Patna; Slid Product in Sitamarhi  and Madhubani;
Terracotta Craft in Darbhanga and Muzaffarpur; Jute in Kathihar and Purnea; lac bangles in Muzaffarpur and Darbhanga; Capur, Durri in Obra (Aurangabad) and bamboo
articles in Patna, Ilajipur and Bhagalpur.
 
1.4.8 Special package
 
1.4.9
        The Committee desires that in order to generate industrial atmosphere in Bihar and to overcome the requirements of raw materials, the Government of India should
provide special package to the state for accelerated development and growth of SMEs in various segment of industries: -
 
Name of Projects
 
Cost of Project (in crores)
Development of Industrial Area & Growth
Centre
 
100.00
 
Development of Entrepreneurship and skills
 
5.00
 
Biotechnology Park
 
25.00
 
Venture Capital Fund
 
100.00
 
Development of Food Processing Industries 25.00
 
Tea processing industries 10.00
 
Rehabilitation of sick industries 500.00

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
  
Development of handicraft
 
10.00
 
Total
 
775.00
 
 
 
 
 
1.4.10 The Committee has been apprised that the main reason for closure of SSI units in the state are non availability of working capital, irregular supply of electricity, tough
competition in marketing of the products, non-up-gradation of the technology, problem in professional management system, lack of advertisement of their product in the
market, non rehabilitation of the sick unit at its appropriate time etc. Therefore, there is the need to arrange working capital for them, regular supply of electricity, provision
of priority in the Government purchases for the Small Scale Industries, provision to grant loan for technology up-gradation to SSI units and to give serious attention in the
basic facilities in these industrial areas. There is the need for developing and providing the important facilities such construction of roads, power supply, water, power plant,
quality testing lab and common facility centre etc.
 
1.4.11             The Committee is of the view that in the changing scenario of increased industrial activity, there is need to impart more training to the entrepreneurs of the
state in the field of Management, Cost effectiveness, Financial Management, advertisement and publicity, patent laws, new technologies in marketing, Inventory
Management etc. To have the global standard of entrepreneurship there is a need to provide additional basic Infrastructural facilities so that the entrepreneurs of the state can
be trained with such a high quality management training inputs which at later stage can be so strong that the identity and eiistence of entrepreneurs can be not effected by the
influence of World Trade Organization.
 
1.4.12              Status of Power supply to Industries
 
1.4.13         The Committee was apprised that Bihar has an installed capacity of around 3000 m.w. Thermal power accounts for over 90 per cent of the total generating
capacity in the state. Implementation of various power projects have been in different stages. These projects cover thermal power at Nabinagar, Chandil , Patna, Kursela and
Tenughat and Hydel Power at KoelKaro, Kadwan and Sankha. Government of India recently announced a package of new schemes worth Rs. 12,036 crores for the State
including assistance to power projects. Several pithead thermal projects are also on the anvil. The Eastern Region of the country (installed capacity 9000 m. .w.) with 6000
m.w. of power operates in an integrated mode as a single system. With the central share available from this system and inequity due to trade equalisation policy, the supply
of power has been erratic in Bihar. The State Government is aptly placing highest priority on the development of power sector in its economic planning to bridge the demand
gap. It is also encouraging private sector participation in power generation and power distribution in the State. Setting up of captive power plants, to meet the existing as well
as future demand for power of industrial units, is being encouraged in the state. Installation of Diesel Generating sets by entrepreneurs are also permitted for running the
enterprises. With the encouraging power policy pursued by the State Government, th industrial activity in the state would pick up in the years ahead.
 
1.4.14  The Committee interacted with the representative the Bihar Chamber of Commerce. The Committee was apprised that suitable action plan may be sketched for
providing timely and adequate for supply power to the state for intensive industrialization of the state. Besides to promote the SSI sector in Bihar the following steps may be
taken:
 
(i)         District wise development strategy for promotion of SSI sector keeping in view the geographical distribution of raw material.
(ii) Setting up of institutional arrangement to facilitate promotion of SSI sector by the new entrepreneurs.
 
(iii)   Need to change mind set of state Government agencies, Banks and financial institutions and entrepreneurs towards industrialisation  of the states. The union ministries
of SSI in tandem with state government agencies and the Banks/Financial Institutions operating in Bihar may take initiative for development of infrastructure in the state.
 
(iv)      Providing incentive such as tax concessions etc. to encourage entrepreneur to start industries.
 
(v)     District Industry Centres should organise programmes to entrepreneur various types of services and facilities being offered by the banks.
(vi) Banks should look into the feasibility of opening specialised  SSI branched an industrial branches for smoothening flow of industrial credit particularly by 1 banks in
Bihar.
 
(vii)      The recommendations of Nayak Committee (1991), Kapur Committee (1998) and S.S. Ganguly Committee should be implemented effectively by banks and

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
financial institutions in the State through assistance of the District Industries Centres for identification of Small entrepreneurs.
 
(viii)      Need for setting up of Venture Capital Fund in the State for Small Scale Industries and for information Technology separately.
 
(ix)       Branch managers should intensity their visits in the service area to create a better rapport and mobilise viable projects with an attitude of the economic development
of the area and Loan applications formats be made available on the Notice Boards of bank branches.
 
1.4.15    The Committee feels that that the State Government should implement the provisions of State Industrial Policy enunciated recently for promotion of Small Scale
Industries in the State.
 
(E) WEST BENGAL
 
1.5 The Committee was. apprised by the State Government that during the period from 1991 to December 2003, 3562 industrial approvals for a proposed investment of
Rs,6797.91 crore have been received of which 1429 approvals involving proposed investment of Rs.14,833.81 crore were received during the period from 2000-2003.
During the period 1991 December 2003, as many as 795 projects involving an investment of Rs.24436.34 crore have been implemented. During the year 2003, 137 industrial
projects were implemented in West Bengal involving investment of Rs.2335. 19 corers as compared to 113 industrial projects during the year 2002 involving investment of
Rs.2325.95 crores. During the last three years (2001-03), average investment involved in implemented projects in West Bengal  stood at Rs.2285.23 crore. The sectors which
registered encouraging growth are iron and steel, information technology, petrochemicals, agro-business, food processing etc.
 
1.5.1 The Committee was further informed that there were 93,321 number of permanently registered SSI units in the state providing employment to 6,13,825 people. The
highest concentration of SSI units is in around the capital city of Kolkota and its adjacent district. SSI units are spread throughout in Durgapur, Rajigunj and Asansol areas of
Burdwan district. The Infrastructural and ancillary benefit was created due to the existence of a large numbers of Public Sector Enterprises resource-based industries like
Rice Mills, Cold Storages etc. in the paddy growing district of Burdwan, Midnapore, Bankura, Hooghly etc. and potato growing districts of Hooghly, Bankura, Midnapore
and Burdwan etc.
 
1.5.2    Thrust Areas for Development in SSI Sector
 
1.5.3    The representatives of State Government apprised the Committee of the prospective major Group of Industries and Thrust Areas for Development in SSI Sector in the
state. Based on the existing industry-status, human and other resources, trend of local and outside demand, technology and export potential the following activities have been
identified as thrust areas for development in Small Scale Industrial Sector viz. Food & Food Processing Industry Plastic & Allied products based on Haldia Petrochemical,
Engineering and Metal Casting industries, Agro based products, Leather and Leather products, Electronics and information technology, Handicrafts and industries on Gem
and Jewelry, Basic drugs and pharmaceuticals industries, Mineral based industries, Textile based industries, Promotion of Tourism and Tourism related services, Jute
Diversified Products and Coir Industries.
 
1.5.4    West Bengal leads the country in the production and export of leather products. Most of the units engaged in manufacturing quality leather products are situated in
and around Kolkata. Full fledged operation of Kolkata Leather Complex and after relocation of all the existing 523 leather tanning units in the said complex, the State would
regain its strength in manufacturing tanned and processed leather.
 
1.5.5    The increasing demand of Indian Handicrafts both in internal and international markets and increasing export of such products during the last decade has encouraged
the Craftsmen of West Bengal to develop and diversify their products and to rural areas of the state. The State Govt. has been playing an important role for growth of
handicraft industries. The State Government has also been implementing different schemes for development of activities like electronics and information technology,
chemical industries, mineral based industries, tourism related services, jute diversified products, coir industries etc. declaring such activities as threat areas.
 
1.5.6    The Committee interacted’ with various SSI Associations and suggestions which came forth for improvement in the status of SSI sector are as under
 
(i)         Re-classification of the SSI Sector into Micro, Mini and Small office and home office
 
(ii)        Uniform Electricity tariff across India, especially for Micro and Mini Units
 
(iii)       Amendment of Delayed Payment Act, and Limited Partnership Act for SSI
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
(iv)       Accredited SSI Managers
 
(v)        Social Security for Workers & Owners
 
(vi)       Special rights for S SI Entrepreneurs’
 
(vii)      Separate Advisory Body for the Agro & Rural Industry Ministry
 
(viii)      Installation of Pollution Control Devices
(
ix)        Advertisement of SSI Products
 
(x)        Implementation of Cluster Scheme at Khagraghat, Murshidabad, Powerloom cluster in Nadia.
 
(xi)       Insurance facility for Small Business Sector and Recovery of Loans from Micro & Mini Enterprises
 
(xii)      Separate Incentive Scheme for Micro & Mini Units and Separate category d. Office & Home Office.
 
1.5.7    The Committee recommends that the Union Ministry of SSI in co-ordination ‘ with the State Government of West Bengal should under take concrete measures for
further proliferation of leather industry by relocating the leather tiny units at suitable places and providing adequate institutional and logistic support for enhancing
production and export of leather products.
 
1.5.8    Taking into consideration the vast potential of handicrafts in the state, the Committee recommends that the Union Ministry of SSI, API and Textile in tandem with
State Government should encourage the weavers and crafts men of the state for developing and diversifying a rural products in the handloom and handicraft segments.
 
 
(F) JHARKHAND
 
1.6       The Committee apprised that after creation of the State on 1 5th November, 2000, the State Government has announced its Industrial Policy, namely, Iharkhand
Industrial Policy-200 1 which highlights the basic strategy for rationalisation  of fiscal concession, infrastructural support at a reasonable cost for efficient functioning of the
industrial sector ; amendment in laws/rules for encouraging private sector participation in various sectors; simplification rules, regulations and procedures to remove
bottlenecks for smooth functioning of the industrial sector etc. Within the framework of Jharkhand Industrial Policy-2001, proposals for investment amounting to
Rs.29924.39 crore has been received for setting up of Mega Industrial Units. The state government has signed MOUs with 23 companies with a total investment potential of
Rs. 17744.66 crores. 39 Small Scale Industrial units have been registered as sick unit for revival.
 
1.6.1    The Committee interacted with the representatives of Chotanagpur Small Scale Industries Association, Santhal Pargana Small Industries Association, Singhbhum
Chamber of Commerce & Industry, Santhal Pargana Chamber of Commerce & Industries and Singhbhum Industries Association which highlighted the problems being faced
by SSI sector in the form of lack of infrastructure development and communication, shortage of proper rail/road communication and air connectivity lack of uninterrupted
supply of electricity lack of implementing and monitary  mechanism; lack of motivation in the first generation of entrepreneurs who face tremendous problems in getting
loans from banks/financial institutions lack of adequate and timely supply of coal by BCCL, ECL, CCL and C1L; price hike in iron and steel and non-cooperative attitude by
the large scale public sector/private sector undertakings towards SSI/ancillaries.
 
1.6.2    The Committee was further apprised that the following strategy may be adopted for promoting SSI sector in the state: -
 
(i)         A Special Central package is urgent need for sick and closed SSI and existing sick and closed units be rehabilitated ‘As is where is basis’.
 
(ii)        Provisions for more soft financing policies is required and direct incentives to the Sulking Industries,
 
(iii)       Insured electricity for at least 18 hours is basic need.
 
(iv)       The balanced Regional Industrial Development is required to prevent further Sociodetoriation of Santhal Pargana.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
 
(v)        Setting of Milk Processing, Fruit Processing, Vegetable Processing, Spice Processing, Harbals based Units, Food Processing Industries in the view of Local Market
as well as overseas market also.
 
(vi)       Special Economic Zone (S.E.Z.) with all latest facilities for promotion of maximum investment opportunity, export activities and economic development of Santhal
Pargana region.
 
(vii)      Data Bank for mineral deposits in Santhal Paragana so that mineral based units may come out.
 
(viii)      Adequate impetus on Infrastructural development like road and bridges, power, water supply.
(ix) Capital subsidy reimbursement and central government subsidy for food processing industries.
 
(x)        Impetus on farming of timber for reducing pressure on reserve forest, environment and better ecology, creation of job opportunity and boosting industrial activity
based farm timber.
 
(xi)       Cost effective, timely and adequate availability of institutional finance (xii) Adequate availability of energy at comparatively cost
 
(xiii)      Prevention and cure in sickness in SSI sector if a legislation like SICA Act is made empowering the State Governments for formation of bodies like BIFR at state
level, with statutoly powers for approving and implementation of package for revival of sick SSI units.
 
(xiv) A comprehensive law should be made to govern all matters related to Small Scale Industries
 
(xv)      Labour laws have to be relaxed to enable SSI sector to fire the erring and make itself more competitive and cost effective.
 
(G)       ANDHRA PRADESH
 
1.7       During the course of interaction with the Government of Andhra Pradesh, the Committee was apprised that Andhra Pradesh has 4,52,935 tiny/SSI industries having
Rs.7649.48 crores of investment and employment to 3 3,90,572 persons. The Industrial sickness is 38%. The State Govt. have introduced a new Scheme, namely APSSERS
for effective revival of sick units.
(iii)       Insured electricity for at least 18 hours is basic need.
 
(iv)       The balanced Regional Industrial Development is required to prevent flirther Sociodetonation of Santhal Pargana.
 
(v)        Setting of Milk Processing, Fruit Processing, Vegetable Processing, Spice Processing, Harbals based Units, Food Processing Industries in the view of Local Market
as well as overseas market also.
 
(vi)       Special Economic Zone (S.E.Z.) with all latest facilities for promotion of maximum investment opportunity, export activities and economic development of Santhal
Pargana region.
 
(vii)      Data Bank for mineral deposits in Santhal Paragana so that mineral based units may come out.
 
(viii)      Adequate impetus on Infrastructural development like road and bridges, power, water supply.
 
(ix)       Capital subsidy reimbursement and central government subsidy for food processing industries.
 
(x)        Impetus on farming of timber for reducing pressure on reserve forest, environment and better ecology, creation of job opportunity and boosting industrial activity
based farm timber.
 
(xi)       Cost effective, timely and adequate availability of institutional finance (xii) Adequate availability of energy at comparatively cost
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
(xiii)      Prevention and cure in sickness in SSI sector if a legislation like SICA Act is made empowering the State Governments for formation of bodies like BIFR at state
level, with statutory powers for approving and implementation of package for revival of sick SSI units.
 
(xiv)     A comprehensive law should be made to govern all matters related to Small Scale Industries
 
(xv)      Labour laws have to be relaxed to enable SSI sector to fire the erring and make itself more competitive and cost effective.
 
(G)       ANDHRA PRADESH
 
1.7       During the course of interaction with the Government of Andhra Pradesh, the Committee was apprised that Andhra Pradesh has 4,52,935 tiny/SSI industries having
Rs.7649.48 crores of investment and employment to 33,90,572 persons. The Industrial sickness is 38%. The State Govt. have introduced a new Scheme, namely APSSIRS
for effective revival of sick units.
 
1.7.1    The Department of Industries, Govt. of Andhra Pradesh is engaged in the core sanctiol , promotion of investment in the State by exploring all the resources available
in the State, increate employment generation by promoting labour intensive industries, to improve the export performance of the industrial sector by providing adequate
support services. Infrastructure has been the key factor influencing the investment in the State and the Government has taken initiatives to develop world class infrastructure
to industrial sector. Andhra Pradesh is the first State to bring a law for “Single Window Industrial Clearances” and erected the “Industrial Single Window Clearance Act
2002”. The State Investment Promotion Committee (SPIC) is also playing a crucial role in helping the industrial development as well as the SBI Advisoiy Board under the
Chairmanship of the Chief Minister.
 
1.7.2 The Committee is pleased to note that Andhra Pradesh is the First State to have the “Single Window Industrial clearance System” and thereby recommends
that other states should follow the suit for the actual furtherance of SMEs. However, the Committee wishes that Andhra Pradesh should continue to be a harbinger
of Information Technology Revolution in the country and play the role model for other states. The Committee desires that the Central Government as well as the
State Government should undertake measures for optimum utilization of available resources in the state by encouraging SMEs in the sun rise Small Scale
Industries and thus explore avenues for employment generation by promoting labour intensive industries.
 
(H)       UTTAR PRADESH
 
1.8       The Sub-Committee for the Ministry of Small Scale Industries of the Committee on Industry interacted with the representatives of State Government on the issue of
status of Small Scale Industries in the state. The Sub-Committee was apprised that upto March 2004, about 4,91,435 units have been established in the State providing
employment opportunities to 18,79,547 persons. In addition there are around 10 lac  artisans and more than 1 lac handicraft units in the State. In the Agro sector, 4 agri-
export zones have been established in the State out of which two are for mango and one each for potato & Basmati rice. Development zones for honey, bananas, amla  &
mentha have also been notified.
 
1.8.1    The Sub-Committee interacted also with the representative of Federation of Association of Small Industries of India, Eastern U.P. Chamber & Industry, Provincial
Industries Association, Rajkiya Audyogik Asthan Sahkari Samiti Ltd., Laghu Udyog Bharti, Uttar Pradesh Small Scale Soap Industry Association, U.P. Pharmaceutical
Manufacturers Federation, Confederation of Indian Pharma Industry, Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, Kanpur etc.
 
1.8.2    The Sub-Committee was apprised of the problems being faced by Small Scale Industries in Uttar Pradesh which are as under:
 
(i)         Lack of infrastructure facilities viz, continuous power supply, high cost of transportation of the raw material and finished goods, linkage with multifarous agencies
thereby their maneuvering capacity is very limited;
 
(ii)        Growth of SSI units in the present day is tardy, as entrepreneurs are hesitant to take up industrial ventures, so, there is dearth of applications coming up for SSI
Sector;
 
(iii)       Lack of technology for producing goods at competitive rates;
 
(iv)       SSI units are highly dependents upon the larger corporate sector;
 
(v)      SSI units are facing stiff competition, lower margins, lower prices etc;

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
 
(vi)       Due to opening of Economy and reduction in tariff by liberalizing in imports, goods from various countries are flooding in Indian Markets ar a cheaper rate.
Consequently, many large units/corporate are getting affected; and
 
(vii)      The NPA under SSI is around 22.1 % which is higher than agriculture and other priority sector.
 
1.8.3    The SSI Associations suggested following strategic course of action to remove the problems being faced by SSI units in Uttar Pradesh:-.
 
(i)         The availability of loan at right time is one of the fundamental requirements of the Industry. The CD. ratio of the State which is 30.4% as against 59.4% at the
national level clearly shows that the position of credit facilitates to the Small Scale Units is not satisfactory and that it requires constant monitoring.
 
(ii)        It is evident that nationalised banks are not taking adequate interest in advancing loans to SSIs. They still demand collateral securities up to the loan amounting to
Rs.25 Lacs which is against the norms. Necessary instructions to banks may be issued.
 
(iii)       In order to improve the global competitiveness of the domestic industries and also to provide for quality infrastructure, the Govt. of India has launche  Industrial
Infrastructure Up-gradation Scheme. The scheme lays down that 25% of the total cost of the project would be borne by other stakeholders of the respective cluster with a
minimum industry contribution of 15% of total project cost. It is suggested that the provision of 25% contribution as above may be relaxed and State Govt. or State Govt.
Institutions may be allowed to contribute the above share.
 
(iv) SIDBI provides guarantee against composite loan of Rs.25 Lacs under Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries. Under this scheme only a few special RRB,s
NSIC, NEDFI, SIDBI & few commercial banks who have entered into an agreement with the Guarantee Trust are authorised  to operate the scheme whereas SFCs have been
kept out. It is therefore, necessary that all the SFC’s and commercial banks may be permitted to participate in the implementation of the scheme.
 
(v)        It would be in the fitness of things that one consolidated & integrated code of rules should be applicable to the SSI units, so that they may not face complexities of
rules and hardship and utilize their time for productive purposes.
 
1.8.4    The Committee feels that Uttar Pradesh, like Bihar, has been bereft of actual industrialization and therefore the State has more or less become an agriculture state.
The Committee, therefore, views that massive efforts should be made for promoting  and 
proliferating Agro Rural Industries and Food Processing Industries in the State. Union Ministry of SSI and API should chalk out strategy for promoting SMEs in field in the
state and accordingly institutional support like opening up of agree export zones and opening up of Agricultural development centres must be provided in the state. Suitable
central assistance may be provided for R & D purposes in the field of agro rural industries.
 
1.8.5    The Committee is also of the view that adequate attention must be given to improve the working conditions of Handicrafts and Handlooms units in the state and
through diversification of products, the profitability of the handloom and handicraft units be enhanced. Suitable strategy should be undertaken for domestic marketing and
export of Lucknow’s Kurta and pyjama and Chicken print clothes to international market.
 
1.8.6    The Committee desires that the Ministry of SSI should examine the proposal whether under Industrial Infrastructure up-gradation scheme the provision of 25% of the
total cost of the project to be borne by the stakeholders of respective cluster may be relaxed and instead the State Government / State Government institution may be allowed
to contribute the share of the stake holders. The consent of the State Government in this regard may be sought and accordingly the Committee may be apprised of.
 
(I) MAHARASHTRA
 
1.9       The Sub-Committee for the Ministry of SSI (of Standing Committee on Industry) interacted with the representatives of Government of Maharashtra, Banks and SSI
Associations like Maharashtra Chamber of Commerce and Industry and came across the following problems! solution of 551 units in the state: -
 
(1)        Reduction in payment period limit by the large scale industrial units to the bills of SSI units from the prevailing limit of 120 days to 30 days by suitable amendment
in the Delayed Payment Act 1998;
 
(ii)        Implementation of Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme and Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme in letter and spirit in the state;
 
(iii)       Assistance from banks from reviving sick units should be closely monitored by the Reserve bank of India and the Ministry of SSI and ART. For taking up revival of

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
existing sick SSI units and to prevent incidence of sickness in future, institutionalized arrangements on the lines of BIFR (for Large Scale Industries) should be set up;
 
(iv)       Better  coordination between implementing Government Agencies and Banks for poverty alleviation and employment related schemes, an institutionalized
arrangement in the form of Lead Bank Scheme should be started;
 
(v)        About 90% of the units assisted by Maharashtra  State Financial Corporation so far have been S SI units in the state,  therefore, SIDBI should reduce interest rates on
re-financing to the MSFC;
 
(vi)       In Maharashtra, district level sick units rehabilitation committee is working under the Chainnanship of the District Collector on the line of BIFR to address sickness
in the Small Scale Industries units, therefore, the certificate issued by district industries centres  must be accepted by the Central Government Organization and accordingly
suitable relief / concession may be granted to the sick SSI units;
 
(vii)      Simple format of loan applications for SSI units and need for policy initiatives to reduce the interest rates for the SMEs;
 
(viii)      Enhancement of exemption limit of Central Excise for SSI sector from Rs. 1 crore to Rs. 3 crore and enhancement in investment limit for SSI units in all SSI sector.
 
(ix)       A separate wage structure for SSI sector;
 
(x)        A declaration of special economy zone for SSI sector and grant of appropriate incentive and relaxation to the SSI units for giving an opportunity to the entrepreneurs
for establishment of industrial towns and its management.
 
1.9.1 The Committee wishes to point out that Maharashtra being on the threshhold of industrial development, an all out efforts should be made for anciliarization
among various segment of industries in order to give fillip to the emergence and consolidation of SMEs in these segment. The Committee also desires that forward
and backward linkages should be set up for integrated development of industries in the state. The Committee recommends that the proposal for establishment of
industrial towns and its management by first generation entrepreneurs must be encouraged and propped up.
 
1.9.2    The Committee desires to know the comment of the Ministry of Small Scale
Industries on the proposal of the industrial federations on the issue of acceptance by the Central Government the certificate issued by District Industries Centres
in regard to rehabilitation of sick units.
 
 
110      General Recommendations
 
1.10.1 The Committee desires that the Ministry of SSI should undergo the merits of the expectation of SSI Associations and the state Governments and accordingly
chalk out course of action to address the same in order to improve and proliferate  the status of SSI sector in the select states. The Committee is of the considered
view that the main issues concerning the Indian SSI sector pertains to rehabilitation of the existing units by providing assistance at concessional rates, advanced
infrastructure of international standards, setting up of Information Technology centres for SSI sector, soft funding for up- gradation and modernization,
relaxation from power cuts and taxation and strict anti- dumping regulations. It will help to increase the potentials of these units and enable to retain employment
and contribution to the domestic production of the country in future. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of SSI should undertake following
course of action:19
 
(I)        Making in depth study and research work regarding the actual status of SS sector to SWOT analysis;
 
(ii)        Selection of key areas for massive action;
 
(iii)       Formulation of district wise development strategy in each state for promotion and proliferation of SSI units;
 
(iv)       Co-ordination with the state Governments, SSI Associations, Banks and other union Ministries I Departments impressing upon the need for promotion of
SSI sector;
 
(v)        Strengthening of monitoring mechanism for effective implementation of SSI promotional schemes and programmes in each state.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
 
1.10.2 The Committee further recommends that the allocation may be made in a manner as to promote SSI sector in economically backward regions like Bihar,
Jharkhand, West Bengal and Orissa where adequate institutional arrangement may be set up for training and man-power development and encouraging scheme,
technology, environmental research and Development. Sufficient fund should be allocated for integrated Infrastructural Development and all out efforts should be
made to implement effectively the credit generator Fund schemes, credit linked capital subsidy for Technology up-gradation and the Micro-Finance programmes.
 
1.10.3 The Committee desires that Action Plan; state-wise should be chalked out for promoting small scale industries by the SIDO and impetus should be given for
marketing assistance and export promotion in and through these regions. It may be noted that SSI Sector would be able to achieve the Twelve per cent annual
growth rate only when the problems being faced by SSI sector in these economically backward regions is removed and when these regions want contributing in
enhancing the growth and development. Then and only then, SSI sector may convert itself into ‘Engine of growth’ for national economy.
CHAPTER –II
 
SCHEMES I PROGRAMMES OF SSI AT WORK
 
2.0 Working of SIDO in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand Maharashtra and Gujarat
 
2.1 SIDO helps in promotion of small scale industries through various promotional programmes and services provided by its field offices e.g. SISIs, RTCs, FTSs,
Autonomous including PPDCs/Tool Rooms & Br. SISIs in the States of Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jhakhand, Maharashtra and Gujarat.
 
2.1.1 The following Institutes working are in the select states:
 
Bihar                           Tool Room & Training Centre at SISI, Patna as Extension Centre                                             ofIDTR, Jamshedpur.
 
West Bengal               Central Tool Room & Training Centre, Kolkata.
 
 
Uttar Pradesh             Process-cum-Product Development Centres (PPDC), Agra; PPDC                                          Meerut; FFDC Kannauj; CDGI, Firozabad.
 
Orissa                         Central Tool Room & Training Centre, Bhubaneshwar.
 
Jharkhand                  Indo-Danish Tool Room, Jamshedpur.
 
Maharashtra              Indo-German Tool Room, Aurangabad; IDEMI, Mumbai.
 
Gujarat                       IGTR, Ahmedabad.
 
2.1.2    To facilitate cost reduction, design, process-modification and product diversification to make the Indian SSI products more competitive, the Ministry of SSI has
modernized PPDCs and Tool Rooms. Process and Product Development Centres were set up in mid eighties with the assistance of UND)O / UNDP. These Centres cater to
the need of technology upgradation for small scale sector including process modification and product diversification in different product groups, viz., Glass & Ceramics,
Foundry & Forging, Essential oils, Sports goods, Hand Tools, Electronics items. Tool Rooms which are provide product development services. These are also providing
trained manpower to industry for improvement of product and processes. These are being upgraded from time to time to meet the present day need. In addition, the field
offices of SIDO i.e Small Industries Service Institutes (SISIs) have set up Technology Resource Centers (TRCs) to advise and enable the SSIs to upgrade themselves to
compete in the global market.
 
2.1.3    The details of the programmes and services provided regularly are as follows:
(i)         Entrepreneurship Developmental Programmes for the educated unemployed youth set-up their own SSI unit;
 
(ii)        Management Development Programmes to enhance the managerial skills of persons from SSI sector;
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
(iii)       Intensive technical assistance! consultancy to prospective and existing entrepreneurs in the filed of product selection, technology! plant and machinery selection,
marketing and financial assistance etc;
 
(iv)       Preparation of Project Profiles, Survey reports, State Industrial Profiles, feasibility report,In-plant study reports etc. as per the requirement of small scale industries;
 
(v)        Organising programmes on WTO, JPRs, ISO 9000/ 14000, Bio-technology, IT based programmes to make the small scale industries more competitive;
 
(vi)       To provide marketing assistance to SSI sector, Vendor Development programmes and exhibition are being organized to bring the buyers and sellers on a common
platform; and
 
(vii)      Common facility services to the small scale industries by way of manufacturing of their hi-tech jigs, fixtures, toolings etc. including training to their man power.
 
2.1.4    Regional Testing Centres located at Kolkata, Mumbai and Field Testing Station at Kolhapur(Maharashtra) are providing testing facilities in the field of mechanical,
electrical, metallurgical and chemical trades covering range of products manufactured by small scale units in the States of West Bengal & Maharashtra. Technology
Resource Centres have been set-up in each SISIs to provide information :o SSI sector on latest commercially viable technologies available on various products including
export of their newly developed technology.
 
2.1.5 Apart from this, some further steps which have been taken, are as follows:
 
(i)         A Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for investment in technology upgradation provides subsidy and credit for technology upgradation. Sector- specific
programmes for modernization of stone, toy industry, lock industry and machine tools are also in operation.
 
(ii)        Limit under Excise Exemption scheme has been enhanced from Rs.50 lakh to Rs.1 crore.
 
(iii)       Scheme for providing 50% assistance subject to a ceiling of Rs.50 lakhs to SSI Associations for setting up testing laboratories.
 
(iv)       Scheme providing for assistance to SSI units in obtaining ISO 9000 & ISO 14001 certification.
(v)        Investment ceiling in handmade tools, hosiery, stationery, drugs & pharmaceuticals and sport shoes has been increased from Rs. 1 crore to Rs.5 crores to enable the
units to go in for technology upgradation and modernization.
 
(vi)       The SSI sector is being prepared and made aware of various provisions of WTO, anti-dumping, Intellectual Property Rights, Geographical Indications, etc. through
seminars, workshops, etc.
 
(vii)      Workshops/trainings have been initiated on procedure for obtaining bar coding. A scheme providing for 75% of the total expenses incurred by SSI units in bar
coding registration has been launched.
 
2.2       Working of credit linked Capital Subsidy Scheme
 
2.2.1    Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for Technology Upgradation in Small Scale Industries has been started by DC(SSI) in year 2000 which provides 12% subsidy
(subsequently raised to 15% ) to selected sub sectors on institutional finance for technology upgradation . The technology related needs for process modification and product
diversification can be fulfilled by SSI sector through the scheme. Action is being taken to enhance the scope of this scheme to cover more areas by O/o DC(SSI).
 
2.2.2    The purpose behind introduction of CLCSS is to motivate and facilitate SSI units to upgrade their technology through infusion of institutional credit. The strategy
adopted for this purpose is to provide 12% upfront capital subsidy on institutional finance availed to facilitate technology upgradation in small scale sector. The ceiling of
loans eligible under the scheme is presently Rs. 40 lakh.
 
2.2.3    The corpus fund created under the scheme is Rs. 600 crore for years of operation from Oct. 2000 to Sept. 30, 2005. Till February 2005, an amount of Rs. 23.86 crore
has been utilized under the scheme which includes an advance of Rs. 5 crore to SIDBI and Rs. 3 crore to NABARD for operationalising  the scheme. The slow progress
under the scheme is due to general inhibition on the part of SSI units to go for technology upgradation . The announcement made under General Budget for the year 2004-05
for enhancement in the rate of subsidy and the ceiling of loans eligible under the scheme will help to make the scheme popular among the SSI units.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
2.2.4    At present, there are forty four sub-sectors and products eligible for availing subsidy under the scheme. These sub-sectors/products have been included under the
scheme on the basis of their contribution to the production in SSI sector and need for their technology upgradation.
 
2.2.5 The CLCSS is expected to promote Small Scale Industries in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Tharkhand, Maharashtra and Gujarat by assisting them to
upgrade their technology by availing institutional credit and subsidy thereupon.
 
2.2.6    The Committee observes that Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme is a very good scheme aimed at technological up-gradation in SSI sector. The progress
so far in the States of Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand , Maharashtra and Gujarat, as apprised by the SSI associations? federations, has
been tardy and in fact the scheme is yet to take off. The Committee desires that in future the scheme in these states should show better results. The Committee
impresses upon the Ministry of SSI to provide better package incentives to SSI units for technology up-gradation and work out and effective strategy in the
economically backward states.
 
2.2.7    The Committee recommends that the Government should undertake the follo steps for improving the functioning of credit linked capital subsidy Bihar,
West Bern Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand , Maharashtra and Gujarat :-
 
(i)         Organising awareness programmes at various location all over the country to increase the awareness level of industry association, banks, SIDBI and
Industry Departments of respective States;
 
(ii)        Review of progress of the scheme in meetings State Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs);
 
(iii)       Incorporating inputs on the scheme into in service training courses of Bank Managers; and
 
(iv)       Publicity measures to increase general awareness about the scheme.
 
2.3       Working of Credit Guarantee Scheme
 
2.3.1    The Credit Guarantee Scheme was launched with a view to alleviate the problems of collateral security faced by the small enterprises, particularly first generation
entrepreneurs, and to remove the impediments in flow of credit to Small enterprises sector. The problems in the implementation of the scheme pertains to low level of
awareness about the scheme amongst the field level officers of MLIs, negative mindset of the MLIs due to greater volume of administrative work in the small enterprises
lending and may be their bad experience in the past on a similar scheme, bankers’ traditional/usual comfort with collateral security and perceived high risk nature of small
enterprises sector. These problems of the bank branches need to be seriously addressed by the management of the banks. By enhancing the awareness about the scheme
among the field level officers of MLIs through seminars/training, the progress under the scheme could be improved. Furthermore, expeditious enhancement of the Corpus
Fund up to the envisaged level of Rs.2500 crore under the scheme would increase the comfort level of participating MLIs and encourage them to avail the scheme on a much
wider scale.
 
2.3.2    Since inception, 49 banks/institutions (i.e., 27 public sector banks, 11 private sector banks, 8 regional rural banks, NSIC, NEDFi and SIDBI) have become Member
Lending Institutions under the Scheme. As on 28 Februaiy 2005, a total of 22,684 proposals were approved for guarantee cover for an aggregate loan ofRs.484.61 crore. Of
this, so far 81 claims have been received from MLIs for settlement involving an amount of Rs. 1.70 crore. The scheme would continue till the end of Tenth Five Year Plan
and decision to continue it further would be taken thereafter.
 
2.3.3    The Credit Guarantee Scheme aims to alleviate the problem of collateral security among the small enterprises, particu’arly to tiny enterprises. To cover the entire tiny
sector, which is defined as units having investment in plant and machinery upto Rs.25 lakh, the Group of Ministers in its meeting held on 16th August, 2004 decided to raise
the loan limit under the scheme from Rs. 10 lakh to Rs.25 lakh. The proposal to further enhance the loan limit from Rs.25 lakh to Rs.50 lakh under the scheme is under
consideration of the Government.
 
2.3.4    The sectors of SSI which have actually been benefited under the scheme since its inception are Basic Metal Industries, Beverages, Tobacco Etc, Chemicals Etc.,
Electrical
‘achinery, Food Products, Information Technology, Jute Textiles, Leather And Fur Products, Paper And Printing etc.
 
2.3.5 The details of proposals approved for guarantee cover under the scheme in these States are given as under:
                                                                                                           (Amount in Rs. lakh)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
Name of the State As on February 28, 2005
 Number of Proposals Amount Sanctioned
Bihar
 
1024
 
868
 
West Bengal
 
1271
 
2787
 
UttarPradesh
 
6602
 
4300
 
Orissa
 
761
 
1057
 
Jharkhand
 
684
 
3916
 
Maharashtra
 
556
 
3584
 
Gujarat
 
296
 
1423
 
 
2.4       Loan Limit under the Credit Guarantee Scheme
 
2.4.1    The Committee observes that loan limit of Rs. 25 lakh for investment in plant and machinery under the Credit Guarantee Scheme is not sufficient so the loan limit
needs to be enhanced at least to Rs. 1 crore.
 
 
 
2.5       Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme
 
2.5.1    The Committee is constrained to observe that despite the provision of the loans up to 25 lakh without collateral/third party guarantee and the guidelines of the
Reserve Bank of India thereto, Banks insists on the collateral security and the third party guarantee and despite the Commiftee’s  repeated recommendation to change the
mind set of the Branch Manager, nothing fruitful has come out. The SSI Associations! federation  in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand complained about
the non- adherence of RBI guidelines by the nationalized banks in this regards.
 
2.5.2    The Committee recommends that the Credit Guarantee Trust should make concerted efforts in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand to create
awareness about the Scheme among the Branch Managers of the banks by organizing regional/zonal based Workshops-cam-Training Programmes where the information
relating to the Scheme and the benefits available are explained in detail. There is however, absence of mechanism assessing the impact of success of credit guarantee
scheme. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to ensure the success of this scheme.
 
2.5.3    The Committee observes that the Credit Guarantee Fund scheme suffered in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand due to high upfront charges of
banks like service charge, processing fee and that too differing from bank to bank under this scheme also one time Guarantee Fee of 2.5% of the sanctioned amount and 1%
Service Fee on the outstanding loan is collected as on 31 March each year. These fees are however, fixed and do not vary from bank to bank. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that these fee should further be rationalised.
 
2.5.4    The Committee reiterates that the Government should expeditiously fulfill its commitment towards building the Corpus of Rs.2500 crore with a view to enhance the
comfort level of Members Lending Institutions (MLIs) participating in the Scheme. With the building of adequate corpus fund, the fears of MLIs could be allayed and the
scheme may start functioning on smooth track throughout the country.
 
2.6       Credit flow to SSI Sector
 
2.6.1    The Committee hopes that implementation of the S.P. Gupta S.S. Ganguly Committee’s recommendations Bihar, West Bengal Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand,
Maharashtra and Gujarat in regard to credit flow to SSI sector by pubic sector Banks to facilitate additional capacity generation, expansion of existing units and improving
capacity utilization diversification and to enhance competitiveness of SSI sectors would fetch positive result for Small Scale Industries . The Ministry of Small Scale

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
Industries in co-ordination with the respective states government and nationalized lead banks should undertake following steps for the furtherance and proliferation in the
select states:
 
 
 
(i)         popularisation of venture capital funding to SSI units
 
(ii)        strengthening credit delivery system and support services agencies;
 
(iii)       furtherance and strengthening of Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDB1) for extending financial and support services to SSIs
 
(iv)       enhancing the net percentage of credit to Small Scale Industries vis-a-vis the large Scale Industries
 
(v)        effective steps for Restructuirng of State Financial Corporations (SFC5);
 
(vi)       Steps for enhancing flow of additional credit for SSI sector;
 
(vii)      Reinforcing Technology Bank for SME up gradation to facilitate technology transfer project evaluation, risks management etc.;
 
(viii)      re-orienting the role of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) for extending credit flow to rural Small Scale Industries;
 
(ix)       introducing and encouraging Laghu Udyog Credit Cards; and
 
(x)        extending sufficient financial assistance extended to Self Help Groups
 
2.7 Credit Rating
 
2.7.1    The Committee strongly recommends for a Credit Rating Mechanism covering both the credit and performance factors. The Committee accordingly recommends the
Ministry to expedite the process of initiating and popularizing the Credit Rating System for SSI units in Bihar, West Bengal , Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand, Maharashtra
and Gujarat for easy procuring of capital by the entrepreneurs.
 
2.8       Activities and services of NSIC
 
2.8.1    NSIC has been stimulating and supporting the development of Small Scale Industries in the backward states through integrated support services.
 
2.8.2    In the state of Bihar, NSIC operates through its branch office at Patna. During the year2004-05, NSIC organized five intensive campaigns for creating awareness for
SSI development. NSIC has also started its intervention in the Bell Metal Cluster at Patna through a diagnostic study. Assistance worth Rs. 22.44 lakh was provided to SSI
units in the area of technology upgradation. Twenty two SSI units were registered under single point Registration Scheme for Government Purchase.
 
2.8.3    In the state of Orissa, NSIC operates through its Branch office at Cuttack and sub office at Rourkela. During the year 2004-05 NSIC organized eight intensive
motivational campaigns, and one industrial exhibition cum vendor development programme to promote small scale industries in the state. During the year forty eight SSI
units were registered under single point Registration Scheme for Government Purchase.
 
2.8.4    In the state of Maharashtra, NSIC operates through a branch office located at Mumbai and sub offices at Pune, Nashik and Nagpur. During the year 2004-05, NSIC
organized thirty three intensive motivational campaigns, two buyer sellers’ meets and three exhibitions for SSI development in the state. 715 SSI units participated in
Government Purchase Prgramme and registered themselves under the Single Point Registration Scheme for Government Purchase.
 
2.8.5    In the state of Jharkhand , NSIC operates through its branch office at Jamshedpur. Eight intensive motivational campaigns were organized in the backward areas of
the state for promoting SSI development. Marketing assistance of Rs 21.67 crore was extended to various SSI units in the areas of raw material assistance and agency sales.
82 units participated in Government Purchase Prgramme and registered themselves under the Single Point Registration Scheme for Government Purchase.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
2.8.6    In the state of Rajasthan,  NSIC operates through its branch office at Jaipur and supported by sub offices at Kota and Bikaner. NSIC also operates a computer
training centre at Jhalawar. During the year 2004-0 5 NSIC organized forty-two intensive motivational campaigns, six seminars and conferences and participated in nine
exhibitions for SSI development in the state. Rs 21.79 crore worth of marketing assistance was provided to SSI units in the areas of Raw Material Assistance and Agency
Sales. Eighty nine units participated in Government Purchase Prgramme and registered themselves under the Single Point Registration Scheme for Government Purchase.
 
2.8.7    In the state of Gujarat, NSIC operates through its branch office at Ahmedabad  and sub office at Rajkot. During the year 2004-05 NSIC organized four intensive
motivational campaigns and participated in two exhibitions for SSI development in the state. Rs 20.50 crore worth of marketing assistance was provided to SSI units in the
areas of raw material assistance and agency sales. 183 units participated in Government Purchase Prgramme and registered themselves under the Single Point Registration
Scheme for Government Purchase.
 
2.8.8    In the state of West Bengal NSIC operates through its branch office at Kolkata, sub office at Durgapur and Technical Services Center at Howrah. During the year
2004-05 NSIC organized five intensive motivational campaigns and participated in six exhibitions development in the state. Marketing assistance worth Rs.. 77.15 crore was
provided to S SI’ in the areas of raw material assistance and agency sales. 287 units participated in Govern Purchase Prgramme  and registered themselves under the Single
Point Registration Scheme for Government Purchase. NSIC will continue its assistance in the above sates in the areas of Marketing, Technology and Information services in
the year 2905-06.
 
2.8.9                The Committee notes the activities undertaken by NSIC in Bihar, West Bengal, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Orissa, Jharkhand and Rajasthan and
recommends that the following Course of Action may be undertaken for making NSIC in fulfilling its role more effectively:
 
(i)         Opening of branches/ sub-offices in each commissionery and Technical Services Center in each district head quarter for promotion of SMEs in various
segament of industries;
 
(ii)        Flexibility to the NSIC Board to induct professionals in order to build the internal competency levels;
 
(iii)       NSIC should be declared a nodal agency for purchases by Government Departments/Agencies. This will enable NSIC to play an effective role in marketing
the products of the SSI sector;
 
(iv)       NSIC should be treated at par with SSIDCs in matters relating to allocation of Steel and other raw materials. At present, allocation of steel is made to NSIC
only in those states where SSIDCs do not exist and
 
(v)        Intensive motivational campaigns, seminars and conferences and exhibitions for the development SSI by extending marketing assistance in the areas of
Raw Material Assistance and Agency Sales in all the states at district-levels.
 
2.9       Sickness in SSI sector
 
2.9.1    The Committee wanted to know as to what has been the outcome of efforts made by Sick Units Rehabilitation Committee and how this mechanism can be made were
result oriented. The Committee wanted further to know as to whether the sick units Rehabilitation Committee is  functional in Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand and West Bengal. the
Ministry of SSI stated that The Sick Units Rehabilitation Committee formed by some of the State Governments headed by Deputy Commissioner / District Collector of the
district deliberate on the reasons for sickness in the S SI sector as well as individual cases of sickness and measures are initiated to address the issue. This forum also initiates
measures to bring general awareness to the problems of sickness and remedial steps to curtail the growth of sickness. The Sick Units Rehabilitation Committee are functional
only in few States like Maharashtra, Karnataka, Punjab, etc.
 
2.9.2    In regard to the Committee’s query pertaining to the outcome of efforts made by State- level Inter Institutional and Committee’s (SLIICs) in Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand
and West Bengal in regard to avoiding delay in rehabilitations, the Ministry of SSI stated that The State Level Inter-Institutional Committees (SLIICs) set up in the States
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Industries Department of the concerned State deal with the problems of co-ordination for
rehabilitation of sick SSI units. In the Sub-Committee of SLIIC, borrowers and concerned bankers are invited to discuss the issue.
 
2.9.3    The Committee wanted to know the progress made in regard to formation of Local Committees between State Government, SSI Associations and Banks to sort out
credit related issues at local level in Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand and West Bengal . the Ministry of SSI replied that the Lead banks in their quarterly meetings of District
Consultative Committee (DCC)! District Level Review Committee (DLRC) critically review the position of flow of credit as well as recovery position of all member banks.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
Whenever discussion on agenda of the State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC)/ DCC / DLRC meeting includes the interest of small enterprises, the representative of small
enterprises Associations are invited as a Special Invitee.
 
2.94     The Committee desires that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries should undertake following concrete steps for rehabilitation of Sick units in Bihar, West
Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand, Maharashtra and Gujarat: -
 
(i)         arresting the mortality rate in SSI sector and extending sufficient credit facilities to SSI units;
 
(ii)        effective outcome of efforts made for Sick Units Rehabilitation Committee;
 
(iii)       Result oriented outcome of efforts made by State-level Inter Institutional and Committee’s (SLUCs) in regard to avoiding delay in rehabilitations;
 
(iv)       Expeditious Progress made in regard to setting up of Local Committees between State Government, SSI Associations and Banks to sort out credit related
issues at local level; and
 
(v)        Representation of SSI Associations in the Rehabilitation Cell.
 
2.9.5    The Committee takes stock of the scenario of Small Scale industries in Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat, where SSI sector is facing specific problems in each
state as advocated by SSI associating federations in the respective States. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of SSI and its aliied  organization should interact
with the SSI associations) federations of respective States for timely redressal of grievances of the problems being faced by these States in promoting SSI sector. The
Committee is of the view that the weightage should be given on consolidation of SSI sector in these states and providing integrated infrastructure for marketing assistance
and expert promoting besides providing adequate credit.
 
2.10     Export Potential of SSI products
 
2.10.1 The export-import data obtained from Department of Commerce, Ministry of commerce and Industry indicate that India’s imports from China have increased to some
extent from Rs.5559 crores during 1999-2000 to Rs.18625 crores during 2003-2004. However, exports of India to China have grown significantly from Rs.2336 crores
(1999-2000) to Rs.13579 crores in  2003-2004.
 
2.10.2    The Committee was apprised that MIs. A.C. Nielsen on behalf of Ministry of
done an evaluation study. As per the findings the said study, major potential export mar for SSIs exports are US, EU and Japan. The potential export-worthy items in the SSI
sec have been categorized into three broad categories:
 
(i)         Potential items produced by SSI units amongst the top 100 items imported by major markets, which do not figure in the top 100 items exported from India to these
major markets:- The product groups that hold potential for SSI exports are agriculture, marine and allied products along with engineering! electrical! electronic product
group. The study identifies Japan as a potential market for exporting agriculture, marine and allied products whereas the European union and the US can be tapped for
enhancing SSI exports of engineering/electrical and electronic items.
 
(ii)        Potential items produced by SSI units amongst the top 100 items imported by major markets, which do not figure in the top 100 items exported from India to these
major markets:- The major thrust areas for SSI exports are agriculture and allied, chemicals, plastic items, leather and textile product groups. The study identifies the US and
EU as the potential markets for textile whereas Japan would be the ideal destination for export of chemicals product groups.
 
(iii)       Potential items produced by SSI units amongst the top 100 items imported by major markets, which do not figure in the top 100 items exported from India to these
major markets:- The potential for SSI is in various product groups like agriculture, marine and allied, chemicals and allied, leather items, textiles and other items. The EU
has been identified as the potential market for textiles including sports equipments whereas export of leather items holds potential for the US and the EU.
 
2.10.3  There is consistent increase in the percentage share of SSI exports in the field of electronics and computer softwate. The percentage share has increased from 13.12%
to 23.93% in 2003-2004 over the previous year. As regards the steps undertaken to increase the export potential of SSI sector, the Development Commissioner (SSI)
promotes participation of SSI units in product specific as well as general exhibitions in India and abroad every year. Besides this, training in export marketing and packaging
for exports is also provided to SSI units. Sector Specific Market Studies are conducted for selected SSI categories. In addition, publicity material for overseas publicity are
also provided to the SSI entrepreneurs.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
 
2.10.4  The Committee is of the view that feasibility study in respect of Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand , Maharashtra and Gujarat be made in regard to
assess the Export potential of SSI Sector and steps must be undertaken to increase the export potential of SSI sector in these States. The Committee feels that there is the
need for technology up gradation, product & process development in small scale sector in these States.
2.11     Challenges of globalization and liberalization
 
2.11.1  The Committee desires that the Government should take measures for preparing SSI sector to meet the challenges of globalization and liberalization under the WTO
regime. However, the basic concern of the Committee is the protection and promotion of domestic SSI sector under the prevailing global market economy. Therefore, the
continuous and concrete efforts should be made by the Government to protect the domestic Small Scale Industries from the on-slaught of adverse impact of globalization and
liberalization through appropriate tariff adjustment, anti dumping measures and other safeguards. Simultaneously the process of strengthening SSI sector and acquiring the
requisite competitive resilience should be .enhanced on the ground level. The Committee is in agreement with the views of SSI associations I federations that the Ministry of
SSI should make efforts for Streamlining and strengthening the Anti-dumping mechanism
 
(i) Conversion of Quantitative restriction (QRs) into rationalised tariff regime for providing protection to the domestic SSIs;
 
(ii) Implementation of VAT and safeguard duties to protect domestic producers in consonance with WTO provision; and
 
(iii) Expeditious disposal dumping cases are anti-dumping actions thereto, in view of almost all SSI products under open general license (OGL) list.
 
212      Legal framework
 
2.12.1  The Committee desires that legal framework affecting the Small Scale Industries must be satisfactory in order to give fillip to the promotion and development of
Small Scale Industries Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand. The following issues may be taken up on priority basis and the Ministry of SSI should pursue
with the concerned Ministries: -
 
(i)         A single Unified Act governing the rules pertaining to retrenchment and layoffs and social benefits for employees.
 
(ii)        Enactment of Single Comprehensive Small Enterprises Development Act for SSEs similar to the Industrial Development and Regulation (IDR) Act.
 
(iii)       Comprehensive Social Security Scheme for widening the social safety nets.
 
(iv)       Amendment in the provision of the Delayed Payment Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertaking Act 1993 as amended in 1998 and the relevant provisions of
the Companies Act i.e. mandatory provision requiring the large enterprises to show in the entries of their Balance sheets the amount due for payment to the SSI units to
enable SSI units/suppliers to get payments as agreed upon.
 
(vi)       The SSI sector needs the Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) Act, therefore, that the Ministry of SSI should continue to pursue for legislation of the Limited Liability
Partnership Act in the interest of Small Scale Sector.
 
2.12.2 The Committee views that small scale industries is the engine of growth, therefore, SSI units must be given the space to grow into medium enterprises. In the context
of globalisation there is a growing feeling in certain quarters that India should also adopt the SME Concept World over, policies are devised to meet the requirement of small
and medium enterprises (SME). The Committee desires that the steps should be initiated for formulating policies for Medium Enterprises and adequate institutional
arrangement and mechanism should be setup for working of medium enterprises in the national economy.
 
2.13 General Recommendations
 
(A) Tiny and Micro Enterprises
 
2.13.1  The Committee recommends that effective measures must be taken for (i) better importing of entrepreneurs skills and training, (ii) acquiring marketing techniques
(iii) Access to appropriate technology (iv) strengthening capital base and institutional credit and (v) providing Infrastructural facilities in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh,
Orissa, Jharkhand , Maharashtra and Gujarat for promotion of Tiny and Micro Enterprises as well.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
 
(B)       Sunrise industries in the SSI sector
 
2.13.2 The Committee desires that adequate steps should be taken to identify the sunrise industries Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand in the SSI sector
e.g. Information Technology (IT), Biotechnology (BT) Pharmaceuticals and Nan technologies along with IT Enabled Services (ITES) and concrete steps may be undertaken
to reinforce appropriate policy regime to promote sunrise SSI industries which have the potential to be the winners of tomorrow. The issue such as IPR protection and
management of rapid up- scaling of operations could be taken up on priority basis.
 
(C)       Streamlining and strengthening the contribution of SMEs
 
2.13.3 The Committee hopes that for streamlining and strengthening the contribution of SMEs in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand Maharashtra and
Gujarat, the Government the should focus on the following issues :-
 
(i)         Providing full credit, technology upgradation, modernization and marketing support to the SSI sector;
 
(ii)        Infrastructure upgradation in general particularly in the major SSI industrial clusters;
(iii)       Freedom from the plethora of rules and regulations existing in the SSI sector, which is known as Inspector Raj;
 
(iv)       Full support to the service industry to fulfill its true growth and employment generation potential; and
 
(v)        Training of existing and potential entrepreneun and workers on a massive scale. Modern management practices and skill up-gradation through advanced training
facilities for capacity building in the SST sector.
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 
ORISSA
 
            The Committee observes that Orissa demonstrates a paradoxical picture of poverty amidst plenty as the state, despite having mineral and marine resources, has been
bereft of sustainable industrial growth and economic development. The Committee finds that the cherished Charter of the Planning Commission which was “to combine a
rapid rise in the Standard of living of the people by efficient exploitation of the resources of the country, increasing production and offering opportunities to all for
employment in the service of the community”, has not seen the light of the day in the state. The state has been devoid of planned development giving rise to the
economically backward district like Bolangir, Koraput and above all the Kalahandi.
(Para 1.1.4)
 
            No major efforts have been made to put the state on the industrial development track, and therefore there is the lack of ancialirisation  of industries in the Small and
Medium sectors. Besides, the general problems like lack of Infrastructural development and marketing assistance and shortage of timely and adequate credit flow etc., the
state has also been the victim of natural calamities like super cyclone in 1999 which have actually devastated the Small scale industrial set up and thus arrested the industrial
growth and promotion and proliferation of small and medium enterprises in the state.
(Para 1.1.5)
           
            The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the financial institutions should come forward for providing timely and adequate credit flow to the entrepreneurs for
accelerated industrial growth and promotion of SMEs in the state. The Committee recommends that concerted efforts must be undertaken for popularization of venture
capital, factoring services and other financial linked schemes like CGYTSI, CLCSS, NEF and SME Fund of SIDBL
(Para 1.1.6)
 
The Committee further recommends that following key areas must be selected for effective action:
(1)        Strengthening the functional aspects of state level inter-institutional Committee (SLIIC) and promotional agencies;
 
(ii)        Financial restructuring of Orissa State Financial co-operation by seriously considering the proposal of adjustment of interest payment to the tune of Rs. 160.33 crore

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
against principle liabilities besides wavering of the interest;
 
(iii)       Extension of income tax and central excise exemption for setting up of SMEs in economically backward districts like Bolangir, Koraput and Kalahandi on NER,
Uttranchal and Himachal Pradesh line;
 
(iv)       Special liberal package to super cyclone effected SSI units like rehabilitation package and one time settlement (OTS).
(Para 1.1.7)
GUJARAT
 
            While the Committee is pleased to note the impressive development of Small Scale Industries in Gujrat, as almost ten thousand new SSI units are registered each
year, however, the Committee feels that the Ministry of SSI should act promptly in co-ordinating  activities with state Government, Banking division and steel sector for
combating the problems of inadequate credit flow, lack of infrastructure development and inadequate supply of steel in the engineering segment. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry of SSI should invite from the state Government proposal under Integrated Infrastructural Development (lID) Scheme. Adequate impetus may
also be given for covering more cases under cluster development approach in the state. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of SSI should co-ordinate with
the steel units in public and private sector for ensuring timely availability of steel raw material to SSI units in the state.
(Para 1.2.2)
           
            The Committee desires that the proposal of extending the operational period of Technology Development Fund Scheme from 3 to 5 years may be suitably examined.
(Para 1.2.3)
 
            Problem being faced by SSI Sectors in Karnataka
 
            The Committee observes that Karnataka is becoming the hub for proliferation of sun rise Small and Medium Enterprises units in the field of Bio-technology,
Electronic, Soft ware, the Committee, therefore, recommends that the State should be given top priority for encouraging investment in specific sectors in those select sectors
viz. Pharma, Automobile and Auto components, Textile, Garments, IT, ITES, Sugar, Food Processing, Engineering and Metallurgy (Iron & Steel and Cement) with greater
R&D impetus for accelerating modernization and up-gradation of mining processing technology.
(Para 1.3.2)
The Committee desires that the outstanding dues to the tune of Rs. 429 crore at state investment subsidy must be reimbursed to the state SSI units at the earliest.
(Para 1.3.3)
           
            The Committee is of the view that the concerted efforts should be made for appraisal of Agree Exports zones at Chitradurga, Kolar, Bangalore, Tumkur and Bijapur.
The Union Ministry of SSI should also undertake promotion of Industrial Development through Cluster approach in select districts. Action Plan should also be chalked out
and effectively implemented for industrialization of backward areas for balanced industrial development in the state.
(Para 1.3.4)
 
            The Committee feels that Union Government in tandem with the state government should give due emphasis on implementation of industrial infrastructure projects,
upgradation of surface transport infrastructure, augmentation of railway network and connectivity to ports and up-gradation and expansion of Mangalore and Karwar ports.
(Para 1.3.5)
 
            The Committee is of the view that basic infrastructure like Cold storage Chain, Research Development, Manpower Development, Improvement in quality of
products, Packaging, Improvement in logistic, Ware House, Quality and Testing Lab are required for achieving proposed Food Processing Industry . Reasonable central
subsidy for the development of basic infrastructure for food processing industry in the state may be provided. The Committee impress upon the Ministry of SSI to take up the
matter with Ministry of Food Processing Industry for promotion of the industry.
(Para 1.4.5)
 
            The Committee is pleased to note that Bihar has the potential for Agro based industries, fruits and vegetables, therefore, the Central Government should open Food
Park in the potentially identified districts of Bihar and a Nodal Agency for promoting SMEs in these areas should be set up for regulating food processing units and
undertaking research and development activities. Opening of a branch each of Central Food Research Institute, Agriculture Science Centres with advanced technology and
APIDA would prove paramount in the promotion and furtherance of SMEs in the state.
(Para 1.4.6)
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
            The Committee has been apprised the vast potential of handicrafts in the state, therefore, an all out efforts should be made for the encouragement and furtherance to
the handicrafts in the state. A detailed strategy should be chalked out for promoting handicrafts as per the availability of raw material / opportunities viz. Madhubani Painting
in Darbhanga and Madhubani; Store Chipping in Gaya and Aurangabad; brass and bell metal in Nalanda, Gaya and Patna; Siki Product in Sitamarhi and Madhubani;
Terracotta Craft in Darbhanga and Muzaffarpur; Jute in Kathihar and Purnea; lac bangles in Muzaffarpur and Darbhanga; Capur, Durri in Obra (Aurangabad) and bamboo
articles in Patna, Ilajipur and Bhagalpur.
(Para 1.4.7)
 
 
            Special package
 
            The Committee is of the view that in the changing scenario of increased industrial activity, there is need to impart more training to the entrepreneurs of the state in the
field of Management, Cost effectiveness, Financial Management, advertisement and publicity, patent Jaws, new technologies in marketing, Inventory Management etc. To
have the gJobal standard of entrepreneurship there is a need to provide additional basic Infrastructural facilities so that the entrepreneurs of the state can be trained with such
a high quality management training inputs which at later stage can be so strong that the identity and existence of entrepreneurs can be not effected by the influence of World
Trade Organization.
(Para 1.4.11)
Status of Power supply to Industries
           
            The Committee feels that that the State Government should implement the provisions of State Industrial Policy enunciated recently for promotion of Small Scale
Industries in the State.
(Para 1.4.15)
Thrust Areas for Development in SSI Sector
 
            The Committee recommends that the Union Ministry of SSI in co-ordination with the State Government of West Bengal should under take concrete measures for
further proliferation of leather industry by relocating the leather tiny units at suitable places and providing adequate institutional and logistic support for enhancing
production and export of leather products.
(Para 1.5.7)
 
            Taking into consideration the vast potential of handicrafts in the state, the Committee recommends that the Union Ministry of SSI, ARI and Textile in tandem with
State Government should encourage the weavers and crafts men of the state for developing and diversifying a rural products in the handloom and handicraft segments.
(Para 1.5.8)
 
            The Committee is pleased to note that Andhra Pradesh is the First State to have the “Single Window Industrial clearance System” and thereby recommends that other
states should follow the suit for the actual furtherance of SMEs. However, the Committee wishes that Andhra Pradesh should continue to be a harbinger of Information
Technology Revolution in the country and play the role model for other states. The Committee desires that the Central Government as well, as the State Government should
undertake measures for optimum utilization of available resources in the state by encouraging SMEs in the sun rise Small Scale Industries and thus explore avenues for
employment generation by promoting labour intensive industries.
(Para 1.7.2)
 
The Committee feels that Uttar Pradesh, like Bihar, has been bereft of actual industrialization and therefore the State has more or less become an agriculture state.  The
Committee, therefore, views that massive efforts should be made for promoting and proliferating Agro Rural Industries and Food Processing Industries in the State. The
Union Ministry of SSI and Affi should chalk out strategy for promoting SMEs in these field in the state and accordingly institutional support like opening up of agree export
zones and opening up of Agricultural development centres must be provided in the state. Suitable central assistance may be provided for R & D purposes in the field of agro
rural industries.
(Para 1.8.4)
 
            The Committee is also of the view that adequate attention must be given to improve the working conditions of Handicrafts and Handlooms units in the state and
through diversification of products, the profitability of the handloom and handicraft units be enhanced. Suitable strategy should be undertaken for domestic marketing and
export of Lucknow’s Kurta and pyjama and Chicken print clothes to international market.
(Para 1.8.5)
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
            The Committee desires that the Ministry of SSI should examine the proposal whether under Industrial Infrastructure up-gradation scheme the provision of 25% of the
total cost of the project to be borne by the stakebolders of respective cluster may be relaxed and instead the State Government / State Government institution may be allowed
to contribute the share of the stake holders. The consent of the State Government in this regard may be sought and accordingly the Committee may be apprised of.
(Para 1.8.6)
 
            The Committee wishes to point out that Maharashtra being on the threshhold of industrial development, an all out efforts should be made for anciliarization among
various segment of industries in order to give fillip to the emergence and consolidation of SMEs in these segment. The Committee also desires that forward and backward
linkages should be set up for integrated development of industries in the state. The Committee recommends that the proposal for establishment of industrial towns and its
management by first generation entrepreneurs must be encouraged and propped up.
(Para 1.9.1)
 
            The Committee desires to know the comment of the Ministry of Small Scale industries on the proposal of the industrial federations on the issue of acceptance by the
Central Government the certificate issued by District Industries Centres in regard to rehabilitation of sick units.
(Para 1.9.2)
General Recommendations
 
            The Committee desires that the Ministry of SSI should undergo the merits of the expectation of SS1 Associations and the state Governments and accordingly chalk
out course of action to address the same in order to improve and proliferate the status of SSI sector in the select states. The Committee is of the considered view that the main
issues concerning the Indian SSI sector pertains to rehabilitation of the existing units by providing assistance at concessional  rates, advanced infrastructure of international
standards, setting up of Information Technology centres  for SSI sector, soft funding for up- gradation and modernization, relaxation from power cuts and taxation and strict
anti- dumping regulations. It will help to increase the potentials of these units and enable to retain employment and contribution to the domestic production of the country in
future. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of SSI should undertake following course of action:
(Para 1.10.1)
 
(i)         Making in depth study and research work regarding the actual status of SSI sector to SWOT analysis;
 
(ii)        Selection of key areas for massive action;
 
(iii)       Formulation of district wise development strategy in each state for promotion and proliferation of SSI units;
 
(iv)       Co-ordination with the state Governments, SSI Associations, Banks and other union Ministries I Departments impressing upon the need for promotion of SSI sector;
 
(v) Strengthening of monitoring mechanism for effective implementation of SSI promotional schemes and programmes in each state.
 
            The Committee further recommends that the allocation may be made in a manner as to promote SSI sector in economically backward regions like Bihar, Jharkhand,
West Bengal  and Orissa where adequate institutional arrangement may be set up for training and man-power development and encouraging scheme, technology,
environmental research and Development. Sufficient fund should be allocated for integrated Infrastructural Development and all out efforts should be made to implement
effectively the credit generator Fund schemes, credit linked capital subsidy for Technology up-gradation and the Micro-Finance programmes.
(Para 1.10.2)
            The Committee desires that Action Plan; state-wise should be chalked out for promoting small scale industries by the SIDO and impetus should be given for
marketing assistance and export promotion in and through these regions. It may be noted that SSI Sector would be able to achieve the Twelve per cent annual growth rate
only when the problems being faced by SSI sector in these economically backward regions is removed and when these regions want contributing in enhancing the growth
and development. Then and only then, SSI sector may convert itself into ‘Engine of growth’ for national economy.
(Para 1.10.3)
Working of credit linked Capital Subsidy Scheme
 
            The Committee observes that Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme is a very good scheme aimed at technological up-gradation in SSI sector. The progress so far in
the States of Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand , Maharashtra and Gujarat, as apprised by the SSI associations! federations, has been tardy and in fact the
scheme is yet to take off. The Committee desires that in future the scheme in these states should show better results. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry of SSI to
provide better package incentives to SSI units for technology up-gradation and work out and effective strategy in the economically backward states.
(Para 22.6)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
            The Committee recommends that the Government should undertake the following steps for improving the functioning of credit linked capital subsidy Bihar, West
Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand , Maharashtra and Gujarat :-
 
(i)         Organising awareness programmes  at various location all over the country to increase the awareness level of industry association, banks, SIDBI and Industry
Departments of respective States;
 
(ii)        Review of progress of the scheme in meetings State Level Bankt.. Committees (SLBCs);
 
(iii)       Incorporating inputs on the scheme into in service training courses of Bank Managers; and
 
(iv)       Publicity measures to increase general awareness about the scheme.
(Para 2.2.7)
Loan Limit under the Credit Guarantee Scheme
 
            The Committee observes that loan limit of Rs. 25 lakh for investment in plant and machinery under the Credit Guarantee Scheme is not sufficient so the loan limit
needs to be enhanced at least to Rs. 1 crore.
(Para 2.4.1)
Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme
 
            The Committee is constrained to observe that despite the provision of the loans up to 25 lakh without collateral/third party guarantee and the guidelines of the
Reserve Bank of India thereto, Banks insists on the collateral security and the third party guarantee and despite the Committee’s repeated recommendation to change the
mind set of the Branch Manager, nothing fruitful has come out. The SSI Associations! federation  in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand complained about
the non- adherence of RBI guidelines by the nationalized banks in this regards.
(Para2.5. 1)
 
            The Committee recommends that the Credit Guarantee Trust should make concerted efforts in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand to create
awareness about the Scheme among the Branch Managers of the banks by organizing regional/zonal based Workshops-cum-Training Programmes where the information
relating to the Scheme and the benefits available are explained in detail. There is however, absence of mechanism assessing the impact of success of credit guarantee
scheme. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to ensure the success of this scheme.
(Para 2.5.2)
            The Committee observes that the Credit Guarantee Fund scheme suffered in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand due to high upfront charges of
banks like service charge, processing fee and that too differing from bank to bank under this scheme also one time Guarantee Fee of 2.5% of the sanctioned amount and 1%
Service Fee on the outstanding loan is collected as on 3l March each year. These fees are however, fixed and do not vary from bank to bank. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that these fee should further be rationalized.
(Para 2.5.3)
            The Committee reiterates that the Government should expeditiously fulfill its commitment towards building the Corpus of Rs.2500 crore with a view to enhance the
comfort level of Members Lending Institutions (MLIs) participating in the Scheme. With the building of adequate corpus fund, the fears of METs could be allayed and the
scheme may start functioning on smooth track throughout the country.
(Para 2.5.4)
Credit flow to SSI Sector
           
            The Committee hopes that implementation of the S.P. Gupta S.S. Ganguly Committee’s recommendations Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand,
Maharashtra and Gujarat in regard to credit flow to SSI sector by pubic sector Banks to facilitate additional capacity generation, expansion of existing units and improving
capacity utilization diversification and to enhance competitiveness of SSI sectors would fetch positive result for Small Scale Industries. The Ministry of Small Scale
Industries in co-ordination with the respective states government and nationalized lead banks should undertake following steps for the furtherance and proliferation in the
select states:
 
(i)         popularisation of venture capital funding to SSI units
 
(ii)        strengthening credit delivery system and support services agencies;
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
(iii)       furtherance and strengthening of Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) for extending financial and support services to SSIs
 
(iv)       enhancing the net percentage of credit to Small Scale Industries vis-a-vis the large Scale Industries
 
(v)        effective steps for Restructuirng of State Financial Corporations (SFCs);
 
(vi)       Steps for enhancing flow of additional credit for SSI sector;
 
(vii)      Reinforcing Technology Bank for SME up gradation to facilitate technology transfer project evaluation, risks management etc.;
 
(viii)      re-orienting the role of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) for extending credit flow to rural Small Scale Industries;
 
(ix        introducing and encouraging Laghu Udyog Credit Cards; and
 
(x)        extending sufficient financial assistance extended to Self Help Groups
(Para 2.6.1)
Credit Rating
           
            The Committee strongly recommends for a Credit Rating Mechanism covering both the credit and performance factors. The Committee accordingly recommends the
Ministry to expedite the process of initiating and popularizing the Credit Rating System for SSI units in Bihar, West Bengal , Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand, Maharashtra
and Gujarat for easy procuring of capital by the entrepreneurs.
(Para 2.7.1)
Activities and services of NSIC
 
            The Committee notes the activities undertaken by NSIC in Bihar, West Bengal, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Orissa, Jharkhand and Rajasthan and recommends that the
following Course of Action may be undertaken for making NSIC in fulfilling its role more effectively:
 
(i)         Opening of branches! sub-offices in each commissionery and Technica Services Center in each district head quarter for promotion of SMEs in
various segament of industries;
Flexibility to the NSIC Board to induct professionals in order to build the internal competency levels;
 
(iii)       NSIC should be declared a nodal agency for purchases by Government Departments/Agencies. This will enable NSIC to play an effective role in marketing the
products of the SSI sector;
 
(iv)       NSIC should be treated at par with SSIDCs  in matters relating to allocation of Steel and other raw materials. At present, allocation of steel is made to NSIC only in
those states where SSIDCs do not exist and
 
(v)        Intensive motivational campaigns, seminars and conferences and exhibitions for the development SSI by extending marketing assistance in the areas of Raw Material
Assistance and Agency Sales in all the states at district-levels.
(Para2.8.9)
Sickness in SSI sector
           
            The Committee desires that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries should undertake following concrete steps for rehabilitation of Sick units in Bihar, West Bengal,
Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand, Maharashtra and Gujarat: -
 
(i)         arresting the mortality rate in SSI sector and extending sufficient credit facilities to SSI units;
 
(ii)        effective outcome of efforts made for Sick Units Rehabilitation Committee;
 
(iii)       Result oriented outcome of efforts made by State-level Inter Institutional and Committee’s (SLIICs) in regard to avoiding delay in rehabilitations;
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
(iv)       Expeditious Progress made in regard to setting up of Local Committees between State Government, SSI Associations and Banks to sort out credit related issues at
local level; and
 
(v)        Representation of SSI Associations in the Rehabilitation Cell.
(Para 2.9.4)
 
            The Committee takes stock of the scenario of Small Scale industries in Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat, where SSI sector is facing specific problems in each
state as advocated by SSI associating federations in the respective States. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of SSI and its allied organization should interact
with the SSI associations! federations  of respective States for timely redressal of grievances of the problems being faced by these States in promoting SSI sector. The
Committee is of the view that the weightage should be given on consolidation of SSI sector in these states and providing integrated infrastructure for marketing assistance
and expert promoting besides providing adequate credit.
(Para 2.9.5)
Export Potential of SSI products
 
            The Committee is of the view that feasibility study in respect of Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand , Maharashtra and Gujarat be made in regard to
assess the Export potential of SSI Sector and steps must be undertaken to increase the export potential of SSI sector in these States. The Committee feels that there is the
need for technology up gradation, product & process development in small scale sector in these States.
(Para 2.10.4)
Challenges of globalization and liberalization
 
            The Committee desires that the Government should take measures for preparing SSI sector to meet the challenges of globalization and liberalization under the WTO
regime. However, the basic concern of the Committee is the protection and promotion of domestic SSI sector under the prevailing global market economy. Therefore, the
continuous and concrete efforts should be made by the Government to protect the domestic Small Scale Industries from the on-slaught of adverse impact of globalization and
liberalization through appropriate tariff adjustment, anti dumping measures and other safeguards. Simultaneously the process of strengthening SSI sector and acquiring the
requisite competitive resilience should be enhanced on the ground level. The Committee is in agreement with the views of SSI associations / federations that the Ministry of
SSI should make efforts for Streamlining and strengthening the Anti-dumping mechanism
(i) Conversion of Quantitative restriction (QRs) into rationalised tariff regime for providing protection to the domestic SSIs;
(ii)        Implementation of VAT and safeguard duties to protect domestic producers in consonance with WTO provision; and
 
(iii)       Expeditious disposal dumping cases are anti-dumping actions thereto, in view of almost all SSI products under open general license (OGL) list.
(Para 2.11.1)
Legal framework
 
            The Committee desires that legal framework affecting the Small Scale Industries must be satisfactory in order to give fillip to the promotion and development of
Small Scale Industries Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand. The following issues may be taken up on priority basis and the Ministry of SSI should pursue
with the concerned Ministries: -
 
(i)         A single Unified Act governing the rules pertaining to retrenchment and layoffs and social benefits for employees.
 
(ii)        Enactment of Single Comprehensive Small Enterprises Development Act for SSEs similar to the Industrial Development and Regulation (IDR) Act.
 
(iii)       Comprehensive Social Security Scheme for widening the social safety nets.
 
(iv)       Amendment in the provision of the Delayed Payment Small Scale a
Ancillary Industrial Undertaking Act 1993 as amended in 1998 and the relevant provisions of the Companies Act i.e. mandatory provision requiring the large enterprises to
show in the entries of their Balance sheets the amount due for payment to the SSI units to enable SSI units/suppliers to get payments as agreed upon.
 
(v) (vi)              the SSI sector needs the Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) Act,
therefore, that the Ministry of SSI should continue to pursue for
legislation of the Limited Liability Partnership Act in
the interest of Small Scale Sector.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/175threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:45]
(Para 2.12.1)
            The Committee views that small scale industries is the engine of growth, therefore, SSI units must be given the space to grow into medium enterprises. In the context
of globalisation there is a growing feeling in certain quarters that India should also adopt the SME Concept World over, policies are devised to meet the requirement of small
and medium enterprises (SME). The Committee desires that the steps should be initiated for formulating policies for Medium Enterprises and adequate institutional
arrangement and mechanism should be setup for working of medium enterprises in the national economy.
(Para 2.12.2)
Tiny and Micro Enterprises
 
            The Committee recommends that effective measures must be taken for (I) better importing of entrepreneurs skills and training, (ii) acquiring marketing techniques
(iii) Access to appropriate technology (iv) strengthening capital base and institutional credit and (v) providing Infrastructural facilities in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh,
Orissa, Jharkhand , Maharashtra and ujarat for promotion of Tiny and Micro Enterprises as well.
(Para 2.13.1)
Sunrise industries in the SSI sector
 
            The Committee desires that adequate steps should be taken to identify the sunrise industries Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand in the SSI sector
e.g. Information Technology (IT), Biotechnology (BT) Pharmaceuticals and Nan technologies along with IT Enabled Services (ITES) and concrete steps may be undertaken
to reinforce appropriate policy regime to promote sunrise SSI industries which have the potential to be the winners of tomorrow. The issue such as IPR protection and
management of rapid up scaling of operations could be taken up on priority basis.
(Para2.13.2)
Streamlining and strengthening the contribution of SMEs
 
            The Committee hopes that for streamlining and strengthening the contribution of SMEs in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand Maharashtra and
Gujarat, the Government the should focus on the following issues :-
 
(i)         Providing full credit, technology upgradation, modernization and marketing support to the SSI sector;
 
(ii)        Infrastructure upgradation in general particularly in the major SSI industrial clusters;
 
(iii)       Freedom from the plethora of rules and regulations existing in the SSI sector, which is known as Inspector Raj;
 
(iv)       Full support to the service industry to fulfill its true growth and employment generation potential; and
 
(v)        Training of existing and potential entrepreneurs and workers on a massive scale. Modern management practices and skill up-gradation through advanced training
facilities for capacity building in the SSI sector.
(Para2. 13.3)