180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
       
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTIETH  REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE  169TH   REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY ON  DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS (2005-06)PERTAINING TO THE DEPARTMENT
 OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES
               
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  22ND MAY, 2006)
   (LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON  22ND MAY, 2006)
                                                RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
                         FEBRUARY, 2006/FALGUN, 1927 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
                 
 1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 2.            INTRODUCTION
 3.            REPORT
            (i)         CHAPTER – I
  Recommendations/observations, which have been  accepted by the Ministry.
                         CHAPTER–II
  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue for now in view of the Government's replies
      (iii) CHAPTER–III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which theCommittee has not accepted replies of the Ministry and
has asked the Ministry to review the reply or the replies of the Ministry are either not relevant to the question
raised by the Committee.
(iv)                 CHAPTER – IV
           Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been received                                     
   5.      OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
  6.         MINUTES                                                                                                                                                       
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of constitution 5th August, 2005)
 
                        Shri Santosh Bagrodia                  —             Chairman
    
      RAJYA SABHA
2.        Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
3.        Prof. M.M. Agarwal  
4.        Shri Surendra Lath    
5.        Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
6.        Dr. K. Malaisamy     
7.        Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
8.        Dr. Vijay Mallya       
9.        Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan         
10.      Vacant

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
                   
                           LOK SABHA
11.      Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.      Shri Kailash Baitha   
13.      Shri Rajnarayan        
14.      Shri Swadesh Chakraborty         
15.      Shri Bapu Hari  Chaure             
16.      Shri Subhash   Sureshchandra Deshmukh      
17.      Shri Ram Singh Kaswan            
18.      Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria             
19.      Smt. Susmita Bauri                  
20.      Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato          
21.      Shri Prakash Paranjpe                
22.      Shri Kishanbhai V.  Patel           
23.      Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna
24.      Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana
25.      Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana        
26.      Smt. Rubab Sayeda                  
27.       Kunwar  Manvendra Singh                        
28.      Shri Ganesh Singh                    
29.      Shri Suraj Singh                      
30.      Shri Girdhari Yadav
31.      Shri Chandramani Tripathi         
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under  Secretary
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad,  Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been  authorized 
by the Committee, hereby present this  One hundred eightieth  Report on the  Action Taken  by the Government on the
Recommendations  contained in  the  169 th  Report of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) in respect of Department of Heavy Industries.
 
2.         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry considered and adopted  the Draft report at
its meeting held on the 22nd May, 2006.
 
NEW DELHI;
BAGRODIA 22nd May, 2006
 
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman
Department –related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry
 
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Heavy Industry on the Recommendations
contained in the 169th Report (of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry).
 
2.             Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Heavy Industry in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report.
These have been categorized as follows :-
 
Chapter -I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
 
Chapter -II- The recommendation/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue for now in view of the Government's replies.
 

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
Chapter -III- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry
to review the reply or the replies of the Ministry are either not relevant to the question raised by the Committee. The Committee expresses its concern
over the non-implementations of recommendations contained in this Chapter and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanation in respect
of these recommendations. 
 
Chapter -IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been received. In respect of
recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished the interim replies or matter has been forwarded to other agency/Department
whose reply is awaited or couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry
should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of recommendations categorised in this Chapter in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of
the recommendations of the Committee.
 
3.         A majority of replies have been put under Chapters III and IV, implying that the Department’s reply have fallen well
short of Committee’s estimates and the Committee would expect the Department to review its replies and furnish them
afresh. The Committee shall continue to pursue these issues and monitor the progress thereof.
 
4.         The Details of the ATR are being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
CHAPTER - I
 
Observations of the Committee
 
1.1            The Committee recommends that both the R&D projects namely Coal Gasification Project and FCRI must be supported till they achieve
commercial viability.
(Para 28.3)
 
Action Taken
 
1.2       Both these projects are national R&D projects and are fully proposed to be supported through the grant from the
Government.
CHAPTER - II
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.1       The Committee apprehends that despite robust growth in capital goods sector, the PSEs find difficult to secure
orders and in several cases to execute the orders due to lack of working capital and other constraints.  The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that efforts should be made by the PSEs to utilize  current opportunities in the market.  As the
capital goods market is essentially technology-intensive, PSEs must undertake the technology upgradation to secure high-
end market.
(Para 6.4)
Action Taken 
 
2.2       While restructuring plans are being considered by BRPSE, all issues including technology upgradation etc. is being
addressed. Turnaround plans include business, organizational/financial restructuring so that the PSE are able to take up the
challenges arising out of liberalization of the economy. PSEs are being advised for considering necessary collaboration/tie-
up with world leaders and emphasis is being laid on continuous upgradation of related technologies including development
of new projects. Stress is also being laid on in-house R&D for improvement in performance and development of variants of
products etc.
 
Observations of the Committee
2.3            The Committee  recommends that the Government should decide the on linkage between BIFR and BRPSE at least, till such time a final
decision on BIFR is taken by the competent Court.(Para 9.3)
 
Action Taken
 
2.4       After the constitution of BRPSE in December, 2004, BIFR was informed that revival/restructuring is being
considered in case of sick/loss making PSEs. Accordingly, revival plans are being placed before BRPSE for seeking their
recommendations on the future of these enterprises.
After the revival plans are approved by the competent authority, BIFR shall be approached separately on a case-to-case

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
basis.
Further Recommendation
2.5       Committee feels that DHI must avoid the multiplicity of approvals and delays caused due to protracted procedures.
  Observations of the Committee
2.6       The Committee  observes with concern that multiplicity of agencies even in deciding the revival may and has
resulted in different opinions, successive appeals and costly delays.  Even after deciding, the revival packages have failed in
several cases.  The Committee apprehends that in the process of analyzing the cases the BIFR has assessed the Techno-
Financial feasibilities of individual PSEs prepared by expert agencies.  Yet the appeals are filed in AAIFR and High
Courts/Supreme Court and now these may further will be referred to new BRPSE for appraisal before a final decision is
taken by the Cabinet.  The entire process is time consuming and costly.  The cost of delay has been immense in terms of
rising liabilities that have eaten up the net worth of the PSEs.  It may be an effort in duplication.(Para 9.4)
 
Action Taken
 
2.7       The process of revival is being expedited through the BRPSE. Out of 28 cases under the Department of Heavy
Industry,  in a short period of 8 months, 16 cases have already been considered by BRPSE. Recommendations have already
been given in case of 12 PSEs by BRPSE which are under process. In case of 3 PSEs Govt. have decided on revival of the
companies and such revival plans are already under implementation.  It is expected that remaining 12 PSEs shall also be
placed before BRPSE in the next 2-3 months time.
 
Further Recommendation
 
2.8       Committee would like to know if the BRPSEs recommendation on revival of individual PSEs are being
implemented in to as per the schedule recommended or in the piecemeal method. A piecemeal approach may affect the
efficiency of the investment. It  should be ensured that the survival of PSEs is sustainable after such a costly revival.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.9            The Committee recommends that the Department must take steps to expedite the decision and implementation for the PSEs’ sustained revival
once case is decided by the competent authority.(Para 9.5)
Action Taken
 
2.10     When a revival plan is approved by the Govt., necessary MOU is being signed between the Management and the
Government to ensure sustainable revival of the PSE. Reviews are proposed to be carried out on a regular basis to ensure
that the projected targets envisaged in the revival package are achieved.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.11          The Committee further recommends that the Government should inform the Committee of the revival packages approved by the Cabinet
before approaching the Parliament for Supplementary Demands.  The Department must also give a post-revival SWOT analysis of the PSEs and that
must reflect its Technological strengths and market viability.(Para 9.6)
Action Taken
2.12     So far Government have approved revival packages in case of the following 3 PSEs under the Department of Heavy
Industry :
 
(i)
                  Bridge & Roof Co Ltd.
(ii)                Hindustan Salts Ltd
(iii)               BBJ Construction Co.Ltd.
 
2.13     Revival plans in these companies are under implementation. Regular reviews shall be carried out on a regular basis
during the implementation period and upon full implementation of the package.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.14     The Committee recommends that the lump-sum expenditures should be sufficiently elaborated for Parliamentary
approval in future.(Para 12.10)
Action Taken

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
2.15     It is assured that DHI will follow the recommendations of the Committee and the lump sum expenditure will be
sufficiently elaborated.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.16          The Committee feels that the issue of payment of Guarantee Fee Subsidy needs to be re-examined in view of the fact that the PSEs which are
not able to even pay for Guarantee fee to the Government, how would they settle other liabilities.  The Committee would also like to know Department’s
comments, if it was necessary to give Guarantee Fee subsidy to same PSEs that utilized the facility even last year.  The government may also informed
about the purpose for which the resources were raised against such guarantee.(Para 20.4)
Action Taken
2.17     As  explained in reply to Para 19.3 that the guarantee fee subsidy is being provided to HEC, HMT and BSCL as
envisaged in their approved revival/restructuring plans for a fixed period. This guarantee fee subsidy will be provided to
these three PSEs for that fixed period as approved in their revival/restructuring plans. Govt. guarantee is being reviewed on
annual basis and extended on annual basis with the approval of Ministry of Finance. In the case of HEC, Govt. has given
guarantee to SBI for working capital facilities of Rs.253 crore to HEC. HMT had raised VRS Bonds for Rs.469 crore for the
separation of their excess manpower as per their turnaround plan for which Govt. has given Govt. guarantee and in the case
of BSCL, Govt. has given guarantee for Rs.55.50 crore for Cash credit limits for working capital from United Bank of India.
         
Observations of the Committee
 
2.18          The Committee takes serious note of the fact that the budgetary allocations do not sufficiently reflect the concern for technological
upgradation of PSEs and R&D which has direct bearing over the efficacy of the Companies keeping in view that PSEs were established as pioneers in
industrial technology.  The Committee feels that the Government should actively involve in the technological upgradation of PSEs and if necessary
extend the financial support.(Para 31.2)
Action Taken
2.19     When the revival plans are considered by the Department/BRPSE, overall packages developed included areas like
financial restructuring, modernization, manpower rationalization etc. apart from technology upgradation etc. Necessary
financial support as envisaged in the package is provided by the Government upon approval by the competent authority.
 
Further Recommendation
 
2.20     While the DHI appears to agree with Committee's view, Committee expects that DHI shall appreciate the criticality
of technology in heavy engineering market whose market is opening up for major global players.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.21          The Committee notes the diverse range of business in which subsidiaries of the BYNL are involved.  The Committee also notes despite
repeated recommendations by this Committee and other expert studies to merge the subsidiary companies into single entity; no initiative has been taken
in this respect.  The Committee would like to know the view of the Government in this respect.(Para 39.2)
Action Taken
2.22     The subsidiaries of BYNL Group of Companies are involved in diverse range of business activities ranging from
civil construction to manufacture of pumps/compressors or structural work. It may not be appropriate to merge these
subsidiaries into a single entity, as it may not result in better capacity utilization, nor  will it make more competitive/viable.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.23          The Committee recommends that Government must support the company’s resource and technology requirements to harness the potential of
non-conventional energy in the country.  The committee is of the view that the Government must help this sector in attaining the economies of scales. 
The non-conventional energy will be economically feasible for the community-based consumption in obscure villages and remote areas where the cost of
energy transmission is high.  The Non-conventional energy sources could be cost-effective supplementary source for energy needs of small habitats and
clusters. (Para 42.4)
Action Taken
 
2.24     The Department has been encouraging REIL to enhance their efforts in improving their presence in the area of non-
conventional energy sources including Solar Photo Voltaic etc. A proposal for establishment of a unit having manufacturing
facilities is under consideration.
Observations of the Committee

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
 
2.25          The Committee notes that DHI was unable to commit on firm and tangible long-term objectives in quantitative terms that could be a
benchmark against which the performance is assessed.  On most of the long-term issues Department’s reply has been elusive.  The Committee observes
that despite huge financial liabilities all the major decisions are still left to BRPSE.  Pending its recommendations being approved by the competent
authority, the Department is taking measures that are ad-hoc window-dressing of depleted worth of PSEs.  The Committee is of the opinion that scarce
resources cannot be lost endlessly amidst huge liabilities of PSEs.  A lasting solution has to be found urgently and accountability must be accordingly
fixed for which it is necessary to determine the benchmarks of performance.(Para 45.1)
Action Taken
 
2.26     The revival plans of the PSEs are prepared  in consultation with the Advisers and the PSEs. BRPSE makes
recommendations after thoroughly examining the proposals.  While the implementation is started  for revival of a PSE, a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) is proposed to be entered / signed in each case between the Government and the
Management of the company to achieve pre-determined level of performance.  Regular reviews are also proposed to be
carried out to take care of any slippages or mid-course correction where  necessary.
 
Further Recommendation
 
2.27     The Committee accepts the reply of DHI but shall continue to monitor the progress and that the obligation of the
Government as a contracting party in MoU must be clearly defined. 
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.28          The Committee would like to suggest to the Government to consider the critical utility of any company before deciding on its sustainable and
comprehensive revival/restructuring instead of going only by their precarious financial condition.  The criticality will depend on long-term prospects of
the company in terms of technology spin-offs and self-reliance in mega-machinery in strategic areas.
Para 45.9)
Action Taken
 
2.29     All issues are taken into consideration while deciding on the viability/sustainability of the company including its
strategic importance. However, in the new regime of economic liberalization, the acid test of a company for survival is its
capability to compete in the globalised market and deliver as per the emerging requirements. None of the PSEs under the
Department of Heavy Industry are operating in the strategic areas where they would need to be run due to consideration of
self-reliance or criticality of the area in which they are operating.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.30          The Committee notes that the growth in exports is hindered due to non-availability of adequate supplier’s credit to buyers, higher rates of
interest and lower duration for which the credit is available.  The Committee recommends that the Government must take a favorable view of the
proposals made by the Department of Heavy Industry with regard to availability of adequate supplier’s credit to buyers, low rate of interest and longer
duration of credit to facilitate growth in export performance of the PSEs.(Para 5.5)
Action Taken
 
2.31     Based on the request received from PSEs on providing suppliers credit to buyers, the matter is taken up with the
concerned Ministries for appropriate financing of such overseas projects on a case-to-case basis.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.32          The Committee observes that while the aggregate growth in PSEs under DHI compares well with the capital goods growth, but this level of
growth is mainly contributed by one PSE namely Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. (BHEL) which showed a growth of 15% during this period.  Most of the
PSEs have shown a negative growth mainly due to financial, marketing and technological constraints.(Para 6.3)
Action Taken
 
2.33     Major growth is seen in BHEL due to their order book position. PSEs operating in other sectors are suffering due to
poor order book, shortage of working capital, surplus manpower, obsolete machinery and technology etc. Consequently
many of these PSEs are making losses. As per the mandate under National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP),
restructuring/revival plans of such PSEs are being placed before BRPSE for improving their performance and achieve viable
turnaround.

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.34          The Committee notes that the expenditures are classified into two parallel categories Capital/Revenue expenditures and Plan/Non-Plan
expenditures.  These two parallel categories are curiously hybridized into four supposedly distinct categories of expenditure.  The Committee would like
to know the rational principles for such classified and sub-classifications, instead of description of expenditure under these categories.(Para 10.6)
Action Taken
2.35     As a general rule, the classification of transactions in Government Accounts, shall have closer reference to the
function, programme and activity of the Government and the object of the revenue or expenditure, rather than the
department in which the revenue or expenditure occurs. Rule 72 of General Financial Rules deals with the transactions in
Government Accounts and Rule 91 with the allocation between capital and revenue expenditure.
 
2.36          Plan Expenditure representing the expenditure on plan outlays approved for each scheme or organization by the Planning Commission and
indicating the extent to which such outlays are met out of budgetary provisions’ other expenditure which cannot be anticipated in advance, comes under
non-plan expenditure.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.37          The Committee desires to know that on what ground the Planning Commission’s approval was sought for certain Revenue and Capital
expenditures leaving remaining sizable Revenue and capital expenditures unapproved.  If any guideline is followed in this respect.  The Committee
would also like to be appraised on such a categorizastion in the Budget.  The Committee also desires to know if such segregation is scientific and does
not affect the efficiency of expenditure.  Further, the Committee would like to have a comment from the Department, if there is need to improve the
Budget scheme.
(Para 10.11)
Action Taken
 
2.38     While the proposals are submitted to Planning Commission by DHI, these are examined in Planning Commission
scheme-wise and necessary allocations are made keeping in view the priorities and resource constraints of the Govt.
Planning Commission specifies the total Govt. budgetary support for various plan schemes. However, subsequent
categorization of a particular scheme under revenue and capital is done as per GFR guidelines.
 
2.39          Significant Expenditure incurred with the  object of acquiring tangible assets of a permanent nature or enhancing the utility of existing assets,
shall broadly be defined as Capital Expenditure. Subsequent charges on maintenance, repair, upkeep and working expenses which are required to
maintain the assets in a running order as also all other expenses incurred for the day-to-day running of the organization, including establishment and
administrative expenses shall be classified as Revenue Expenditure. Capital and Revenue expenditure shall be shown separately in the Accounts (Rule
79 of GFRs).
Observations of the Committee
 
2.40          The Department has been closely associated with the promotion of Automobile R&D facility in the country.  However, a significant Grant in
Aid of Rs. 25 crores to R&D institution is still treated as a Non-Plan Revenue expenditure along with Secretariat expenditure and Interest subsidy.  The
Committee observes that the character of expenditure is too diverse to be kept under similar category.
(Para 14.2)
Action taken
 
Grants-in-Aid are kept under Revenue Expenditure.
 
2.41          Non-plan expenditure is a generic term, which is used to cover all expenditure of Government not included in the Plan. It includes both
developmental and non-developmental expenditure. Expenditure on maintaining the assets created in previous plans is also treated as Non-plan
expenditure. Similarly, expenditure on continuing services and activities at levels already reached in a Plan period is classified as Non-plan expenditure.
Therefore, the funds approved for promotion of Automobile R&D Facility are taken under Non-plan Revenue.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.42          The Committee observes with concern that every year during past few years the non-plan expenditure has been higher than plan expenditure. 
Last year at the RE stage the non-plan expenditure increased while the plan expenditure declined.  The Committee welcomes the higher plan allocation
in 2005-06 as compared to last year and hopes that the Department would be able to utilize the money.  The Committee feels that the government should
also make efforts to reduce non-plan expenditure.

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
(Para 23.1)
Action Taken
 
2.43     The plan fund provided in the budget 2005-06 is likely to be utilized during the year. The restructuring/revival
exercise undertaken for sick/loss making PSEs under DHI is a step in the direction of improving the viability of the
companies. With the improvement in performance of the PSEs, the non-plan expenditure for payment of salary/wages and
statutory dues etc. is likely to come down, in the years ahead.
Observations of the Committee
 
2.44          The Committee recommends that DHI should apprise it of the Revised Estimates and the Supplementary Demands.  (Para 45.10)
Action Taken
 
Revised Estimates
 
2.45     Estimates are revised (normally in September or October) after taking into account the actual expenditure from April
to August and anticipated expenditure from September to March, with reference to the Budget estimates.
 
Demands for Supplementary Grants
 
2.46     If savings are not available within the Grant to which the payment is required to be debited, or if the expenditure is
on  “New Service” or “New Instrument of Service” not provided in the budget, necessary Supplementary Grant or
Appropriation in accordance with Article 115(1) of the Constitution should be obtained before payment is authorized. (Rule
60 of GFRs).
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.47          The Committee is of the view that existing classification heads needs further rationalization and desires that the Government should review
the same.
(Para 10.7)
Action Taken
 
2.48     A four digit Code has been allotted to the Major Head, the first digit indicating whether the Major Head is a Receipt
Head or Revenue Expenditure Head, or Capital Expenditure Head or Loans and Advances Head or it pertains to Public
Account, if the first digit is ‘0’ or ‘1’, the Head of Account will represent Revenue Receipt; ‘2’ or ‘3’ will represent
Revenue Expenditure; ‘4’ or ‘5’ Capital Expenditure; ‘6’ or ‘7’ Loans & Advances Head; (4000 for Capital Receipt) and ‘8’
will represent Contingency Fund and Public Account – (8000 for Contingency Fund).
 
2.49          The Controller General of Accounts under Ministry of Finance is the Competent Authority to review the matter.
CHAPTER - III
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.1            The Committee observes that many of the PSEs, however have not been able to retain their original position in the market and withstand the
global competition in the new liberalized economy.(Para 1.4)
Demands for Grants
Action Taken
 
3.2            With the liberalization of economy, the PSEs are under pressure to perform in the light of protection levels coming down over the years.
Therefore, the PSEs need to readjust themselves in the new regime to remain competitive and sustainable.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.3            Even after  commanding monopoly in the market, for more than four decades the PSEs in the infrastructure sector have not  been able to earn
brand loyalty. The DHI’s view on Committee’s observation does not indicate the urgency to restore the primacy of PSEs in a competitive market in
infrastructure. Fifteen years have been reasonably long transition for PSEs to reorient themselves to new market realities. Furthermore, even in an open
market scenario, PSEs should have retained their primacy as the prominent Companies in their respective sectors. There is no obvious linkage between
in opening up of the market and the PSEs loosing their market share unless there were sustained inefficiencies that were protected for years. In fact the

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
PSEs do continue to enjoy the protection in form of Purchase Preference Policy. Even then they have lost their market share. The Committee wonders
whether Companies created any reserves during those monopoly years to sustain it during difficult transition or those reserves have dried up. The
Committee also seeks the Department to candidly assess its own role as the administrative Department of these PSEs   majority of whom appear to have
failed in market competition.   During its interactions the Committee have found the Department to be desperately ad-hoc in its approach towards these
PSEs. The Committee recommends that DHI may carve out a role in more specific terms instead of  a general statement.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.4            The Committee notes that most of the companies under major conglomerates like BBUNL, BYNL, HMT, AYCL, with diversified business in
heavy engineering, are making losses.  These companies rely on major Government projects for orders to generate working capital.  The Committee
feels that these engineering conglomerates have critical potential for the capital goods sector in the country and need to be re-aligned to the larger
market.  The Committee would like to know of the measures that are being considered in this respect for these companies.(Para 2.3)
 
Action Taken
 
3.5       Most of the companies under the various groups are loss making / sick and are with BIFR.  As enunciated under the
National Common Minimum programme (NCMP), the sick industry is to be revived. In line with this policy,
revival/restructuring packages of loss making/sick companies are being placed before the Board for Reconstruction of
Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE). These companies have a major role in catering to the requirements of capital goods
sector in the country. Orders from Government Departments are generally awarded based on the competitiveness of the
offers submitted by these companies and the purchase preference available to them under the recently revised guidelines of
Purchase Preference Policy valid upto 31.3.2008.
Further Recommendation
 
3.6            DHI recognizes the important role of these industrial conglomerates. However, the precarious financial condition
of the companies makes their ability to withstand competition a suspect. In such a situation will they be able to discharge
the major role as envisaged for them. In reply to the Committee’s recommendation that these engineering conglomerates
should realign with the market, the DHI has stated that these Companies are getting orders under Purchase Preference
Policy. Considering that most of the Companies under these conglomerates are either loss making/sick and are with BIFR,
the Committee wonders whether they have the resources to execute their orders which in any case are placed by the
Government or its agencies.   In such a scenario  whether the Government shall have to inject resources to enable them to
execute its order or provide them the Guarantees and other subsidies to enable them to generate resources from non-
budgetary sources. In both the cases the Government shall have to bear the financial burden in addition to giving preference
to PSEs in placing orders. And despite these protective cushions, the DHI still considers thatthe protection has been lowered
over the years and that the  market competition has been the main cause of present plight of PSEs.  The DHI’s reply does
not reflect on these counts. The Committee desires that DHI should re-assess its reply in view of its observations. The DHI
should also  elaborate its own role vis-a-vis BRPSE, in formulating the strategy for long-terms sustainability of its PSEs. 
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.7            The Committee recommends that the public sector enterprises should be encouraged and advised to gradually and increasingly compete in
private sector projects as more sectors have been opened up for private sector.  PSEs may be given preference for Government orders but it does not
preclude them from exploring larger market domestically or globally.  PSEs must not be allowed to suffer due to drying up of Government orders.  In
any case, by supplying the Government orders practically does not add anything to the Consolidated Fund of India.  It is only ‘Deemed Earning’.
(Para 4.2)
Action Taken
 
3.8       PSEs under the Department of Heavy Industry are being encouraged to procure orders not only from the Public
Sector/Government but also establish their presence in supplies to private sector. With the liberalization of economy and
Government acting more as a facilitator, the major investments in infrastructure sector are now expected to be from private
sector. Therefore, emphasis is being laid for increasing supplies of public sector companies in private sector projects.
 
3.9       The proceeds on execution of Government orders by public sector companies do not get reflected in the
Consolidated Fund of India.

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.10     The reply does not give specific details of the encouragements being given to PSEs to secure supply orders from
Private Sector. And what has been the outcome of such encouragement? Committee would like to have specific details. The
Committee recommends that the DHI should consider issuing specific guidelines to the PSEs in this regard.
Observations of the Committee
 
3.11          The Committee recommends that with the opening up of the economy and WTO regulations coming into force.  PSEs must make use of new
opportunities by entering into JVs and marketing tie-ups to enter into larger global market.  The Department should issue specific guidelines to its PSEs
to explore export markets.                 (Para 4.3)
 
Action Taken
 
3.12     With the liberalization of the economy, Govt. controls are being reduced. PSEs are being encouraged to take
advantage of the new regime and increase their preference in export arena.
 
3.13     As per the policy enunciated under NCMP, the profit making PSEs are to be provided greater autonomy in their
functioning. Accordingly, Navaratna /Miniratna PSEs have been provided greater powers in terms of Joint Ventures
formation, investments, HRD policies etc.
 
Further Recommendation
3.14     With only nine out of thirty four PSEs under DHI earning some profit, the plight of these PSEs is glaring. The DHI’s
reply does not specify what encouragements are being given to PSEs to take the advantage of new liberal regime. Even if
there were any such policy, in view of current status of most of the PSEs, it has hardly yielded desired results. The
Committee would like to know the specific initiatives in this regard and their objectives.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.15          The Committee further recommends that diversification of market should be incorporated as one of the significant factor in MoU rating of the
PSEs so as to encourage them to explore new market.(Para 4.4)
Action Taken
 
3.16     Diversification of market is one of the areas of discussion while MoUs are finalized with the PSEs. However, final
decisions are taken depending upon the core competence of the company and opportunities available in those areas.
 
Further recommendation
 
 3.17         The Committee would like to know if such a discussion on diversification of the markets also include the exports. However looking at the
export performance of the PSEs and their over reliance on the Government, it appears that PSEs have either not explored the export market or they are
not able to withstand the competition and demands of prospective customers. With country striving to firm up infrastructure and with India entering into
trade agreements with regional blocks, there are ample opportunities for heavy industries provided their technology profile meets the market
requirements at competitive price. The Committee seeks DHI to specify its role as the administrative Department, in view of above observations.
Observations of the Committee
 
3.18          The Committee recommends that the Department of Heavy Industry must evolve a strategy, as an integral part of revival schemes for PSEs to
promote exports given the country has a well-laid capital goods sector.     (Para 5.4)
Action Taken
3.19     It is the endeavor of the Department of Heavy Industry to prepare a revival/restructuring plan to achieve a
sustainable turnaround either by improving the presence in the domestic market or exporting their products. There are
various schemes of Government of India for promoting exports, which can be utilized by the PSEs to improve their
performance. While revival of a company is considered, all issues including exportability of the products are being
considered.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.20     While DHI accedes to the Committee's recommendation regarding requests by the PSEs the reply does not inform

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
the specific initiatives/guidelines to provide exports. In fact the export performance in last three years has only declined.
DHI has itself conceded that 95% of the exports earning are on the account of BHEL. The Committee recommends that DHI
must take specific initiatives in coordination with Ministry of Commerce  to promote exports in view of the fact that these
PSEs were set up as state of art companies to pioneer industrial growth.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.21          The Committee is in agreement with the allocation made in respect of specific project with BEML.  The Committee would however, like to
know the terms of agreement, if any.(Para 13.3)
Action Taken
 
3.22     An amount of Rs.72.90 crore has been provided in DHI’s budget for BEML, to be routed through this Department
for their R&D project and expansion scheme for manufacture of Metro coaches. BEML has proposed to associate HMT in
this regard and necessary approvals are being sought.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.23     BEML was allocated a total of Rs. 72.90 crores which included Rs. 56.00 crores under Major Head 2852 and
another Rs. 16.90 crores under Major Head 12858.  The Committee would like to know the status of utilization of the
money allocated to BEML and how DHI monitor, its proper utilization.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.24          The Committee notes with grave concern that out of the total allocations of Rs. 861.32 crores, more than Rs. 400 crores are Lump-sum
allocations.  Last year too similar allocation of Rs. 400 crores was made.  Such a practice undermines the principle of Parliamentary scrutiny of
Budget.                   Para 15.4)
Action Taken
 
3.25     Funds to the tune of Rs.400.00 crore have been kept as Lump sum provision to meet the expenditure on
implementation of VRS/VSS and for payment of statutory dues which are worked out from time to time during the course
of the year and prior calculations are unavailable. These funds are released to the PSEs with the approval of Ministry of
Finance by re-appropriation after careful examination of the proposals.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.26          DHI's  explanation does not add to Committee's knowledge. However, Committee still finds it strange that the Department does not have a
planned road map for its long term objectives. Unexplained  Non-plan allocation of Rs.400 crores was made in 2004-05 too which was reduced to only
Rs.211 crores in Revised Estimates of 2004-05. Committee finds that DHI's performance has been and impress upon DHI to set up  dismal long term
objectives and formulating plan of action to achieve the same.
Observations of the Committee
 
3.27          The Committee takes serious note that against the total investment of Rs. 8590 crores and projected out turn of Rs.15363.65 crore in 2005-06
the earning from dividends and profits would be meager Rs. 69.63 crores, which is around 0.45% return on the outturn.  Even of this amount a BHEL is
the largest single contributor.  Further more the Revenue receipts are likely to go down even further this year.  Against the anticipated Revenue receipts
of Rs.190.55 crores in 2004-05 the projected Revenue receipts for 2005-06 are likely to be meager Rs. 76.48 crores.  The Committee observes that it is
not a healthy situation and directly related to the performance of the PSEs. The Department of Heavy Industry has to make concerted efforts.           (Para
19.2)
Action Taken
 
3.28     It is a fact that the earning on account of dividends is meager so far as PSEs under DHI are concerned. However, it is
clarified that out of 34 operating PSEs, there are only 9 PSEs which are making profit. Again, out of these 9, there are only
4 PSEs (BHEL, EPI, HPC and SIL), where Govt. holds the equity directly. Two of these PSEs  (HPC & SIL) are not paying
any dividend so far as they are having accumulated losses. So, there are only two PSEs (BHEL & EPI) which are paying
dividend to the Govt. With the proposed revival of the PSEs, the projected performance is likely to improve, which may
result in enhanced  revenue to the Govt.
 
Further Recommendation

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
 
3.29          The Committee finds DHI's reply  inadequate in as much as it does not spell out to the efforts  being  made by these PSEs and the DHI to
enhance earning. 
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.30          The Committee is concerned that PSEs are not able to pay their Guarantee fee to the Government. On the contrary government has to provide
a subsidy on Guarantee Fee.  The Committee desires that Government should take suitable steps in this regard.(Para 19.3)
Action Taken
 
3.31     There are 3 PSEs, which are provided subsidy to pay their Guarantee Fee to Government.
(i)                    HEC
(ii)                  BBUNL
(iii)                 HMT Ltd.
3.32     Guarantee fee subsidy is being considered on a case-to-case basis in these PSEs which are unable to pay such a fee
due to their financial health.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.33          The Committee finds the situation untenable in longer term.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.34          The Committee views such a trend as an unviable drag on the government’s scarce finances.  The Government is not earning sufficient
dividends on its investments in the PSEs rather it is loosing money on its loans it had lent to the PSEs.  Instead of charging the Guarantee Fee the
Government is supposed to subsidize the Guarantee Fee on the finances raised from the banks and financial institutions.  The Committee desires that the
Government should take appropriate measures to stop this trend.  DHI should prepare a time-bound strategy in this respect.                 (Para 19.6)
 
Action Taken
 
3.35     Out of the 34 operating PSEs, only two PSEs (BHEL & EPI) have been paying dividend to the Government. A
provision has been made for providing Guarantee fee subsidy to only three PSEs (HEC, HMT & BSCL) because of their
adverse financial health. Such subsidy is being provided on a case to case basis. As per the policy enunciated in NCMP,
revival/restructuring proposals of loss making sick PSEs, aimed at improving the viability of such PSEs and ensuring long
term sustainability are being placed before BRPSE.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.36          The Committee finds the situation unacceptable in longer term.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.37          The Committee notes with constraint that out of 34 PSEs that are still functioning under the Department, as many as 27 are entirely dependent
on the budgetary support from the Government.  Of the total outlay to the PSEs, 54% is generated through budgetary support.  The Committee finds this
to be a telling comment on the precarious financial conditions of the PSEs as the commercial enterprises.
(Para 21.3)
Action Taken
 
3.38     There are  number of PSEs under the Department of Heavy Industry which are sick/loss making. The reasons for
deterioration of performance are poor order book, shortage of working capital, surplus manpower, obsolete plant and
machinery etc. Various restructuring efforts like rationalization of manpower, minor modernization of plant and machinery
is being regularly carried out. Financial and other restructuring efforts are a continuous process. The objective is to make
these PSEs stand on their own and sustain themselves in this competitive environment.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.39          DHIs reply is inadequate for the obvious reasons mentioned in the reply. DHI is in agreement with Committee observation yet no plan of

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
action has been suggested by DHI. The Committee accordingly by suggests that an action plan be prepared.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.40          The Committee observes that cement and non-metallic industries are not able to generate extra-budgetary support in the engineering and
consumer industry sector only BHEL and HPC are able to garner extra budgetary support to some significant level.  Whereas the generation of resources
by rest of the companies, is nominal.  This is certainly not an acceptable situation.  The DHI should come out with concrete proposal so that not only the
number of companies who generate the internal resources increases but also these Companies generate substantial resources.           (Para 21.5)
Action Taken
 
3.41     Revival/restructuring plans are being prepared for sick/loss making PSEs as per mandate under NCMP. Such revival
plans are examined by BRPSE for making recommendations on future of the PSEs. It is expected that such revival efforts
will bring about a sustainable turn around for these companies and generate resources to take care of their investment and
other needs.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.42     The Committee finds the reply less than convincing. The Committee advised DHI to monitor the situation closely.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.43          The Committee is of the view that the Department has still not prepared a detailed strategy for the reconstruction of PSEs including their
technological upgradation.  Allocations for revival are still ad-hoc in nature for immediate purposes.
(Para 31.3)
Action Taken
 
3.44     Ad-hoc allocations have been made for reconstruction of PSEs since the revival packages are still under
preparation/consideration. As and when the revival plan is approved by the Government, necessary funds envisaged in the
plan are sought.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.45     The Committee feels that the DHI should ascertain if the BRPSEs recommendations addresses the issue of long-term
technological sustainability of the PSEs. Without such a measure the long-term sustainability will remain uncertain. It is
necessary that DHI and BRPSE both must take a cue from prevalent business trends. The Patent regime will make
availability of technology more and more difficult. It is therefore necessary for DHI to convince itself of technological
profile of the PSE before deciding on its revival.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.46          The Committee recommends that regular technology audit must be conducted by agencies like DSIR or other resource agencies to assess the
technology update of the PSEs. (Para 31.4)
Action Taken
3.47     Status of technology in each PSE under the Department of Heavy Industry is regularly assessed by the Boards of
these companies. Efforts are made to acquire new technologies as per the requirements of the market. Considering the span
of activities of various PSEs and the diversified areas in which they operate, perhaps a single agency like DSIR may neither
be in a position to justify nor be having the desired capabilities to undertake such an exercise.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.48          Current status of most of the PSE do not bear a testimony to DHI's assertion. The Committee wonders if the Boards of the PSEs are
responsible for the current plight of PSEs? DHI has admitted that the availability of new technologies is becoming difficult for PSEs as the MNCs who
have the technologies, find PSEs as competitors for domestic Indian market. Also, the current Patent regime will make technology a costly input. In such
a scenario how would PSEs be able to sustain the competition?   The Committee feels if DHI could administer the PSEs operating in such diverse
spectrum of sectors, Premier institutions in the field of  for scientific and industrial research may be assigned to make a SWOT assessment of the PSEs 
from technological point of view.  
Observations of the Committee

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
 
3.49          The Committee further suggests that in order to ensure that the PSEs gain from technology alliances it is necessary that strong learning
capabilities are built up to facilitate skill acquisition, internal training.  The receptivity in the PSEs also would have to be built up to accumulate, retain
and transfer of knowledge to take the full advantage of the Joint Ventures or any other technological alliance.(Para 32.4)
Action Taken
 
3.50     In the initial stages of the establishment of Public Sector Enterprises under the Department of Heavy Industry,
technical collaboration agreement were entered into with various world leaders in different areas of manufacture of
engineering goods. Over the last 2-3 decades such collaborations have resulted into acquisition of technology by the PSEs.
PSEs generally have the necessary infrastructure for absorbing the technical know-how provided by the collaborators.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.51          The current state of the PSE does not bear testimony to DHI's assertion. Committee  would like to know if PSEs have been convening  the
training programmes for their  engineers and technical staffs in new technologies. If yes give the details of such training programmes and the resource
agency that conducted such program. 
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.52          The Committee recommends that the PSEs could be effectively used for the creation of infrastructure and promotion of skills to capitalize on
our competitive advantage.          (Para 33.2)
Action Taken
 
3.53     PSEs have by and large effectively played the role of an agent to create an infrastructure within the country and
develop skills to meet the emerging requirement. In the past, due to protection by the Government in various forms, these
PSEs had not laid emphasis on the competitiveness. However, with the liberalization of the economy, they are gradually
restructuring themselves to meet the challenges arising out of globalisation.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.54     Last fifteen years have been a rather long transition for PSEs to restructure themselves to a competitive environment,
should a consistent medium term policy been devised. Instead, reconstruction of PSEs still remains an ad-hoc process. The
present piecemeal investments in PSEs  will make their revival an even more costly proposition. 
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.55          The Committee recommends that the Department should formulate a road map for the consideration of Government on the major challenges
faced by PSEs like obsolete technology and lack of marketing strategy.  The Committee also suggests to take into account the cumulative cost of delay,
previously due to pendency of cases under BIFR regime and now under BRPSE is finalizing a decision on PSEs.(Para 45.2)
 
3.56          The Committee observes that the multiplicity of agencies involved had led to inefficient delays in finalizing revival.  The Committee is of the
view that steps must be taken to reduce multiplicity of agencies in preparing, assessing and revival proposals.
(Para 45.3)
 
3.57          DHI has the mandate to promote the developments and growth of capital goods and engineering industry in the country, which in turn has
critical bearing over the infrastructure development in the country.  However, plight of the PSEs urgently requires an expeditious and consistent action
by the DHI instead of postponing the decision on successive series of multiple bodies.
 
3.58          The committee notes that while the PSEs in the heavy engineering and capital goods category are facing the constraints due to lack of orders
mainly from Government and competition from foreign companies due to opening up of domestic market.  Heavy wage bill, inability to generate internal
resources or extra budgetary resources due to huge liabilities and previous NPAs, over reliance on the budgetary support even for working capital and
also for the orders, inability to upgrade the produce line according to market needs, technological drawbacks, lack of corporate dynamism, inability to
create new niche in the market or locate new market are the major constraints for any sustainable revival of the PSEs.(Para 45.5)
3.59          The Committee, therefore, recommends that technological upgradation, upgrading the product line according to new niche market and
identifying new domestic and export markets have to be the cardinal elements for a sustained viability of the PSEs.
(Para 45.6)
Action Taken

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
 
3.60     A review is being carried out on performance of sick/loss making PSEs under the Deptt. This review includes
financial restructuring, technology, marketing strategy, organizational restructuring etc.  While it is agreed that BIFR regime
was taking much longer time in preparation of revival packages, the BRPSE is making recommendations on a fast-track
basis.  Out of 28 cases of the Department of Heavy Industry, 16 cases have already been submitted to BRPSE. BRPSE have
given recommendations in case of 12 PSEs. Remaining 12 PSEs of DHI are also proposed to be submitted to BRPSE in the
next 2 – 3 months time.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.61     To Committee, it appears that DHI has ceded  its mandate to BRPSE. It's replies do not have any vision for PSEs nor
the strategy to achieve the vision. In absence of such a strategy the steps are bound to be ad-hoc measures. While 
recommending a revival package to BRPSE, DHI must also ensure the order books of the PSE must not solely  depend upon
Government orders and that they should look for larger domestic and international market.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.62     The Committee recommends that certain companies in capital goods sector are critical for development of heavy
engineering and infrastructure sectors irrespective of their financial condition.  These companies in any case rely heavily on
the Government’s investment in huge infrastructure projects.  While they can be encouraged to generate their internal
resources through innovative corporate strategies like global tie-ups and JVs. Government must at the same time support
such facilities.
(Para 45.8)
Action Taken
 
3.63     Government have been supplementing the efforts of the PSEs for their modernization to meet the requirements of
the market where viable proposals are submitted by the company. Capital investment support for crucial balancing
investments/renewals/replacements are  regular heads under the plan programmes of the Department of Heavy Industry. So
far as the procurement of orders in infrastructure and other works from Government agencies is concerned, the purchase
preference scheme has been further extended by a period of 3 years which is now valid upto 31.3.2008.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.64          The PSEs under DHI deal in 19 industrial sub-sectors of these only  BHEL  and HMT have shown growth, where
other sectors have shown dismal performance. In an era of growing competition  and liberal market integration, those   PSEs
should be promoted as India MNCs in these 19 sub-sectors.  Budgetary support to the PSEs should be subject to this
objective. And the MoUs with PSEs must include tangible benchmarks on these counts.
CHAPTER - IV
Observations of the Committee
 
4.1            The Committee observes that the Government has to take necessary steps to reduce the dependence of PSEs on Government for finances and
orders; Professionalise the Boards of the PSEs, in the spirit of Government’s policy leading to more and more autonomy and enter into MoU agreements
with more companies, setting and elaborate objectives for better results.(Para 2.8)
 
Action Taken
 
4.2       As per the policy enunciated under NCMP, the profit making PSEs are to be provided greater autonomy in their
functioning. Accordingly recently Navaratna/Mini ratna PSEs have been provided greater powers in terms of Joint Ventures
formation, investments, HRD policies etc.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.3            Committee would like to know if these steps will lessen their dependence on the Government in terms of finance and orders. DHI may inform
in percentage terms the dependence of each of the Navratna and Miniratna company, on the Budgetary support and Government orders. It will be
indicative of their ability to sustain their autonomy in the market competition. 
 

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
Observations of the Committee
 
4.4            The Committee observes with grave concern that the PSEs under DHI have been incurring huge aggregate losses that not only eat up the
aggregate profits earned by few companies but also burden the exchequer with huge net losses.  The Committee is more worried as the losses are
increasing year after year.  The Committee impresses upon the Government to not only arrest the decline but also reverse the trend so that loss making
companies can also earn profits.  The Committee also desires that it may be apprised of the specific steps taken in this regard.             (Para 3.2)
Action Taken                                                                                                 
 
4.5       The loss making sick PSEs are being placed before BRPSE for restructuring/revival. Restructuring proposals are
aimed at improving the viability of the PSEs and ensuring long term sustainability and competitiveness. It is expected that
such steps including rationalization of manpower would not only help in arresting the decline but also help in improving the
performance.
Further Recommendation
 
4.6       The reply is devoid of specific details. As per the outcome budget DHI for the year 2005-06, it was expected that 29
PSEs should be referred to BRPSE. The reply does out reflect the status on that count. The 
Committee would like to know how
many revival packages as recommended by BRPSE have been accepted by the Government.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.7            The Committee observes that the character and nature of the expenditure is too diverse to be kept under same sub-category.  The Committee is
not convinced of the classification of such varied expenditures like R&D projects and Modification of Offices being kept under the same category of
expenditure as Plan-Revenue Expenditure.  Such classification appears to be unscientific.  The Committee would like to have Department’s comments
on the need for a more rational classification.                          (Para 11.3)
Action Taken
 
4.8       Grants-in-aid are shown under Revenue Expenditure and hence the expenditure approved by the Planning
Commission for R&D Projects has been taken under Plan-Revenue.
 
4.9       Expenditure on modernization of offices comes under revenue expenditure; hence taken under Plan – Revenue.
 
4.10     The controller General of Accounts, under Ministry of Finance, has been approached, to review the policy regarding
the classification.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.11          Committee desires that the matter may be pursue with CGA under Ministry of Finance.
Observations of the Committee
 
4.12          The Committee observes enhanced allocation for almost all the PSEs for the renewals/replacements, additions, modifications etc.  However,
the Committee notes several allocations are of Rs. 1 lakh.  The Committee observes with concern if any sustainable purpose could be served with such
meager Plan Capital allocations, particularly keeping in view that similar allocations were made the previous year too.                  (Para  12.3)
 
Action Taken
 
4.13     A token provision of Rs.1 lakh for many PSEs has been kept in the budget so as to keep their head operational. Upon
revival of the PSE, necessary funds would flow through this head.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.14     The Committee would like to know if additional funds were provided to such allocations during the financial year
2005-06.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.15          The Committee recommends the allocation for the renewals/replacements, additions, and modifications etc. should be judicious and should be
justified by the objectives it is likely to achieve.  Allocations should not be for mere token symbolism as it may amount to blocking scarce resources,

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
which the country can only ill-afford.  The Committee was informed that such allocations were necessary for the technical requirements of budgetary
process.  The Committee feels that such small amount obscures the entire scope and scenario of prospective expenditure.  The Department may avoid
blocking such amounts in future.(Para 12.4)
Action Taken
 
4.16     A token of Rs.1 lakh is kept due to the reasons explained in Para 12.3. Such amounts are generally not remaining
unutilized as they are diverted to other PSEs/schemes by re-appropriation.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.17     The Committee would like to know if additional funds were provided to such allocations during the financial year
2005-06.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.18          The Committee observes that there is a multiplicity of allocation for similar purpose.  Apart from allocation for Plan Capital expenditures to
individual PSEs, there are allocations for Crucial Balancing, for addition/modifications/ replacement and for restructuring the PSEs.  Also, Rs. 150
crores is allocated as lump-sum Non-Plan Capital expenditure for the revival of the PSE.              (Para 12.7)
 
4.19          The Committee would like to know if there is any significant qualitative difference between these categories of expenditures for which
distinct allocations are made.  If not, Government should find out the way how this multiplicity could be avoided, even if by clubbing such allocations
together.           (Para 12.8)
Action Taken
 
4.20     The lump sum allocations for crucial balancing and additions/modifications/replacements (AMR) are being kept to
take care of any emergency requirements of renewals/replacements during the course of the year. This also gives the
Department a flexibility to prioritise such allocations so that  the really needy PSEs are not deprived of the funds. These
provisions are meant for those schemes which could not be identified as a part of the Annual Plan (2005-06) proposals sent
to the Planning Commission. 
 
4.21     While a revival/restructuring package is approved by the Government, generally capital expenditure on investments
is provided from Plan budget and any requirements of VRS/Salary/wages/statutory dues is funded from non-plan budget.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.22          Committee recommends that DHI should give greater Head wise elaboration to the expenditures for which Demands for Grants  are made in
Expenditure Budget II. Such elaboration should also give the detail of the expenditure and justify the category in which it has been placed i.e. which
Planned/Non-planned or Capital or Revenue Expenditure.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.23          The Committee further observes that there are too many lump-sum allocations for Plan-Capital expenditure that have not been sufficiently
elaborated.  The Committee has been further informed that these allocations are liable to be raised at the subsequent stages.  The Committee shall be
apprised if such unexplained expenditure that cannot be estimated, could at all be Planned-Capital expenditure.               (Para 12.9)
Action Taken
 
4.24     The process of preparation of Annual Plan for the year is started about 6 months before the commencement of the
financial year. At the time of preparation of the Annual Plan, estimates are unknown on the items like revival packages,
emergency, renewals/replacements etc. Therefore lump-sum provisions are made so that money is provided for such
schemes without waiting for funds through supplementary grants etc.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.25     The Committee appreciates the constraints which force the DHI to make lump-sum provisions. The Department 
could however furnish the actual provision made while furnishing their ATR. The Committee would like the Department to
furnish the details of allocation and their utilisation in the year 2005-06.
 

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
Observations of the Committee
 
4.26   The Committee however recommends that companies must be encouraged to garner extra-budgetary support.  The
PSEs should be advised to seek their funding needs from Banks/Financial Institutions as extra budgetary resources.  The
policy of the Government should be able to provide PSEs as minimum a budgetary support from Government as possible. 
At the most government guarantees can be provided to enable the PSEs seek funds from Banks/financial institutions.  Even
in revival cases, the PSEs should be advised to obtain institutional finance wherever feasible.(Para 21.6)
Action Taken
4.27     The PSEs have been advised that the revival plans being prepared should be bankable. It is suggested that while the
equity support shall be provided by the Government, the loan component should be provided by banks and financial
institutions. However, the banks and financial institutions are not inclined to provide funds for sick/loss making companies
without a Government guarantee. This issue is under discussion with Ministry of Finance / Planning Commission.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.28     The Committee would like the DHI to  pursue the situation closely.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.29          The Committee further recommends that instead of relying solely on budgetary support, the Government should seriously consider to raise
finances for reconstruction of PSEs, from market through an IPO of which government would be the promoter with employees having the option of
preferential shares.  The management of the company will be accountable to market and the shareholders and, therefore, would be autonomous to a
significant extent.  Such an IPO shall have wider public participation in the reconstruction of PSEs with employees as major stakeholders having the
preference.  Budgetary resources thus saved should be committed for clearing the dues of VRS/VSS optees.        (Para 21.7)
Action Taken
4.30     The Government proposes to list large profitable PSEs on the domestic stock exchanges and on a case to case basis,
may sell minority stake in such PSEs while retaining at least 51% of the share with full management control so as not to
alter the public sector character of the company. The proceeds of sale of minority stake go to the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4.31     Budgetary support is being provided under a support head towards compensation for VRS/VSS to employees of
PSEs under DHI.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.32          DHI’s reply does not indicate the Department’s view on Committee’s recommendation to garner extra-budgetary resources for the infirm
PSEs through IPO. The DHI may consider offering a bouquet IPO in which infirm PSEs are clubbed with profit-making Nav-ratna or Mini-ratna PSEs.
The stakeholders in such PSEs may be given preferential offer. Money garnered through such an IPO could be utilized for the revival of loss making
PSEs included in such a bouquet. The PSEs should be given a time bound target to firm up their finances after which the IPO should be de-merged. The
Committee  would like to have Department’s detailed view on its recommendation.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.33          The Committee has taken note of the view of the DHI that the PSEs may dispose of surplus assets particularly to fund their own revival plans. 
The Committee is of the view that the Government should be cautious while doing so.  It is suggested that Government should draw a policy or a
guidelines for all the interested parties and stakeholders in this respect.
(Para 22.1)
Action Taken
4.34     Revival plans for PSEs are being prepared in consultation with all concerned agencies including Banks, State
Governments, PSEs etc.  Wherever surplus assets are available with the PSEs, the same are proposed for disposal to
fully/partly fund their revival plans.
 
4.35     Major item of surplus assets is the availability of land with the PSEs. Land has been acquired by the PSEs by various
means namely; lease from the State Governments, gifted land by State Governments; land given at a normal price by State
Governments and direct purchase of land by PSE. Disposal of such land is therefore considered in consultation with the
State Govts. This issue is being resolved on a case to case basis in consultation with the State Governments.
 
Further Recommendation

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
 
4.36     Committee would like to know if a policy guideline is being formulated in consultation with State Governments.
The Committee also recommends that the DHI through DPE should initiate consultations with the respective State
Governments to develop guidelines to dispose of surplus assets with the PSEs only to generate resources for revival and to
settle VRS dues. The Committee would also like to know if BRPSE has   advised the Government in this regard.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.37          The Committee views that current regime of lowering the customs and increasing the excise duty on items like steel will have serious
implications for the PSEs in capital goods sector.              (Para 24.2)
4.38          The Committee cautions the Government that such a duty regime would result in an uneven competition with PSEs facing serious handicap
against cheaper imports and MNCs.  If the Government is serious about reviving the PSEs, it must help them regain their standing in domestic market
instead of imposing a duty regime that perpetuates the disadvantage against cheap imports.  It is the responsibility of the Government to seek redressal, if
necessary, against such an uneven competition under the WTO provisions.               (Para 24.3)
Action Taken
 
4.39     The Task Force on Indirect Taxes had recommended accelerated reduction of import duty on raw materials and
intermediate goods. Recognising the need of access/source inputs/raw materials at a rate lower than the final product and
also to avoid inverted custom duty structure, the custom duty of steel has been reduced to improve the cost effectiveness of
the final product. It is felt that reduction of import duty on raw materials will help the domestic manufacturer compete better
against imports.
 
4.40     As regards increase in excise duty in steel, it is felt that steel should attract mean CANVAT rate of 16% at par with
other metals. Accordingly, in the budget 2005-06, it has been decided to increase the excise duty of steel from 12% to the
mean rate of 16%.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.41     Committee would like to know the view of DHI on the recommendation of Task Force on Indirect Taxes. In view of
the impact of current duty rates on the PSEs and Auto sector, does the DHI agree with the recommendations of the Task
force, if yes reasons therefore? If not, did the DHI take up the issue with the Ministry of Finance and what was its response?
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.42          The Committee recommends that the benefits of the Notifications No. 50/96 & 51/96 should not discriminate against the premier R&D
institutions like ARAI for nuances.  The Committee directs the DHI to pursue the matter with Ministry of Finance.  (Para 26.8)
Action Taken
 
4.43     The issue was referred to the Deptt. of Revenue who have shown their inability to extend the benefits of the
notifications No.50/96 & 51/96 to ARAI as ARAI does not meet the conditions laid down for benefits under these two
notifications.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.44          The Committee would like to know about the substantive reasoning behind declining to extend similar concessions to such premier R&D
institutions to which even Government is providing the Budgetary assistance. The Committee recommends that DHI should raise the issue with Ministry
of Finance for the Financial Year 2006-07.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.45     The Committee observes that the fast pace of technology developments and obsolescence has left very little choice
on technology front for developing countries like India.  The Committee therefore desires that the Government should
ensure the development and commercialization of new technologies.  The Government should come out with a policy
providing for technology upgradation in general and the PSEs in particular.          (Para 29.4)
Action Taken
 
4.46     The broad overall issue of technology transfer is under consideration in the Department. Policy guidelines shall be

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
framed upon a final decision on this issue based on consideration of regulations and other international commitments. So far
as individual PSEs are concerned, the boards of these PSEs have been reviewing regularly the technology status in an effort
to meet the requirements of the user sectors.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.47          Committee would like to be apprised of comprehensive policy guidelines on Technology transfer which should
be decided at the earliest. In this regard the Government should hold consultation with concerned nodal
Ministries/Departments including Ministry of Finance, Commerce, CSIR and DHI. Effort should be made to encourage
PSEs to develop their respective R&D set-ups which should be gradually made autonomous and commercially viable. It has
been observed that most of the industrial conglomerates develop their separate R&D set-up which is essential for a long-
term sustainability in  current Patent regime. The Committee apprehends that in absence of such continous technological
upgradation, the PSE’s long-term viability shall always be doubtful, when other players would be upgrading their
technology and product profile. The Committee appreciates that it will be a sustainable and capital intensive effort.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.48          The Committee notes that the Chinese model, where the technology transfer to a domestic manufacturer is mandatory for an MNC to get an
order in that country, could be an effective policy in facilitating technology transfer.  China is successfully leveraging its market access to foreign
manufacturers, to acquire technology and ensure that a significant share of the equipment of strategic economic importance is manufactured locally in
China.  Similarly, the Bhoomiputra policy of Malaysia has been evolved within the WTO frameqwork to ensure technology transfer in manufacturing
industry and a similar approach would improve the access for the latest technology for the Indian Industry.(Para 32.2)
 
4.49          The Committee would like to have the view from government in order to bring about the technological revival of the PSEs one of important
issues is, if the foreign companies securing large contracts in India, could be obliged to associate competent local companies for technology transfer, as
is the policy in some other developing countries such as China and Malaysia.(Para 32.3)
 
Action Taken
 
4.50     The recommendations of the Committee have already been conveyed to the concerned Ministries such as M/O
Science and Technology, Deptt. of IPP & M/O Finance.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.51     The DHI must pursue the issue with the concerned Departments and apprise the Committee of their view.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.52     The Committee recommends that the government should consider the following policy initiatives to facilitate
technology transfer to capital goods sector:
(i)                                Issue suitable technology transfer policy guidelines so that for all capital goods and services any foreign vendor desirous of
suppying the same in the domestic Indian market must necessarily source at least 30% of the proposed bid from local companies
within India.  Moreover, the foreign vendor must also give an option for transferring technology to the desirous and capable local
company for critical equipment and service involved in the project/product.
(ii)                              Enhance bilateral/multilateral co-operation with developed countries for state of art technology transfer and exchange of technical
experts in the areas of emerging technologies.
(iii)                             While granting FDI approval for trading/sale service, wherever there is a provision for setting up a manufacturing facility in due
course with adequate investment, a clause should be incorporated and implementation monitored meticulously for materialization of
such investment on a time bound basis.
(Para 34.1)
Action Taken
 
4.53     As stated in reply to paras 32.2 and  32.3 the matter has been taken up with the concerned Ministries / Departments.
 
Further Recommendation
 

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
4.54     The Committee shall continue to monitor with the DHI and PSEs  on these counts.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.55          The Committee observes that the restructuring exercise should now involve a major strategic repositioning of the company’s competitive
focus so as to enhance its value and to strengthen it adequately to compete effectively by improving its resilience and the earning potential.  The
Committee recommends that the Companies must re-align with the market, identify and create niche in the market.  This will require comprehensive
marketing strategy, techno-value addition of products-profile and diversification of market.            (Para 35.3)
 
4.56          The Committee observes that the revival effort should aim to optimally allocate resources to ensure the increasing returns over the long run by
improvement in the innovation and implementation capacity and increasing its reserve capacity to meet the challenges of the market driven globalized
economy.               (Para 35.4)
 
4.57          The Committee recommends that the objective of the restructuring effort should be:
(i)
                                Improvement in the innovation ability of the PSEs by: strengthening the R&D and technology management and absorption.
(ii)                              Improvement in implementation capacity by: improving the management knowledge and skills, marketing skills, product quality,
and technology familiarity.
(iii)                             Reduction in the vulnerability by improving liquidity and cash flow coverage.     (Para 36.1)
4.58          Furthermore, the restructuring exercise should include:
(i)                                Operational restructuring by modifying production process by bringing economics of scale, improving the level of the quality and
improvement in the process technology.  Technological upgradation to target the high-end market.
(ii)                              Marketing restructuring by repositioning and diversifying the marketing and the distribution channels.
(iii)                             Financial and capital restructuring to increase earning power of the company that may entail increased reserve capacity, bank ability
and ability to generate extra budgetary resources.
(iv)                             Organisational restructuring  to motivate performance and formulate a long-term objectives in accordance with the projected trends
of market.            (Para 36.2)
 
4.59          The Committee would like to know the comments and the concrete, tangible action taken or to be taken by the Department on these
steps.          (Para 36.3)
Action Taken
 
4.60     A fresh initiative has been taken for revival/restructuring  of PSEs under DHI with assistance from the consultants
and PSEs. The aim is to convert these PSEs into viable enterprises which would be able to meet the challenges of the
competitive environment. Under the restructuring exercise presently being undertaken for revival/restructuring of the PSEs,
all the above aspects are being considered like product market, strategies, technology requirements, diversification etc.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.61     The Committee shall continue to monitor on the Department’s assurance.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.62          The Committee notes that the Jharkhand Government has refused the proposal to convert the assets into resources.  The Committee takes
serious note of the clear disjoint in the policies of Central and State Governments that has seriously, affected the prospects of the Company.          (Para
38.3)
 
4.63          The Committee directs the DHI to take up the issue to removing bottlenecks with the Government of Jharkhand and inform the Committee of
the outcome.          (Para 38.4)
 
Action Taken
 
4.64     A number of meetings have been held between DHI officials and officials of the Govt. of Jharkhand during the
period April - June, 2005.  A Committee for this purpose had been constituted to look into assets (various buildings and
lands) which could be transferred to Government of  Jharkhand, including modalities for creation of Special Purpose
Vehicles (SPV) on revenue sharing model to enable this Department prepare a revival plan for  HEC.
 
Further Recommendation

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
 
4.65          The Committee is of the view that  comprehensive guidelines should be made in consultation with State
Government, PSEs and BRPSE regarding disposal of surplus assets to generate resources for the PSEs.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.66          The Committee also notes that of the seven companies, five have been referred to BIFR. Of the seven companies only Bridget & Roof is
earning profit.  Appeals against BIFR’s decision in respect of R&C and TSL are pending before AAIFR.  The Committee also notes that the companies
under BYNL group are being placed before BRPSE in phases.  The Committee hopes that BRPSE would expedite the matter.          (Para 39.3)
 
4.67          The Committee notes that accumulated loss of BYNL during 2003-04 was Rs. 1001.50 crores.  The company with a paid-up capital of Rs. 186
crores has had a negative net worth to the tune of Rs. 838.36 crores in 2003-04.  The Committee directs the DHI to apprise the committee of its course of
action.            (Para 39.4)
      
4.68          The Committee notes with grave concern that the financial parameters of the holding company and five of its subsidiaries are dismal.  The
companies that have been referred to BIFR are still waiting for revival or otherwise.
(Para 39.5)
Action Taken
 
4.69     All sick/loss making companies are being reviewed for restructuring/revival. Bridge & Roof (B&R) was considered
by BRPSE and Government have taken a decision for its revival. Three other subsidiaries namely R&C, BPCL and TSPL
have also been considered by BRPSE and recommendations made. These recommendations are being processed for seeking
a Government decision. Remaining PSEs under BYNL Group are yet to be considered by BRPSE.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.70     DHI may apprise the Committee of the final view of Government on BYNL and its subsidiaries.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.71          The Committee notes that the company’s productivity and profitability suffers from old machinery causing frequent breakdowns and high rate
of rejections.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends for urgent upgradation of technology and machines and hopes that the revival plan would take
care of this aspect.      (Para 40.3)
 
Action Taken
 
4.72     In case of PTL, BRPSE have recommended for revival of the company. The revival proposal includes technological
upgradation as well. The recommendations of BRPSE are under process in the Department.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.73     Committee may be apprised of Govt's view on BRPSE's recommendations. Committee would like to know of the
terms of the fresh MoU to be signed with the PSE in view of BRPSEs recommendations and the obligations agreed by the
PSE and the Government.
 
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.74          The Committee recommends to the DHI to assess the profitability prospects of TCIL and if satisfied, assist the company in regaining its
financial viability.            (Para 41.4)
Action Taken
 
4.75     A revival plan for TCIL has been recommended by BRPSE through the process of Joint Venture formation. Further
action would be initiated in the light of Supreme Court Judgment with regard to disinvestment of equity  in PSEs which
have been acquired by the Government through an Act of Parliament.
 
Further Recommendation

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
 
4.76          The Committee would like to know the  status of the PSE following the  Supreme Court’s Judgment, when it is delivered.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.77          The Committee recommends that constraints faced by BHEL, need to be addressed by the government with a favorable view to support this
flag-ship company that is financially self-reliant but facing uneven competition due to the policy structure.                   (Para 43.10)
Action Taken
 
4.78     The matter has been taken up with M/O Finance, M/O Science & Technology and Deptt. of Industrial Policy &
Promotion.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.79          Committee may be apprised of the outcome of the discussion with concerned Ministries.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.80          The Committee observes that the Budgetary scheme and explanatory notes on expenditures do not give sufficient explanation/details of the
allocations.  There is always a possibility of duplication of expenditures through multiple Heads.  The test criterion of the budget is clarity and
transparency instead of ambiguity.  The objective of the parliamentary scrutiny of budget is to know efficacy of the objective and efficiency of
expenditure to achieve the objective.  Expenditures are split into classes and sub-classes, thereby preventing a clearer picture of expenditure for a
particular objective.  The committee would also like to know the rational necessity and objective criteria of the classification of diverse expenditures
under one category and Budget Head instead of the details of allocations.  The committee feels that the DHI should take up these issues for consultation
with the Ministry of Finance.            (Para 44.1)
Action Taken
 
4.81     It is regretted that the explanatory note did not contain sufficient explanation/details on the expenditure. It is assured
that DHI will provide sufficient explanation in future.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.82          The Committee shall monitor the assurance given by the DHI.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A GLANCE
 
The Committee recommends that both the R&D projects namely Coal Gasification Project and FCRI must be supported till they achieve
commercial viability.     (Para 28.3)
 
                The Committee apprehends that despite robust growth in capital goods sector, the PSEs find difficult to secure orders and in several cases to
execute the orders due to lack of working capital and other constraints.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that efforts should be made by the
PSEs to utilize current opportunities in the market.  As the capital goods market is essentially technology-intensive, PSEs must undertake the technology
upgradation to secure high-end market.
(Para 6.4)
 
                The Committee  recommends that the Government should decide the on linkage between BIFR and BRPSE at least, till such time a final
decision on BIFR is taken by the competent Court.(Para 9.3)
 
            The Committee  observes with concern that multiplicity of agencies even in deciding the revival may and has
resulted in different opinions, successive appeals and costly delays.  Even after deciding, the revival packages have failed in
several cases.  The Committee apprehends that in the process of analyzing the cases the BIFR has assessed the Techno-
Financial feasibilities of individual PSEs prepared by expert agencies.  Yet the appeals are filed in AAIFR and High
Courts/Supreme Court and now these may further will be referred to new BRPSE for appraisal before a final decision is
taken by the Cabinet.  The entire process is time consuming and costly.  The cost of delay has been immense in terms of
rising liabilities that have eaten up the net worth of the PSEs.  It may be an effort in duplication.(Para 9.4)
 
The Committee recommends that the Department must take steps to expedite the decision and implementation for the PSEs’ sustained revival
once case is decided by the competent authority.(Para 9.5)

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
 
                The Committee further recommends that the Government should inform the Committee of the revival packages approved by the Cabinet
before approaching the Parliament for Supplementary Demands.  The Department must also give a post-revival SWOT analysis of the PSEs and that
must reflect its Technological strengths and market viability.
(Para 9.6)
          The Committee recommends that the lump-sum expenditures should be sufficiently elaborated for Parliamentary
approval in future.(Para 12.10)
 
                The Committee feels that the issue of payment of Guarantee Fee Subsidy needs to be re-examined in view of the fact that the PSEs which are
not able to even pay for Guarantee fee to the Government, how would they settle other liabilities.  The Committee would also like to know Department’s
comments, if it was necessary to give Guarantee Fee subsidy to same PSEs that utilized the facility even last year.  The government may also informed
about the purpose for which the resources were raised against such guarantee.(Para 20.4)
 
                The Committee takes serious note of the fact that the budgetary allocations do not sufficiently reflect the concern for technological upgradation
of PSEs and R&D which has direct bearing over the efficacy of the Companies keeping in view that PSEs were established as pioneers in industrial
technology.  The Committee feels that the Government should actively involve in the technological upgradation of PSEs and if necessary extend the
financial support.         (Para 31.2)
 
                The Committee notes the diverse range of business in which subsidiaries of the BYNL are involved.  The Committee also notes despite
repeated recommendations by this Committee and other expert studies to merge the subsidiary companies into single entity; no initiative has been taken
in this respect.  The Committee would like to know the view of the Government in this respect.(Para 39.2)
 
                The Committee recommends that Government must support the company’s resource and technology requirements to harness the potential of
non-conventional energy in the country.  The committee is of the view that the Government must help this sector in attaining the economies of scales. 
The non-conventional energy will be economically feasible for the community-based consumption in obscure villages and remote areas where the cost of
energy transmission is high.  The Non-conventional energy sources could be cost-effective supplementary source for energy needs of small habitats and
clusters. (Para 42.4)
 
                The Committee notes that DHI was unable to commit on firm and tangible long-term objectives in quantitative terms that could be a
benchmark against which the performance is assessed.  On most of the long-term issues Department’s reply has been elusive.  The Committee observes
that despite huge financial liabilities all the major decisions are still left to BRPSE.  Pending its recommendations being approved by the competent
authority, the Department is taking measures that are ad-hoc window-dressing of depleted worth of PSEs.  The Committee is of the opinion that scarce
resources cannot be lost endlessly amidst huge liabilities of PSEs.  A lasting solution has to be found urgently and accountability must be accordingly
fixed for which it is necessary to determine the benchmarks of performance.(Para 45.1)
 
The Committee would like to suggest to the Government to consider the critical utility of any company before deciding on its sustainable and
comprehensive revival/restructuring instead of going only by their precarious financial condition.  The criticality will depend on long-term prospects of
the company in terms of technology spin-offs and self-reliance in mega-machinery in strategic areas.(Para 45.9)
 
                The Committee notes that the growth in exports is hindered due to non-availability of adequate supplier’s credit to buyers, higher rates of
interest and lower duration for which the credit is available.  The Committee recommends that the Government must take a favorable view of the
proposals made by the Department of Heavy Industry with regard to availability of adequate supplier’s credit to buyers, low rate of interest and longer
duration of credit to facilitate growth in export performance of the PSEs.(Para 5.5)
 
                The Committee observes that while the aggregate growth in PSEs under DHI compares well with the capital goods growth, but this level of
growth is mainly contributed by one PSE namely Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. (BHEL) which showed a growth of 15% during this period.  Most of the
PSEs have shown a negative growth mainly due to financial, marketing and technological constraints.(Para 6.3)
 
                The Committee notes that the expenditures are classified into two parallel categories Capital/Revenue expenditures and Plan/Non-Plan
expenditures.  These two parallel categories are curiously hybridized into four supposedly distinct categories of expenditure.  The Committee would like
to know the rational principles for such classified and sub-classifications, instead of description of expenditure under these categories.(Para 10.6)
 
                The Committee desires to know that on what ground the Planning Commission’s approval was sought for certain Revenue and Capital
expenditures leaving remaining sizable Revenue and capital expenditures unapproved.  If any guideline is followed in this respect.  The Committee
would also like to be appraised on such a categorizastion in the Budget.  The Committee also desires to know if such segregation is scientific and does
not affect the efficiency of expenditure.  Further, the Committee would like to have a comment from the Department, if there is need to improve the
Budget scheme. (Para 10.11)

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
                The Department has been closely associated with the promotion of Automobile R&D facility in the country.  However, a significant Grant in
Aid of Rs. 25 crores to R&D institution is still treated as a Non-Plan Revenue expenditure along with Secretariat expenditure and Interest subsidy.  The
Committee observes that the character of expenditure is too diverse to be kept under similar category.             (Para 14.2)
                The Committee observes with concern that every year during past few years the non-plan expenditure has been higher than plan expenditure. 
Last year at the RE stage the non-plan expenditure increased while the plan expenditure declined.  The Committee welcomes the higher plan allocation
in 2005-06 as compared to last year and hopes that the Department would be able to utilize the money.  The Committee feels that the government should
also make efforts to reduce non-plan expenditure.(Para 23.1)
 
                The Committee recommends that DHI should apprise it of the Revised Estimates and the Supplementary Demands. 
(Para 45.10)
                The Committee is of the view that existing classification heads needs further rationalization and desires that the Government should review the
same.(Para 10.7)
 
                The Committee observes that many of the PSEs, however have not been able to retain their original position in the market and withstand the
global competition in the new liberalized economy.(Para 1.4)
 
                The Committee notes that most of the companies under major conglomerates like BBUNL, BYNL, HMT, AYCL, with diversified business in
heavy engineering, are making losses.  These companies rely on major Government projects for orders to generate working capital.  The Committee
feels that these engineering conglomerates have critical potential for the capital goods sector in the country and need to be re-aligned to the larger
market.  The Committee would like to know of the measures that are being considered in this respect for these companies.(Para 2.3)
 
                The Committee recommends that the public sector enterprises should be encouraged and advised to gradually and increasingly compete in
private sector projects as more sectors have been opened up for private sector.  PSEs may be given preference for Government orders but it does not
preclude them from exploring larger market domestically or globally.  PSEs must not be allowed to suffer due to drying up of Government orders.  In
any case, by supplying the Government orders practically does not add anything to the Consolidated Fund of India.  It is only ‘Deemed Earning’.
(Para 4.2)
 
                The Committee recommends that with the opening up of the economy and WTO regulations coming into force.  PSEs must make use of new
opportunities by entering into JVs and marketing tie-ups to enter into larger global market.  The Department should issue specific guidelines to its PSEs
to explore export markets.(Para 4.3)
 
                The Committee further recommends that diversification of market should be incorporated as one of the significant factor in MoU rating of the
PSEs so as to encourage them to explore new market.(Para 4.4)
 
                The Committee recommends that the Department of Heavy Industry must evolve a strategy, as an integral part of revival schemes for PSEs to
promote exports given the country has a well-laid capital goods sector.(Para 5.4)
 
3.21          The Committee is in agreement with the allocation made in respect of specific project with BEML.  The Committee would however, like to
know the terms of agreement, if any.(Para 13.3)
 
                The Committee notes with grave concern that out of the total allocations of Rs. 861.32 crores, more than Rs. 400 crores are Lump-sum
allocations.  Last year too similar allocation of Rs. 400 crores was made.  Such a practice undermines the principle of Parliamentary scrutiny of Budget.
(Para 15.4)
 
                The Committee takes serious note that against the total investment of Rs. 8590 crores and projected out turn of Rs.15363.65 crore in 2005-06
the earning from dividends and profits would be meager Rs. 69.63 crores, which is around 0.45% return on the outturn.  Even of this amount a BHEL is
the largest single contributor.  Further more the Revenue receipts are likely to go down even further this year.  Against the anticipated Revenue receipts
of Rs.190.55 crores in 2004-05 the projected Revenue receipts for 2005-06 are likely to be meager Rs. 76.48 crores.  The Committee observes that it is
not a healthy situation and directly related to the performance of the PSEs. The Department of Heavy Industry has to make concerted efforts.(Para 19.2)
 
                The Committee is concerned that PSEs are not able to pay their Guarantee fee to the Government. On the contrary government has to provide a
subsidy on Guarantee Fee.  The Committee desires that Government should take suitable steps in this regard.(Para 19.3)
 
                The Committee views such a trend as an unviable drag on the government’s scarce finances.  The Government is not earning sufficient
dividends on its investments in the PSEs rather it is loosing money on its loans it had lent to the PSEs.  Instead of charging the Guarantee Fee the
Government is supposed to subsidize the Guarantee Fee on the finances raised from the banks and financial institutions.  The Committee desires that the
Government should take appropriate measures to stop this trend.  DHI should prepare a time-bound strategy in this respect.(Para 19.6)

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
 
                The Committee notes with constraint that out of 34 PSEs that are still functioning under the Department, as many as 27 are entirely dependent
on the budgetary support from the Government.  Of the total outlay to the PSEs, 54% is generated through budgetary support.  The Committee finds this
to be a telling comment on the precarious financial conditions of the PSEs as the commercial enterprises.(Para 21.3)
 
                The Committee observes that cement and non-metallic industries are not able to generate extra-budgetary support in the engineering and
consumer industry sector only BHEL and HPC are able to garner extra budgetary support to some significant level.  Whereas the generation of resources
by rest of the companies, is nominal.  This is certainly not an acceptable situation.  The DHI should come out with concrete proposal so that not only the
number of companies who generate the internal resources increases but also these Companies generate substantial resources.(Para 21.5)
 
                The Committee is of the view that the Department has still not prepared a detailed strategy for the reconstruction of PSEs including their
technological upgradation.  Allocations for revival are still ad-hoc in nature for immediate purposes.(Para 31.3)
 
                The Committee recommends that regular technology audit must be conducted by agencies like DSIR or other resource agencies to assess the
technology update of the PSEs.(Para 31.4)
 
                The Committee further suggests that in order to ensure that the PSEs gain from technology alliances it is necessary that strong learning
capabilities are built up to facilitate skill acquisition, internal training.  The receptivity in the PSEs also would have to be built up to accumulate, retain
and transfer of knowledge to take the full advantage of the Joint Ventures or any other technological alliance.(Para 32.4)
 
                The Committee recommends that the PSEs could be effectively used for the creation of infrastructure and promotion of skills to capitalize on
our competitive advantage.          (Para 33.2)
 
                The Committee recommends that the Department should formulate a road map for the consideration of Government on the major challenges
faced by PSEs like obsolete technology and lack of marketing strategy.  The Committee also suggests to take into account the cumulative cost of delay,
previously due to pendency of cases under BIFR regime and now under BRPSE is finalizing a decision on PSEs.(Para 45.2)
 
                The Committee observes that the multiplicity of agencies involved had led to inefficient delays in finalizing revival.  The Committee is of the
view that steps must be taken to reduce multiplicity of agencies in preparing, assessing and revival proposals.(Para 45.3)
 
                DHI has the mandate to promote the developments and growth of capital goods and engineering industry in the country, which in turn has
critical bearing over the infrastructure development in the country.  However, plight of the PSEs urgently requires an expeditious and consistent action
by the DHI instead of postponing the decision on successive series of multiple bodies.
 
                The committee notes that while the PSEs in the heavy engineering and capital goods category are facing the constraints due to lack of orders
mainly from Government and competition from foreign companies due to opening up of domestic market.  Heavy wage bill, inability to generate internal
resources or extra budgetary resources due to huge liabilities and previous NPAs, over reliance on the budgetary support even for working capital and
also for the orders, inability to upgrade the produce line according to market needs, technological drawbacks, lack of corporate dynamism, inability to
create new niche in the market or locate new market are the major constraints for any sustainable revival of the PSEs.(Para 45.5)
 
                The Committee, therefore, recommends that technological upgradation, upgrading the product line according to new niche market and
identifying new domestic and export markets have to be the cardinal elements for a sustained viability of the PSEs.(Para 45.6)
 
            The Committee recommends that certain companies in capital goods sector are critical for development of heavy
engineering and infrastructure sectors irrespective of their financial condition.  These companies in any case rely heavily on
the Government’s investment in huge infrastructure projects.  While they can be encouraged to generate their internal
resources through innovative corporate strategies like global tie-ups and JVs. Government must at the same time support
such facilities.
(Para 45.8)
                The Committee observes that the Government has to take necessary steps to reduce the dependence of PSEs on Government for finances and
orders; Professionalise the Boards of the PSEs, in the spirit of Government’s policy leading to more and more autonomy and enter into MoU agreements
with more companies, setting and elaborate objectives for better results.(Para 2.8)
 
                The Committee observes with grave concern that the PSEs under DHI have been incurring huge aggregate losses that not only eat up the
aggregate profits earned by few companies but also burden the exchequer with huge net losses.  The Committee is more worried as the losses are
increasing year after year.  The Committee impresses upon the Government to not only arrest the decline but also reverse the trend so that loss making
companies can also earn profits.  The Committee also desires that it may be apprised of the specific steps taken in this regard.(Para 3.2)

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
 
                The Committee observes that the character and nature of the expenditure is too diverse to be kept under same sub-category.  The Committee is
not convinced of the classification of such varied expenditures like R&D projects and Modification of Offices being kept under the same category of
expenditure as Plan-Revenue Expenditure.  Such classification appears to be unscientific.  The Committee would like to have Department’s comments
on the need for a more rational classification.(Para 11.3)
 
                The Committee observes enhanced allocation for almost all the PSEs for the renewals/replacements, additions, modifications etc.  However,
the Committee notes several allocations are of Rs. 1 lakh.  The Committee observes with concern if any sustainable purpose could be served with such
meager Plan Capital allocations, particularly keeping in view that similar allocations were made the previous year too.        (Para  12.3)
 
                The Committee recommends the allocation for the renewals/replacements, additions, and modifications etc. should be judicious and should be
justified by the objectives it is likely to achieve.  Allocations should not be for mere token symbolism as it may amount to blocking scarce resources,
which the country can only ill-afford.  The Committee was informed that such allocations were necessary for the technical requirements of budgetary
process.  The Committee feels that such small amount obscures the entire scope and scenario of prospective expenditure.  The Department may avoid
blocking such amounts in future.(Para 12.4)
 
                The Committee observes that there is a multiplicity of allocation for similar purpose.  Apart from allocation for Plan Capital expenditures to
individual PSEs, there are allocations for Crucial Balancing, for addition/modifications/ replacement and for restructuring the PSEs.  Also, Rs. 150
crores is allocated as lump-sum Non-Plan Capital expenditure for the revival of the PSE.(Para 12.7)
 
                The Committee would like to know if there is any significant qualitative difference between these categories of expenditures for which distinct
allocations are made.  If not, Government should find out the way how this multiplicity could be avoided, even if by clubbing such allocations together.
(Para 12.8)
 
                The Committee further observes that there are too many lump-sum allocations for Plan-Capital expenditure that have not been sufficiently
elaborated.  The Committee has been further informed that these allocations are liable to be raised at the subsequent stages.  The Committee shall be
apprised if such unexplained expenditure that cannot be estimated, could at all be Planned-Capital expenditure.            (Para 12.9)
 
          The Committee however recommends that companies must be encouraged to garner extra-budgetary support.  The
PSEs should be advised to seek their funding needs from Banks/Financial Institutions as extra budgetary resources.  The
policy of the Government should be able to provide PSEs as minimum a budgetary support from Government as possible. 
At the most government guarantees can be provided to enable the PSEs seek funds from Banks/financial institutions.  Even
in revival cases, the PSEs should be advised to obtain institutional finance wherever feasible.(Para 21.6)
 
                The Committee further recommends that instead of relying solely on budgetary support, the Government should seriously consider to raise
finances for reconstruction of PSEs, from market through an IPO of which government would be the promoter with employees having the option of
preferential shares.  The management of the company will be accountable to market and the shareholders and, therefore, would be autonomous to a
significant extent.  Such an IPO shall have wider public participation in the reconstruction of PSEs with employees as major stakeholders having the
preference.  Budgetary resources thus saved should be committed for clearing the dues of VRS/VSS optees.(Para 21.7)
 
                The Committee has taken note of the view of the DHI that the PSEs may dispose of surplus assets particularly to fund their own revival plans. 
The Committee is of the view that the Government should be cautious while doing so.  It is suggested that Government should draw a policy or a
guidelines for all the interested parties and stakeholders in this respect.(Para 22.1)
 
The Committee views that current regime of lowering the customs and increasing the excise duty on items like steel will have serious
implications for the PSEs in capital goods sector.(Para 24.2)
 
                The Committee cautions the Government that such a duty regime would result in an uneven competition with PSEs facing serious handicap
against cheaper imports and MNCs.  If the Government is serious about reviving the PSEs, it must help them regain their standing in domestic market
instead of imposing a duty regime that perpetuates the disadvantage against cheap imports.  It is the responsibility of the Government to seek redressal, if
necessary, against such an uneven competition under the WTO provisions.    (Para 24.3)
 
                The Committee recommends that the benefits of the Notifications No. 50/96 & 51/96 should not discriminate against the premier R&D
institutions like ARAI for nuances.  The Committee directs the DHI to pursue the matter with Ministry of Finance.          (Para 26.8)
            The Committee observes that the fast pace of technology developments and obsolescence has left very little choice
on technology front for developing countries like India.  The Committee therefore desires that the Government should
ensure the development and commercialization of new technologies.  The Government should come out with a policy

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
providing for technology upgradation in general and the PSEs in particular(Para 29.4)
 
                The Committee notes that the Chinese model, where the technology transfer to a domestic manufacturer is mandatory for an MNC to get an
order in that country, could be an effective policy in facilitating technology transfer.  China is successfully leveraging its market access to foreign
manufacturers, to acquire technology and ensure that a significant share of the equipment of strategic economic importance is manufactured locally in
China.  Similarly, the Bhoomiputra policy of Malaysia has been evolved within the WTO frameqwork to ensure technology transfer in manufacturing
industry and a similar approach would improve the access for the latest technology for the Indian Industry.(Para 32.2)
 
                The Committee would like to have the view from government in order to bring about the technological revival of the PSEs one of important
issues is, if the foreign companies securing large contracts in India, could be obliged to associate competent local companies for technology transfer, as
is the policy in some other developing countries such as China and Malaysia.(Para 32.3)
 
            The Committee recommends that the government should consider the following policy initiatives to facilitate
technology transfer to capital goods sector:
 
(iv)                             Issue suitable technology transfer policy guidelines so that for all capital goods and services any foreign vendor desirous of
suppying the same in the domestic Indian market must necessarily source at least 30% of the proposed bid from local companies
within India.  Moreover, the foreign vendor must also give an option for transferring technology to the desirous and capable local
company for critical equipment and service involved in the project/product.
(v)                               Enhance bilateral/multilateral co-operation with developed countries for state of art technology transfer and exchange of technical
experts in the areas of emerging technologies.
(vi)                             While granting FDI approval for trading/sale service, wherever there is a provision for setting up a manufacturing facility in due
course with adequate investment, a clause should be incorporated and implementation monitored meticulously for materialization of
such investment on a time bound basis.(Para 34.1)
 
                The Committee observes that the restructuring exercise should now involve a major strategic repositioning of the company’s competitive focus
so as to enhance its value and to strengthen it adequately to compete effectively by improving its resilience and the earning potential.  The Committee
recommends that the Companies must re-align with the market, identify and create niche in the market.  This will require comprehensive marketing
strategy, techno-value addition of products-profile and diversification of market.(Para 35.3)
 
                The Committee observes that the revival effort should aim to optimally allocate resources to ensure the increasing returns over the long run by
improvement in the innovation and implementation capacity and increasing its reserve capacity to meet the challenges of the market driven globalized
economy.(Para 35.4)
 
                The Committee recommends that the objective of the restructuring effort should be:
(iv)
                             Improvement in the innovation ability of the PSEs by: strengthening the R&D and technology management and absorption.
(v)                               Improvement in implementation capacity by: improving the management knowledge and skills, marketing skills, product quality,
and technology familiarity.
(vi)                             Reduction in the vulnerability by improving liquidity and cash flow coverage.(Para 36.1)
 
                Furthermore, the restructuring exercise should include:
(v)
                               Operational restructuring by modifying production process by bringing economics of scale, improving the level of the quality and
improvement in the process technology.  Technological upgradation to target the high-end market.
(vi)                             Marketing restructuring by repositioning and diversifying the marketing and the distribution channels.
(vii)                            Financial and capital restructuring to increase earning power of the company that may entail increased reserve capacity, bank ability
and ability to generate extra budgetary resources.
(viii)                          Organisational restructuring  to motivate performance and formulate a long-term objectives in accordance with the projected trends
of market.
(Para 36.2)
 
                The Committee would like to know the comments and the concrete, tangible action taken or to be taken by the Department on these steps.(Para
36.3)
 
                The Committee notes that the Jharkhand Government has refused the proposal to convert the assets into resources.  The Committee takes
serious note of the clear disjoint in the policies of Central and State Governments that has seriously, affected the prospects of the Company.(Para 38.3)
 
                The Committee directs the DHI to take up the issue to removing bottlenecks with the Government of Jharkhand and inform the Committee of

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
the outcome.(Para 38.4)
 
                The Committee also notes that of the seven companies, five have been referred to BIFR. Of the seven companies only Bridget & Roof is
earning profit.  Appeals against BIFR’s decision in respect of R&C and TSL are pending before AAIFR.  The Committee also notes that the companies
under BYNL group are being placed before BRPSE in phases.  The Committee hopes that BRPSE would expedite the matter.(Para 39.3)
 
The Committee notes that accumulated loss of BYNL during 2003-04 was Rs. 1001.50 crores.  The company with a paid-up capital of Rs. 186
crores has had a negative net worth to the tune of Rs. 838.36 crores in 2003-04.  The Committee directs the DHI to apprise the committee of its course of
action.(Para 39.4)
      
                The Committee notes with grave concern that the financial parameters of the holding company and five of its subsidiaries are dismal.  The
companies that have been referred to BIFR are still waiting for revival or otherwise.(Para 39.5)
 
                The Committee notes that the company’s productivity and profitability suffers from old machinery causing frequent breakdowns and high rate
of rejections.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends for urgent upgradation of technology and machines and hopes that the revival plan would take
care of this aspect.(Para 40.3)
 
                The Committee recommends to the DHI to assess the profitability prospects of TCIL and if satisfied, assist the company in regaining its
financial viability.(Para 41.4)
 
                The Committee recommends that constraints faced by BHEL, need to be addressed by the government with a favorable view to support this
flag-ship company that is financially self-reliant but facing uneven competition due to the policy structure.(Para 43.10)
 
                The Committee observes that the Budgetary scheme and explanatory notes on expenditures do not give sufficient explanation/details of the
allocations.  There is always a possibility of duplication of expenditures through multiple Heads.  The test criterion of the budget is clarity and
transparency instead of ambiguity.  The objective of the parliamentary scrutiny of budget is to know efficacy of the objective and efficiency of
expenditure to achieve the objective.  Expenditures are split into classes and sub-classes, thereby preventing a clearer picture of expenditure for a
particular objective.  The committee would also like to know the rational necessity and objective criteria of the classification of diverse expenditures
under one category and Budget Head instead of the details of allocations.  The committee feels that the DHI should take up these issues for consultation
with the Ministry of Finance.(Para 44.1)
 
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
Minutes of the Meeting
 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 16th May, 2006  in the Committee Room  ‘A’  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
Shri Santosh Bagrodia                  —             Chairman
     
Rajya Sabha
 
Shri Surendra Lath
Suresh Bhardaj
Dr. K. Malaisamy
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
 
Lok Sabha
 
Shri  Guharam Ajgalle
Shri Rajnarayan
Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Smt. Susmita Bauri
Shri Suraj Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
 

180th report of Committee On Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/180threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:59:49]
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Committee Officer
 
2.             The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members of the Committee.
 
3.             The Committee then took up the following reports for   consideration and adoption:-
(i) One Hundred Seventy-ninth Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in Committee's One Hundred Sixty-
eighth  Report on Demands for Grants             (2005-06) of the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
                (ii) One Hundred Eightieth  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in One Hundred Sixty-ninth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Heavy Industries  (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
                (iii) One Hundred Eighty- first  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in One Hundred Seventy-
first  Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)  of the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries;
                 (iv) One Hundred Eighty- second Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred
Sixtieth Report on  the Tax Proposals affecting various segments of industries  of  the Ministry of Small Scale Industries;
                 (v) One Hundred Eighty- third  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred
Seventieth  Report  on  the Demands for Grants                 ( 2005-06) of the Ministry of  Agro and Rural Industries;
                (vi) One Hundred Eighty- fourth  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred 
Seventy- second Report on Demands for Grants           (2005-06) of the Ministry of  Agro and Rural Industries ;
                (vii)  One Hundred Eighty- fifth  Report  on Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred
Seventy-third Report on Inter-Sectoral  Strategic Co-operation to Promote Small Scale Industries of the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries; 
                 (viii) One Hundred Eighty- sixth   Report  on  Action Taken by theGovernment  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred
Seventy-fourth   Report on  Operational Effectiveness of PMRY, REGP and KVI  Schemes  in Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Maharastra of the
Ministry of  Agro and Rural Industries ; 
           
(ix) One Hundred Eighty-seventh Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred Seventy-fifth
Report on Key concern areas  of SSI in select states of the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries;
(x) One Hundred Eighty-eighth Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07)   Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries;
(xi) One Hundred Eighty-ninth   Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07)  Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
(xii) One Hundred Ninetieth  Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of  Department of Heavy Industries ( Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises);  and
(xiii)  One Hundred Ninety - first Report on   Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).
4.             The Committee, after a brief discussion, adopted all the above reports without any modification.
 
  5.           The Committee authorized Shri Surendra Lath  and in his absence Dr. Malaisamy  to present the Report in Rajya Sabha and Shri Ram Singh
Kaswan and in his absence Shri  Guharam Ajgalle to ley a copy of the Report in Lok Sabha.
 
  6. The meeting was adjourned at 4.25 pm.
 
New Delhi
16th May, 2006
K.P. Singh
Under Secretary
 
 