 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2025/Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
 
331 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTY-ONE 
Report 
on 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
the 328th Report of the Committee on ―Review of Performance of Prime Minister’s 
Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP)‖ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th December, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th December, 2025) 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*To be appended at a later stage. 
CONTENTS 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 3 
2.  INTRODUCTION  4 
3.  ACRONYMS 5-6 
4.  
REPORT  
CHAPTER–I: THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS 
WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 8-9 
CHAPTER–II: THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS 
WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
FURTHER IN VIEW OF THE GOVENMENT‟S REPLIES 
10--19 
CHAPTER–III: THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN 
RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED 
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
20-32 
CHAPTER–IV: THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN 
RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE 
STILL AWAITED 
33-34 
5.  ANNEXURE 35-39 
6.  MINUTES OF THE MEETING 40-41 

3 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Reconstituted w.e.f 26th September, 2025) 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva   -    Chairman 
2. Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha 
3. Shri Mahendra Bhatt 
4. Shrimati Sulata Deo 
5. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
6. Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
7. Shri Jose K. Mani 
8. Dr. Parmar Jashvantsinh Salamsinh 
9. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
10. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Afzal Ansari 
12. Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
13. Shri Chandan Chauhan 
14. Shrimati Veena Devi 
15. Shri Arvind Dharmapuri 
16. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
17. Shri Subbarayan K. 
18. Dr. Ganapathy Rajkumar P. 
19. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
20. Km. Sudha R. 
21. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
22.  Shri Rakesh Rathor 
23. Dr. Mallu Ravi 
24. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy 
25. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
26. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
27. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
28. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
29. Shri E. Tukaram 
30. Shrimati Smita Uday Wagh 
31. Shri Rajabhau Parag Prakash Waje 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Ms Garima Jain, Joint Secretary 
2.   Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Director 
3. Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
4.   Shri Prabhakar Singh, Under Secretary 
5. Kumari Manju Meena, Assistant Committee Officer 

4 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this 331st Report on the 
action taken by the Govern ment on the recommendations/ observations contained in the 328th 
Report of the Committee on the “Review of Performance of the Prime Minister‟s 
Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP)” , pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises. 
2. The 328th Report of the Committee  was presented to Parliament o n 28th March 2025. 
The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises furnished the Action Taken Replies  
on 15th July 2025. 
3. The Committee, in its meeting held on the 9th December, 2025, considered and 
adopted this Report. 
 
 Tiruchi Siva 
Chairman 
New Delhi 
9th December, 2025 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
BPL Below Poverty Line 
CDP Cluster Development Programme 
CIBIL Credit Information Bureau (India) Limited 
CMRY Chief Minister‟s Rojgar Yojana 
DIC District Industries Centre 
DFS Department of Financial Services 
DLFTC District Level Task Force Committee 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
EDP Entrepreneurship Development Programme 
FY Financial Year 
GeM Government e-Marketplace 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
IA Implementing Agencies 
IBA Indian Banks‟ Association 
IMEs Informal Micro Enterprises 
IT Information Technology 
J&K Jammu and Kashmir 
KVIC Khadi and Village Industries Commission 
M/o MSME  Ministry of Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises 
MSE Micro and Small Enterprises 
MSEFC Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council 
MSME Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises 
MUDRA Micro Units Development and Refinance Agency 
NAMCABS National Mission for Capacity Building of Bankers for Financing 
MSME Sector 
NER North Eastern Region 
NPA Non-Performing Asset 
ONDC Open Network for Digital Commerce. 
OTS One-Time Settlement Scheme 
PMEGP Prime Minister‟s Employment Generation Programme 

6 
 
PMRY Prime Minister‟s Rojgar Yojana 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
PHDCCI PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
REGP Rural Employment Generation Programme 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
RSETI Rural Self Employment Training Institute 
MSME SAMADHAN Solution for Delayed Payment to Micro and Small Enterprises 
SC Scheduled Caste 
SHG Self Help Group 
SIDBI Small Industries Development Bank of India 
SLBC State Level Bankers' Committee 
ST Scheduled Tribe 
TAT Turn Around Time 
UP Uttar Pradesh 
Udyam Udyam Registration Portal (for MSMEs) 
UT Union Territory 
 
 
 
 
 
  

7 
 
REPORT 
 
This Action Taken Report deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises (MSME) on the recommendations and observations made by the 
Committee in its 328th Report on the Review of the Prime Minister‟s Employment Generation 
Programme (PMEGP). 
 
2. The Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry in respect of the said 
recommendations and observations have been classified as follows: 
 
Chapter-I The Recommen dations/observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
   
Para: 3.8 
(Total- 1) 
 
Chapter-II  The Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue further in view of the Government‟s replies. 
 
Para: 2.7, 2.11, 3.7, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 6.5, 6.7, 6.10, 6.11  
(Total- 11) 
 
Chapter-III The Recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has 
not accepted the replies of the Government. 
  
Para: 1.5.3, 2.9, 2.10, 4.7, 4.12, 4.14, 4.16, 5.3, 5.4, 6.4, 6.13 
(Total- 11) 
 
Chapter-IV The Recommendations/observations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Government are still awaited.  
    
 Para: 2.8, 4.2 
(Total- 2) 
  
3. The Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry, along with the further 
recommendations/observations of the Committee, if any, are provided in the subsequent 
pages.  
 
4. Further, the paragraph numbers cited on the right side of each 
Recommendation/Observation in this Report correspond to those in the 328 th Report and are 
provided for ease of reference. 
 
---  

8 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
FINANCIAL ASPECTS OF THE SCHEME  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.1 The Committee appreciates the Ministry's efforts to fully  utilize the PMEGP budget 
and seek additional funds. It recommends that the Ministry and DFS focus on generating self-
employment through micro-enterprises. The Committee urges IAs and banks to adopt the best 
practices and suggestions from the meetings. It also suggests holding conferences and 
seminars to share experiences and best practices, helping achieve targets. 
(Para 3.8) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
1.2 (i) Key objective of the PMEGP Scheme is to assist entrepreneurs in setting up of 
new, micro enterprises in the non -farm sector to provide employment opportunities to 
traditional artisans/ rural and urban unemployed youth.  
(ii) During the current EFC Cycle i.e. FY 2021 -22 to FY 2025 -26, the scheme has 
fully utilized the allocated funds and over -exceeded its targets in terms of margin 
money subsidy during the first three years resulting in budgetary constraints for FY 
2024-25 and FY 2025 -26. The Finance Minis try has been approached for 
enhancement of budget outlay of the programme for FY 2025-26. 
(iii) Following initiatives are being undertaken to achieve the targets under PMEGP: 
a) Under various National/State level events of the Ministry such as MSME Day, 
State Conclaves etc., successful beneficiaries under various schemes of the 
Ministry including PMEGP are invited for experience sharing on 
establishment of their enterprise, business expansion, profit making, 
employment generation etc. Multiple spaces are provi ded to scheme 
beneficiaries to showcase their products and services for enhanced visibility 
under various exhibitions organized by the Ministry and State Governments. 
b) Various seminars and conferences are held at different levels to facilitate, 
mobilize, an d provide support to implementing agencies such as Khadi 
Boards, DICs, etc., to help them achieve targets. State Directors conference is 
also held regularly for dissemination of information and interaction between 
them for including best practices, sharing  experiences and helping each other 
in achieving the targets. 
c) At field level, Seminars and workshops are regularly held by KVIC field 
offices for beneficiaries to share experiences and implement best practices. 
Implementing Agencies also organize meetings focusing on streamlining loan 
disbursal, application processing and use of digital platforms for PMEGP 
proposals at district level with the co -ordination of respective Bank‟s Lead 
District Manager (LDM) in each district. 

9 
 
d) Additionally Banks have been organizing several conferences and meetings in 
collaboration with different government agencies for sharing best practices in 
achieving goals. Bank branches also conduct monthly customer service 
meetings, where features of government schemes are propagated to bo th 
customers and non -customers. Existing PMEGP customers are also invited in 
such meetings to explain how they have benefitted through the scheme. 
--- 

10 
 
CHAPTER–II 
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE FURTHER IN VI EW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES 
 
SALIENT FEATURES OF THE SCHEME  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.1 The Committee acknowledges PMEGP as a skill-based program preserving traditional 
artisanship and it recommends the ministry that it must remove the VIII standard education 
requirement under PMEGP, recognizing that many artisans acquire skills through family 
traditions and mentorship rather than formal education. 
 (Para 2.7) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
2.2 (i) Under the PMEGP Scheme, there is no requirement for any educational 
qualification for setting up projects costing up to Rs. 10 lakh in manufacturing sector 
and up to Rs. 5 lakh in service sector.  
(ii) Further, during the last four years i.e. from FY 2021 -22 to FY 2024-25 around 
78% of the units assisted under PMEGP have been under the project cost of below Rs. 
10 lakh. Therefore, majority of the current beneficiary pool of PMEGP is outside the 
ambit of the educational qualification criteria. This is expect ed to be so in the future 
given the thrust of the Ministry for assisting units with lower project size. 
(iii) However, for projects ranging more than Rs 10 lakh under manufacturing and 
5 lakh under service sector respectively, education qualification crite ria is kept due to 
following considerations: 
a) Successful running of an enterprise over a longer horizon of time duration 
requires adequate knowledge about accounting, taxation, financial 
management and banking formalities apart from basic skills that are ac quired 
through family traditions and mentorship. 
b) Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP) training is provided to 
potential beneficiaries with the objective to provide orientation and awareness 
pertaining to various managerial and operational functions  such as finance, 
production, marketing, enterprise management, banking formalities, book -
keeping, statutory compliances etc. Accordingly, a minimum level of 
educational qualification of a VIII th standard is considered necessary for 
beneficiaries with lar ger project size to enable them to effectively gain from 
the EDP training and run their business sustainably. 
c) Ministry has undertaken a third -party evaluation study wherein major 
objectives include understanding why PMEGP units become non -functional 
and their transition into NPAs. As per the draft report submitted, a positive co -
relation between educational qualification of a PMEGP beneficiary and long -
term sustainability of its enterprise has been identified. The educational profile 
of NPA unit owners indicated that a significant majority possess relatively low 

11 
 
formal education where over 51% have education levels between IX to XII 
standard, while 35% have limited education up to VIII standard. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.3 The Committee recommends that i nstead of the existing input based EDP training the 
Ministry must implement an output -based training and eligibility system under the PMEGP 
scheme. The system is to link the approval of loans or subsidies to measurable outcomes, 
such as business readiness, skill proficiency, and a viable business plan. This approach would 
enhance accountability, support capable applicants, and improve the scheme‟s effectiveness. 
         (Para 2.11) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
2.4 Currently the following sequence/process is followed in the PMEGP Scheme: 
i) Scrutiny at IA level - Under PMEGP, once an application is submitted by an applicant, a 
scrutiny of following aspects is carried out at IA level before the application is forwarded 
to the Bank for taking a credit decision: 
a) Evaluation of marks obtained in the scorecard: The applicants are mandated to 
undertake a scorecard assessment to self -evaluate their business readiness and 
capabilities. Parameters such as marketing tie -ups, skill certification, and experience 
in the line of trade are already part of the scorecard.  
b) Detailed Project Reports  
c) Activities whether permissible and not under Negative List 
d) Financial and other documents, etc.  
ii) Handholding supportat IA level : IAs provide support to potential applicants under 
PMEGP through the following: 
a) A wide range of more than 1,000 Model Detailed Project Reports have been prepared 
on various industries and made available on the PMEGP online portal and KVIC 
website for the benefit of participants.  
b) Technical experts & Bank Officials (Retd.) have been engaged by KVIC to provide 
support to prospective PMEGP beneficiaries during application stage to avoid 
rejection at bank level. 
c) Potential beneficiaries are identified during the awareness campsfor handholding 
support in identification of  activities, formulation of DPR, documentation, online 
application, co -ordination with the Financing Bank etc. through the expert 
resources/agencies.  
iii) Bank appraisal  - Subsequent to IAs scrutiny, Banks appraise the projects both 
technically and economicall y after ensuring that each project fulfills the criteria of 
Industry, Per Capita Investment, Own Contribution, Rural Areas and Negative Activity 
List and take their own credit decision on the basis of viability of each project.  
iv) EDP Training - Once a bank has taken a credit decision and loan has been sanctioned 
against a PMEGP application, Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP) training 
is mandated to be provided to beneficiaries. EDP training is meant to be input - based 
learning and orientation to the beneficiaries with the objective of generating awareness on 
managerial and operational functions needed for successful running of an enterprise. An 
output-based training system as proposed would not be facilitative to beneficiaries from 
remote and rural background as approximately 80% of the scheme beneficiaries belong to 
rural areas. 

12 
 
2.5 KVIC has been advised vide letter dated 12.06.2025 by this Ministry to take 
necessary modifications and upgradations in the existing curriculum of EDP training with 
modules on digital literacy and customized sector specific components benefitting the 
beneficiaries through upskilling. Furthermore, KVIC has also been advised to take measures 
to support beneficiaries on various aspects of GEM portal and ONDC etc. 
 
FINANCIAL ASPECTS OF THE SCHEME 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.6 The Committee commends the Ministry for exceeding PMEGP targets since FY2021 - 
22 and extending the scheme until 2025-26 with increased funding. However, it reiterates that 
the scheme‟s success should be measured by employment generated, not by Margin Money 
utilized (as stated in the Committee's 251st Report). The Committee recommends proper fund 
usage and job creation, expecting the increased budget to increase youth employment 
opportunities. 
(Para 3.7) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
2.7(i) Since inception i.e. FY 2008 -09 till FY 2024 -25, employment opportunities to an 
estimated ~1.02 crore persons have been generated under PMEGP by assisting 10.18 
lakh micro enterprises with Margin Money subsidy of Rs. 27,166.07 Crores.  
     (ii) Furthermore, to evaluate the scheme‟s impact on employment generation and 
enterprise creation, Ministry has conducted a third -party evaluation study covering 
28,200 PMEGP units. As per the draft report, the average employment per un it 
emerged to be about 10 workers. When distributed by industry type, in the 
manufacturing sector, on an average approximately 12 workers were employed per 
unit, while the average employment generated by service and trading sectors stood at 
approximately 8 and 10 respectively. 
 (iii) During the current EFC Cycle i.e. FY 2021 -22 to FY 2025 -26, the scheme has 
exceeded the targets during FY 2021 -22 to FY 2023 -24 resulting in budgetary 
constraints for the remaining two financial years i.e. FY 2024 -25 and FY 202 5-26. 
Thus, the Finance Ministry has been approached for enhancement of budget outlay of 
the programme for FY 2025 -26 to support additional number of micro - enterprises 
with a special focus on SC, ST, Women and Youth entrepreneurs. 
 
DEVELOPMENTS–INNOVATIONS & MODIFICATIONS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.8 The Committee appreciates the Ministry's involvement of technical/ marketing 
experts and ex -bankers in guiding applicants. It recommends establishing a dedicated help 
desk to provide real -time assistance a nd offer continuous hand -holding support throughout 
the application process till the final loan disbursement. 
(Para 4.3) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
2.9 (i) To provide real-time assistance and offer continuous handholding support to potential 
beneficiaries throu ghout the application process till final loan disbursement, KVIC has 
been advised vide letter dated 12.06.2025to operationalize Help Desks in its State Offices 

13 
 
from existing resources. Additionally, KVIC has established a dedicated helpline number 
at their Headquarters to provide support to prospective beneficiaries for any queries they 
may have.  
(ii) Apart from involvement of technical experts and retired bank officials, additional 
initiatives undertaken to provide support throughout the application process to avail 
benefits under PMEGP include the following: 
a) A wide range of more than 1,000 Model Detailed Project Reports has been prepared 
on various industries and made available on the PMEGP online portal and KVIC 
website to be showcased during the awareness camps for the benefit of participants.  
b) IAs organize special awareness camps in the poor performing districts to improve the 
performance of the scheme. The potential beneficiaries identified during the 
awareness camp are provided handholding suppor t in identification of activities, 
formulation of DPR, documentation, online application, co -ordination with the 
Financing Bank etc. by the IAs through the expert resources/agencies.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.10 To improve outreach, the Committee urges  the Ministry and banks to enhance 
publicity through media, workshops, awareness camps, and social media, with a special focus 
on youth and women artisans for employment generation. Additionally, the Ministry is 
encouraged to collaborate with RBI and Rural  Self-Employment Training Institutes (RSETI) 
to educate entrepreneurs and strengthen PMEGP promotion. 
(Para 4.4) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
2.11 (i) To enhance publicity through media, workshops, awareness camps and social 
media, major initiatives that are being undertaken under PMEGP include: 
a) KVIC in close coordination with other IAs organizes awareness camps throughout the 
country to popularize PMEGP. While conducting awareness programmes, webinars, 
workshops, etc., more emphasis is given to rural, backward, u nder-served areas, 
Aspirational districts and NE Region particularly for SC/ST, women and youth 
beneficiaries. During FY 2024-25, KVIC has conducted 330 such awareness camps.  
b) PMEGP is also being popularized by Implementing Agencies through publicity 
campaigns including posters, banners, hoardings, radio jingles, television messages, 
advertisements in national/local papers in English, Hindi and local languages, social 
media and other related activities. 
c) Banks are regularly publicizing through social media, Audio Visual media and 
Workshops for publicity of various Govt Schemes including PMEGP with special 
focus on employment generation for different segment of customers. Banks have also 
placed Scheme related information on their respective websites along with  link to the 
PMEGP portal for applying online. 
 
(ii) Under PMEGP, Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP) is provided 
to beneficiaries in collaboration with accredited Training Centers run by Central 
Government including Rural Self-Employment Training Institutes (RSETI). 

14 
 
 
(iii) Banks have established Financial Literacy Centers (FLCs) across all States/ 
Union Territories for promoting financial awareness by disseminating essential 
financial knowledge to individuals across various segment of society.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.12 The Committee appreciates the inclusion of aspirational districts and transgender 
applicants. However, it emphasizes the importance of upskilling, reskilling and unlearning. It 
recommends developing training modules on digi tal literacy, financial management, and 
entrepreneurship in collaboration with the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship. 
(Para 4.5) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
2.13 (i) Currently under the scheme, Entrepreneurship Development Programme 
(EDP) is pro vided to potential beneficiaries with the objective of orientation and 
awareness pertaining to various managerial and operational functions like finance, 
production, marketing, enterprise management, banking formalities, book -keeping, 
statutory compliances etc. to run their business effectively.  
(ii) KVIC has been advised vide letter dated 12.06.2025 by this Ministry to take 
necessary modifications and upgradations in the existing curriculum of EDP training 
with modules on digital literacy and customized s ector specific components 
benefitting the beneficiaries through upskilling. Furthermore, KVIC has also been 
advised to take measures to support beneficiaries on various aspects of GEM portal 
and ONDC etc. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.14 The Committee further recommends monitoring the impact of increased project costs 
and relaxing the negative list for animal husbandry activities. The Ministry should implement 
a quarterly review system to assess the uptake of these changes and ensure that they 
effectively address entrepreneurs' capital needs. 
 (Para 4.6) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
2.15 (i) The Ministry published new PMEGP guidelines in year 2022 with enhanced 
project cost, which has been doubled from Rs. 25 to 50 lakh in Manufacturing sector 
and Rs. 10 to 20 lakh  in Service sector. During the last 4 years i.e. FY 2021 -22 to FY 
2024-25, project cost and Margin Money subsidy per unit have increased by over 26% 
and 28% respectively, leading to higher outgo of subsidy under the Scheme and 
impacting the no. of beneficiaries. 
(ii) The negative list for animal husbandry has been relaxed under the scheme and 
following activities are permitted: 
a) Dairy — Milk and other dairy products through primarily Cows but also 
sheep, goats, camels, buffaloes, horses, and donkeys. 
b) Poultry - Poultry, kept for their eggs and for their meat, include chickens, 
turkeys, geese and ducks. 

15 
 
c) Aquaculture —Farming of aquatic organisms including fish, molluscs, 
crustaceans and aquatic plants.  
d) Activities related to insects - including Bees, Sericulture , etc. has also been 
allowed under the Scheme. 
(iii) Review meetings are held on a frequent basis in the Ministry on various 
aspects of performance of PMEGP with KVIC, Banks, India Post and other 
stakeholders including State Governments. Banker‟s meetings at State, Zonal and Top 
level are held to monitor and assess the impact and issues associated with the 
performance and implementation of the Scheme. Further, field visits are also made by 
the Ministry and KVIC officials to PMEGP units for feedback from ben eficiaries on 
the implementation aspects of the Scheme. 
ON-GROUND ASSESSMENT AND COLLABORATIVE INSIGHTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.16 The Committee appreciates the efforts of State Governments and banks in promoting 
PMEGP. It recommends that banks shou ld take more responsibility in providing financial 
literacy, forwarding applications, and assessing project viability. The Ministry of MSME 
should streamline the process and continue offline applications for less educated applicants. 
The Committee recommen ds reviewing State schemes and improving PMEGP. It also urges 
KVIC to be more proactive in recovering dues from beneficiaries. 
(Para 6.5) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
2.17 (i) Under PMEGP, Banks appraise the projects both technically and economically 
after ensuring that each project fulfills inter alia the criteria of Industry, Per Capita 
Investment, Own Contribution, Rural Areas and Negative Activity List and take their 
own credit decision on the basis of viability of each project.  
(ii) CMDs of all major banks have been advised by the Ministry to issue 
instructions to bank branches to take steps to reduce the rejection of applications and 
to avoid the reasons i.e. “Out of Service Area” and “Target Achieved” as basis for 
rejection of applications. CMDs have also been advised to take suitable steps in 
making PMEGP beneficiaries aware about the provision of 2 nd loan and encourage 
them to apply for the same.  
(iii) Accordingly, there has been an 18% increase witnessed in the applications 
sanctioned by Banks out of th e total applications forwarded to them (from 22% to 
40%) during FY 2019 -20 to FY 2024 -25 respectively. Furthermore, % rejection rates 
by Banks have decreased by more than 18% from 64% to 46% during the period. 
(iv) Since January 2024, all IAs are accepting  PMEGP applications in physical 
form (offline mode) in 12 scheduled languages i.e., Hindi, Gujarati, Malayalam, 
Punjabi, Manipuri, Bangla, Marathi, Tamil, Assamese, Kannada, Oriya and Telugu in 
addition to English. 
(v) To further enhance the accessibility of beneficiaries from remote areas, KVIC 
has been advised vide letter dated 12.06.2025 to accept offline applications in all 22 
scheduled languages and organize awareness programs and disseminate IEC material 
and video clips in regional languages to promote PMEGP scheme in remote areas. 

16 
 
Actions by Banks for effective implementation of PMEGP: 
 
2.18 Banks provide detailed information about PMEGP on its official website, including 
eligibility criteria, application procedures, and benefits. This ensures that po tential 
entrepreneurs have easy access to necessary information to apply for the scheme.  
Banks have taken several measures to promote PMEGP scheme and to handhold less 
educated applicants as under: 
1. Awareness campaign:  Banks have been organizing MSME Credit outreach programmes 
and awareness campaigns periodically at various regional centers across the country.  
During these programs, banks effectively communicate detailed benefits of various govt 
sponsored schemes, including PMEGP covering all stages from assessing project 
viability, application process till disbursement. 
2. Skill Development through RSETIs:  Banks are conducting extensive skill development 
training programs and awareness campaigns through RSETIs under different schemes 
including PMEGP. 
3. Financial Literacy Centers (FLCs):   Banks through FLCs are actively engaged in 
promoting financial awareness by disseminating essential financial knowledge to 
individuals across various segment of society. 
2.19 The process of applying for loan under PMEGP is online. However, banks‟ branches 
accept offline applications also and guide the applicants about applying for the loan through 
portal. 
2.20 Further, Banks provide financial consultancy/ financial management services through 
FLCs & RSETIs to the borrowers by providing them holistic guidance, support and nurturing 
them. 
 
2.21 Field functionaries are taking care of less educated applicants with the help of branch 
staffs, Business Correspondents (BCs), FLCs, Centers for Financial Literacy (CFLs) and 
RSETIs who help them in local dialect. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.22 To improve PMEGP‟s accessibility, success rate, and participation, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry must collaborate with Department of Financ ial Services (DFS) 
to include more number of private banks to promote PMEGP Scheme. State -level PMEGP 
bodies should be empowered to identify and prioritize key sectors specific to their regions, 
with a reduced beneficiary contribution requirement for economically weak er sections in 
these sectors. 
 (Para 6.7) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
2.23 (i) Presently, more than 100 banks, including all PSBs, private banks and co -
operative banks have been onboarded on the PMEGP portal as Financing Banks. 
Around 19% of the loans sanctioned under PMEGP were undertaken by private Banks 
during the last 4 years i.e. FY 2021 -22 to FY 2024 -25, enhancing their contribution 
under the scheme.The recommendation for including more private banks has been 
taken up by the Ministry with DFS for implementation. 

17 
 
(ii) Under PMEGP, Special category beneficiaries such as SCs, STs, OBCs, 
Minorities, Women, Ex -servicemen, Physically Handicapped, Transgenders, 
beneficiaries belonging to Northeastern Region, Hill and Border areas, and 
Aspirational Districts are benefitted with higher margin money subsidy rate and lower 
own contribution rate on the project cost.  
(iii) For prioritizing key region -specific sectors, KVIC provides specific training 
programs or support for Industries like handicrafts, Vegetable  & fruit processing 
under food processing, computer trainings etc. Furthermore, KVIC has been advised 
vide letter dated 12.06.2025 to collaborate with State MSME Divisions/Departments 
and identify and explore activity wise sub sectors specific to their reg ion for focused 
and dedicated support. 
ON-GROUND ASSESSMENT AND COLLABORATIVE INSIGHTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.24 The Committee, concerned about the high rejection rate of applications, it 
recommends that the Ministry must implement an automated, menu-driven application form 
to screen out ineligible applicants. It also recommends forming committees with key 
stakeholders to reduce bank branch -level rejections and ensure applications are not rejected 
without valid reasons. 
(Para 6.10) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
2.25 (i) Under PMEGP, a scrutiny of the following is carried out at IA level before an 
application is forwarded to a Bank for taking a credit decision: 
a) Evaluation of marks obtained in the scorecard: The applicants are mandated to 
undertake a scorecard assessment to self -evaluate their business readiness and 
capabilities. Parameters such as marketing tie -ups, skill certification, and 
experience in the line of trade are already part of the scorecard. Upon reaching 
the eligible score, applicants are allowed for application submission and 
further scrutiny at the IA level. 
b) Detailed Project Reports  
c) Activities whether permissible and not under Negative List 
d) Financial and other documents, etc.  
(ii) Subsequently, Banks appraise the projects both technically and economically 
and take their own credit decision on the basis of viability of each project.  
(iii) For reducing rejection of PMEGP applications by Banks, the following 
initiatives have been undertaken: 
a) CMDs of all major banks have been advised by the Ministry to issue 
instructions to bank branches to take steps to reduce the rejection of 
applications and to avoid the reasons i.e. “Out of Service Area” and “Target 
Achieved” as basis for rejection of applications. Further, CMDs of all major 
banks having high rejection rates have been advised to improve the 
performance of PMEGP scheme. 

18 
 
b) Applications rejected by Banks have decreased by more than 18% from 64% 
to 46% during FY 2019-20 to FY 2024-25. 
c) To enhance the quality of applications to reduce rejections, technical experts 
& Bank Officials (Retd.) have been engaged to provide handholding support 
to prospective PMEGP beneficiaries during application stage. More than 1,000 
model Detailed Project Reports  on various industries have been uploaded on 
PMEGP portal. 
d) Further, committee approach is already in place for validating rejections under 
PMEGP Scheme and it is ensured that rejections are referred to next higher 
authority and are not done at the level of sanctioning authority. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.26 The Committee also found that there is a lack of clarity on project details and funding 
among applicants. The Committee recommends that the Ministry and banks provide detailed 
educational materials a nd training to help applicants prepare project reports and manage 
funds effectively.  
(Para 6.11) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
2.27 Various initiatives undertaken for providing handholding to potential PMEGP 
applicants in terms of improving quality of application s and enhanced project viability 
include the following: 
a) A wide range of more than 1,000 Model of Detailed Project Reports have been 
prepared on various industries and made available on the PMEGP online portal and 
KVIC website to be showcased during the awa reness camp for the benefit of 
participants.  
b) Technical experts & Bank Officials (Retd.) have been engaged to provide 
handholding support to prospective PMEGP beneficiaries during application stage to 
avoid rejection at bank level. 
c) IAs organize special awareness camps in the poor performing districts to improve the 
performance of the scheme. The potential beneficiaries identified during the 
awareness camp are provided handholding support in identification of activities, 
formulation o f DPR, documentation, online application, co -ordination with the 
Financing Bank etc. by the IAs through the expert resources/agencies.  
d) To provide real-time assistance and offer continuous handholding support to potential 
beneficiaries throughout the appli cation process till final loan disbursement, KVIC 
has been advised to operationalize Help Desks in its State Offices from existing 
resources. 
e) Various Seminars, conferences and workshops are regularly held by KVIC field 
offices to share experiences and implement best practices at the ground level to 
facilitate and mobilize support to potential beneficiaries. 
f) Banks through FLCs conduct various workshops, seminars to educate and promote 
financial awareness to manage the funds effectively apart from providi ng educational 
materials through FLCs to help applicants. 

19 
 
2.28 To encourage applicants to take advantage of credit facilities, awareness is being 
disseminated among beneficiaries by Bank staff  about PMEGP Scheme through awareness 
campaigns, brochures, vis its by field staffs etc. These initiatives enable them to understand 
about the scheme‟s benefits and application procedures 
 
--- 
 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER–III 
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.1 The Committee, in its 327 th Demand for Grant Report (2025 -26) for the Ministry of 
MSME, has recommended the creation of a "nano" category within the MSME framework, 
with a financial limit of Rs. 10 lakh. The Committee recommends the Ministry to provide 
additional benefits and focused support under the PMEGP Scheme. This initiative aims to 
enhance access to credit and subsidies for micro -entrepreneurs, rural artisans, and street 
vendors, fostering financial inclusion in rural and semi-urban areas. 
 (Para 1.5.3) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
3.2 (i) The majority of the MSMEs fall in the category of Micro Enterprises. Through 
the revised definition of  MSMEs which came into effect on 01.04.2025, an attempt 
has been made to incorporate the dynamic changes within the MSME ecosystem. 
Further, the Ministry has made special efforts to provide support to Informal Micro 
Enterprises (IMEs) which were about 2.72 crore as on 30th June 2025 as below: 
a) Udyam Assist Platform (UAP) launched in association with Small Industries 
Development Bank of India (SIDBI)for formalization of Informal Micro 
Enterprises (IMEs) which are outside the ambit of GST on 11.01.2023.These 
IMEs are almost 45% of the total MSMEs and do not have a turnover of more 
than Rs. 40 Lakh. They have been made eligible for Priority Sector Lending and 
marketing support of the Ministry.  
b) Special Provision for the Informal Micro Enterprises (IME)‟ under Cr edit 
Guarantee Scheme was launched on 14.02.2024 having guarantee covers credit 
facilities up to Rs. 20 lakh with 85% coverage, with no primary security required. 
(ii) Under PMEGP, the Ministry has taken the following measures to facilitate 
access to credit and subsidies for smaller projects below 10 lakh: 
a) Priority is given to applications from beneficiaries with project cost below Rs. 10 
lakh. It may be noted that during the last four years i.e. from FY 2021 -22 to FY 
2024-25 around 78% of the units assiste d under PMEGP have been under the 
project cost of below 10 lakh. 
b) Under PMEGP Guidelines, no collateral security is to be insisted by Banks for 
projects involving loan upto 10 lakh. Strict compliance of this provision has also 
been reemphasized by the Minis try during Top Level Bankers‟ meetings and 
written communication to all major Banks. 
c) PMEGP uses a scorecard -based evaluation by the Implementing Agencies (IAs) 
during application processing. For projects with a cost below Rs. 10 lakh, the 
qualifying score is 50 marks as compared to 60 marks for higher -value projects. 

21 
 
This facilitates forwarding of PMEGP applications with a lower project size in a 
liberal way. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry’s reply mentions preferential treatment 
for projects below ₹10 lakh, easier scorecard norms and collateral -free loans. However, 
these steps fall short of the Committee’s recommendation to formally recognise a 
separate ―Nano‖ category. Without clear policy status, dedicated  targets or budgetary 
allocation, these smallest enterprises remain indistinguishable in reporting and may 
continue to be overlooked in implementation. 
 
3.4 The Committee therefore reiterates that a distinct ―Nano Enterprise‖ category—
covering investments up to ₹10 lakh —should be notified. Such recognition will ensure 
dedicated monitoring, simplified processes and assured funding for first -generation 
entrepreneurs in rural and semi -urban areas. This small but well -defined tier would 
strengthen the foundation of self-employment and inclusive growth. 
 
SALIENT FEATURES OF THE SCHEME 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.5 The Committee recommends that the Ministry must set up a single -window clearance 
system to facilitate faster approvals and reduce procedural delays,  improving the overall 
effectiveness of the scheme. 
(Para 2.9) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
3.6 The Ministry has taken initiatives towards operationalizing a single-window clearance 
mechanism to facilitate faster approvals and reduce procedural delays through dev elopment 
of a new PMEGP portal which is under last stage of development. Key advancements under 
new portal include: 
a) Integrated digital platform for end -to-end processing of applications and real -time 
API integration with all stakeholders to minimise delays . All key stakeholders 
including Implementing Agencies, Banks, EDP training partners, and physical 
verification agency are on boarded onto this unified system 
b) Other major enhancements are: 
i. Aadhaar-based e KYC and auto-verification of applicant details  
ii. Auto-tagging of rural/urban category through LGD codes 
iii. Integration with EDP training institutions  
iv. Workflow-based application routing across agencies  
v. API integration of the portal with the Digital Lending Platforms (DLPs) of banks, 
which allows for faster an d more transparent loan processing. All updates 
regarding sanction/rejection, disbursement and Margin Money claim by banks are 
reflected real-time on the portal  

22 
 
vi. Provision of mobile -based SMS notifications to applicants at major stages of the 
application l ifecycle including application approval/rejection by Implementing 
Agencies and Banks, bank loan sanctioning, Margin Money approval and 
disbursement status, reminders for mandatory EDP training, Udyam registration, 
physical verification, final MM adjustment  etc. to improve real -time 
communication and transparency. 
vii. New mobile app which enables beneficiaries to track applications through mobile 
and raise grievances in the system. 
 
The above developments aim to establish a more responsive, applicant -friendly, 
and transparent system in line with the Committee‟s recommendations. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.7 The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s progress in developing a single -
window PMEGP portal with integrated workflows, real -time updates, and enhanced 
applicant services. However, the reply lacks clarity on the exact timeline for full 
operationalization, the readiness and compliance of all banks and agencies, and the 
mechanism for effective grievance resolution. Details on system testing, data s ecurity, 
and periodic monitoring are also not provided. 
 
3.8 The Committee recommends that the Ministry prescribe firm rollout timelines, 
ensure the mandatory on -boarding of all stakeholders, and establish a clear grievance -
resolution framework within the portal. The Committee further advises conducting 
regular system audits, providing structured user training, and submitting periodic 
reports on the portal’s performance, level of adoption, and its impact on reducing 
delays. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.9 The Committee observes that delays and lack of real -time communication in the 
PMEGP application process leave applicants unaware of their status of application. It 
recommends that the Ministry must implement a mobile -based notification system to provide 
real-time updates on PMEGP applications in that single window clearance system. This 
system must inform applicants at each stage, notify them of any delays, apprise about the 
reasons of rejection of their applications both by banks and nodal agencies, and of fer updates 
via SMS and additionally a mobile app to give feedback mechanism. 
(Para 2.10) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
3.10 The Ministry has taken initiatives towards operationalizing a single-window clearance 
mechanism to facilitate faster approvals and reduce p rocedural delays through development 
of a new PMEGP portal which is under last stage of development. Key advancements under 
new portal include: 
c) Integrated digital platform for end -to-end processing of applications  and real -time 
API integration with all stakeholders to minimise delays. All key stakeholders 
including Implementing Agencies, Banks, EDP training partners, and physical 
verification agency are on-boarded onto this unified system 

23 
 
d) Other major enhancements are: 
i. Aadhaar-based eKYC and auto-verification of applicant details  
ii. Auto-tagging of rural/urban category through LGD codes 
iii. Integration with EDP training institutions  
iv. Workflow-based application routing across agencies  
v. API integration of the portal with the Dig ital Lending Platforms (DLPs) of banks, 
which allows for faster and more transparent loan processing. All updates 
regarding sanction/rejection, disbursement and Margin Money claim by banks are 
reflected real-time on the portal  
vi. Provision of mobile -based SMS notifications to applicants at major stages of the 
application lifecycle including application approval/rejection by Implementing 
Agencies and Banks, bank loan sanctioning, Margin Money approval and 
disbursement status, reminders for mandatory EDP traini ng, Udyam registration, 
physical verification, final MM adjustment etc. to improve real -time 
communication and transparency. 
vii. New mobile app which enables beneficiaries to track applications through mobile 
and raise grievances in the system. 
3.11 The above developments aim to establish a more responsive, applicant -friendly, and 
transparent system in line with the Committee‟s recommendations. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.12 The Committee notes that the Ministry has introduced significant digital 
improvements through the new PMEGP portal, including real -time integrations, SMS 
alerts, and a mobile app. It appreciates that t hese steps are broadly aligned with the 
Committee’s recommendation. However, the reply does not clearly confirm whether 
applicants will receive complete stage -wise updates, detailed reasons for delays or 
rejections by both banks and implementing agencies, or how the Ministry will ensure 
timely and accurate communication. The absence of a clear rollout timeline and 
monitoring mechanism is also noted. 
 
3.13 The Committee recommends that the Ministry ensure the notification system 
provides comprehensive, real-time updates at every stage, including specific reasons for 
delays and rejections. A clear implementation timeline, mandatory statu s updating by 
all stakeholders, and a monitoring system to verify accuracy and responsiveness should 
be put in place. Pilot testing of the portal and mobile app before full launch is also 
advised to ensure smooth and user-friendly functioning. 
 
DEVELOPMENTS–INNOVATIONS & MODIFICATIONS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.14 The Committee notes the discontinuation of the District Level Task Force 
Committees (DLFTC) due to the online portal. It recommends that state and district -level 
bodies continue monitoring to maximize PMEGP‟s impact. These bodies should address 

24 
 
applicant issues, improve processes, and encourage local participation. They should conduct 
regular reviews, guide applicants, and track progress. A feedback loop with central offices 
should inform policy adjustments and improve the scheme‟s effectiveness.  
(Para 4.7) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
3.15 Under PMEGP, the following measures are in place to monitor and evaluate the 
implementation and impact of PMEGP at State and District level: 
i) State level Review by Principal Secretaries (Industries) with representatives of KVIC,  
KVIB and senior officials of Banks. 
ii) District level Monitoring Committee chaired by District Magistrate and members i.e. lead 
Bank manager, representatives of IAs, NYKS/SC/ST corporation, MSME -DI, Panchayat,  
RSETI, RUDSETI, DIC of the district to monitor the performance of implementation of 
PMEGP in their respective district on quarterly basis and submit report to 
Commissioner/Principal Secretary(Industries). 
iii) Review meetings by KVIC with Implementing Agencies (IAs) i.e. State offices of Khadi 
and Village I ndustries Commission, State Khadi and Village Industries Boards, State 
District Industries Centers and financial institutions.  
3.16 Review meetings with major banks at State/Zonal/National level to ensure proper 
sanctioning of loans, disbursement of margi n money, bottlenecks in implementation are 
resolved, outcomes are effectively achieved, and targets are met. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.17 The Committee notes that while the Ministry has outlined various state and 
district-level monitoring mechanisms, it has not clarified if these effectively replace the 
discontinued DLFTCs. Moreover, the reply also lacks details on how applicant 
grievances are addressed, how local participation is promoted, and the frequency and 
impact of these reviews. Fur thermore, there is no mention of a formal feedback system 
to the central office for policy improvements, as recommended by the Committee. 
3.18 The Committee reiterates its recommendation and strongly recommends the 
Ministry to institutionalize mechanisms w ithin these committees to proactively address 
applicant issues, streamline processes, and boost local awareness and participation. 
Regular, documented reviews should be supplemented by transparent tracking of 
grievance redressal and process enhancements. T he Committee also emphasizes 
establishing a robust and formal feedback system from district and state bodies to the 
central level to enable timely policy revisions based on ground realities. Periodic impact 
assessments and public disclosure of monitoring o utcomes will enhance accountability 
and maximize the scheme’s effectiveness. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.19 The Committee notes that high interest rates and inconsistencies across banks are 
challenging for PMEGP loan applicants, particularly given their lack of regular income. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry, in collaboration with the RBI, must establish a 
uniform and streamlined interest/margin rate for MSMEs across all banks. Furthermore, the 

25 
 
Ministry should focus on increasing allocations an d enhancing outreach efforts to ensure the 
scheme reaches its full potential. 
(Para 4.12) 
 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
3.20 (i) Currently under PMEGP, Normal rate of interest is charged. Repayment 
schedule may range between 3 to 7 years after an initial moratorium as may be 
prescribed by the concerned Bank/financial institution. Furthermore, RBI has issued 
necessary guidelines to t he Banks to accord priority in sanctioning projects under 
PMEGP.  
(ii) Reserve Bank of India has progressively deregulated the interest rate on 
advances sanctioned by Banks in a calibrated manner with certain prudential 
prescriptions. As such, the interest  rates on advances are determined by banks with 
the approval of their respective Board of Directors, subject to the broad regulatory 
framework issued in this regard by the RBI. The interest rate on advances depend on 
several factors such as cost of funds, operating cost, tenor of the advance etc. apart 
from credit risk of the borrower. 
(iii) Under PMEGP, initiatives have been taken for increase in budget allocations 
to enhance the scalability of the scheme benefits to targeted beneficiaries. PMEGP 
was appro ved with an outlay of Rs.13,554.42 Cr for the period FY 2021 -22 to FY 
2025-26. However, Rs. 11,221.29 Cr Expenditure has been incurred during the initial 
4 years leaving budgetary FY 2025 -26 as the scheme had exceeded its targets. The 
Finance Ministry has been approached for enhancement of budget outlay of the 
programme for FY 2025-26. 
(iv) Under outreach efforts, KVIC has conducted 330 awareness camps during FY 
2024-25 in all States/UTs including backward and under -performing areas, 
Aspirational districts, North Eastern Region, etc. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.21 The Committee finds the reasoning  of the Ministry that interest rates are 
deregulated and left to individual banks —unsatisfactory. Such an approach results in 
uneven lending terms for beneficiaries of the same government scheme, undermining 
fairness and predictability. 
 
3.22 The Committee reiterates that the Ministry, in consultation with DFS and the 
RBI, should work towards a uniform or concessional interest band for PMEGP loans. 
Incentives like priority -sector credit recognition or special refinance support may be 
explored to make this feasible. A predictable lending framework will ensure that 
applicants are not disadvantaged merely by the bank they approach. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.23 The Committee recommends that the Ministry must strengthen capacity -building 
initiatives by updating training modules, increasing collaboration with industry experts, and 
expanding outreach in rural areas. It also suggests introducing digital skill s programmes and 

26 
 
providing continuous post -training support to enhance project sustainability and 
entrepreneurial success. 
(Para 4.14) 
 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
3.24 Multiple capacity -building initiatives have been supported through various schemes 
of the Ministry as mentioned below: 
i) The network of Technology Centres / Tool Rooms in the country supports MSMEs in 
providing access to advanced manufacturing technologies, training & skilling and 
business consultancy services to make them competitive.  
ii) Under PMEGP, Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP) is provided to 
potential beneficiaries with the objective to provide orientation and awareness pertaining 
to various managerial and operational functions like finance, production, marketing, 
enterprise management, banking formalities, book -keeping, statutory compliances etc. 
The training includes interaction with successful rural entrepreneur, Banks as well as 
orientation through field visits.  
iii) KVIC has been advised vide letter dated 12.06.2025 by th is Ministry to take necessary 
modifications and upgradations in the existing curriculum of EDP training with modules 
on digital literacy and customized sector specific components benefitting the beneficiaries 
through upskilling. Furthermore, KVIC has also been advised to take measures to support 
beneficiaries on various aspects of GEM portal and ONDC etc. 
iv) To digitally empower MSEs, the Trade Enablement and Marketing (Team) Scheme has 
been launched.  
v) Entrepreneurship and Skill Development Programme promotes new enterprises, build 
capacity of existing MSMEs and inculcate entrepreneurial culture in the country. 
vi) The Government has also taken several measures to encourage MSMEs to integrate with 
digital payment systems and onboarding on  e-commerce platforms for entrepreneurial 
success. Through Udyam Registration Portal, the MSMEs can link with GeM platform 
and participate in the Government procurement. MSME Global Mart Portal under 
National Small Industries Corporation is a Business 2 Business (B2B) portal facili tating 
online marketing support to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.  
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.25 The Committee notes that the Ministry has outlined several capacity -building 
and digital empowerment initiatives, including updates to the ED P training modules. 
However, it has not provided adequate information on the scale, effectiveness, and 
impact of these efforts. Details on collaboration with industry experts, expansion of 
outreach in rural areas, and continuous post -training support for s ustained 
entrepreneurial success are also limited. While the Committee notes that KVIC has 
been advised by the Ministry (vide letter dated 12.06.2025) to comply with these 
recommendations, further clarity and evidence of implementation are needed. 

27 
 
3.26 The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry strengthen monitoring 
by providing comprehensive data on beneficiaries and outcomes, enhance partnerships 
with industry professionals, and actively expand outreach in rural regions. It also urges 
the Minist ry to ensure sustained post -training support and submit regular progress 
reports on these capacity-building efforts. Further, the Committee requests the Ministry 
to obtain a detailed action taken report from KVIC regarding the communication of 
12.06.2025 a nd furnish it within one month of this Report’s presentation to enable 
timely monitoring of implementation. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.27 In view of the impact of AI in the Scheme, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry integrate AI technology acros s PMEGP operations and portal to improve service 
delivery and promote financial inclusion. This includes adopting AI tools for faster 
application processing, automated project monitoring feedback, address the gaps 
continuously and predictive analytics to i dentify sector-specific opportunities. Additionally, 
the Committee advises the Ministry to collaborate with technology experts and research 
institutions to develop AI solutions tailored for MSMEs. 
(Para 4.16) 
Action Taken Replies 
3.28 (i) The new PMEGP portal, which is under development, will incorporate 
automated workflows, system integrations, and data analytics to enhance service 
delivery and financial inclusion. Integrations with UIDAI, Udyam, and LGD enable 
real-time data validation, reduce manual i nterventions, and support faster application 
processing. 
(ii) The Ministry is developing MIS and dashboards to generate performance 
insights by sector, geography, and implementing agency. These analytical tools will 
serve as a foundation for introducing AI-driven features such as predictive analytics to 
identify sector-specific opportunities and address implementation challenges. 
3.29 In the next phase, the Ministry plans to explore the use of AI tools for practical 
applications such as resolving applican t queries through a chatbot and enabling real -time 
feedback collection to support project monitoring. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.30 The Committee appreciates the intention to introduce analytics and AI in a later 
phase but notes the absence of timelines and a clear plan. Without defined milestones, 
such commitments risk remaining aspirational. The reply also omits reference to data -
security safeguards, which are crucial when Aadhaar and Udyam data are involved. 
 
3.31 The Committee reiterates tha t the Ministry prepare a ph ased roadmap for AI 
integration, beginning with chat -based assistance and predictive a nalytics for project 
evaluation, along with clear completion dates. Data -privacy protocols and user consent 
procedures must be established befo re implementation. Collaboration with reputed 
technical institutions would lend credibility and transparency to this effort. 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
SECTORAL IMPACT AND FEEDBACK  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.32 The data shows uneven utilization of margin money in the Northeast, with states like 
Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim over using funds than Meghalaya and Manipur. The 
Committee recommends a data -driven formula for margin money allocation in Northeast 
states, b ased on eligible population, unemployment rate, and artisan share. It also 
recommends performance -based incentives —increasing funds for high -demand states with 
effective utilization and providing support to underutilizing states to improve access and 
capacity.  
(Para 5.3) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
3.33 (i) PMEGP is a demand driven scheme, and the final sanction of project and 
release of loan is done at the level of concerned Bank.  
(ii) Out of the total budgetary allocation for the PMEGP scheme, 10% of the 
allocation is earmarked and fully utilized for the Northeastern region every year to 
support scalability, create jobs, and improve economic resilience. 
(iii) Under PMEGP, margin money subsidy provided to NE Region has increased 
by 28% from Rs. 180.12 Cr in  FY 2021 -22 to Rs. 231.41 Cr in FY 2024 -25. 
Furthermore, no. of units assisted in NE Region has also increased by 62% from 
4,852 in FY 2023-24 to 7,840 in FY 2024-25. 
(iv) Incentives being provided to uplift and support the performance of PMEGP in 
North-Eastern Region include the following:  
a) Beneficiaries belonging to Northeastern Region (NER) are covered under 
Special category, which are provided with the Margin Money subsidy of 35% 
in rural areas and 25% in urban areas as against 25% in rural areas and 15 % in 
urban areas in case of General category beneficiaries. 
b) Own contribution of beneficiaries belonging to NER is 5% of the project cost 
as against to own contribution of 10% under General category. 
c) 2ndloan tranche of upto Rs. 1 crore is being provided for  upgradation and 
expansion of well -performing existing PMEGP/REGP/MUDRA units with 
subsidy of 20% for NER and hilly areas as against 15% in other areas. 
d) There is no ceiling on the number of projects financed under transport 
activities in NER as against the  10% ceiling on number of projects in other 
areas. 
e) Awareness programmes with a focus on beneficiaries from underperforming 
States within the North-Eastern region.  
f) Industries related to Animal Husbandry like dairy, poultry, aquaculture, 
insects (bees, sericulture, etc.) have been allowed under the scheme. 
g) As a special case, piggery, a major source of livelihood in NER, is allowed in 
NER States. 

29 
 
h) Under the Evaluation Study commissioned by the Ministry, a regional analysis 
with focus on issues faced by benefic iaries in NER region has also been 
sought to be included for uptake of more measures to address constraints in 
effective scheme implementation in this region. 
(v) PMEGP performance in NE Region during FY 2019 -20 to FY 2024 -25 in 
terms of no. of units assis ted, Margin Money subsidy disbursed and estimated 
employment generated is given at Annexure 1. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.34 The Committee notes that the Ministry has described PMEGP as a demand -
driven scheme, but this approach alone cannot correct regional imbalances. Several 
North-Eastern States continue to under -utilise allocations due to limited outreach and 
administrative capacity. A purely demand-based mechanism perpetuates this disparity. 
 
3.35 The Committee reiterates that a balanced allocation formula be introduced, 
combining a minimum assured quota with performance -linked incentives for each 
North-Eastern State. Additional training, awareness drives and mentoring support 
should accompany this approach to build capacity and ensure equ itable access to 
PMEGP benefits across the region. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.36 The Committee appreciates KVIC's efforts to provide employment in NER under 
PMEGP. However, there has been a decline in project support from FY 2021 -22, especially 
in Assam, Nagaland, Manipur, and Mizoram. The Committee recommends enhancing support 
through targeted outreach, simplifying the application process, and making region -specific 
modifications. Additionally, the Committee suggests prioritizing additional financi al 
assistance for successful units to support scalability, create jobs, and improve economic 
resilience. 
(Para 5.4) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
3.37 (i) PMEGP is a demand driven scheme, and the final sanction of project and 
release of loan is done at the level of concerned Bank.  
(ii) Out of the total budgetary allocation for the PMEGP scheme, 10% of the 
allocation is earmarked and fully utilized for the Northeastern region every year to 
support scalability, create jobs, and improve economic resilience. 
(iii) Under PMEGP, margin money subsidy provided to NE Region has increased 
by 28% from Rs. 180.12 Cr in FY 2021 -22 to Rs. 231.41 Cr in FY 2024 -25. 
Furthermore, no. of units assisted in NE Region has also increased by 62% from 
4,852 in FY 2023-24 to 7,840 in FY 2024-25. 
(iv) Incentives being provided to uplift and support the performance of PMEGP in 
North-Eastern Region include the following:  
a) Beneficiaries belonging to Northeastern Region (NER) are covered under 
Special category, which are provided with the Margin Money subsidy of 35% 
in rural areas and 25% in urban areas as against 25% in rural areas and 15% in 
urban areas in case of General category beneficiaries. 

30 
 
b) Own contribution of beneficiaries belonging to NER is 5% of the project cost 
as against to own contribution of 10% under General category. 
c) 2ndloan tranche of upto Rs. 1 crore is being provided for upgradation and 
expansion of well -performing existing PMEGP/REGP/MUDRA units with 
subsidy of 20% for NER and hilly areas as against 15% in other areas. 
d) There is no ceiling on the number of projects financed under transport 
activities in NER as against the 10% ceiling on number of projects in other 
areas. 
e) Awareness programmes with a focus on beneficiaries from underperforming 
States within the North-Eastern region.  
f) Industries related to Animal Husbandry like dairy, poultry, aquaculture, 
insects (bees, sericulture, etc.) have been allowed under the scheme. 
g) As a special case, piggery, a major source of livelihood in NER, is allow ed in 
NER States. 
h) Under the Evaluation Study commissioned by the Ministry, a regional analysis 
with focus on issues faced by beneficiaries in NER region has also been 
sought to be included for uptake of more measures to address constraints in 
effective scheme implementation in this region. 
(v) PMEGP performance in NE Region during FY 2019 -20 to FY 2024 -25 in 
terms of no. of units assisted, Margin Money subsidy disbursed and estimated 
employment generated is given at Annexure. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.38 Although the Ministry has mentioned awareness camps and review meetings, the 
reply lacks evidence of concrete, region -specific simplifications. Persistent barriers such 
as limited banking outreach and connectivity gaps appear to continue to disc ourage 
applicants in several North-Eastern States. 
 
3.39 The Committee reiterates that tailored action plans to tap region -centric 
indigenous skills and artistry be prepared for each State in the region. These should 
include simplified documentation, mobil e facilitation units, language support and clear 
coordination between KVIC, State agencies and banks. Success should be measured by 
increased beneficiary numbers, project completion rates and jobs created within these 
States. 
 
 
ON-GROUND ASSESSMENT AND COLLABORATIVE INSIGHTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.40 The Committee notes that while margin money disbursement has increased, the 
number of assisted units has declined due to higher per -unit costs. It believes this trend 
contradicts PMEGP‟s goal of maximizing employment and stresses that without a budget 

31 
 
increase, fewer beneficiaries will be supported. The Committee strongly recommends 
providing smaller loans to more beneficiaries to ensure the scheme‟s success. 
 (Para 6.4) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
3.41 (i) Due to revision in scheme guidelines during 2022 -23, pro ject cost was 
doubled from Rs. 25 to 50 lakh under manufacturing sector and Rs. 10 to 20 lakh 
under Service sector. Furthermore, due to economic upturn, the project cost per unit 
during the last 4 years i.e. FY 2021 -22 to FY 2024 -25 has also increased by o ver 
26%, leading to higher outgo of subsidy under the Scheme. Accordingly, there has 
been over performance under PMEGP during FY 2021 -22 to FY 2023 -24 leading to 
budgetary constraints for FY 2024-25 and FY 2025-26.Therefore, a shortfall has been 
witnessed in FY 2024 -25 in terms of achieving the targets and Finance Ministry has 
been approached for enhancement of budget outlay of the programme for FY 2025 -26 
to assist more number of units and generate additional employment opportunities. 
(ii) Recognizing the need for promoting smaller projects, Ministry has taken 
following measures:  
a) Priority is given to applications from beneficiaries with project cost below Rs. 
10 lakh. It may be noted that during the last four years i.e. from FY 2021-22 to 
FY 2024-25 around 78% of the units assisted under PMEGP have been under 
the project cost of below 10 lakh. 
b) Under PMEGP Guidelines, no collateral security is to be insisted by Banks for 
projects involving loan upto 10 lakh. Strict compliance of this provision has 
also been reemphasized by the Ministry during Top Level Bankers‟ meetings. 
c) PMEGP uses a scorecard -based evaluation by the Implementing Agencies 
(IAs) during application processing. For projects with a cost below Rs. 10 
lakh, the qualifying score is 50 marks as compa red to 60 marks for higher -
value projects. This facilitates forwarding of lower project sized PMEGP 
applications in a liberal way. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.42 The Committee observes that the upward revision of project cost ceilings has led 
to fewer beneficiaries under the same budget. While higher -value projects may have 
their place, the broader goal of self -employment calls for wider participation. The 
Ministry’s reply does not address this trade-off. 
 
3.43 The Committee reiterates that priority be accorded to financing a larger number 
of smaller projects, particularly those generating quick and sustainable employment. 
The Ministry should present alternative budget models comparing the job creation 
potential of large versus small projects , enabling evidence -based decisions for future 
allocations. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.44 The Committee endorses the suggestions from stakeholders and witnesses, urging the 
Ministry of MSME and the Department of Financial Services to address the concern s within 
their mandates and provide an action-taken report. 
           (Para 6.13) 

32 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
3.45 Ministry of MSME has requested KVIC and major Banks to implement pertinent 
recommendations of the Committee. 
3.46 Department of Financial Services  has requested Public Sector Banks and Indian 
Banks‟ Association (IBA) to look into the suggestions of the Committee to improve the 
performance of PMEGP and take action as appropriate in the matter. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.47 The Committee reiterates that meaningful improvement in PMEGP 
performance requires more than advisory communication. Structured intervention is 
essential, particularly to secure wider participation of private banks and to strengthen 
access for weaker sections. According ly, the Committee recommends that the M/o 
MSME, in consultation with DFS and IBA, prepare a clear action framework with 
defined incentives such as achievable credit targets, simplified compliance procedures 
and periodic review to enhance private bank participation under PMEGP. 
3.48 The Committee further observes that real inclusiveness depends on making 
beneficiary contribution norms responsive to the needs of vulnerable groups. It 
therefore recommends that pilot projects be initiated in priority sectors em ploying 
women, youth and economically weaker sections, with calibrated relaxation of 
beneficiary contribution norms. Pilots backed by measurable indicators and monitored 
outcomes can provide an evidence base for informed scaling and ensure that PMEGP 
translates into measurable inclusion rather than intent. 
--- 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED. 
 
 
SALIENT FEATURES OF THE SCHEME 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.1 The Committee recommends the Ministry/KVIC to accept the application forms both 
online and offline in all 22 scheduled languages and further expanding awareness through 
multilingual training, particularly in rural and semi -urban areas. It suggests creating and  
distributing concise video clips in regional languages to promote PMEGP in remote areas. 
 (Para 2.8) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
 4.2 Major initiatives being undertaken to promote PMEGP in remote areas include: 
i) Since January 2024, all Implementing Agencies are accepting PMEGP applications in 
physical form (offline mode) in 12 scheduled languages i.e., Hindi, Gujarati, 
Malayalam, Punjabi, Manipuri, Bangla, Marathi, Tamil, Assamese, Kannada, Oriya and 
Telugu in addition to English.  
ii) Awareness camps are organized by KVIC with more emphasis on rural, backward, 
under-served areas, Aspirational Districts and NE Region particularly for SC/ST, 
women and youth beneficiaries. During FY 2024 -25, KVIAC has conducted 330 such 
awareness camps.  
iii) Video clips of PMEGP assisted enterprises as success stories are being recorded and 
publicized for promoting the scheme in remote areas. The scheme is also being 
popularized through publicity campaigns including posters, banners, hoarding s, radio 
jingles, television messages, advertisements in national/local papers in English, Hindi 
and local languages, social media and other related activities.  
iv) To further enhance the accessibility of beneficiaries from remote areas, KVIC has been 
advised vide letter dated 12.06.2025 (Annexure-2) to accept offline applications in all 
22 scheduled languages and organize awareness programs and disseminate IEC material 
and video clips in regional languages to promote PMEGP scheme in remote areas. 
 
DEVELOPMENTS–INNOVATIONS & MODIFICATIONS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.3 The Committee observes that the current loan application process under PMEGP 
involves extensive scrutiny, leading to delays, especially for small -value loans. The 
Committee recommends Ministry m ust implement a self -certification mechanism for loan 
applications up to loan amount of Rs 10 Lakh to streamline the process and reduce delays. 
Applicants would submit a self -certified declaration of compliance with eligibility and 
documentation, with random sample testing conducted periodically for transparency. 
(Para 4.2) 
 

34 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
4.4 (i) Under PMEGP, Banks appraise the projects both technically and economically 
after ensuring that each project fulfills inter alia the criteria of Industry, Per Capita 
Investment, Own Contribution, Rural Areas and Negative Activity List and take their 
own decision on the basis of viability and credit parameters defined by the Bank. 
(ii) KVIC has been advised vide letter dated 12.06.2025 to examine the feasibil ity 
of automating the scrutiny process of applications at IA level and implementing a 
self-certification mechanism for projects involving loans less than Rs. 10 lakh to 
reduce procedural delays due to manual scrutiny. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.5 With regard to the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry on the 
recommendations of the Committee in Paras 2.8 and 4.2 of its Report on the subject 
above, t he Committee notes that KVIC has been advised by the Ministry vide letter 
dated 12.06.2025 for compl iance with the recommendation s of the Committee . In this 
regard, the Committee desires the Ministry to obtain a detailed action taken report 
from KVIC on the said communication and furnish the same to the Committee within 
one month of the presentation of t his Report to the Parliament to enable the Committee 
to monitor the implementation of its recommendation in a timely manner. 
 
 
------- 
  

35 
 
  ANNEXURE-1 
 
PMEGP performance in NE Region during FY 2019-20 to FY 2024-25: 
1. Performance of PMEGP in Mizoram during FY 2019-20 to FY 2024-25: 
S. 
No. Financial Year No. of Units 
Assisted 
Margin Money 
Subsidy (Rs. Cr) 
Estimated 
Employment 
Generated 
1 2019-20 760 10.83 6,080 
2 2020-21 810 14.12 6,480 
3 2021-22 650 14.62 5,200 
4 2022-23 412 13.54 3,296 
5 2023-24 401 17.55 3,208 
6 2024-25 484 15.90 3,872 
2. Performance of PMEGP in Nagaland during FY 2019-20 to FY 2024-25: 
S. 
No. Financial Year No. of Units 
Assisted 
Margin Money 
Subsidy (Rs. Cr) 
Estimated 
Employment 
Generated 
1 2019-20 1,109 26.49 8,872 
2 2020-21 740 20.45 5,920 
3 2021-22 1,241 24.95 9,928 
4 2022-23 469 15.35 3,752 
5 2023-24 517 29.18 4,136 
6 2024-25 1262 36.03 10,096 
3. Performance of PMEGP in Tripura during FY 2019-20 to FY 2024-25: 
S. 
No. Financial Year No. of Units 
Assisted 
Margin Money 
Subsidy (Rs. Cr) 
Estimated 
Employment 
Generated 
1 2019-20 963 18.35 7,704 
2 2020-21 842 18.29 6,736 
3 2021-22 958 20.84 7,664 
4 2022-23 703 16.89 5,624 
5 2023-24 588 14.44 4,704 
6 2024-25 730 18.61 5,840 
4. Performance of PMEGP in Sikkim during FY 2019-20 to FY 2024-25: 
S. 
No. Financial Year No. of Units 
Assisted 
Margin Money 
Subsidy (Rs. Cr) 
Estimated 
Employment 
Generated 
1 2019-20 79 1.74 632 
2 2020-21 57 1.52 456 
3 2021-22 85 2.14 680 
4 2022-23 57 1.31 456 

36 
 
S. 
No. Financial Year No. of Units 
Assisted 
Margin Money 
Subsidy (Rs. Cr) 
Estimated 
Employment 
Generated 
5 2023-24 132 4.49 1,056 
6 2024-25 316 11.45 2,528 
5. Performance of PMEGP in Arunachal Pradesh during FY 2019-20 to FY 2024-25: 
S. 
No. Financial Year No. of Units 
Assisted 
Margin Money 
Subsidy (Rs. Cr) 
Estimated 
Employment 
Generated 
1 2019-20 211 3.63 1,688 
2 2020-21 98 2.32 784 
3 2021-22 196 7.88 1,568 
4 2022-23 158 7.01 1,264 
5 2023-24 169 17.64 1,352 
6 2024-25 156 8.53 1,248 
6. Performance of PMEGP in Manipur during FY 2019-20 to FY 2024-25: 
S. 
No. Financial Year No. of Units 
Assisted 
Margin Money 
Subsidy (Rs. Cr) 
Estimated 
Employment 
Generated 
1 2019-20 1,173 20.35 9,384 
2 2020-21 1,556 58.98 12,448 
3 2021-22 1,139 33.37 9,112 
4 2022-23 545 14.62 4,360 
5 2023-24 348 8.10 2,784 
6 2024-25 608 15.08 4,864 
7. Performance of PMEGP in Meghalaya during FY 2019-20 to FY 2024-25: 
S. 
No. Financial Year No. of Units 
Assisted 
Margin Money 
Subsidy (Rs. Cr) 
Estimated 
Employment 
Generated 
1 2019-20 377 5.69 3,016 
2 2020-21 359 5.79 2,872 
3 2021-22 699 9.74 5,592 
4 2022-23 306 6.65 2,448 
5 2023-24 280 7.25 2,240 
6 2024-25 1,114 34.71 8,912 
8. Performance of PMEGP in Assam during FY 2019-20 to FY 2024-25: 
S. 
No. Financial Year No. of Units 
Assisted 
Margin Money 
Subsidy (Rs. Cr) 
Estimated 
Employment 
Generated 
1 2019-20 2,587 35.577 20,696 
2 2020-21 2,939 49.48 23,512 

37 
 
S. 
No. Financial Year No. of Units 
Assisted 
Margin Money 
Subsidy (Rs. Cr) 
Estimated 
Employment 
Generated 
3 2021-22 3,855 66.58 30,840 
4 2022-23 2,596 59.54 20,768 
5 2023-24 2,417 64.06 19,336 
6 2024-25 3,170 91.10 25,360 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

38 
 
 
 
 
Letter dated 12.06.2025 addressed to CEO, KVIC 
 
ANNEXURE-2 
 
 


39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


40 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INDUSTRY 
IV 
(Minutes of the Fourth Meeting) 
 
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, 9 th December, 2025, in Room No. 67, 
First Floor, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
i. Shri Tiruchi Siva - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
ii. Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha 
iii. Shri Mahendra Bhatt 
iv. Shrimati Sulata Deo 
v. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
vi. Dr. Parmar Jashvantsinh Salamsinh 
vii. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
viii. Shri Afzal Ansari 
ix. Shri Chandan Chauhan 
x. Shrimati Veena Devi 
xi. Shri Arvind Dharmapuri 
xii. Shri Subbarayan K. 
xiii. Dr. Ganapathy Rajkumar P. 
xiv. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
xv. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
xvi.  Shri Rakesh Rathor 
xvii. Dr. Mallu Ravi 
xviii. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy 
xix. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
xx. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
xxi. Shri E. Tukaram 
xxii. Shri Rajabhau Parag Prakash Waje 
 
SECRETARIAT 
i. Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Director 
ii. Shri Prabhakar Singh, Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting. 

41 
 
 
3. The Chairman then informed the Committee that the agenda of the meeting was to 
consider and adopt the 331 st Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations and observations contained in the 328 th Report of the Committee on the 
„Review of the Performance of the Prime Minister‟s Employment G eneration Programme 
(PMEGP)‟ pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME). 
 
4. Following a discussion, the Committee unanimously adopted the Report. It was 
further decided to lay the Report in both Houses of Parliament on Wednes day, the 10 th of 
December, 2025. The Committee decided that the Report may be presented in the Rajya 
Sabha by the Chairman, and in his absence, by Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav, and in her absence, 
by Shri Mahendra Bhatt. In the Lok Sabha, the Committee decided that Shri Parshottambhai 
Rupala, and in his absence, Shrimati Veena Devi, would lay the Report. 
 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 10.50 a.m. 
 
 
New Delhi                                                    
9th December, 2025 
NIANGKHANNEM GUITE 
DIRECTOR 
                                                                  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 