151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-FIRST REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION  TAKEN   BY  THE  DEPARTMENT  OF  DEPARTMENT  OF
SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH ON  THE RECOMMENDATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED FORTY-SECOND  REPORT OF THE
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON  THE DEMANDS  FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006) OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 25TH APRIL, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 25TH APRIL, 2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER,2005/AGRAHAYANA,1927(SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
     1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                  
        2. INTRODUCTION
       3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE   
       4.MINUTES OF THE MEETING                                                                                            
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2005)
----------
1. Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Dr.Prabha Thakur
4. Shri Dilip Singh Judev
5. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav
6. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
7. Smt. Kum Kum Rai
8. Shri Birabhadra Singh
    *9.   Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha
  Ф10.   Vacant
LOK  SABHA
11. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
12. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad            
13. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
14. Shri Pankaj Choudhary
15. Shri Mohan S. Delkar  
16. Shri Francis Fanthome 
17. Shri Anantrao Gudhe

151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
18. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
19. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik           
20. Shri Brahmananda Panda
21. Smt. Neeta Pateriya
22. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil        
23. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
24. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
25. Shri Rakesh Singh
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh                                              
27. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh   
28. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar                     
29. Shri D. Venugopal
30. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
31. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
  SECRETARIAT
      Shri N.C.Joshi, Additional Secretary
      Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
      Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
 Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One
 Hundred Fifty-first Report on the Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
 recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty-second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-
2006) of the Department of  Scientific and Industrial Research.
      2.   The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of               Scientific and Industrial
 Research on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty-second Report of the Department-related
 Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants
 (2005-2006) of the Department of  Scientific and Industrial Research which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25
th
 April, 2005.
      3.   There were  eighteen recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty-second Report of the Committee. 
 Action Taken Notes on the recommandations of the Committee were received from the Department  on 3 rd August,
 2005. 
            4.         In the meeting held on 20 th December, 2005, the Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report
 and adopted the same.
NEW DELHI;
-------- 2005 
P.G,NARAYANAN
Chairman
         Department-related Parliamentary Standing
 Committee on
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests 
 
REPORT
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research
 on the Recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty Second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
 Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the
 Department of Scientific & Industrial Research, presented to both Houses of Parliament on 25 th April, 2005.  There
 were eighteen Recommendations contained in the Report. Action Taken note on those Recommendations was received

151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
 from the Department on 3rd August, 2005.  The Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report in its meeting held
 on 18 th November, 2005 and decided to seek clarification/additional information on certain points  contained in paras 
 21, 29, 37, 40, 44, 48, 58 and 68.  The Department’s clarification/additional information on the points was received on
 1st December, 2005.
The Committee’s Recommendations, Action Taken thereon by the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research,
 points raised by the Committee (wherever necessary), clarifications by the Department and comments of the Committee
 thereon are set out in the succeeding paragraphs:-
 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Recommendation  
        The Committee finds that pace of expenditure for the fourth quarter of 2004-2005 is not uniform and there is a lot
 of variation in them. The Committee is not convinced with the reply of the Department in this regard and is of the
 considered view that the Department needs to evolve a mechanism to maintain uniform pace of expenditure, to the
 extent possible, throughout the year.                                                                      (Para 11)                    
Action Taken by the Department
     During the financial year 2004-05, the vote on account was passed by the Parliament twice. On the first occasion it
 was for four months before dissolution of the Lok Sabha and thereafter for two months after formation of new Lok
 Sabha. Due to this, the Grant-in-aid to CSIR which constitutes a major portion of the total grant of the Department was
 released twice in the 1
st and 3 rd quarter of the financial year. No grant-in-aid could be released to CSIR in the 2 nd
 quarter of the year resulting in an un-even booking of the expenditure during the financial year. However, in the 4 th
 quarter an amount of Rs. 342.28 crore was released on the basis of approved Revised Estimates of the Department Thus
 except for 2 nd quarter, the pace of expenditure was uniform. However, considering the observations of the Committee
 various measures have been taken by the Department. to book the expenditure proportionately throughout the current
 financial year. These include phasing of the project activities in a manner that expenditure is booked evenly without
 affecting their progress. The progress of expenditure is monitored on monthly basis to maintain uniformity in each
 quarter of the financial year. Secondly, the expenditure details under each scheme/project are put on the website for
 quick decision making. Quarterly monitoring meetings of the progress of projects will further help in utilizing the
 budget resources in a uniform manner.
Comments
       The Committee notes the reply. 
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR)
Recommendation
            The Committee appreciates that the CSIR is striving towards undertaking a wide gamut of research and
 developmental activities in the area of high technology, which would help in projecting India as a forerunner amongst
 scientifically advanced nations. The Committee, however, feels that emphasis of CSIR should be dissemination of new
 technologies from the laboratories for the benefit of the common man.                (Para 21)                              
                                                   
Action Taken by the Department
CSIR’s research outputs of new knowledge, products/technologies are placed in the public domain through

151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
 publications, annual reports, newsletters etc.
Thus information about various R&D programs, new technologies and other activities of CSIR laboratories is
 disseminated through CSIR Samachar (Hindi, monthly) and CSIR News (English, fortnightly). CSIR News and
 CSIR Samachar not only provide information on R&D programmes but also help in forming useful links between
 various CSIR constituents and users, other R&D organizations, university departments and industry.
·            Research-based scientific information, covering all the major disciplines of Science & Technology, is
 disseminated through 17 scholarly research journals and two secondary scientific journals brought out by
 NISCAIR.  All journals are peer-reviewed and covered by major indexing and abstracting services.
·            CSIR is also committed to inculcating scientific temper among common people and achieve this through three
 well-circulated popular science magazines brought out by NISCAIR – Vigyan Pragati, Science Reporter and
 Science ki Duniya.  These magazines apart from publishing informative popular science articles on
 contemporary science topics, science news from around the world, inventions and discoveries, science projects,
 biographies of scientists, etc. also disseminate information on new technologies/developments in CSIR
 laboratories.
·
            CSIR is bringing out a journal of Rural Technology, (English) aimed at disseminating information on
 emerging rural technologies and their outreach to rural communities, Is this Hindi and English or  bilingual
 specify.
    Besides specially the dissemination through print media, CSIR laboratories establish interactions with common
 man and other stake holders through measures such as participation in Exhibitions; business development and
 marketing through IPR acquisition/ exploitation; establishing direct interaction/linkages/joint ventures with
 industry.
          Following is the illustrative list of specific initiatives by some of the labs:
·
        CIMAP disseminates its technology for the entrepreneurs, industry personnel, researchers and farmers by
 organizing the “National Interactive Meet (NIM)” every two years and “Kisan Melas-Farmers Fairs” on yearly
 basis where the newly developed agrotechnologies (plant varieties), process technologies and processes for
 herbal product formulations are displayed for their commercial exploitation. CIMAP gets a high positive
 response and most of the newly developed agrotechnologies get transferred to the farmers/growers for the
 benefits of the common man.
·
         CMERI disseminates information on the new technologies for the common man through different channels (i)
 Newspaper (ii) Exhibition (iii) Trade fair (iv) Industrial Get together (v) Leaflet (vi) Technical film (vi) CMERI
 updated website (www.cmeri.res.in) and (vii) Training in new technologies.
·        IIP disseminates the information about the developed technologies through means such as participating in
 exhibitions, seminar/workshops, special publications such as “Compendium of technologies/techniques
 developed” and “ An Insight-IIP” IIP- Industry Meets etc.
·        NBRI disseminates its technologies by way of training demonstrations to      various sections of society
Point raised by the Committee
How is the effectiveness of Programmes like NIM and Kisan Melas are measured?  How many agro technologies
 have been developed so far and transferred to the farmers? 
Clarification by the Department
 (i)        The National Interactive Meets (NIM) organised by Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants (CIMAP)
 provide effective platform for close interaction among participating industry leaders, growers of medicinal and
 aromatic plants and the scientists. These are the business like meets wherein technologies developed are

151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
 presented both through posters and oral presentations and users’ response in terms of knowhow acquirement/
 collaborations/ sponsorship are solicited. Similarly, in case of kisan melas, CIMAP has been able to disseminate
 the salient features of improved varieties and agrotechnologies amongst the farmers assembled on the occasion
 through lectures, field visits and live demonstrations. The effectiveness of the above events is measured through
 the feedback /enquiries received during or after the programme in terms of planting materials of elite plant
 varieties, agrotechnology packages, processing technologies and equipments, marketing, pre-licensing
 evaluation of herbal formulations, among others..
Through NIM,  CIMAP has been able to establish contact with more than 30 leading companies and industry
 associations including financial institutions and CIMAP has licensed the knowhow to industries for making
 herbal formulations such as pain balm, mosquito repellent spray, floor mopping emulsion, herbal disinfectant
 hankool, artemisinin rich variety of Artemisia annua 'CIM -Arogya', var. CIM- Ayu of Tulsi and CIM- Indus of
 Peppermint, besides processing of Artemisia annua herb into artemisinin and supply of design drawing for
 distillation unit and installation of distillation plant for rose and other oils.
(ii)        Agrotechnologies for about two dozen medicinal and aromatic plants developed at CIMAP have been transferred
 as package to the farmers. Some of the major agrotechnologies and varieties developed and transferred are
 Mentha arvensis (Menthol mint); Mentha piperita (Peppermint); Mentha citrata (bergamot mint); Mentha spicata
 (Spearmint); Mentha cardiaca (Scotch spearmint);Cymbopogon winterianus (Citronella); Cymbopogon martinii
 (Palmarosa); Cymbopogon flexuosus (Lemongrass); Pelargonium graveolens (Geranium); Rosa damascena
 (Rose) ; Matricaria chamomilla (chamomile) Vertiveria zizanioides (vetiver); Chrysanthemum cineriaefolium
 (Pyrethrum) ;Catharanthus roseus (Periwinkle); Withania somnifera (Ashwagandha); Phyllanthus amarus (Bhuin
 amlaki); Ocimum sanctum (Krishna Tulsi) ; Plantago ovata (Isabgol); Cassia angustifolia (Senna), Artemisia
 annua, etc.
Comments
        The Committee notes the reply with satisfaction. It would at the same time observe that our country with a
 substantial population of small and marginal farmers having small land holdings require technology suited to them at
 affordable prices. If the technology does not suit their requirement or beyond their affording capacity, our efforts, in that
 case, may not have the desired result. Involving Industry for commercial production of such technology and creating
 market among farmers for such indigenous technologies is the need of the hour. Interactive programmes like “National
 Interactive Meet (NIM)” and Kisan Melas should be organized frequently throughout the country in order to
 disseminate the developed technologies and also to get the necessary feedback from the users.
NATIONAL LABORATORIES
Recommendation
The Committee commends the efforts of the Department to keep pace with the new technologies and to project
 the country as a technologically developed nation. The Committee feels that keeping in view the fact that the CSIR
 infrastructure was built or acquired more than thirty years ago, building of new infrastructure and renovation of the
 existing ones are of utmost importance and should be taken up in right
 earnest.                                                                                                     
(Para 25)
Action Taken by the Department

151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
           A scheme on Infrastructure Renovation and Refurbishing has been taken up in the X Plan for upgrading the
 ageing infrastructures at CSIR laboratories. Under this, 33% of the budgetary resources provided by the government
 have been allocated to renovation/refurbishing and the rest of the resources would be met from the internal resources of
 CSIR.
Comments
      The decision of the Department to mobilize two- third of the resources required for renovation of its labs on its own
 from the internal resources is a welcome step and indicative of future scheme of things. In all likelihood self-financing
 of projects under the aegis of the State will be the trend of the future. The Committee appreciates the scheme as a step in
 right direction.
RESEARCH SCHEMES, SCHOLARSHIPS AND FELLOWSHIPS
Recommendation
      The Committee notes that most of the scholarships/fellowships are provided to students at the higher level i.e. Ph.D /
 Research levels. The Committee recommends that scholarships/fellowships may be provided at the entry level i.e.
 graduation level and may be increased for students in Post-graduate level to stimulate interest among the new generation
 towards basic sciences. The Committee also recommends that the number and amount of fellowships/scholarships
 should be increased over a period of time. The Committee feels that for the development of science, there is a need to
 improve the opportunities for well-trained scientists and young talents to pursue innovative research, to educate the next
 generation to apply science in areas of importance for the health, prosperity and security of the nation .                           
 (Para 29)
Action Taken by the Department
CSIR Fellowships/Scholarships are provided for doing doctoral & post-doctoral research.  CSIR has, however,
 initiated two programmes during the recent years, which cater to graduate & post graduate students: -
CSIR has initiated a unique ‘hand holding scheme’ “CSIR programme on Youth for Leadership in Science
 (CPYLS)” during the X Plan to attract the best young school students towards science. Every year top 100
 students at the Secondary School Examination (X Class) from CBSE, ICSE & State Boards are invited at CSIR
 expense to visit the nearest CSIR Laboratory for two open days along with one of their parents/guardian/teacher.
 The objective of this scheme is to expose the young students to the exciting world of science so as to build
 scientific temper at an early age. Amongst these students, who secure over 90% marks in natural science subjects
 (Physics, Chemistry, Biology & Mathematics) in the Senior Secondary Examination and continue to pursue
 science subjects, at graduation level are supported financially for 14 weeks in a year for another three years till
 graduation to do project work in a CSIR laboratory of their interest.
CSIR is also supporting “Integrated Ph.D. programme in specialized areas” on an experimental basis under the
 theme ‘catch them young’. Under this programme, fellowships are given to M.Sc. students for two years. After
 two years on getting M.Sc. degree, Junior Research Fellowships are provided to those students who qualify NET
 (National Eligibility Test for Junior Research Fellowship & Eligibility for Lecturership).
Point raised by the Committee
            In a competitive world where business studies and information technology disciplines promise faster and higher
 growth, incentives offered in the area of Basic Science Research seem meagre. What has been done by the Department
 to bring back talented students to basic science courses keeping in mind lucrative careers offered in other fields?

151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
Clarification by the Department
             CSIR reiterates that it has initiated a unique ‘hand holding scheme’ “CSIR Programme on Youth for Leadership
 in Science (CPYLS)” to attract the best young school students towards science. Every year top 100 students at the
 Secondary School Examination (X Class) from CBSE, ICSE & States Boards are invited at CSIR expenses to the
 nearest CSIR laboratory for two open days along with one of their parents/guardian/teacher. The objective of this
 scheme is to expose the young students to the exciting world of science so as to build scientific temper at an early age
 and attract them towards science education.
In furtherance to the objective encouraging budding young scientific talent and to nourish the scientific research
 in basic sciences, CSIR has a special fellowship scheme, named Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Fellowship (SPMF), for
 selected top 20% of NET qualified scholars and top 100 GATE qualified scholars with percentile 99.
The SPM Fellowship carries an amount of Rs. 12,000/- p.m. for the first two years followed by Rs. 15,000/- p.m.
 for the remaining tenure plus other benefits like HRA and medical allowances, as applicable to CSIR’ NET JRFs and a
 contingent grant of Rs. 50,000/- per annum.
Comments
       The Committee notes that a number of incentive schemes have been introduced by the Department to attract young
 talent towards basic science and research.  The Department should, however, periodically  evaluate and monitor these
 schemes to ensure their effectiveness and suitably amend them, if necessary.   
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT
Recommendation   
        The Committee commends the CSIR for achieving number one position in securing Patents in India and abroad and
 hopes that the CSIR would strive towards safeguarding the country's interests, specially keeping in view the efforts
 made by foreign organizations to encroach upon our traditional base.                                                (Para 37)
Action Taken by the Department
     To safeguard our traditional knowledge base, CSIR through its NISCAIR is jointly working with the Department of
 Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH), Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Govt. of India on
 Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL). The information available from this library will be useful to the
 examiners in the patent offices worldwide in several languages to prevent the grant of patents based on such knowledge
 available & used/practised for thousands of years in our country.
Point raised by the Committee
       When is the Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) likely to be completed?
Clarification by the Department
 i)         TKDL has been created for 56,900 formulations in Ayurveda out of the target of 59,000 formulations.
(ii)        With respect to TKDL Unani out of 77,000 formulations, transcription has been completed for 48,000
 formulations.
(iii)       TKDL for Ayurveda, Unani and Siddha systems of medicine is likely to be completed by December 2006.
(iv)   TKDL presently contains information on 10 million pages in five international languages, which would protect
 1,07,000 formulations in Ayurveda and Unani. India has also received request for access to TKDL from European
 Patent Office (EPO) in July 2005 itself.  However, clearance for giving access to EPO is presently pending with

151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
 Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion which is a nodal department concerning matters on IPRs with respect to
 World Intellectual Property Organization.
Comments
            The Committee hopes that the TKDL for Ayurveda, Unani and siddha will be completed by December, 2006, as
 informed by the Department.  Expeditious completion of the TKDL would help in checking grant of patents based on
 our traditional knowledge. 
NEW MILLENIUM INDIAN TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP INITIATIVE (NMITLI)        
Recommendation
           The Committee recommends that a special cell may be set up to coordinate and pool the knowledge gained in the
 CSIR laboratories and the private sector companies and disseminate it through direct interactions with the industry or
 through the print and electronic media. Efforts may also be made to ensure that there is no duplication in the research
 work carried out in the CSIR laboratories and the private sector companies so that country's scarce resource is not
 wasted.                                                               (Para 40)
 Action Taken by the Department    
         CSIR has put in place the scheme New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative (NMITLI) to provide
 leadership role to India through CSIR-Industry active participation. CSIR has placed dedicated manpower for
 implementation and monitoring of the NMITLI projects. CSIR, as a part of the process, interacts with industry at every
 stage in development of the project.  For each defined area, an expert group is specially constituted to formulate the
 project and invariably, industry expert is associated with the expert group.  Besides helping in pooling the expertise and
 establishing synergistic relationship, it helps in avoiding duplication of R&D effort in industry and research institutes.
Point raised by the Committee
       How many such expert groups have been constituted? What are the details of industry participation over the last
 couple of years?
Clarification by the Department
       Under the NMITLI scheme, all the projects are developed with the help of eminent experts transcending the interests
 as well as expertise of the wide spectrum of constituencies. So far, 37 projects are under implementation. Each project
 has been developed as per the guidance of expert groups specifically constituted for it. Thus, 37 individual expert
 groups were constituted to develop all the projects.
In the last couple of years following industries were enrolled into NMITLI Scheme.
Lensel Optics Pvt. Ltd., Pune; Intra Ocular Care Pvt. Ltd., Baroda; Xcyton, Bangalore; TVS Motor, Chennai; Godavari
 Sugar Mills Ltd., Mumbai; Reliance Group of Ind., Mumbai; Avestha Gen, Bangalore;  Strand Genomics, Bangalore;
 TCS, Hyderabad, USV, Mumbai; Rallis Res. Centre, Bangalore; JK Paper Ltd., Ballarpur Ind. Ltd.; ITC Ltd.; Biocon,
 Bangalore; Shantha Biotechnics Pvt. Ltd, Hyderabad; TTK Healthcare; Universal Orthosystems, Vadodara; Genova
 Biotech, Hyderabad; Bharat Biotech International Limited (BBIL), Hyderabad; Phytotron, Bangalore Excel Industries,
 Mumbai; JK Agrti, Kolkata, DiviNet, Pune.
Comments
   The Committee notes the reply.

151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
INFRASTRUCTURE RENOVATION AND REFURBISHMENT
Recommendation
       The Committee feels that India needs the most advanced infrastructure and laboratories for carrying out cutting edge
 research in various fields. The infrastructure should be seen as a strategic national resource and funding should be given
 on a long-term basis so that the modernization becomes a continued process for effectiveness and improvement in our
 scientific growth. The Committee is also of the view that the laboratories at the graduate/post-graduate level should be
 upgraded so that interest can be generated among the young students for further research.                                  (Para 44)
Action Taken by the Department
·
        A scheme on ICT Infrastructure Renovation and Refurbishing is being pursued at an estimated cost of Rs. 97.50
 crores. The salient features of this project are:
·        Modernisation and Upgradation of the ICT Infrastructure of all the 38 laboratories of CSIR.
·        Video Conferencing facilities are proposed to be set-up among laboratories, CSIR HQs. etc. so that project reviews
 could get facilitated.
·        Integrate the entire ICT Infrastructure of CSIR and its laboratories over E-GRID to enforce common technical
 standards and office procedures.
·        Through this project, common standards software/solutions in the area of e-governance shall also get implemented.
 For establishing grid enabled system and implementing e-governance systems a Data Centre with state of art
 computing facilities is to be created at New Delhi (CRRI Complex) with mirror site at CSE, NCL, Pune.
·        For providing development of science in the country funding through Research Scheme is being provided to well
 trained scientists in regular jobs in the universities/R&D Institutions.   To do innovative research infrastructure is
 being continually improved in the universities / R&D Institutions through small equipment grant component under
 the Research Schemes. Efforts are being made to upgrade laboratories at the school/college level to generate interest
 among the young students for future research through “Adoption of school & colleges by CSIR labs”, a scheme
 instituted by CSIR during the X plan.
·
        UGC has created UGC Information Network connecting all colleges & universities.  The Universities are connected
 through 100 MBPS backbone and they enjoy both the Intra as well as Internet connectivity.
·        Access to around 2500-research journals on-line manner was provided to the researchers as well as the teaching
 faculty.
Point raised by the Committee
       It has been observed that in India interaction between Universities and R&D Institutions is weak. What has been
 done by the Department to improve it?
Clarification by the Department
       Many of the CSIR laboratories have been working in collaboration with Universities on many research and teaching
 programmes. A Task Force constituted by the Government of India, Ministry of HRD for leveraging synergies between
 Premier Academic Institutions (PAIs) and CSIR system for promoting a symbolic partnership has recently made several
 recommendations. The recommendations interalia include partnership in research activities for work of mutual interests,
 setting up of joint high class R&D facility, joint offering of skill up gradations/training programmes for R&D personnel,

151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
 offering academic programmes  jointly in emerging transdisciplinery subjects etc. The Task Force has also suggested
 implementation mechanism, which include setting up a CSIR-PAI Steering Committee as an overarching policy,
 programmes and guidelines laying Body.
Comments
            The Committee hopes that expeditious follow-up action will be taken by the Department on the recommendations
 of the Task Force constituted for promoting symbolic partnership between Premier Academic Institutions (PAIs) and
 CSIR system, under intimation to it. 
TECHNOLOGY PROMOTION, DEVELOPMENT AND UTILIZATION PROGRAMMES
Recommendation
         The Committee feels that the Department should initiate action to coordinate the research work undertaken by the
 CSIR laboratories and the industrial houses and an atmosphere of co-operation should be generated so that both stand to
 benefit from each other's expertise.                                                                                                               (Para 48)
Action Taken by the Department
DSIR has taken proactive steps through its Technology Development and Demonstration Programme (TDDP)
 under Technology Promotion, Development and Utilization (TPDU) Scheme to interact with industries and
 National laboratories in technology development and demonstration projects. The Scheme supports lab
 scale/bench scale technologies developed by CSIR, National Laboratories /institutions and Universities for scale
 up and commercialization by Indian industries. In addition to this, DSIR also considers consortium projects for
 development of technologies of common interests for group of industries/associations to be undertaken by
 industrial units jointly with National Laboratories in important focused areas.
·
              The TDDP also provides support to projects for development of technologies at     National
 Laboratories/institutions for use of cluster of industries.  DSIR has supported few such projects for cluster of
 industries at National Laboratories/institutions during X Plan period.
·              As suggested by the Committee, the Department would further enhance its             interaction with CSIR
 laboratories and industrial units to formulate joint         technology development and demonstration projects to
 benefit from each others         expertise.
Point raised by the Committee
        How many lab scale/bench scale technologies developed by CSIR have actually been commercialized and
 successfully entered the market? How many consortium projects for development of technologies have been undertaken
 by the Department?
Clarification by the Department
        DSIR through Technology Development and Demonstration Programme (TDDP) under Technology Promotion
 Development & Utilization Scheme has been supporting projects of industries for development of technologies for new
 products and processes. The TDDP objectives also envisage to support projects for scale up and commercialization by
 Indian industries of lab scale / bench scale technologies developed by National Laboratories / Institutions, International
 Laboratories and Universities. About 12 such lab scale / bench scale technologies developed by National Laboratories /
 Institutions and Universities including CSIR Labs have been successfully completed and commercialized.

151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
DSIR has supported 45 collaborative projects of industries with National Laboratories / Institutions and Universities
 for development of technologies for new products / processes. In addition to this, DSIR has also supported 2 projects of
 national research organizations for development of technologies of common interests for group of industries.
Comments
    The Committee notes the reply. Participation of Industry in research efforts, cost- benefit analysis of the research
 undertaken and economic feasibility of the research products- all these are extremely important considerations to
 sustain research in the long run.   
DEVELOPING NEW GENERATION FUELS
Recommendation
         The Committee notes that the research regarding bio-fuels is still at a research stage and commercial production is
 yet to begin. However, the initiative taken by the Department to produce bio-fuel, especially from ‘Jatropha Curcas '
 plant is commendable in view of the fact that large tracts of wasteland in the country can be utilized and the farmers can
 benefit a lot from the commercial production of this plant. The Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts should be
 made towards early commercialization of the technology, which will benefit the farmers as well as the
 consumers.                                                                                                                         (Para 57)
Action Taken by the Department
·
                  The department is grateful to the Committee for commending the efforts of CSIR in this area and particularly of
 Jatropha curcas. The Committee has rightly observed that R&D work in biofuels is still at a research stage. It is
 submitted that Department will make all possible efforts to transfer the technology for commercial exploitation.
      Some of the activities already undertaken and the progress thereon is given below:
·                  CSMCRI has developed a process for EN14214 grade bio-diesel from Jatropha curcas and is in discussions with
 several companies for possible commercialization.  It has also assigned non-exclusive rights to NRDC to market the
 technology on Institute’s behalf.  These efforts follow the successful trial runs with neat bio-diesel in Mecedes Benz
 cars (with Daimler Chrysler), tractors (with Massey Feguson), Tata bus and earth moving equipments (with
 Rajasthan State Mines & Minerals Ltd.,) stationary engines (in-house and with NSIC, Rajkot) and most recently in
 AP State Transport Bus (Southern Online Biotechnology Ltd., Hyderabad).
·
                  IIP, another institute of CSIR has also developed the technology of producing bio diesel from non-edible plants
 like Jatropha Curcas.
Comments
         Bio-fuels are the fuels of future. One of the biggest and the fastest growing economies, India cannot allow its fate
 to hang in balance as a result of precarious availability and supply of fossil fuels.  Extremely good quality scientific
 man power of this country can be used to research and develop bio-fuels to replace the existing pattern of fuel
 consumption.  The real challenge is in making such technologies commercial and making availability of such fuels at
 affordable cost. Successful trial runs with neat bio-diesel in Mecedes Benz cars and other automobiles are encouraging
 and an important step in the direction of self- dependency in energy sector.
NATIONAL GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE (NGRI), HYDERABAD   
Recommendation
          The Committee is happy to learn that NGRI is developing a special groundwater management strategy for coastal

151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
 fresh water aquifers, endangered by saline incursion and in certain industrial belts for mitigation of groundwater
 pollution.                (Para 58)                                                 
                                                                                                                                                 
Action Taken by the Department
           NGRI is executing a network project for development of techniques and methodologies for exploration,
 assessment and management of Ground Water in hard rock areas to develop a groundwater management strategy for
 coastal fresh water aquifers, endangered by saline incursion and in certain industrial belts for mitigation of groundwater
 pollution.
Point raised by the Committee
         When is this project likely to finish and what has been the success so far? When is the Seismic Hazard Map
 Covering Himalayas and other Seismically active regions in India likely to be prepared? What are the features of Global
 Seismic Hazard Assessment Programme? What is the probability of GPS tracking the collision of tectonic plates that
 cause earthquakes?
Clarification by the Department
 i) The project for “Development of techniques& methodologies for exploration, assessment and mangement of
 groundwater resources in hard rock areas” will be completed in March 2007.
      The following are the success of the project  as follows:
·         Techniques developed to delineate fractured aquifer system through the application of 
Þ      Integration of geo-information through the application of GIS which is cost effective and rapid,
Þ      2D resistivity and closed spacing resistivity investigation
Þ      Multi-channel analysis of surface waves (MASW ) and
Þ      Radon gas profile.
·         Natural groundwater recharge assessed in hard rock area for better developmental scheme and evaluation of various
 techniques to estimate groundwater recharge.
·         Groundwater sanctuary created for augmentation of drinking water supply in water scarce and fluoride affected
 region of Nalgonda District.
·         Natural polluting hazard such as Fluoride, Uranium and Thorium affecting groundwater in hard rocks of Nalgonda
 District assessed .
·         Industrial pollution affecting groundwater regime assessed in industrial belt of M.P.
·         Groundwater resources on an Island (A&N Island) and scheme for augmentation for drinking water supply during
 non-monsoon period assessed.
·         Data/Information Bank system for efficient storage and retrieval of groundwater data developed.
·         Natural recharge studies have been carried out in Wailapalli watershed (granite) and Ghatiya watershed (basalt)
 using injected tritium technique. In order to collate the recharge results with hydrogeological responses,
 investigations such as permeability, infiltration and geophysical changes were also carried out.
Characterization of the samples for fluoride and uranium in Wailapalli watershed has been completed. The studies
 reveal very high concentration of fluoride in soil and rocks. This high concentration of fluoride will percolate
 down and contaminate groundwater. High concentrations of uranium and thorium are observed in some selected
 pockets of Wailapally in rocks as well as soil samples.
Rainwater harvesting and artificial recharge studies were carried out in Wailapalli watershed in Nalgonda district.
 A groundwater source with fluoride concentration of less than 0.7 ppm was created through large diameter open
 well.
(ii)        A seismic hazard map covering Himalayas and other seismically active regions was prepared under the Global
 Seismic Hazard Assessment Program (GSHAP). The hazard map depicts the levels of expected ground

151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
 accelerations due to earthquakes in different parts of the country. The highest levels are estimated for the
 Himalaya and northeastern India regions. High to moderate levels are estimated for other seismically active
 regions like Bhuj in Gujarat and Koyna in Maharashtra. The GSHAP is an internationally coordinated effort to
 prepare a unified global map of earthquake hazard under the umbrella of United Nations.
(iii)       GPS measurements can be effectively used to monitor crustal deformation across any collisional belt. In
 Himalaya it has been demonstrated by taking measurements in Nepal, Garhwal and northwest Himalaya.
Comments
     The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation  
       The Committee is further happy to know that NGRI under a global attempt has taken a lead to prepare a Seismic
 Hazard Map covering the entire Himalayan Belt and Seismically active regions of India, under Global Seismic Hazard
 Assessment Programme (GSHAP).                                                                                                     (Para
 59)                                                                            
           Apart from this, NGRI as a premier institute is handling considerable original researches in engineering
 geophysics, redox-history of the planet and in several important areas of radioactive and geo-chemical properties of
 earth.                     (Para 60)
         The Committee, however, has noted that in a few prominent areas where research is necessary to understand the
 anatomy of earth's inner core, the Institute has not so far undertaken any scientific investigation, which are as follows:
a)         Heat generating capacity of Radio-genic isotopes of potassium which may power           convection in the core of
 the earth and          drive the magnetic field in the earth’s crusts;
b)         The earth's dynamo action; and
c)         Geo-neutrino picture of earth's interior for its better comprehension.       (Para 61)
The Institute has stated that since geo-neutrino study is not within the purview of NGRI's research activities, the Institute
 has not attempted any research work in this field. The Committee, however, sees no reason why such an important study
 has not been kept within the purview of the research activities of the Institute while in other parts of the world the study
 of geo-neutrino imaging of earth crusts is being given primary importance. The Committee feels that geo-neutrino
 imaging can give vital information about earth's core that may prove to be extremely useful for Institute's preparation of
 Seismic Hazard Map on which the Institute has already taken a lead under a global
 attempt.                                                                                                    (Para 62)
       Moreover, some neglected areas like the understanding of the heat generating capacity of Radio-genic Isotopes and
 greater understanding about earth's dynamo action may be of considerable help for the Institute to establish a perfect
 intelligibility of the anatomy of earthquake and its accurate prediction which is still eluding the scientists the world
 over.                                                                                                                        (Para 63)
           The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that feasibility should be explored by the Institute to direct its
 research activities to the following fields which have hitherto remained neglected:
ii)         Understanding of earth's dynamo action; Geo-neutrino imaging of earth's interior; and
iii)
               Understanding   of   heat   generating   capacity of  Radio-genic  stopes  of  Potassium for a clear intelligibility of
 the anatomy of heat flow from core to mantle, driving convection motion in the outer core that could be linked
 with   generation of earthquake.                                                                                  (Para
 64)                                                             

151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
Action Taken by the Department
            As per the recommendations of the Committee, NGRI has taken action and conducted feasibility study with
 regard to the points raised by the Hon’ble Members. NGRI’s observations are as follows:
    Earth Dynamo action: It is believed that radiogenic potassium, if present in the earth's core in substantial
 quantities, has the potential to generate heat adequate enough to power earth's geodynamo action. Recent studies
 indicate the possibility of the compatibility of radioactivity in producing earth's early magnetic field, which helps
 in dynamo action. To verify this hypothesis experiments are being conducted at few places in USA and some
 other countries.
    Geo-neutrinos imaging of earth's interior: Geo-neutrinos are produced by beta-decay of radioactive elements
 present inside the earth, in particular, the long-lived isotopes of U238, Th232, Rb87 and K40. It is believed that
 measuring these geo-neutrinos directly will provide information on the magnetic field of the earth and the
 geodynamo. The only attempt to directly detect geo-neutrinos is being attempted using sophisticated low energy
 Kam LAND (Kamioka Liquid Scintillator Anti-Neutrino Detector) facility being built at Honshu in Japan.
 Indirect methods to estimate geo-neutrino flux theoretically are quite ambiguous.
      Both the points raised by the Hon’ble Members are linked, viz., earth’s dynamo action is believed to be
 caused by the magnetic field inside the earth, partly due to heat flow from radiogenic isotopes including
 potassium which produces geo-neutrinos by beta-decay. The concern of the Members is valid and well taken as
 they feel that these studies could be linked to the generation of earthquakes, which are of prime concern to the
 mankind, especially, in view of the recent damaging earthquakes including generation of tsunamis.
    NGRI is already in the forefront of studying the phenomenon of earthquakes and the assessment of hazard
 associated with it so that mankind can be saved from this natural disaster. Several seismological observatories in
 the country are being operated and maintained by NGRI. The preparation of the Seismic Hazard Map covering
 Himalayan and other seismically active regions in India under a Global Seismic Hazard Assessment Programme
 is one such action in this direction. It is now well known that earthquakes occur only up to depths of about 700
 km beneath the earth.  For an earthquake to occur the material has to be brittle.  This is probably the reason that
 earthquakes do not occur at great depths due to increase in temperature and pressure, which makes the material
 more plastic, or fluid in nature.   This molten material inside the earth drives the tectonic plates, which collides,
 and cause damaging earthquakes along collision boundaries and other parts of the earth.  The movement of these
 tectonic plates can be measured using Global Positioning System (GPS), which can provide information about the
 estimates of the rate of movements.  NGRI has already a major program on GPS studies with permanent and
 mobile observation stations.  In the last 5 years, a permanent GPS station has also been installed at the Indian
 Maitri Station in Antarctica. Several  other studies related to seismic structure of the earth are also being carried
 out at NGRI. All these studies directly address the earthquake phenomenon and also lead to the understanding of
 the geodynamics of the earth in terms of the convection in the earth’s interior.
    The concern of the Honorable Members in suggesting these studies seems to address the problem of earthquake
 generation, which is playing havoc with the lives of the people and causing great economic losses. NGRI is
 already addressing this concern by taking up appropriate and detailed studies as per the International
 understanding of the earthquake phenomenon. The studies recommended by the Honorable Members of
 Parliament are very important to understand the dynamics of the planet earth but do not directly address the
 problem of earthquake generation. However the recommendations of the Committee are well taken and in
 response, NGRI has setup a core group of scientists to explore the possibility of initiating the suggested studies in

151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
 our country.
Comments
        The Committee welcomes setting up of a core group of scientists by NGRI to explore the possibility of initiating
 research in the fields of geo-nuetrino studies, earth’s dynamic action, radio-genic isotopes etc.  Though such studies
 might not be directly related to earthquake prediction, they could generate enough linkages in understanding the nature
 of earthquakes.
 NATIONAL RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (NRDC)
Recommendation  
The Committee has been informed that the budgetary Plan allocation for NRDC is Rs. 1.00 crore for the year 2005-
06. It is a premier organization engaged in development, promotion and also acts as a catalyst for transforming
 innovative research into marketable industrial products. Keeping in view the specialized activities of NRDC, the
 Committee feels that the present allocation is too meager. The Committee, therefore recommends that the Plan
 allocation should be substantially increased from the present Rs. 1.00 crore to at least Rs. 4.00
 crores.                                                             (Para 66 )          
Action Taken by the Department   
As desired by the Committee, approval of the Planning Commission has been obtained for enhancing the allocation
 of NRDC to Rs. 4.00 crores during 2005-06 within the overall approved Plan outlay of Rs. 846 crore of the Department.
Comments
      The Committee notes the reply
PROMOTION OF SCIENTIFIC TEMPER
 Recommendation   
            In a country where a sizable population is barely literate, inculcating a scientific temperament and national
 outlook is not an easy task.  However, to improve the quality of life of the people and removing backwardness and
 superstitious thinking, science popularization is of utmost importance.  Therefore, the Committee feels that the
 Department should not only focus on the transfer of technologies but also disseminate basic scientific knowledge to the
 people through various popular media like Television, Documentary Films, frequent melas and demonstrations
 throughout the country.                                     
(Para 68)    
Action Taken by the Department
   Efforts of CSIR in this direction already discussed in Para 21.  As regards DSIR with a view to popularize
 science and disseminate basic knowledge to the people, the Department has been participating in various
 exhibitions and conducting workshops in different parts of the country.  Recently DSIR has taken up the
 production of 12 films of half an hour duration to telecast in National Channel-DDI as part of the Vigyan Lok
 Programme.  A series of four workshops were organized at Indore, Coimbatore, Bhubaneswar  and Guwahati
 during Jan-March 2005 to create awareness about the activities and programmes of DSIR among industries and
 industrial R&D establishments.
Point raised by the Committee
How does the Department gets feedback about the effectiveness of such programmes?  What criteria have been fixed by
 the Department to judge the success of such programmes?

151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
Clarification by the Department
Documentary films telecast on Doordarshan and the workshops provided full contact details of the department and
 invited viewers/ participants to get in touch with the department for clarifications, application forms etc. The films and
 the workshops were effective in generating many enquiries about the operation, funding mechanism etc. of the
 departmental schemes.  In order to judge the success of such dissemination programmes, the department encourages
 proposals under its various schemes, of value much higher than the expenditure incurred on such dissemination
 programmes.
Comments
            Popularization of Science among the masses is a Herculean task.  To generate their interest in science and to
 persuade them to rely on reason and logic, science has to be presented to the communities through the symbolism of
 their own cultrural life so that science becomes a part of their day-to-day life.  The Department has made a good
 beginning but the Committee feels that a local flavour in such programmes should be stressed in order to overcome/fight
 psychological barriers in their minds, which prevent them from adopting scientific practices.
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 03.30 p.m. on Tuesday, the 20
th December, 2005 in Room No. 121 (Committee
 Chairman’s Room), First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            PRESENT
1.   Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-din Soz
3. Dr. Prabha Thakur
4. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
5. Shrimati Kum Kum Rai
LOK  SABHA
6. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
7. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
8. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
9. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
10. Shri Rakesh Singh
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
SECRETARIAT
                        Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
2.   The Committee took-up consideration of revised draft 147
th, ***,  ***, ***, *** and 152nd Action Taken Reports of
 the Committee on the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations contained in its One Hundred Forty-third,
 ***, ***, ***, *** and *** reports on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) relating to Departments of Ocean
 Development; ***; ***; ***; ***; and ***, respectively.  After discussion and suggesting a minor change in 147 th
 report, the Committee adopted all the reports.
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy to present the
 Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Sujan Chakraborty, and in his absence, Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli to lay the
 Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha on Thursday, the 22nd  December, 2005.

151stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/151streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:14]
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy to present the
 Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Sujan Chakraborty, and in his absence, Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli to lay the
 Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha on Thursday, the 22nd  December, 2005.
4.         The Committee, then, decided to hear the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and
 Forests in respect of control and supervision on experiments on Animals for the purpose of Drugs and Pharmaceutical
 Research, in its next meeting to be held on the10 th January, 2006. The Committee also decided to hear the Drugs
 Controller General of India and representatives of Indian Council of Medical Research in the matter in its future
 meetings.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 04.35 p.m.
NEW DELHI;
December 20, 2005
                          C. B. RAI UNDER SECRETARY
 
                                                                                   
                                                                                                 
 
☼ Pursuant to the adoption of the 5th Report of the Committee on Ethics on 13.12.2005, the Member was suspended from the Rajya Sabha pending the presentation of the
 final Report of the Committee on Ethics.
Ф Shri Jaswant Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  11th August, 2005 consequent upon his resignation from  the Committee.
 
*** Related to other matters.