3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
 TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1993-94)
 
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE MINISTRY OF
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
FOR THE YEAR 1992-93
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE DECEMBER, 1993
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 1993
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
C O N T E N T S
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                      
2.INTRODUCTION                                                               
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                   
4.APPENDIX                                                                         
    MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE            
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
 ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
 
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi  Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
3.         Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
4.         Prof. M.G.K. Menon
5.         Shri Suresh Pachouri
6.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
@7.     Vacant
*8.       Shri Murli Manohar Joshi
9.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
10.       Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.       Shri M.G. Reddy
12.       Shri Oscar Fernandes
13.       Shri K.G. Shivappa
14.       Shri Digvijaya Singh
15.       Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
16.       Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
17.       Shri Sharad Dighe
18.       Shri Rama Chandra Rath
19.       Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
20.       Shri Harchand Singh
21.       Shri Yashwantrao Patil
22.       Shri Vijay Naval Patti
23.       Shri P.C. Chacko
24.       Kumari Frida Topno
25.       Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
____________________________________________________________________________
@ Vacancy caused due to retirement of Dr. R.K. Poddar from membership of Rajya Sabha.
* Nominated w.e.f. May 13, 1992 vice Dr. Naunihal Singh resigned.
** Nominated w.e.f. August 26, 1993 vice Shri Bhagey Gobardhan died.
26.       Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
27.       Shri Chandresh Patel
28.       Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
29.       Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
30.       Shri Balraj Pasi
31.       Shrimati Bhavana Chikhalia
32.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh
33.       Shrimati Saroj Dubey
34.       Shri Harpal Panwar
35.       Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
 36.       Shri Jitendra Nath Das
 37.       Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
 38.       Vacant
 39.       Shri Bhim Singh Patel
 40.       Shri E. Ahmed
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary
Shri Vandana Garg, Under Secretary
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
Shri R. Rajamani, Secretary
Shri A.K. Mukherjee, Inspector General of Forests
Shri Vinay Shankar, Additional Secretary
Shri K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary
Shri Narain Singh, Additional IGF
Shri S.C. Dey, Additional IGF (WL)
Shri S.S. Hasurkar, Joint Secretary
______________________________________________________________________________
* Vacancy occurred due to the death of Shri Nani Bhattacharya.
 
Shri Mukul Sanwal, Joint Secretary
Shri George Joseph, Joint Secretary
Shri S.S. Rizvi, Joint Secretary
Shri J.C. Kala, Joint Secretary
Shri S.C. Maudgal, Advisor
Shri M. Parabramham, Advisor

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
Shri  Harjeet Singh, Advisor
Shri D.K. Biswas, Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board
Shri P.K. Hazra, Director
Shri Arun Khetrapal, Joint Secretary
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I N T R O D U C T I O N
 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised
 by the Committee to present the report on its behalf, present this Third Report of the Committee. This Report deals with
 issues contained in the Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment & Forests for the year 1992-93.
 
2.         The Committee held in all four meetings on 7th, 8th, 9th June and 20th October, 1993 (Appendix). In the
 meeting held on 7th June, 1993, the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests gave an overview of
 various activities of the Ministry. On 8th and 9th June, 1993 the Committee discussed in detail the activities of the
 Ministry.
 
3.         The Committee expresses its appreciation for the officials of the Ministry for their cooperation and making
 available the material whenever required by the Committee.
 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the draft report at its meeting held on the 20th October, 1993.
 
NEW DELHI  
October 20, 1993
SYED SIBTEY RAZI
Chairman
Committee on Science and Technology,Environment and Forests
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R E P O R T
 
GENERAL BACKGROUND
 
The very existence of the country and its all-round progress as we move into the future will be greatly dependent
 on sustainable development: It is, therefore, very vital that a check is exercised on the demands placed on the
 environment so as not to exceed the carrying capacity of the environment for the present as well as the future
 generations.
 
2.         We have in India, our own hoary traditions of environmental conservation which have inculcated in us a deep
 reverence for nature and an awareness of the age-old truth that all forms of life, be it human, animal or plant are inter-
woven and any damage to one may cause serious threat to the rest. The age-old traditions of environment protection and
 reverence to the mother nature have been given prominence in our national priorities as is evident from the
 constitutional provisions which enjoin upon all individuals a duty to protect and improve the natural environment,
 including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures. We have an impressive array of
 laws which aim at protecting and promoting environment and controlling pollution. Environment is also one of the
 priorities of our Planning.
 3.         However, it is being noticed that alongwith economic progress, pressure is steadily
 increasing on the environment and the natural resources; and this has reached in some cases
 alarming proportions. Environmental protection in the present scenario has become very
 vital for the prosperity of the country.
 4.         The Ministry of Environment and Forests, which is entrusted with the gigantic task of
 preserving the environment plants, promotes and coordinates environmental and forestry
 programmes. The main activities of the Ministry include conservation and survey of flora,
 fauna, forests and wildlife; prevention and control of pollution, undertaking programmes for on of degraded areas,
 protection of the environment and afforestation and re-generation of degraded areas, protection of the environment and
 promoting research related to these fields. These tasks are being fulfilled through environmental impact assessment,

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
 eco-regeneration, assistance to organisations implementing environmental and forestry research, extension, education
 and training to augment the requisite manpower, collection, collation, storage and dissemination of environmental
 information, and creation of awareness at the national level.
 
5.         With a view to assessing whether the Ministry is fulfilling its mandate effectively, the Committee decided to
 make an indepth study of the various aspects of the functioning of the Ministry by analysing its Annual Report for the
 year 1992-93.
 
6.         At the very outset, the Committee was appraised of the history of the creation of the Ministry of Environment
 and Forests and its functioning. The Committee was informed that conservation, study of and research on natural
 resources are the main thrust areas of the Ministry. To carry out this task, there are a number of institutions like
 Botanical Survey of India, Himalayan Institute of Environmental Development, National Museum of Natural History,
 Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education which are working under the Ministry. Raising environmental
 awareness among masses is an important task being performed by the Ministry. For this purpose, there is the National
 Environmental Awareness  Committee at the centre which is having a network with a number of non-governmental
 organisations all over the country. Besides this, there are 16 Environment Information Centres which have a potential
 for further expansion.
 
tonnes of fodder, calculated at a nominal rate of 50 paise per kg. comes to Rs. 12,500 crores per year. The Ministry was
 of the view that on a conservative estimate, the value of goods and services provided by the forests came around to
 approximately Rs. 26,500 crores per annum. The representative of the Ministry emphasised that the tremendous
 pressure on our forests was evidently unsustainable if appropriate amount of revenues generated from the forest areas
 was not reverted back towards the regeneration and renewal of the forest resources. It was felt that investment in this
 area should at least be 10% of the total benefit accrued. However, investment on such a scale is not available, the
 representative of the Ministry specifically elaborated upon the element of total neglect of this vital sector in all the Five
 Year plans, it was clarified that the allocation of the forestry sector for the 8th Five Year plan stood at Rs. 4082.00
 crores which was not more than 0.94% of the total allocation and showed perceptible decline when compared with
 percentage allocation of the forestry sector in the 7th Five Year Plan. Neglect could also be borne out by the fact that
 whereas organised energy sector comprising thermal, hydro-electrical and nuclear projects has at its disposal 25% of
 plan resources, rural energy had been given just one per cent.
 
13.       One heartening feature in the otherwise dismal scenario in the foresty sector is that India has been successful in
 attracting both multilateral and bilateral donors like the World Bank, Swedish International Development Authority
 (SIDA), Overseas Economic Corpora­tion Fund (OECF) (Japan), EEC and Official Development Assistance (ODA)
 (UK) to get assistance for this vital sector. This external assistance is likely to continue in future also. But due to
 inadequate funding by the Government of India, the externally aided forestry projects had failed to make the progress
 as laid down in the Approved Project Documents (APD). This created a very embarrassing position when the donor
 agencies found that the projects already sanctioned were falling behind .the schedule.
 
14.       As a result of the devaluation of the India rupee vis-a-vis all major foreign currencies, more rupee funds are
 needed to fully utilize the external assistance which has necessitated extension in the life of some projects. Due to
 financial constraints some State Governments are not able to make adequate provision in their budget for the project to
 utilize the aid. The Ministry informed that the State Governments are impressed upon from time to time to make
 adequate provision in the budget so as to utilise the entire aid for the project being implemented by them. The
 inadequate funding of the forest sector has resulted in (a) delayed implementation of the externally aided projects; (b)
 accretion to the foreign exchange reserves of the country from the soft loans and grants provided by the external donors
 is lower than it can be; and (c) the forest operations that were approved under the project cannot be undertaken as
 approved and the regeneration and renewal of the forest resources suffer.
 
15.       Employment generation is a core issue in our plan outlays. Tree planting activities offer a vast potential for

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
 employment generation. As per the estimates of the Ministry, afforestation and tree-plantation programmes have a
 wage component of nearly 70% which is much higher than the employment generation capabilities of other sectors of
 Indian economy. Other welcome feature of employment generation by this sector also alleviates hardships associated
 with migration of rural population to urban areas, not only this, these activities help a lot in creating assets for the local
 community. Thus by activating the forest sector, effective implementation of the rural development programmes can be
 ensured. The representative of the Ministry pointed out that 25% of the funds under such employment generation
 programme as NRF, RLEGP, etc. were earmarked for the afforestation and tree-planting activities. However, the
 allocation of funds for afforestation and tree planting activities has now been done away-with in the Jawahar Rojgar
 Yojana. A positive action that has been taken in this area, however, is the creation of a joint management system for
 forests adjacent to villages. 13 States have already issued orders that wherever villagers are involved in planning
 preservation, protection, raising, management, etc. of new plantation, they should be provided free grass, fuel,
 medicinal plants, etc. Not only this, after harvesting 25 to 50% of the produce or the price would be kept at the disposal
 of the villagers.
 
16.       The representative also informed the Committee that enactment of the Forest (Conservation) act in 1980 has
 brought about a revolutionary change in the conservation of forests. Now, even State Governments can not arbitrarily
 transfer any forest land for non-forestry purpose. Not only this, it has now been made mandatory that in the event of
 transfer of forest land for any project, proportionate non-forest land would be transferred for forestry purpose in the
 state and the cost of afforestation would be borne by the project management. Despite all this forests are under heavy
 pressure. The Committee expressed its utmost concern over large scale deforestation involving illicit felling and
 removal of trees and arbitrary transfer of forest land for non-forestry purpose.
 
17.       The Committee suggested that the deforestation problem could be resolved to a great extent if a survey of
 villages where lot of land on river banks was lying vacant was conducted. Another suggestion was that wastelands in
 rural areas could be developed as energy farms, thereby providing much needed fuelwood to the villagers. The
 representative of the Ministry clarified that practice of putting wastelands to plantation of fuelwood and fodder species
 was already in vogue in all the States. The Committee also observed that a great stress has been laid on the plantation of
 babul and Eucalyptus trees, which are neither good for health nor are they fruit bearing and useful from ecological point
 of view. It was also enquired whether any alternative scheme for plantation of trees had been evolved. In this regard,
 particularly attention was drawn to the plantation of fruit bearing and other trees which increase the fertility of land.
 
18.       The Committee pointed out that Government sponsored tree plantation weeks are merely show schemes as no
 follow up action is taken to ensure care of the trees planted. The Committee also expressed concern over the
 effectiveness of afforestation programmes, especially wanted to know about the mechanism which exists for their
 monitoring and evaluation. The representatives of the Ministry replied that social forestry project sponsored by World
 Bank and other international agencies are continuously monitored not only by the Government but also by the donor
 agencies and also by the non-Governmental organisations. Mid-term evaluation of survival of sapplings planted under
 the national Social Forestry Project in Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh had also been
 conducted by the World Bank. It was reported to the Committee that among the developing countries India was
 considered as one of the most acceptable countries where donors feel that the funds were being utilised to the best
 advantage.
 
19.       The Committee was also informed that evaluation done in 36 districts shows that in 25 districts, survival
 percentage of saplings was more than 70% in 7 districts it was 60 to 70% and in four districts it was below 50%. In case
 of Government where the survival rate was low, the attention of the State Governments had been drawn and they had
 been advised to take precautionary measures. In this regard the Ministry also quoted a study undertaken by the Indian
 Institute of Public Opinion between 1983 and 1988 which revealed the survival rate of sapplings in some of the States
 as follows:-
 
 
State                                                                                    Survival percentage
 Karnataka                                                                                                     82.5%

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
 Tamilnadu                                                                                                      58.8%
 Uttar Pradesh                                                                                                60.6%
West Bengal                                                                                                  63.2%
 
20.       On the suggestion of the Committee that wherever possible wood could be substituted in order to preserve
 forests, the Ministry informed that already they have taken action in this regard. In housing sector and Railways, wood-
substitutes were already being used, it was also informed that in coordination with the departments of Animal
 Husbandry programme of silvipasture had also being taken up by which fodder would be grown outside forest land and
 people would be trained to stall-feed their animals instead of allowing them to graze. The Ministry was also involved in
 the distribution of smokeless chullahas and gobbar gas plants.
 
21.       The Indian Forest Act, 1927 is the main legislation which deals with management of forests by states. This Act
 has become quite old and needs proper updating, particularly in view of the conceptual changes that have been
 incorporated in the National Forest Policy of 1988. With a view to incorporating new concepts of forest management, a
 need 'is being felt to bring forward a revised and more comprehensive legislation. The Ministry of Environment and
 Forests is already seized of the matter and a draft revised legislation has been circulated among the State Governments
 for their comments. Comments on the draft of the revised legislation have been received from the States/Union
 Territories of Andaman and Nicobar lands, Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesb, Kerala,
 Maharashtra, Mizoram, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Lakshdweep, Pondicherry and West Bengal. The remaining States have
 been requested to expedite their comments. The draft Bill would have to be reviewed in the light of the comments
 received from the State Governments as well as considered through the joint and collective consultation in the Inter-
State Council. The Committee feels that the urgency of the matter may be highlighted to the State Governments and the
 Union Territories and they may be requested to furnish their comments within a specified time-frame and in case they
 have no comments to offer that also may be informed to the Ministry; as this would obviate unnecessary delay in the
 matter of finalising a comprehensive Forest Act.
 
22.       The Committee is constrained to find that in spite of several laws, which aim at forest conservation and
 promoting afforestation, the forest areas are steadily undergoing various stages of degradation. The Committee feels
 that as almost every section of the society is closely linked, in one way or the other, with forests, responsibility of
 conservation and enhancement of forest areas should not be left with the Ministry of Environment and Forests alone.
 Instead, society at large should be fully involved in this task. The Committee is aware of the great contribution being
 made by non-governmental organisations and environmental experts in this area. There is, however, still enough scope
 for using official media to enlighten public about the far-reaching consequences of deforestation. To promote
 environ­mental education, programmes may be prepared in regional languages and shown frequently on television or
 broadcast on the radio, besides this, talks, plays, songs, etc. in local languages may be produced which can be broadcast
 or telecast to create interest and concern about environment among the general public. Special programmes may be
 devised for the rural masses in this regard.
 
23.       Forestry which is a vital sector of Indian economy has been unfortunately neglected in all the Five Year Plans.
 The Committee feels that allocation of Rs. 4082.00 crores for the forestry sector in the Eighth Five Year Plan, being
 0.94% of the total plan allocation is considerably low and, therefore, recommends that immediate steps should be taken
 for substantially increasing the allocation of funds for the forestry sector. At the same time, the Ministry should also
 explore the possibility of raising needed funds through the forestry sector which may be utilised again for regeneration
 of forests, protection of wildlife, etc. The Ministry should also ensure that there is no wastage of funds and the money
 sanctioned is actually used for increasing the forest cover. The Ministry shall have to be vigilant about illegal falling of
 trees and theft of forest wealth. All this will have a healthy effect on externally aided forestry projects as they could
 then be implemented efficiently and within prescribed time-frame by showing quick results.
24.       The forestry operations create assets for the village communities improve the water regime and contribute
 significantly to the rural development effort and for this reason, forestry operations must be seen as critical to the
 process of upgrading the rural economy and alleviating rural poverty. The Committee is,-therefore, of the view that
 employment generation programmes should invest a part of their allocation in afforestation and tree-planting activities
 to realise the vast employment potential of the forestry sector. Towards this end, the Committee recommends that at
 least 25% of funds be earmarked for afforestation and tree-planting activities under the Jawahar Rojgar Yojana and

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
 other Rural Employment Schemes.
25.       The Ministry informed that there arc 75 national parks and 421 sanctuaries. The Committee was also given an
 idea about the wildlife conservation which cover both flora and fauna. The present wildlife conservation strategy is
 two-pronged, on the one hand it aims at protecting species by legislation and on the other hand, it devotes itself to area
 conservation. The Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 is an important Act in this regard. As a result of an amendment to
 this Act in 1991, certain species of plants, .in addition to animals, were  brought under its ambit. In the species
 conservation programme, some mega projects like 'Project tiger', 'Project elephant' and 'Project Rhino' have been taken
 up besides, these mega projects, there are also projects for protecting minor species like 'Sibberian crane' and 'Pigmoy
 Hog' etc.
26.       On being asked about the floristic work done in different States of the country, the Ministry informed that
 whereas floristic work in many states is either continuing or has been completed. Bihar, Maharashtra, Orissa, Uttar
 Pradesh, Dadar and Nagar Haveli and Pondicherry were the States/Union Territories where work has yet to start.
27.       The Committee is happy to note that activities relating to identification, nomenclature, taxonomic description
 and enumeration of various species belonging to several families for Flora of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland,
 Mizoram, Sikkim, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, South-Western ghat, Jammu and Kashmir and Madhya Pradesh ahs
 been completed. The Committee is, however, surprised to find that the floristic work is yet to begin in some of the big
 states. The Committee hopes that work in the remaining states/Union Territaries would also begin shortly and the
 Ministry would make concerted efforts in this direction.
28.       The Committee noted that during the 7th Five Year Plan the Ministry had provided assistance to 150 sanctuaries
 and national parks under the scheme 'Development of National Parks and Sanctuaries'. 24 States got assistance for
 control of poaching. Three new tiger reserves were notified and brought under the purview of the Project Tiger
 Scheme.- In the 8th Five Year Plan two schemes namely, control of Poaching and Illegal Trade in Wildlife and
 Conservation of Rhinos in Assam have been transferred to States.
29.       Incidents of poaching in national parks and sanctuaries are often reported in the newspapers. The Committee
 feels that it is a serious crime and effective steps should be taken at the level of Ministry to curb this illegal practice.
 The Ministry cannot remain a silent spectator to the illegal trade in wildlife on the ground that national parks and
 sanctuaries are under the control of respective State Governments. The Committee is of the firm view that an
 institutional system should be devised whereby state Governments may be asked periodically to furnish reports
 mentioning cases of illegal poaching in the national parks and sanctuaries reported to them or noticed by them and the
 action taken against guilty persons.
Bio-sphere Reserves
30.       Biosphere Reserves are, multipurpose protected areas to preserve genetic diversity in representative ecosystems.
 Since the launching of the programme, the following seven Bio­sphere Reserves have been set up:
Nilgiri (Karnataka, Kerala & Tamil Nadu)
Nanda Devi (Uttar Pradesh)
Norket (Meghalaya)
Great Nicobar (Andaman & Nicobar Islands)
Gulf of Mannar (Tamil Nadu)
Manas (Assam)
Sunderbans (West Bengal)
 
31.       The Ministry informed that the National Committee on Bio-sphere Reserves which was set up in December,
 1992 takes an integrated approach for implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the Bio-sphere Reserves
 Programme, Financial assistance for the current financial year for Bio-sphere Reserves namely, Noket, the Great
 Nicobar, Nanda Devi Sunderbans, Gulf of Mannar, Nilgiri has been allocated. However, in respect of manas
 Bio­sphere Reserve possibility of opening of bi-national Bio-sphere Reserve between India and Bhutan is being
 explored.

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
32.       The Committee is happy to note that financial grant has already been sanctioned for the Bio-sphere Reserves of
 Nokrek, the Great Nicobar, Nanda Devi Sunderbans, Gulf of Mannar and Nilgiri and hopes that these Biosphere
 Reserves must have also started receiving the full benefit of technical expertise and know-how including trained
 personnel.
33.       The scheme of biodiversity conservation was initiated during 1991-92 to ensure proper co-ordination among
 various agencies concerned with issue relating to conservation of biological diversity and to review, monitor and evolve
 adequate policy instruments for the same. The Ministry informed that India has contributed effectively in the
 negotiations in the six sessions during the last two years for finalising the Convention on Biological Diversity which the
 Government of India signed along with 155 other countries during the UNCED Earth Summit held at Rio de Janeiro,
 Brazil in 1992. Apart from setting up an in-house Committee under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Ministry of
 Environment and Forests, an expert group consultation was also organised in December, 1992. A status report on bio-
diversity conservation, as suggested in the first meeting of the in-house Committee is under preparation. The Committee
 hopes that this status report would be finalised as per the time schedule as this would be an important document for
 policy makers as well as for those conducting research in the area of management and conservation of bio-diversity.
National Fund for Afforestation and Wastelands Development
34. According to the Ministry the National Fund for Afforestation and Wastelands Development was set up on the 17th,
 July, 1990, to achieve the objective of involving all sections of society and mobilising resources of individuals as well
 as organisations, both corporate and non-corporate in the task of wastelands development. On being asked about the
 corpus of the fund, the Committee was informed that a sum of Rs.11,01,85 is presently available in the fund which has
 to be spent on projects submitted by Government Departments/Trusts/Public Sector Undertakings/Local
 Bodies/Cooperatives/Companies. The Committee was also informed that wide publicity was given about the setting up
 of Fund within the country and outside also.
35.       The Committee feels that the Ministry has not given adequate publicity to the setting up of the Fund, as no
 project proposals have been received by the Ministry so far. Besides, the money lying in the Fund in not sufficient to
 achieve afforestation and Wastelands development in an effective manner. In order to involve individuals and
 organisations, more publicity should be given to the programme not only to attract money for the Fund but also to
 disburse money to the Government Departments, Cooperatives, local bodies etc. who may submit sound proposals for
 the afforestation and wastelands development.
Aerial Seeding
36.       The Committee felt that the plantation on mountain tops has generally remained neglected which could be
 effectively tackled by aerial seeding. The Ministry informed the Committee that a centrally sponsored scheme has been
 tried in the past in the States of West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Rajasthan. However, the
 Ministry is not sure about the cost effectiveness and usefulness of aerial seeding. The Committee feels that if aerial
 seeding is found to be cost-effective, then more areas may be identified for the purpose.
Housing and Construction activities by Private colonisers in hill areas
37.       The Committee highlighted the recent phenomenon of colonizers moving towards hilly areas and promoting
 housing activities there. While everybody wants to enjoy the salubrious climate of the hills but then it is also to be seen
 that the ecology of the hills is not disturbed or destroyed. If ecological imbalance is caused in hilly areas, it will have
 serious repercussions even for those who are living in plains. But the Ministry has not devised any method to check or
 control these colonizers from moving towards hills. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Environment and Forests
 should take up this matter with States having hilly terrains, particularly those where Himalayan ranges lie and impress
 upon the state Governments that there should be strict check on the construction activity promoted by the private
 colonizers for the purpose of making huge profit.
Prevention and Control of Pollution
38.       Pollution control is another thrust area identified by the Ministry of Environment and Forests. There are various
 policies and programmes relating to abatement and control of pollution which are administered by the Ministry. There
 also exist many schemes which are administered either directly by the Central Pollution control Board or through the
 State Boards. The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) is the principal agency which advises the Ministry on
 technical matters in formulating standards with regard to water and air pollution and other related areas. It also

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
 functions as an enabling organisation helping the state Pollution Control Boards to perform their roles in an effective
 manner. This is done by having a regular inter-action with State Pollution Control Boards.
39.       The Committee drew the attention to an announcement made in the recently concluded Conference of State
 Ministers of Small Scale Industries whereby henceforth clearance certificate for compliance with existing pollution
 control laws was not required for small scale industries and wanted to know the exact position in the matter. The
 Ministry clarified that in view of a large number of representations received from small scale industries, it has been
 decided that with the exception of 17 grossly-polluting industries, whether large, medium or small, all other categories
 of small scale industries may have simply to submit a forms to the State Pollution Control Boards. Further, was no need
 for the industry to obtain periodic renewal of consent till such time as the unit modified its process itself. However,
 random checks could always be conducted by the State Pollution Control Boards. In order to help small scale
 industries, government is implementing a scheme for providing assistance for promoting combined facilities for
 treatment of effluent and solid wastes generated in clusters of small scale units.
 
40.       Task forces have been set up by the CPCB on air pollution control in urban areas. Despite all these measures
 initiated by the Ministry, the Committee was of the view that the pollution load is increasing day by day. The Ministry
 had admitted itself that the average rate of growth in the industrial sector during the Seventh Five Year Plan was 8.87%
 with the liberatisation of industrial policy the growth rate is expected to be significantly higher. This would naturally
 lead to the increased pollution load. While the Committee notes that the Ministry has issued instruction that industries
 that came into operation after 16.5.1981 were to comply with standards by 31.12.1993, the control of pollution, in fact,
 calls for stringent measures. The Ministry should very closely monitor the industries in order to make them conform to
 the standards laid down by the target date.
41.       The Committee recommends that the Central Pollution Control Boards (CPCB) should coordinate with the State
 Pollution Control Boards in order to bring out an updated version of the inventory of all polluting industries, as the
 inventory prepared in 1984 has become outdated.
42.       The Committee also pointed out that the Effluent Treatment/Plant located at Najafgarh is not functioning
 properly and steps may be taken to set it in order. The Ministry informed the Committee that it is taking up the matter
 with the concerned authorities.
43.       The representatives of the Ministry were asked to clarify the specific actions taken toward prevention, control
 and abatement of air pollution after the promulgation of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981. The
 Committee was informed that a number of actions have been taken in this regard. Guidelines have been issued for
 assessing the emissions and effluents based on the quantum of production. Guidelines have also been issued to
 encourage the utilisation of waste as a resource, wherever it is possible. Steps have also been taken to curb automobile
 pollution. Gross and mass emission standards for all types of vehicle have been notified under the Motor Vehicle Rules,
 1989.
44.       Vehicular traffic is, in fact, one of the major sources of air pollution in cities, particularly in those spots which
 have high traffic density. In Delhi itself vehicular exhaust causes air pollution by more than 60%. The Department of
 Transport of the Delhi Administration has formulated a detailed schemes in July, 1990 for certification of pollution
 standards of private vehicles registered in Delhi. The Government has also started a programme of running battery
 operated buses so as to minimise vehicular pollution. DTC has made a comprehensive action plan to reduce pollution
 and control smoke emission from its buses. This action plan consists of (a) reducing smoke emission by tuning
 vehicles/engines (b) acquiring buses for replacement of over-aged buses from active fleet (c) reducing overloading (d)
 introducing buses with fuel conservative engines (e) equipping the units with smoke meters for monitoring the smoke
 levels of the fleet in the unit, But it appears that this plan is hardly put to use. The Committee feels that the owner of
 private vehicles which pollute the air should be heavily fined and disincentives should be instituted for the owner of
 such vehicles. In congested areas where pollution load is already very high use of battery operated public transport be
 introduced. People may be encouraged to car-pooling and public transport systems with proper check on vehicular
 emission be promoted. Wherever possible pathways may be laid which can be used safely by the pedestrians and for
 those using cycles.
 

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
45.       The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Environment and Forests should issue instruction to all
 Government Departments including the Ministry of Defence, that the fleet of vehicles maintained by them should fully
 conform to the pollution control norms. And in this regard a responsible officer in the Ministries and Government
 offices may periodically conduct surprise checks in this regard.
46.       The Committee hopes that prescribed emission standards would be strictly adhered to by all concerned. The
 Committee finds that one of the actions taken is to persuade the industries to comply with the consent requirements of
 the State Pollution Control Boards within the stipulated period. The Committee feels that only persuasive action would
 not be effective and if necessary, punitive measures may also be involved.
47.       The Committee is happy to find that noise has been included as pollutant under the Air (Prevention and Control
 of Pollution) Amendment Act, 1987 and standards for ambient noise, automobile noise and noise from domestic
 appliances have been notified too. There also exists a code of practice for the abatement and control of noise pollution
 from public address system, aircraft operations, railway operations, construction activities and bursting of crackers. The
 Committee, however, feels that in spite of there being so many provisions, noise pollution from public address system
 and domestic appliances continues unabated. No doubt, due thought has been given to all the methods/actions required
 for curbing noise pollution in the legislative framework, but what is sadly lacking is its effective and forceful
 application. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the laws enacted for curbing the noise pollution should be
 strictly enforced.
48.       The Committee wanted to know about the continuous air quality monitoring stations which are functioning in
 the country. The Ministry informed that the two air monitoring stations are already in operation and data are regularly
 collected from these stations. There was a programme to set up a third monitoring station also but the equipment got
 damaged while importing it. It is being repaired to make it functional. The Committee feels that in view of the
 constantly increasing pollution in the country a feasibility study for the setting up of more such monitoring stations be
 carried out and some more monitoring stations be set up.
State Pollution Control Boards
49.       The Committee pointed out that while it is the responsibility of the State Pollution Control Boards to check
 pollution in their respective States, in most of the cases proper monitoring is not done and many complaints are made
 against State Pollution Control Boards. Admitting that the Ministry has been receiving complaints about inadequate,
 monitoring, the secretary of the Ministry informed that State Boards were asked to take suitable action in such matters.
 Besides that in serious cases or where complaints are being received very often the Ministry directly intervenes and
 asks the Central Pollution Control Board to look into them. If the complaints of corruption are received against the
 personnel of the Boards, the Government takes up these matters with the State Departments of Environment. The
 Committee, however, feels that State Pollution Control Boards should be activised. Their work should be streamlined
 and they should be strengthened. State Pollution Control Boards which carry out the policies laid down by the CPCB
 are flooded with various kinds of litigation. The Committee suggests that the CPCB may render all possible help to the
 State Boards for the settlement of the cases.
Ganga Action Plan and National River Action Plan
50.       Over the years, the process of development, unplanned growth of towns on the banks of the rivers and
 industrialisation which has spread over the vast area have been the prime factors behind the rising pollution in the
 rivers. In 1985, a programme for cleaning up the river Ganga in the States of U.P., Bihar and West Bengal was
 launched. In the first phase, it has been decided to deal with the pollution problems caused by discharge of municipal
 sewage into the river, lack of proper individual and community toilets and throwing of the unburnt or half burnt bodies
 in the river.
Out of 261 schemes under the Ganga Action Plan (GAP), 208 schemes coming under various categories had
 been completed by 30th April, 1993. Of the remaining 53 on-going schemes, 44 schemes are targeted to be completed
 by 1993-94, 8 more are likely to be completed by 1994-95. One schemes may spillover beyond this period. The State
 Govern­ments have been asked to ensure expeditious implementation of these schemes.
52.       To assess the impact of GAP schemes in terms of water quality improvement, 27 selected locations (20 on the
 mainstream of Ganga and 7 on the tributaries) are being monitored since 1986, 42 parameters namely; physio-chemical
 and bacteriological (25), heavy metals and pesticides (17) are monitored in this exercise.

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
53.       According to the Ministry the water quality has improved discernibly in Rishikesh, Haridwar, Allahabad,
 Varanasi, Patna and Uluberia towns where the pollution abatement schemes, wholly or in part, have been
 commissioned.
54.       When the Committee pointed out that in Allahabad and Banaras water quality is still not good the Secretary of
 the Ministry Stated as follows:--
"As far as the water quality is concerned, Varanasi and Allahabad are two cases where the schemes have
 not been completed. Out of 147 million litres which are generated in Varanasi, 125 have been
 intercepted or diverted. But treatment has been only given to 102 million litres. When the States start
 monitoring, there will be some improvement in water quality. In Allahabad, the picture is not still good
 because for the 110 million litres generated the treatment plant is not complete."
55.       Attention of the Ministry was drawn to various small scale industries and tanneries which are discharging most
 of the effluents into the river Ganga at Kanpur. In Unnao also tanneries are causing lot of pollution. To tackle this
 situation the Secretary informed that the Ministry is trying to enforce the provisions of the law relating to pollution
 control. In Kanpur, the small scale industries and tanneries have already set up a common effluent treatment plant. In
 Unnao also they are setting up the Unnao Tannery Pollution Control Company with the assistance of the Industrial
 Bank of India. Effort is also being made to take up the highly polluting small scale industries and tanneries as part of
 the Ganga Action Plan.
56.       The Committee noted the work so far done in cleaning up of the river Ganga. The Committee is of the opinion
 that in the cleaning up operation of the rivers there should be greater community involvement. Unless people are taught
 the methods as to how they can keep their rivers clean, efforts of the Government will not achieve the desired success.
 The Committee strongly recommends that the cleaning up of the river Ganga in Kanpur, Allahabad and Varanasi
 should be attended to with all earnestness. Adverse effects of continued unhygienic practices on the banks of the river
 such as bank side defecation, Cattle wallowing, cloth washing, carcass and solid waste dumping, ritual offerings and
 mass bathing should be highlighted through official media so that there is a gradual decrease in such practices. The
 Committee hopes that with the change in the attitude of people, the pace of which is, of course, slow, the infrastructure
 created like electric crematoria, individual and community toilets, etc. would be utilised to a greater extent and the
 quality of water of the river Ganga will improve.
57.       The Committee was informed that in order to cleanse other rivers from pollution a National River Action Plan
 has been proposed. Under this plan pollution abatement measures would be initiated in various grossly polluted
 stretches of major  rivers in the country. Based on the present studies of grossly polluted stretches, the river Ganga,
 Yamuna, Damodar, Gomti, Hindon, Sabarmati, Sutlej, Subarnarekh, Godavari, Krishna, Kali, Khan, Shipra, Baitarni,
 Badra, Brahmani, Tunga, Cauvery, Tapti, Narmada and Betwa have been covered.
58.       As regards river basin studies the Committee was informed that out of the 14 major rivers in respect of which
 basin studies have been taken up by the Central Pollution Control Board in consultation with the State Pollution Control
 Boards, studies for 5 rivers have been completed and reports prepared. These are Ganga (Main), Ganga (Yamuna Sub-
basin), Sabarmati, Subarnarekha, Krishna and Brahmani-Baitarani. In case of three rivers namely, Brahmaputra, Indus
 (J&K portion) and Pennar, the studies have yet to commence. For rest of the rivers studies are at different stages of
 completion. The Committee feels that this work should be completed and reports published at an early date.
Hazardous Substances Management
59.       As a sequel to the Bhopal Gas Tragedy in 1984, the Government of India enacted the Environment (Protection)
 Act, 1986. Under the Act the responsibility in laying down the procedure and safeguards for handling of hazardous
 substances and prevention of accidents was entrusted to the Ministry of Environment and Forests. To discharge this
 responsibility a separate division called Hazardous Substance Management Division has been functioning in the
 Ministry. The Committee was informed that the first priority of the Ministry is the prevention of accidents for which the
 Ministry has developed its on site Management Plan for the industries. Under this Plan training is imparted to the
 workers employed in hazardous industries so that the risk of accident is minimal. In addition, the Ministry also
 undertakes risk assessment within these industries in order to find out the root cause of the accident, in case, any
 accident occurs. The Ministry does not permit setting up of industry dealing with hazardous substance unless it submits
 to the Ministry a safety report. If by any chance an accident takes place, the Ministry takes immediate remedial
 measures to mitigate the sufferings caused by the disaster. The Ministry has provided the State Governments

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
 technical know-how for setting up of Emergency Response Centres so that any emergency situation is responded to
 quickly. A Central Crisis Group is also functioning within the Ministry. The Ministry is also participating in
 international discussions for example, London Guidelines are the results of one of such discussions. London Guidelines
 are, in fact, an important international environment policy instrument which facilitates exchange of informa ­tion on
 chemicals among countries on the global scale. In order to implement the London Guidelines, need was felt to develop
 a system for proper collection and exchange of information from existing sources within the country and as a result a
 National Register for Potentially Toxic Chemical has been set up. According to these guidelines banned and restricted
 Chemicals should not be exported by any country unless the importing country is given full information about the
 chemical so that the importing country can take an informed decision whether to import or not to import that particular
 chemical. The Ministry has prepared Manufacture, Storage & Import of Hazardous Chemicals Rules, 1989, Hazardous
 Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 1989 and Manufacture, Use, Import, Export and Storage of Hazardous Micro
 Organism/Genetically engineered Organism or Cell Rules, 1989. The Committee was also informed that the Ministry
 has taken initiative and assisted the State Governments in identifying the hazardous waste sites and studies have been
 conducted to assess their impact on environment. The Ministry has also recently taken an initiative in respect of
 biomedical wastes. Despite all these precautions, should an accident take place, there is Public Liability Insurance Act,
 1991 under which immediate relief is provided to the affected persons.
60.       Hazardous substances are highly toxic and can pose serious threat to living beings and environment. The
 Ministry had informed the Committee that infrastructure for regulating management of hazardous substances has been
 created in most of the State Boards. The industrial units which come under the purview of Manufacture, Storage and
 Import of Hazardous Chemicals. Rules are inspected regularly by the concerned authorities. On-site plans are prepared
 by the industrial units whereas preparation of off-site emergency plan is the responsibility of the District Collector. The
 Committee has noticed that preparation of off-site plans for all the districts has not been completed so far. The Ministry
 has initiated preparation of model off-site plan in some districts. The Committee suggests that this work may be
 expedited and the Ministry should monitor the progress of the on-site and off-site plans by calling reports from the
 Chief Inspector of factories and the District Collectors. In case any assistance or technical information in the matter is
 required by the district authorities, the same may be provided to them with promptitude.
61.       On the question of impact assessment of the sites which are selected for the disposal of hazardous waste, the
 Committee finds that the impact assessment indicators used by the, Ministry are quite comprehensive. The Committee,
 however, is of the view that the first draft of the Siting Guidelines and the Rules on classification, labelling and
 packaging which are being revised may be finalised by March 1994, as proposed by the Ministry. The comprehensive
 rules relating to the handling of bio-medical wastes may also be finalised with urgency and for this the Ministries and
 organisations which have been consulted by the Ministry of Environment and Forests may be asked to expedite their
 comments.
Sardar Sarovar Project
62.       The Committee made a reference to a recommendation made in an independent review of the Sardar Sarovar
 Project commissioned by the World Bank namely, that detailed assessment of social, human and environmental impacts
 need to be carded out for the project. The Committee enquired whether work on such a detailed assessment has
 commenced as yet or not.
63.       The representative of the Ministry clarified that the project authorities were not ready with the data and field
 surveys/studies to carry out realistic Environmental Impact Assessment in 1987 when a decision to go ahead with the
 project was taken at the highest level. It was decided at that time that the project authorities would be in a position to
 furnish Environmental Impact Assessment Reports and Action Plans by the end of 1989. However, it was informed that
 all the requisite Environmental Action Plans had not yet been finalised.
64.       The Committee fails to comprehend the actual factors responsible for the non-implementation of the specific
 recommendation made by the World Bank for carrying out realistic Environmental Impact Assessment of the Sardar
 Sarovar Project. The question of environmental impact assessment is not merely a technical requirement. In fact, it
 involves a broader question of human welfare and affects society in a direct manner. Before work any project
 commences, the project authorities should see to it that proper plans are chalked out for the rehabilitation of the oustees.
 The Committee is surprised to note that absence of these recommended studies did not deter the Government from
 going ahead with the project. The Committee feels that the independent review of the Sardar Sarovar Project
 commissioned by the World Bank should have been accorded due importance. The Committee is pained to note that in

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
 spite of the existence of an Environmental sub-Group under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Environment & Forests)
 for ensuring preparation of satisfactory Environment Action Plan in a time bound manner, all the requisite plans have
 not yet been finalised.
Tehri Dam Project
65.       As regards the Tehri Dam Project the Committee enquired whether environmental impact assessment of the
 Tehri Dam Project was done before initiating the Project. The representative of the Ministry clarified that this project
 was initiated at a time when there existed no requirement for carrying out such studies. It was only in 1980 that an
 evaluation of the environmental impact assessment was ordered by the then Prime Minister. However, report in this
 regard could be submitted only in 1986. As an outcome of the Report, it was, however, decided in October 1986 that
 the Tehri Dam Project should be finally abandoned A query was then made about further scientific studies on micro-
level seismicity and actual testing on the design for accellerogram of Gazli Earthquake as recommended by a High-
Level Committee of Experts constituted by the Department of Mines. It was informed that this study has not yet been
 taken up. Expressing the concern about environmental damage caused by the Tehri Dam, the Committee enquired
 whether ecological balance around the areas has been restored. The representative admitted that the environmental
 damage caused by the Tehri Dam would be manifested over a very large area including the catchment, dam-site and the
 command. On being pointed out by the Committee that comprehensive studies are required to be taken up for evolving
 requisite environmental action plans, the representative  submitted that these Action Plans were still under formulation.
 Action has only been taken up for catchment Area Treatment, Rehabilitation of oustees and Compensatory
 Afforestation.
66.       The Committee notes that the decision to abandon the Tehri Dam Project was taken as far back as in October,
 1986. However, the scientific studies as stipulated by the High Level Committee of Experts to be carried out have not
 yet been taken up through the Department of Mines. The Committee expresses its serious concern over this inordinate
 delay and recommends that these studies should begin without any further delay. The Committee fails to understand the
 factors behind non-formulation of all the requisite Environmental Action Plans which were essential for mitigating
 adverse implication of environmental changes cause by the Tehri Dam Project and hopes that this sensitive issue would
 be accorded top priority by the Ministry.
Environmental Statement and Audit
67.       The Committee feels happy over the fact that a notification under rules framed under the Environment
 (Protection) Act, 1986 making environmental statement mandatory has been issued which requires all industries
 applying for environment clearance to submit an annual environmental statement to the concerned State Pollution
 Control Boards. The Environmental Statement has been made mandatory as a management tool but not as a regulatory
 tool. As such no penalty is imposed for the non-compliance with the notification to carry out the statement. The
 Committee feels that while the idea of making environmen ­tal statement mandatory as a management tool is sure to
 promote environmental conscious­ness among the industrial units, it recommends that in case it is found that any
 particular industrial unit is not conforming to the environmental standards then there should not be any hesitation in
 taking recourse to Section 15 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 which prescribes penalties for non-compliance
 with requirements of the Act.
68.       The scheme of environmental audit is being implemented by the Government to exercise control over industries
 which pollute environment. A notification making environ­mental audit mandatory has already been issued by the
 Ministry. Environment audit is a very specialised area and it required trained manpower to conduct audit from the
 environment standpoint. The Ministry informed the Committee that the work of environ­mental audit is being
 implemented with the cooperation of various industrial associations. Assistance is also being given to the Development
 Commissioner, small scale industries for major awareness programmes covering all states. The Committee has also
 learnt that the Ministry is bringing out a booklet giving details as to how environmental audit should be conducted. The
 Committee would like the Ministry to take up the matter with the Department of Company Affairs to amend the
 Companies Act 1956 to include the Environmental Statement in the Annual Reports of the Companies. The Committee
 was also informed that the environment impact assessment work shops are being organised for training personnels from
 the Central and State Governments and their agencies in the field of environmental impact assessment (EIA). It is
 proposed to strengthen a few centres in the country with regard to EIA and also continue the programme. The
 Committee feels that techniques of environmental audit should also be incorporated in such training programmes.
Climatic changes in urban areas

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
69.       The Committee also raised a point about the climatic conditions in urban areas. Due to increase in housing
 activity, the jungle of concrete structures is increasing very fast in our cities as a result of which there is a discernible
 rise in day temperature. The city of Bangalore is one such example. The Committee, therefore, suggests that the
 Ministry of Environment & Forests, should study this phenomenon of rise in temperature in our cities due to
 environmental degradation and suggest measures to bring down temperature by restoring ecological balance in cities
 which were earlier known for their pleasant climate.
Effect of Pollution on the Taj Mahal
70.       The Committee expressed its concern over the threat to the Taj Mahal due to high pollution load in the city of
 Agra. The Committee was informed that steps have been taken to improve the environment so that the Taj Mahal is not
 affected by the pollution in the air. The area around the Taj Mahal has been delimited and in the 'non-development
 zone' any proposal for installation of new industries has to be cleared first. Only those industries are allowed to be set
 up which are non-polluting. The problem posed by the Mathura Oil Refinery is also being looked into. The actual
 problem is being caused in Agra by the foundries and vehicular pollution. The Mathura Oil Refinery and the Railways
 have done their part to reduce the pollution in the city but the problem of shifting industries, particularly foundries is
 still to be tackled. The Committee is not satisfied with the action taken so far to reduce the threat to the Taj Mahal
 caused by the pollution. The Taj Mahal forms part of our national heritage. It is one of the most beautiful monuments in
 the world. The Committee strongly recommends that concerted efforts should be made to protect this monument from
 environmental pollution. The Committee is not satisfied with the situation as it obtains today and desires that a time-
bound action plan for the protection and restoration of the Taj Mahal be prepared.
Open Policy in respect of Lakshadweep, Andaman & Nieobar Islands and establishment of hotels in coastal
 areas.
71.       The Committee was informed that tourism development in Lakshadweep, Andaman & Nicobar Islands has been
 restricted to some selected islands only. UNDP sponsored EIA study for sustainable tourism in islands is being
 conducted by the Andaman & Nicobar Administration. The EIA will be restricted only to those islands which have
 been agreed to be opened for tourism with certain restrictions. The Committee notes with satisfaction that Ministry has
 not agreed to the proposal for setting up of a free port in Andaman & Nicobar Islands and the Ministry has also not
 approved the felling of forest areas for oil palm plantation for ecological reasons. The Committee is of the view that the
 recommendations of the Expert Committee set up to review the establishment of hotels in coastal areas which has made
 many significant recommendations having a bearing on the fragile eco-system in the various islands should be carefully
 assessed and implemented.
Agenda-21
Agenda-21 is an important programme of action for the implementation of the principles enunciated in the Earth
 Charter which is an enumeration of what Government must do to bring us into the 21st Century on a sustainable path.
 In the Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Agenda-21 has not been touched upon though it is an
 important programme. The Committee was informed that a number of inter-ministerial meetings have already been
 convened m respect of Agenda-21. The matter pertaining to this Agenda is still in the formative stages and for the
 specialised areas the Ministry brings out several documents wherever feasible. The Committee is of the view that
 Agenda-21 which addresses itself to the major environment and development priorities in the area of sustainable
 development is an important programme having the international support. This agenda should, therefore, be accorded
 priority and special treatment may be given to implement the programmes outlined in the Agenda-21. The Committee
 feels that a major weakness in the functioning of the Ministry of Environment  and Forests lies in the fact that at present
 it is not functioning as a powerful agency to give a lead in the area of sustainable development. Regulatory work being
 done by the Ministry is no doubt, important but the Ministry has to play an active role in the promotive area as well.
 For this Ministry of Environment and Forests may have to coordinate its activities with other Ministries, department
 and various governmental institutions which are concerned with areas like energy, transportation, land use, water use
 and urban development, etc. The Ministry of Environment and Forests has an overall responsibility in giving direction
 to other agencies in formulating and implementing plans in such a manner that they lead to sustainable development.
 Sufficient time has elapsed after the Rio Conference and even before holding that Conference the participating
 countries had done lot of work for making the Conference a success. Yet on matters relating to Agenda-21 and on long
 term research and development relevant-to global changes and similar matters, the Ministry has nothing concrete about

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
 which it could inform the Committee. India is prominent among the developing countries and should provide leadership
 in implementing Agenda-21. The Committee, therefore, suggests that Ministry of Environment and Forests should play
 a more active role in implementing programmes concerning Agenda-21 and States should also be activised in this
 regard. A proper monitoring system should be devised to ensure coordination between the Central and the State
 Governments.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
VI
            SIXTH MEETING
 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
 met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 7th June, 1993 in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New
 Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi-Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
3.         Dr. R.K. Poddar
4.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
5.         Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
 
LOK SABHA
 
6.         Shri Oscar Fernandes
7.         Shri K.G. Shivappa
8.         Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
9.         Shri Sharad Dighe
10.       Shri Harchand Singh
11.       Shri Vijay Maval Patil
12.       Kumari Frida Topno
13.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh
14.       Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
15.       Shri Jitendra Nath Das
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Deputy Director
Smt. Vandana Garg, Under Secretary
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment & Forests
 
Shri R. Rajamani, Secretary
Shri A.K. Mukherjee, Inspector-General of Forests

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
Shri Vinay Shankar, Additional Secretary
Shri K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary
Shri Narain Singh, Additional IGF
Shri S.C. Dey, Additional IGF (WL)
Shri S.S. Hasurkar, Joint Secretary
Shri Mukul Sanwal, Joint Secretary
Shri George Joseph, Joint Secretary
Shri S.S. Rizvi, Joint Secretary
Shri J.C. Kala, Joint Secretary
Dr. S.C. Maudgal, Advisor
Shri Harjeet Singh, Advisor
Shri Arin Ghosh, Director
Shri D.K. Biswas, Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board
Shri P.K. Hazra, Director
Shri Arun Khetrapal, Joint Secretary
 
2.         The Committee took up for consideration the Annual Report 1992-93 of the Ministry of Environment & Forests.
3.         At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Environment &
 Forests. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests then introduced his colleagues to the Committee.
 Thereafter, the Secretary assisted by the respective Department Heads gave an overview of the activities of the Ministry
 of Environment & Forests.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4.         The discussion on the Annual Report 1992-93 of the Ministry of Environment & Forests remained inconclusive.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 8th June, 1993.
 
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
 met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 8th June, 1993 in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New
 Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi--Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Prof. M.G.K. Menon
3.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
4.         Dr. R.K. Poddar
5.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
6.         Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
 
LOK SABHA
 
7.         Shri Oscar Fernandes
8.         Shri K.G. Shivappa
9.         Shhi Shankarrao D. Kale
10.       Shri Sharad Dighe
11.       Shri Harchand Singh
12.       Kumari Frida Topno

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
13.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh
14.       Shrimati Saroj Dubey
15.       Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
16.       Shri Jitendra Nath Das
17.       Shri B. Ahamed
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Deputy Director
Smt. Vandana Garg, Under Secretary
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment & Forests
 
Shri R. Rajamani, Secretary (E&F)
Shri A.K. Mukherjee, Inspector-General of Forests
Shri Vinay Shankar, Additional Secretary
Shri K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary
Shri Narain Singh, Additional IGF
Shri S.C. Dey, Additional IGF (WL)
Shri S.S. Hasurkar, Joint Secretary
Shri Mukul Sanwal, Joint Secretary
Shri George Joseph, Joint Secretary
Shri S.S. Rizvi, Joint Secretary
Shri J.C. Kala, Joint Secretary
Dr. S.C. Maudgal, Advisor
Shri M. Parabramham, Advisor
Shri Harjeet Singh, Advisor
Shri D.K. Biswas, Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board
Shri P.K. Hazra, Director
Shri Arun Khetrapal, Joint Secretary
 
2.         The Committee further considered the Annual Report 1992-93 of the Ministry of Environment & Forests.
3.         The Members sought clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation made by the representatives of
 the Ministry in its previous meeting.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4.         The discussion on the Annual Report 1992-93 of the Ministry of Environment & Forests was not concluded.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 1.20 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 9th June, 1993.
 
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
 met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 9th June, 1993 in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New
 Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi--Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
 
2.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
3.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
4.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
5.         Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
 
LOK SABHA
 
6.         Shri Oscar Fernandes
7.         Shri K.G. Shivappa
8.         Shri Sharad Dighe
9.         Shri Harchand Singh
10.       Kumari Frida Topno
11.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh
12.       Shrimati Saroj Dubey
13.       Shri Jitendra Nath Das
14.       Shri E. Ahamed
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Deputy Director
Smt. Vandana Garg, Under Secretary
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment & Forests
 
Shri R. Rajamani, Secretary (E&F)
Shri A.K. Mukherjee, Inspector-General of Forests
Shri Vinay Shankar, Additional Secretary
Shri K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary
Shri Narain Singh, Additional IGF
Shri S.C. Dey, Additional IGF (WL)
Shri S.S. Hasurkar, Joint Secretary
Shri Mukul Sanwal, Joint Secretary
Shri George Joseph, Joint Secretary
Shri S.S. Rizvi, Joint Secretary
Shri J.C. Kala, Joint Secretary
Dr. S.C. Maudgal, Advisor
Shri M. Parabramham, Advisor
Shri Harjeet Singh, Advisor
Shri D.K. Biswas, Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board
Shri P.K. Hazra, Director
Shri Arun Khetrapal, Joint Secretary
2.         The Committee further discussed the Annual Report 1992-93 of the Ministry of Environment & Forests. The
 representatives of the Ministry replied to the clarifications sought by the Members.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3.         The Committee then adjourned at 1.45 P.M.
 
XXIV
TWENTY-FOURTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday; the 20th October, 1993 in Room No. 67, First Floor,
 Parliament House, New Delhi.

3rd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/3rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:50]
 
PRESENT
 
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi-Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
3.         Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
4.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
5.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
6.         Shri Oscar Fernandes
7.         Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
8.         Shri Harchand Singh
9.         Kumari Frida Topno
10.       Shri Balraj Pasi
11.       Shrintati Bhavana Chikhalia
12.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh
13.       Shri Jitendra Nath Das
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee considered and adopted its Third Report on the Annual Report of Ministry of Environment &
 Forests for the year 1992-93.
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence, Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel to present the Report to the
 Rajya Sabha.
4.         The Committee further authorised Shri Oscar Fernandes and in his absence, Shri Ram Prasad Singh to lay the
 Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
5.         The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 11.30 A.M.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 