PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED NINTH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the
Department of Biotechnology
(Demand No. 85)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th March, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th March, 2018 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)
309
REPORT NO.

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED NINTH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the
Department of Biotechnology
(Demand No. 85)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th March, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th March, 2018 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-34
5. R ECOMMENATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS— AT A GLANCE ......................................................... 35-43
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 45-51

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2017)
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
5. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
6. Shri C. P. Narayanan
7. Shri Parimal Nathwani
8. Shri Sharad Pawar
9. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri P. P. Chauhan
16. Kumari Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20 Shrimati V asanthi M.
21. Shri Daddan Mishra
22. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
23. Shri Chirag Paswan

(ii)
24. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
130. Vacant
231. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
1 Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan ceased to be a member of the Committee  w.e.f. 12th December, 2017.
2 Shri Nana Patole ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from the Lok Sabha w.e.f.
 14th December, 2017

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report
on its behalf, present this Three Hundred Ninth Report of the Committee. This Report deals with the
detailed Demands for Grants (2018-2019) of the Department of Biotechnology (Demand No. 85).
2.  In the meeting of the Committee held on 13th February, 2018, the Secretary and other officers of
the Department of Biotechnology gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the
Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Department to enable it to
scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3.  The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications
sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise
the Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology.
4.  The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 6th March, 2018.
  N
EW D ELHI; ANAND SHARMA
6 March, 2018 Chairman,
Phalguna 15, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
BIBCOL : Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals Corporation Limited
BIRAC : Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council
CDFD : Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics
CDRI : Central Drug Research Institute
CIAB : Center of Innovative and Applied Bioprocessing
IBSD : Institute for Bioresource and Sustainable Development
ICAR : Indian Council of Agricultural Research
ICGEB : International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology
ILS : Institute of Life Sciences
NBFGR : National Bureau of Fish Genetic Resources
NBRC : National Brain Research Centre
NCCS : National Centre for Cell Sciences
NER : North Eastern Region
NII : National Institute of Immunology
NIPGR : National Institute for Plant Genome Research
R&D : Research and Development
SAM : Acute Malnutrition
(iv)

REPORT
INTRODUCTION
Mandate of the Department of Biotechnology (DBT)
1.1 The Department of Biotechnology was set up as an Independent Board in the year 1982, and
thereafter became a full-fledged Department under Ministry of Science & Technology in 1986. The
mandate of the Department is given below:
- To evolve policies and integrated programmes in biotechnology and ensure their implementation
and monitoring.
- To identify specific programmes of Research and Development and manufacturing in biologicals
and biotechnology and oversee the initiation and pursuit of related research and manufacturing
activities.
- To identify, set up and support Centres of Excellence for Research and Development in
biotechnology and ensure proper dovetailing of their activities as per national priorities and
objectives.
- To act as a screening, advising and approving agent of the Government with regard to import
and transfer of new technologies for the manufacture of biologicals, biotechnological products
and their intermediates.
- Evolve safety guidelines for biotechnology Research and Development and manufacturing in
India.
- To act as the central agency for the import of genetically manipulated materials, culture, cells,
specimens, tissues and biotech products including DNA and RNA of any type or size and for
promoting their production in the country.
- Serve as the inter-ministerial and interagency nodal point for all specific international bilateral
and multilateral Research and Development collaborations and agreements in the area of
biotechnology; act as the nodal point for all technology transfers in the area of biotechnology.
- Manufacture and ensure application of recombinant, cell-based and DNA vaccines, diagnostics
and other biotechnological products.
- To evolve programmes for Human Resource Development in the area of biotechnology.
- Serve as an administrative and implementing Department of agencies, commissions, boards,
etc. specifically formed by the Government for fulfilling the national objectives in biotechnology
and also to serve as the nodal point for Bio-informatics including training and creation of
infrastructure, collection, dissemination and exchange of information relating to biotechnology.
- Establishment of National Biotechnology Regulatory Authority

2
- Matters relating to:
• International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), New Delhi
• National Institute of Immunology (NII), New Delhi
• National Centre for Cell Sciences (NCCS), Pune
• Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad
• National Institute for Plant Genome Research (NIPGR), New Delhi
• National Brain Research Centre (NBRC), Manesar, Gurgaon
• Institute for Bioresource and Sustainable Development (IBSD), Imphal
• Institute of Life Sciences (ILS), Bhubaneshwar
• Translational Research in Health Science and Technology Institute, Faridabad
• Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Tiruvananthapuram
• UNESCO Regional Centre for Education, Training & Innovation in Biotechnology, Faridabad
• National Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Kolkata
• Institute for Stem Cell Science and Regenerative Medicine, Bengaluru
• National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute Mohali, Punjab
• National Institute of Animal Biotechnology, Hyderabad
• Center of Innovative and Applied Bioprocessing (CIAB), Mohali
- Matters relating to:
• Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals Corporation Limited (BIBCOL), Bulandshahar,
Uttar Pradesh
• Indian Vaccine Corporation Limited
• Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC), New Delhi
1.2 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment
& Forests considered the Demands for Grants 2018-19 of the Department of Biotechnology in its
meeting held on the 13th February 2018.
2. FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT DURING THE LAST FIVE YEARS:
2.1 The Budget Estimates & Revised Estimates and actual expenditure, year-wise, for the
year 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18 of the Department of Biotechnology are as
under:

3
(Rupees in crore)
Year Budget Revised Actual Percentage
Estimates Estimates Expenditure Utilisation
2013-14 1485.00 1300.00 1289.50 99.19
2014-15 1500.00 1395.00 1344.35 96.36
2015-16 1625.14 1624.35 1554.27 95.68
2016-17 1820.00 1917.23 1895.50 98.86
2017-18 2222.11 2260.11 1705.97* 75.48
*As on 31st January, 2018
2.2 The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the funds utilisation capacity of the Department
during the last five years. Fund utilisation capacity of the Department is reflective of its financial
prudence and due diligence while making optimal utilisation of the budgetary allocation.
3. BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2018-19
3.1 The following table showcases the budgetary allocation made in favour of the Department of
Biotechnology for the year 2018-19:-
(Rupees in crore)
Sl. No. Division of Schemes Amount
Scheme
1. Biotechnology Research & Development 1 195.07
2. Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development 244.24
Non Scheme
3. AI & PSU 779.98
4. Secretariat 32.31
Others
5. North-Eastern Region 159.93
(i) Biotechnology Research & Development - `154.93 crore
(ii) Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development - `5.00 crore
T
OTAL 2411.53
3.2 The Committee notes that the Department has been allocated a total amount of `2411.53 crore in
BE 2018-19 which is `151.42 crore higher than the allocation of ` 2260.11 crore at RE stage in

4
2017-18. The Department in response to the information sought by the Committee with regard to the
Action Plan prepared by the Department for the year 2018-19 informed about the focus areas which are
as under:-
• The Department would further strengthen the research and development programmes, review
ongoing and received proposals for financial support and further improve overall management
of projects by the application of ICT.
• In Agriculture Biotechnology Programme the emphasis will be on development of genomics
to breeding platform, development of network programme in pulses, development of network
programme in oil seeds, development of platform for gene driven technology for controlling
white fly and support to new R&D project and continuing projects.
• Energy Biosciences program will be strengthened and 2G ethanol plants will be established at
two indentified sites. Further potential foreign collaborator for Biofuel challenge will be identified.
Waste to Energy Projects will be commissioned. New calls will be invited on Synthetic &
System Biology and demonstration proposals for initiating MSW and MLW technology in
various region of the country will be sanctioned. The Support for development of technologies
for waste management and environment improvement will be continued. Evaluation of established
Bio-Toilets in NER region of India will be undertaken.
• In Medical Biotechnology program, the Department will encourage scientists from diverse
fields to come together to embark on multidisciplinary projects in the area of placental biology,
cancer biology and other relevant diseases. A new consortium on Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
(SLE) will be supported. The Department will establish an integrated R&D approach for the
development of preventive, therapeutic and diagnostic tools for Neuro Disease Biology and
Brain Bank Facility at NIMHANS. National Initiative on Glial Cell Research in Health and
Disease Phase-II will be taken. The Department will consider the launch of grant call for
Epidemiology of Infections and setting-up of National Accreditation Quality Laboratories for
high quality laboratory services for surveillance of infections and will fund proposals in the
area of 'Repurposing of Drugs for Infectious Diseases' besides proposals received under the
Competitive Grant Scheme. Mapping of data needs for epidemiological preparedness for flavivirus
vaccine trials in India will be undertaken. Clinical institutions will be engaged for long term
collaborative research basic and translational research projects.
• The Department will initiate new programme in following areas:
(i) Blue Skies Research - The programme would be driven by curiosity driven research.
(ii) Forest and Conservation Biotechnology in Protected Areas - This programme will address
research gaps in genomics and biotechnology to improve the growth and quality of forest
trees for conservation and sustainable use as well as a tool for mitigation of climate
change impact.

5
• The Department will continue to support Human Resource Development Program and under
International Collaboration support the ongoing collaboration and forge new joint research
programs with partnering countries in emerging areas of biotechnology. Under Joint DBT-
Heidelberg Program in Big Data Research, the Graduate program (PhD Phase) will be implemented
during the year.
• There will be a major emphasis on the implementation of the Mission Programs. The department
will ensure periodic monitoring and ensure efficient implementation of the mission programs
and Action Points.
3.3 The Committee takes note of the Action Plan contemplated by the Department for the year
2018-19 and hopes that the Department would utilise the increased budgetary allocation of
`````2411.53 crore in BE 2018-19 optimally and ensure that the targets/objectives set for the year
2018-19 are fully achieved within the stipulated time frame.
3.4 The Committee is also of the opinion that timely completion/realisation of the targets/
objectives will certainly help the Department to improve its performance both physically as well
as financially and also help in reducing the overhead costs resulting from the delayed progress.
Thus, the Committee recommends the Department to strictly adhere to the time frame for the
targets/objectives set and keep a continuous vigil with the help of a robust internal monitoring
mechanism in order to ensure that the fixed timelines are met and the budgetary support
provided for the purpose is utilised judiciously and optimally.
3.5 Informing the Committee about the Mission Programmes, the Department of Biotechnology has
submitted that it has initiated several Mission Programs based on the action plans developed on the
Recommendation of Group of Secretaries to solve natural problems and benefiting the society by
providing solutions through biotechnological interventions. Following are the details of major Mission
Programs being implemented during the period:
INDUSTRY-ACADEMIA COLLABORATIVE MISSION FOR ACCELERATING DISCOVERY RESEARCH
TO EARLY DEVELOPMENT FOR BIOPHARMACEUTICALS - "INNOV ATE IN INDIA (I
3)"
An Industry-Academia Collaborative Mission for Accelerating Early Development for
Biopharmaceuticals; to be implemented by BIRAC, was approved by the Cabinet for implementation in
May 2017 with a total cost of `1500 crore (50% grant will be arranged through world bank loan). The
Mission I 3 is "Innovate in India" for Biopharma. It will create an ecosystem for innovative indigenous
product development by Researchers, Startups and SMEs and make Indian Biotech Industry globally
competitive. The Mission is a PAN India programme involving all stakeholders and BIRAC as a Product
Development Partnership (PDP). The Mission is designed in a manner in which it addresses the key
components of the vision outlined in the National Missions-Make in India and Start up India and also
aims to take forward the commitments made by DBT in the National Biotechnology Development
Strategy. Following is the focus areas of the Mission:
1. Development of product leads that are at advanced stages of the product development lifecycle
and relevant to the public health need by focusing on managed partnerships.

6
2. Establish and strengthen shared infrastructure facilities and product discovery/validation and
manufacturing.
3. Develop human capital by providing specific trainings to address the critical skills gap among
nascent biotech companies across the product development value chain, including in business
plan development, and market penetration.
4. Creating and enhancing technology transfer and intellectual property management capacities
and capabilities in public and private sector.
(i) Mission Innovation in Clean Energy:
Mission Innovation (MI) is a global initiative of 22 countries and the European Union to accelerate
global clean energy innovation. MI was announced on 30th November, 2015 in Paris during COP-21.
As part of the initiative, participating countries have committed to seek to double their government's clean
energy research and development (R&D) investments over five years. The second Mission Innovation
Ministerial (MI Ministerial) was held in Beijing China (in June 2016), where leaders of MI countries
announced seven innovation challenges for advancement of clean energy technologies.
(ii) Swachh Bharat Mission on Waste to Energy:
The Department of Biotechnology through its programmes on Waste to Energy will Partner with
Ministry of Urban Development and Swachh Bharat Mission to demonstrate technologies at Pilot Scale
for converting Municipal Solid and liquid waste to Energy. The Municipal Corporation and other private
sectors will be involved. These demo plants can be set up in cooperation with the Smart City Projects.
Through competitive process Waste to Energy proposals have been identified for demonstration of
innovative and viable processes over traditional methods like land filling and saving the environment from
adverse effects of global warming by minimizing the emissions of methane from landfill sites. One
demonstration project and 5 R&D projects have been sanctioned during the year. Two demonstration
projects are under consideration. It is expected that the successful technologies can then be transferred
to Municipal Corporations for implementation to disposal off MSW more scientifically and environment
friendly manner.
(iii) Reinventing the Toilets:
Demonstration of Bio-toilets in Schools of North East India: This programme is prepared based on
integration of proven technologies and known knowledge customized in easily takeaway module for
school children of North East region. So far 75 Units have been installed and operationalised.
(iv) Accelerated Growth with Inclusion and Equity: Creating a Startup Innovation Ecosystem:
Startup India is a flagship initiative of the Government of India, intended to build a strong
eco-system for nurturing innovation and Startups in the country that will drive sustainable economic
growth and generate large scale employment opportunities. The Government through this initiative aims
to empower Startups to grow through innovation and design. The Prime Minister of India formally

7
launched this initiative on January 16, 2016. Following are the major achievements in Biotechnology
Sector under Startup India Action Plan:
• Presently 30 Bio-incubators have been setup across India with world class facilities.
• Department is supporting 3 Bio-clusters (NCR, Kalyani and Bengaluru) and approval of Pune
Bio-cluster is in advance stage.
• BIRAC has launched ACE Fund and SEED fund to provide capital assistance to start-ups and
act as a bridge between promoters' investment and venture/angel investors. Seven incubators
have been provided funding under the SEED Fund programme.
• BIRAC has setup two regional centers BIRAC Regional Innovation Centre (BRIC) at IKP
Hyderabad and BIRAC Regional Entrepreneurship Centres (BREC) at CCAMP Bengaluru.
• Bengaluru-Boston Biotech Gateway to India has been formed. Through this initiative, a range
of institutes in Boston (Harvard/ MIT) and Bengaluru are able to connect and share ideas and
mentor the entrepreneurs and young scientists especially in the areas of Genomics, Computational
Biology, Drug Discovery and New Vaccines.
(v) Biotech-KISAN Farmer Centric Mission:
This programme aims to work with small and marginal farmers especially the women farmer for
better agriculture productivity through scientific intervention and evolving best farming practices in the
Indian context by linking available science and technology to the farm by first understanding the problem
of the local farmer and provide solutions to those problems. During the financial year 2017-18, a Biotech-
KISAN Hub has been established at Himalayan Environmental Studies and Conservation Organization
(HESCO), Dehradun to cover the agro-climatic zone of Western Himalayan Region. The Sub-Hubs have
been created at Almora, Chakrata and Chamoli, which are connected to the Central Hub in Dehradun.
Three Polyhouse facilities have been created in each of the three Sub-Hubs to promote protected
cultivation of improved varieties of vegetables sourced from GB Pant University of Agriculture and
Technology, Pantnagar and Indian Agriculture Research Institute, New Delhi for enhancing the production,
quality and profitability to the marginal farmers. A mushroom production-cum-training centre has also
been established at Karbari village near Central Hub. Seven days training programme on promotion of
horticulture crops and beekeeping have so far been organised at Sub-Hubs located at Chakrata, Chamoli
and Almora.
3.6 The Secretary, Department of Biotechnology in the meeting of Committee held on 13th February,
2018 also submitted before the Committee that an additional financial support of `1000.00 crore would
be required to implement the Mission Programmes and other inter-ministerial programmes of the
Department.
3.7 The Committee while sharing the ambitious and inspiring targets/objectives envisaged by
the Department is of the considered view that the adequate financial support needs to be made
available by the Government for the realisation of these targets/objectives set by the Department.

8
The Committee, therefore, is of the firm view that the request made by the Department of
Biotechnology for the additional amount of `````1000.00 crore during the year 2018-19 is fully
justified. The Committee, therefore, desires the Department to share its view with the concerned
Ministry/Department of Government of India and impress upon them and seek the requisite
budgetary allocations at the RE stage for the successful implementation of its Mission Programmes.
3.8 The Committee also applauds the Department for establishment of a Biotech-KISAN Farmer
Centric Mission at Himalayan Environmental Studies and Conservation Organization (HESCO),
Dehradun to cover the agro-climatic zone of Western Himalayan Region. The Committee further
takes note that the proposals for establishment of five more Biotech-KISAN Hubs in five agro-
climatic zones viz. Central Plain Zone, Lower Gangetic Plains Region, Southern Plateau and Hills,
Eastern Himalayan Region and East Coast Plains and Hills have also been developed by the
Department.
3.9 The Committee while taking note of the above mentioned proposals for establishing five
more Biotech-KISAN Hubs hopes that the Department would work in tandem with the respective
State Governments and the other stakeholders of these regions to establish these five Hubs and
completes the task in a time bound manner. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
Department to constitute a high level committee consisting members from the Department and
the respective State Governments to ensure that the deadlines fixed for the completion of these
hubs are strictly adhered to and zero tolerance policy be opted in the matter in order to maximise
the benefits of this programme for these regions.
4. CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES/PROJECTS
4.1 The Committee notes that during the 12th Five Year Plan the Department had a number of schemes
for promoting research and development, developing skilled human resources, creating infrastructure and
nurturing entrepreneurship in the Biotechnology Sector. The major schemes were on Research and
Development, Human Resource Development, Bioinformatics, Biotechnology for Societal Development,
Program for Promotion of Excellence & Innovation, Biotech Facilities, International Cooperation, Public
Private Partnership, Biotechnology Cluster and support for programme of North East Region. Subsequently,
these schemes were merged and currently (FY 2016-2017 onwards) the major schemes are: "Research
and Development" and "Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development- Public Private Partnership". The
details of the Schemes are as under:-
Biotechnology Research & Development
4.2 The Committee notes that Biotechnology Research and Development Assistance is provided for
Human Resource Development, Bioinformatics, Biotech Facilities, Centre of Excellence and Inter-Institutional
Centres, Research and Development including Research and Development projects under International
Collaboration and Societal Development. This also includes identified major National Missions.

9
4.3 The following table shows the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates allocations and actual expenditure,
year-wise, for the year 2015-16, 2016-17, 2017-18 and allocation made for 2018-19 under the scheme
Biotechnology Research & Development:-
(Rupees in crore)
Y ear Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual Expenditure
2015-16 620.00 609.00 545.85 (89.63%)
2016-17 920.00 1020.04 1012.64 (99.27%)
2017-18 1250.58 1252.42 850.11* (67.87%)
2018-19 1350.00 -- --
*As on 31.01.2018
4.4 The Committee notes that in BE 2017-18, budgetary allocation of `````1250.58 crore was made
under this head which was insignificantly increased to ````` 1252.42 crore in RE 2017-18 of which
also the Department could only manage to spend ````` 850.11 crore i.e. 67.87% utilisation of the
funds allocated till the end of January, 2018 leaving `````402.31 crore to be spent only in 59 days.
4.5 The Committee, thus, expresses its displeasure over the underutilisation of funds made
available to the Department under this head during the year 2017-18. The Committee feels that
the financial performance of the Department under the head Biotechnology Research and
Development is not very encouraging to note. The Committee firmly believes that the R&D
activities are in the core of all other activities and of the greatest importance for any technological
advancement to take place. Thus, under-utilisation of the budgetary allocation made for the
purpose is perturbing. The Committee is of the view that the Department should have aligned
its budgetary allocation with the activities undertaken during this period and it should have been
ensured that a constant vigil was taken while prioritising activities and funds utilisation thereon.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department should accord due focus and
recognition to its R&D activities while making earnest efforts to utilise the budgetary allocations
so made fully and optimally.
5. RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
5.1 The Department has informed the Committee that during the year 2016-17 and 2017-18 (till 6th
February, 2018), the Department has sanctioned 748 new proposals and supported 987 ongoing proposals
for undertaking innovative research and development activities in the area of Biotechnology. This support
has resulted in about 1200 publications, development of 65 technologies, filing of 38 patents and grant
of 14 patents. The research projects each year in Basic, Discovery and Translational Research in the
areas of Agriculture and allied areas including Animal Biotechnology and Aquaculture, Healthcare including
Vaccine, Drugs, Medical Devices and Implants, Bio-engineering, Food and Nutrition, Environment and
Clean Energy and Industrial Biotechnology have been considered for support. It was also brought to the

10
notice of the Committee that during the period (April, 2016 - February, 2018), 4325 proposals were
received in PRC (excluding) North Eastern Region and 748 (17.29%) proposals have been funded so far.
Based on these reviews the activities have been planned upto March, 2020.
5.2 The details of publications, patents and technologies generated (FY 2016-17 and 2017-18) are as
below:
No of No of Patent Patent Granted Technologies Technologies
Publication filed Developed Commercialized
1300 34 14 65 13
5.3 The Committee notes the work done and progress achieved by the Department during the
period 2016-17 and 2017-18 (upto 6
th February, 2018). The Committee is also happy to note the
number of technologies, i.e. 65, developed during this period by the Department. The Committee,
however, is little dismayed to note the numbers of technologies which could actually be put to
commercialisation. The Committee is at a loss to figure out the reasons due to which rest of the
developed technologies of the Department could not reach to the stage of commercialisation if
they are well aligned with the technological requirements of the concerned industry and as per
its requirement. The Committee is also of the view that limited availability of well structured
framework to facilitate and undertake technology transfer and commercialisation and poor linkage
between the Department and the industry adding to the poor performance of the Department to
put its developed technologies to commercialisation on a much greater scale. The Committee,
therefore, recommends the Department to take necessary action in the matter and take on
board the concerned stakeholders as well while identifying its industry oriented research work
so that the developed technologies are best suited and able to cater to the technological
requirements of the concerned industry. The Department should also come out with a forward
linkage forum where the interface between the Department and the industry is further strengthened
which in turn would help the Department as well to keep pace with the latter's technological
requirements.
6. CROP BIOTECHNOLOGY
6.1 The Department has informed the Committee that the mandate of Agriculture Biotechnology program
is knowledge generation, technology and product development for productivity gains, enhanced nutrition
and ensuring quality, resistance to drought salinity, high temperature, resistance to pests and diseases,
input use efficiency, climate resilience and biosafety. The nature and types of programs include product
oriented basic research, translational R&D projects, national networks, autonomous institutions, grand
challenge program, centers of excellence, international collaboration, public-private partnership, etc. It
has been informed that agriculture biotechnology programme deals with a wide range of economically
important crops including rice, wheat, cotton, millets, oilseeds and pulses. Key focus and support areas
are: (i) Nutritional quality & productivity of crops (ii) Climate resilient varietal development in crops
(iii) Biotic stress (iv) trait discovery and marker assisted introgression (v) IT interface technology in

11
agriculture (vi) Big data in agriculture (vii) Sustainable crop development (viii) establishment of technology
platforms. Under major initiatives, during the period 2016-17 and 2017-18, the Department has supported
new projects on improving oil quality and productivity in Groundnut, genome wide association study in
Phaseolus vulgaris - Colletotrichum lindemuthianum  pathosystem, development of genetic stocks for
maturity and growth habit genes in Soybean. Network programs were supported on double haploid
platform for accelerated maize breeding, hybrid development and enhanced genetic gains in South Asia,
marker-assisted breeding and mapping of QTLs for drought tolerance in wheat, genomics-assisted
introgression and field evaluation of rice varieties with genes/QTLs for yield under drought, flood and
salt stress, characterization, race profiling and genetic analysis of wheat powdery mildew pathogen in
India.
6.2 Network programmes on fiber quality traits of cotton, on rust resistance, on biotic and abiotic
stresses in wheat and quality in wheat and on intrigression of abiotic stress traits in rice have been
initiated. 189 ongoing projects and 42 network projects have been supported. Major achievements of the
Department include: A herbicide tolerant mutant of Nagina 22, (named as  Robin) identified, mapped and
characterised earlier is being used in marker assisted backcross breeding program to introgress herbicide
tolerance in 10 varieties of rice viz. PB1121, PB 1509, Sahabhagidhan, Naveen, Pooja Swarna-Sub1, C0
51, Anna, CB 06803 and CB 08702. At Directorate of Wheat Research, Karnal, a project was initiated
for improving biscuit making quality of wheat in North Western Plains using MAS. Prebred PBW373 and
UP2425 lines developed by crossing Nap Hal as source of Glu-D1 double null during 1st phase of the
project were used for Glu-D1 donor as main activity.
6.3 Responding to the query of the Committee about the preparedness of the Department to address
the issues of biotic and abiotic stresses and improving yield and quality traits of the existing crops
through its research activities, the Department has submitted that it is aware of the challenges posed by
the climate change which is the primary contributor to abiotic stresses in crop, evolution of the new
pests and pathogens (biotic stresses). In addition, the Department is also focusing on yield and quality
traits in crops. The Committee was also informed that the Department in order to target these issues
is supporting 56 ongoing projects through extra mural support; 7 projects are on nutritional quality, 19
on yield improvement and 30 on biotic and abiotic stress.
6.4 The Committee appreciates the efforts being undertaken and progress achieved by the
Department in the field of Crop Biotechnology during the year 2016-17 and 2017-18. The Committee
is hopeful that with its earnest efforts in this direction the Department would be able to fetch
the desired results. The Committee, however, feels that the institutional linkage between the
Department and the agricultural universities along with ICAR further needs to be strengthened.
The Committee is also of the view that the Department should collaborate with the International
institutes of repute working in these fields. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
Department to forge partnerships with such institutes to further intensify its research activities
in the field of agricultural biotechnology.
6.5 The Committee also notes that the Department has been supporting a research and
development proposal for development of rust resistant variety in Brassica juncea and a proposal

12
has also been supported for dissecting the molecular interface between the biotrophic pathogen
Sporisorium scitamineum  and its host sugarcane. The Committee, however, feels that drought
resistance varieties of sugarcane, if made available, will ease out the problems, to a considerable
extent, being faced by the sugarcane growers in the country due to lack of irrigation facilities
and dependence on the vagaries of monsoon. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
Department to also start its research and development activities in the direction of developing
drought resistance varieties of sugarcane in the country.
6.6 The Committee also enquired about the budgetary allocation and utilisation thereof in respect of 19
projects continuing for the yield improvement during the last three years by the Department. The
Department in its written reply informed that the total allocation for these 19 projects is `37.33 crore
and utilisation of budget is `22.22 crore during the last three years.
6.7 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the poor financial performance of the
Department in terms of utilisation of the budgetary support made available in respect of above
mentioned 19 yield improvement projects. It is disheartening and discouraging as well to note
that the Department though allocated `````37.33 crore for the purpose, could only spend `````22.22
crore which is just 59.52 per cent utilisation of the total financial support. The Committee is of
the considered view that the Department fails to attach the due importance to these projects and
could not take timely action to ensure that budgetary allocation is utilised fully and optimally.
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to furnish the detailed reasons for this
poor utilisation of budgetary allocation.
7. ANIMAL PRODUCTION
7.1 The Committee notes that livestock production is becoming increasingly important to economic
growth of the country and therefore application of biotechnological tools to enhance the productivity of
livestock sector is continued through R&D interventions supported by the Department. The programme
aims to provide R&D support for generation of new knowledge in the basic areas of livestock health
and production, to enhance production and productivity of livestock sector through biotechnological
interventions and development of newer and improved vaccines and diagnostics (heat stable, broad
spectrum, longer immune response, better adjuvants, recombinant, less side effects and residues in milk
and meat) for major diseases and also for emerging ones. The strategies employed are based on
conventional and recombinant routes. Key focus area supported during the period have been animal
production including animal nutrition, animal reproduction transgenics, cloning and knockout technology,
genomics and genetic characterisation of animal genetic resources and animal vaccine and diagnostics.
7.2 Major actions taken and achievements of the Department include: Genetic diversity study of selected
cattle breeds was carried out and a total 7,77,962 SNPs were genotyped. Out of these SNPs 1000
markers were identified having potential to differentiate various cattle breeds. A programme on genome
sequencing of 5 indigenous cattle breeds has been initiated. Various types of nano-formulation were
developed and utilised as functional feed supplements for model animals to confirm their effect on health
and productivity. Supplementation of Se and Zn nano particles in the feed had beneficial effects on

13
growth performance of animal. A novel non-invasive technique for the generation of transgenic rat model
was developed by integrating transgene into the genome of the spermatogonial cells by testicular injection
of DNA.
7.3 The Committee is appreciative of the progress made by the Department in the field of
Animal Production. The Committee, however, feels that the Department has a long way to go
in this direction considering the fact that Indian livestock production system still operates
significantly on the traditional knowledge. It is noteworthy that a large section of our livestock
has very dismal average productivity. The Committee is also of the considered view that to
deliver the technological advancements to the targeted group, the Department needs to further
strengthen its linkage with the stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
Department to start a systemic designed outreach campaign to popularise biotechnology among
livestock farmers.
7.4 The Committee also recommends the Department to come out with a strategy paper in the
matter and prepare a roadmap to enhance the production and productivity of livestock in the
country.
8. ANIMAL HEALTH (VACCINE & DIAGNOSTIC)
8.1 The Committee has been given to understand that the objective of this programme is to establish
collaborative research for development of new generation vaccines and diagnostics along with translation
of existing candidate vaccines and diagnostics for field use around major animal disease of national
importance to make product affordable to small and marginal farmers. Translational research in the area
of animal health and projects on development of new generations vaccines and diagnostics have been
supported.
8.2 During the period a recombinant vaccine against Mycobacterium avium for goats, vaccine for
canine mammary tumor, Nano-Newcastle disease virus vaccine, recombinant antigen based diagnostics
and chimeric plant virus-like particle based vaccine for Infectious Bursal Disease Virus (IBDV) were
developed. Studies to develop dip-strips to detect acaricide resistant ticks, biosensors for detection of
peste des petits ruminants (PPR), and economic diagnostics for surra have been done. Newcastle disease
Virus Antibody Test Kit, NDV-Check was also developed through the project supported by the Department.
A study was also done on status of veterinary biologicals in India and as a result a book has been
published on "Animal Biotechnology -Vaccines and Diagnostics- Markets and Investment Opportunities".
During the period, 10 products were generated, 5 technologies were developed, 2 technologies were
commercialised, 1 patent was granted, 6 patents were applied and a total of 43 research papers have been
published.
8.3 Under Animal Biotechnology Career Enhancement Programme (ABCEP), 10 students were successfully
trained during the year. In addition the Post Doc's are involved in development of Ketocheck, a kit to
detect subclinical ketosis in bovine and a lateral flow assay for simultaneous detection of antibodies to
canine parvo and rabies viruses under the ABCEP training program.

14
8.4 The Committee notes that Brucella infects cows, buffalos, sheep, goats, deer, pigs, dogs and other
animals and humans. The Secretary, Department of Biotechnology while making presentation before the
Committee in the meeting held on 13th February, 2018 informed that disease causes economic losses of
about ` 28000.00 crore per year in veterinary sector.
8.5 The Committee expresses its deep concerns over the loss to exchequer on count of Brucella
infection. The Committee, therefore, is of the considered opinion that given the quantum of
economic losses to public exchequer due to infection in animals and humans, the problem throws
a huge challenge to the Department of Biotechnology expecting biotechnological solution to this
problem. The Committee is happy to note that the Department is seized of the issue and in its
endeavour to address the issue making efforts in the form of implementation of 'Brucellosis Free
Villages Mission' on pilot scale in 50 villages of 10 States in phased manner . The Committee,
however, feels that the Department needs to further intensify this Mission Programme and reach
out to all the States where the cases of Brucella infections have been registered.
8.6 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should make a database for
the purpose and roll out the implementation of 'Brucellosis Free Villages Mission' in rest of the
States as well in a time bound manner so as to not only provide the biotechnological solution to
the problem but also preventing the huge economic losses.
9. AQUACULTURE & MARINE BIOTECHNOLOGY
9.1 The Department in its submission informed the Committee that Aquaculture and Marine Biotechnology
programme supports R&D and demonstration nature projects towards development of useful products
and process from the marine resources. The focus is on creation of specialised manpower in molecular
biology, infrastructure development and establishment of sophisticated R&D facilities for augmenting and
expediting research. The innovations supported are expected to benefit the aquatic and marine sectors
and help the scientific and research community in pursuing good research priorities by putting emphasis
on various sectors of Aquaculture and Marine Biotechnology addressing areas  viz.  feed and nutrition,
health, environment and productivity increase through adoption of molecular tools and techniques, aspects
on marine genomics and proteomics and extremophiles. Centres of excellence in theme based areas of
Marine Biotechnology and Aquaculture are being set up to boost up the sector in research and development.
9.2 During the period, support has been provided for developing effective diagnostics and prophylactic
solution for the aquaculture, for harnessing marine resources for aquaculture/human benefit, for development
of standardised protocol for cell lines and its characterisation, Molecular screening, cell culture based
isolation and characterisation of finfish and shellfish viruses. The activities related to develop new feed
for enhancement of aquaculture productivity, sustainable and viable culture technology in new species
of aquaculture have been supported. Proposals on genetic characterisation and improvement of labeo
rohita, L. calbasu fish species, Fish genomics, proteomics and transcriptomics have been also been
supported.
9.3 Programmes undertaken on actinobacteria could help in exploring new molecules for anti-HIV and
immune-modulatory substances for aquaculture. Project supported on fish genomics, proteomics and

15
transcriptomics also created large number of genetic data. More than 50 fish cell lines have been
developed. 50 cell lines available at NBFGR, Lucknow were further improved and characterised for
various toxicological and genetic characterisation work.
9.4 During the period, 35 manpower have trained, 30 research papers published, 04 patents filed and
05 new technologies being utilised by the beneficiaries in Aquaculture & Marine Biotechnology area.
9.5 The Committee takes note of the work done/being done by the Department in the field of
Aquaculture and Marine Biotechnology. However, it observes that health, feed and nutrition are
the major challenges to be addressed in marine and aquaculture sector. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Department to prepare a roadmap for developing requisite and efficient diagnostics
and take prophylactic measures to address these issues.
9.6 The Committee also recommends that the Department should strive hard to complete the
task of setting up Centres of excellence in theme based areas of Aquaculture and Marine
Biotechnology to boost up the research and development activities in a time bound manner and
ensure that the time frame fixed for the purpose is strictly adhered to.
10. MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS
10.1 The Department has informed that the Translational Research on Products and Processes from
Medicinal and Aromatic Plants programme aims to support and encourage R&D activities on translational
research for products and processes development from medicinal and aromatic plants. The programme
has focus on taking forward the research leads to their logical conclusion through multi-disciplinary
approach. Following are the major achievements during the year 2016-17 and 2017-18 (till 6th February,
2018):
• Agreement has been signed between ICGEB, New Delhi and Sun Pharma Ltd. for developing
herbal drugs from  Cissampleos pareira  for dengue infection.
• Project to develop herbal drug from Butea monosperma for osteoporosis is planned to be
initiated at CDRI, Lucknow in collaboration with other institutions.
• Efforts have been undertaken to develop demonstration project on cultivation of priority aroma
crops in Bundelkhand and North East Region.
• V egetative propagation of  Symplocos racemosa and seed propagation of Pterocarpus marsupium
and Saraca asoca have been standardised.
• Anti-dermetophytic herbal formulation using essential oil of Trachyspermum ammi (Ajwain)
has been further improved. Significant results obtained against Microsporum canis and
Trichophyton mentagrophytes suggests its utility in treating animal dermatophytes, common
in pets.
• Novel strategy has been formulated and implemented wherein natural chemotypes of Picrorhiza
kurrooa were used in ascertaining and validating the biosynthetic routes of both the picrosides

16
(Picroside-I and II). Multi-location testing of genetically superior chemotypes (PKS-1 and
PKS-5) of P. kurrooa has been undertaken in farmers' fields in high altitude areas.
10.2 The Secretary, Depart ment of Biotechnology informed the Committee that the Department has
announced a Phyto-Pharma Plant Mission with the financial support of `50.00 crore for the conservation
and cultivation of endangered and threatened endemic medicinal plants of North East India and discovery
of new botanical drugs for unmet medical needs using the rich traditional ethno-botanical knowledge and
biodiversity of these States.
10.3 The Committee is of the considered view that medicinal and aromatic plants sector has the
immense potential and untapped opportunities. This sector in Committee's view can play a
significant role in helping diversified livelihood of poor and vulnerable section of our society. The
Committee, thus, appreciates the move of the Department and hopes that the financial support
of `````50.00 crore as earmarked for the Phyto-Pharma Plant Mission by the Department would be
adequate to cater to the financial requirements of the Mission and the objectives/targets would
be achieved both in terms of physical and financial targets as envisaged by the Department.
11. INFECTIOUS DISEASES
11.1 The Committee has been informed by the Department that in order to address various issues and
concerns related to infectious diseases, the Department promotes research and development activity in
the area of infectious diseases specifically relevant for the country caused by various pathogenic agents
like bacteria, viruses, parasites, and fungi. The overall emphasis of the programs supported is to develop
preventive, therapeutic and diagnostic tools for major infectious diseases like Hepatitis, Influenza,
Chikungunya, Malaria, Leishmaniasis, HIV/AIDS, Dengue etc. The Committee notes that during the
period 2016-17 and 2017-18, 30 new proposals have been sanctioned and 100 ongoing proposals have
been reviewed. In the program Repurposing of Drugs - Antimicrobial Resistance, a Brain storming
session was organised and launched a grant call, invited LoIs. Shortlisted 181 LoIs received under the
call based on scientific merit to 20 LoIs for receiving full application. In the Glue Grant program 06
ongoing proposals were reviewed. Progress of THSTI-IAVI HIV Vaccine Design Program, Bio-space
(Policy Centre for Biomedical Research) program and Advanced Technology Platform Centre has been
reviewed. The support to aforementioned programs resulted in 83 publications and filing of 08 patent
applications.
11.2 Responding to the concern of the Committee about the research work undertaken by the Department
in the direction of vaccine development, research and product development for Japanese encephalitis,
research programme on Dengue, Malaria, Chikungunya, etc, the Department informed that it has made
concerted efforts in strengthening vaccine research and development since its inception in 1986-87
through various endeavours. Currently major efforts are being implemented through the Vaccine Grand
Challenge Programme (VGCP), Indo-US Vaccine Action Programme (V AP) and through the infectious
disease biology program. The Department has supported R&D and product development activities for
development of vaccines Japanese encephalitis, Dengue, Chikunguniya, Malaria etc.

17
11.3 Progress of Major vaccine development projects is as under:
(i) Rotavirus Vaccine : Rotavirus Vaccine-(ROTA VAC®) is the first indigenous rotavirus vaccine,
developed from an Indian strain-by an Indian company, and tested by Indian investigators in
an effort led by the Indian government and supported by several national and global partners.
The vaccine is manufactured in India by M/s Bharat Biotech International Limited, Hyderabad
under cGMP conditions and is a more affordable alternative to the rotavirus vaccines already
on the market. The vaccine is commercialized and based on the recommendations of National
Technical Advisory Group on Immunization (NTAGI); ROTA V AC® has been introduced in the
EPI programme of nine states.
(ii) Malaria Vaccines : International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB),
New Delhi along with its translational research partner "Multi Vaccines Development Program"
earlier known as "Malaria Vaccine Development Program" (a not-for-profit society formed and
registered under the Societies Registration Act) has advanced the development of blood-stage
vaccines for P. falciparum and P. vivax malaria over the last decade. Funding support through
Vaccine Grand Challenge Program of Department of Biotechnology, Biotechnology Industry
Research Assistance Council (BIRAC) and multiple international agencies including Malaria
Vaccine Initiative (MVI), PA TH and European Vaccine Initiative (EVI) has been received.
These recombinant protein-based adjuvanted Malaria vaccines advanced through the translational
development pathway of GMP production, pre-clinical immunogenicity testing, GLP compliant
toxicity testing and Phase I trial after receiving all necessary regulatory approvals. All these
translational development activities have been done with Indian partners or collaborators or
through an out-sourced model. Following vaccine candidates have undergone development
beyond lab bench:
(iii) JAIV AC-2 (Second generation P. falciparum vaccine candidate) : Presently the formulations
are undergoing Acute and Repeat Dose toxicity studies after approval from Review Committee
on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) and Animal Ethics Committee.
(iv) PvDBPII ( P. vivax vaccine candidate) :  Currently, the Phase I first-in-man clinical trial of
PvDBPII/GLA-SE in 36 healthy volunteers is underway after receiving necessary approvals
from RCGM, Drug Controller general India, CDL Kasauli and Ethics Committee.
(V) Dengue Vaccine : Department has been supporting the group at ICGEB, for the development
of safe, efficacious and inexpensive tetravalent dengue vaccine. The encouraging outcomes in
the pre-clinical evaluation of DSV4 have enabled negotiating with a potential industrial partner
to advance DSV4 to the next stage of GMP production and toxicity evaluation.
11.4 The Committee appreciates the progress made by the Department in the direction of vaccine
development of diseases like malaria, dengue, Japanese encephalitis, etc. The Committee, however,
did not find any mention of the efforts being undertaken by the Department in the direction of
Chikungunya and as to what research and development activities have been undertaken by the

18
Department during last few years. The Committee is of the considered view that our country has
been facing severe health issues with regard to Chikungunya infection and the disturbing figures
of the deaths registered during last few years on account of this disease in our country. The
Committee feels that there is a need to control mosquito population which can to an extent be
an attributed factor in spreading Chikungunya infection. The Committee also feels that the
Department of Biotechnology can play an important role by finding biotechnological solutions to
keep mosquito population under control. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department
to intensify its R&D and product development activities for development of safe, efficacious and
inexpensive Chikungunya vaccine.
12. MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH
12.1 Improvement of maternal health and reduction in child mortality has been stressed globally with
World Health Organisation (WHO) adding them as two priority areas in the Millennium Development
Goals. The Department realises the importance of this area and hence funds programs focusing on
understanding the biology and development of affordable care for adverse pregnancy conditions, fetal
growth & development and neonatal survival. It keeps pace with the latest global developments and
incorporates critical components into the program like setting up of mandate for placental research and
a well-directed project to decipher Preterm Biology. The focus of the programme is on pregnancy
complications such as preeclampsia, IUGR, recurrent miscarriages, developmental anomalies and diseases
of early childhood, developmental basis of adult onset of diseases.
12.2 During the year, in an inter-institutional program on Preterm Birth, a hospital-based cohort of
pregnant women at the Gurgaon Civil Hospital (GCH), Haryana, was established as part of this effort.
2663 women were found to have pregnancy with period of gestation (POG) < 20 weeks on clinical
assessment and by the last menstrual period (LMP) after screening 8281 women attending the antenatal
clinic at GCH. Out of these 1801 were confirmed to have a uterine pregnancy < 20 weeks POG on
ultrasound (USG) evaluation and were enrolled. The Department has partnered with Canadian Institute
of Health Research (CIHR), Canada for a Healthy Life Trajectories initiative (HeLTi) which is a multi-
country effort where interventional cohorts will be established in India, China & South Africa. The
Department has signed a Program of Cooperation (PoC) with CIHR.
12.3 A Call for RFAs was made through which a team was selected which was sent to Geneva to attend
a strengthening workshop for development of a proposal for linked international cohorts sharing the
SOPs/protocols with other countries. A call for proposal under Maternal & Child health programme was
made under the Joint Working Group with ICMR which endeavours to identify invention and early-stage
development of new medical technologies, early translation, development of innovative tools & technologies
in the identified areas. This year a call for LOIs was made focusing on Preeclampsia, Neonatal Sepsis
& Birth Asphyxia, against which 187 LoIs were received and out of which 41 have been shortlisted for
development of full proposals. 22 new proposals have been funded in the area of complications in
pregnancy such as preeclampsia, IUGR, recurrent miscarriages, effect of maternal nutritional status on
pregnancy outcome, development of neonatal immune system.

19
12.4 The Committee takes note of the efforts being made by the Department in the direction
of maternal and child health. The Committee, however, is concerned to note that anemia,
stunting, malnutrition and micronutrient malnutrition cases are widespread in the country and
the efforts being undertaken by the Department in the form of development of Iron fortified rice
i.e. IFR-1 (fortified with iron) and IFR-2 (fortified with iron, folic acid) is nothing less than a drop
in the ocean. The Committee is of the firm view that the Department has to come up with out
of box and innovative biotechnological solutions to these problems. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Department to chalk out a roadmap in this direction and make earnest efforts
in providing scientific solution to these health problems related to child health.
13. STEM CELL RESEARCH
13.1 The Committee notes that Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine has been identified as one of the
thrust areas under biomedical research of the Department. The objective is to promote basic, early and
late translational research and formulation of regulatory framework for stem cell research in India.
13.2 The Committee in its endeavour to know about the ongoing stem cell research and progress
achieved by the Department of Biotechnology in this direction has been given to understand that the
Department is making efforts to promote this area in an integrated way by supporting both early
translational research (basic and pre-clinical research) and late translational research (clinical studies). It
has been informed that stem cell research is an exciting field of life sciences. Stem cells are unspecialised
cells and have capability to renew themselves. Since this field is only more than a decade old, research
is being conducted to understand basic biology of these cells and also differentiation into different
lineages. Though stem cells are present during all stages of human life right from fertilisation to adulthood,
however, their plasticity varies based on source of isolation. It has been brought to the notice of the
Committee that a road map was formulated and strategy was finalised by the Department in consultation
with national and international experts and a separate Task Force on Stem Cell research & Regenerative
Medicine was constituted in 2003. The Department sharing the major achievements in the area of stem
cell submitted that clinical study on 10 patients with large segmental bone defects receiving tissue
engineered bone transplant (custom made triphasic hydroxyapatite scaffolds loaded with mesenchymal
stem cells) has been completed with no serious adverse effects and the "National Guidelines for Stem
Cell Research, 2017" jointly formulated by Department of Biotechnology and the Indian Council of
Medical Research was released on 11th October, 2017. The Department also informed that one hundred
per cent of the spinal cord injury cases showed improvement with respect to muscle strength, urine
control, spasticity, etc. Eighty-five per cent of cases of cerebral palsy showed improvements, out of
which 75% reported improvement in muscle tone and 50% in speech among other symptoms. Eighty-
eight per cent of cases of other incurable neurological disorders such as autism, Retts Syndrome, giant
axonal neuropathy, etc., also showed improvement. No significant adverse events were noted. The
results show that this treatment is safe, efficacious, and also improves the quality of life of children with
incurable neurological disorders and injury.
13.3 The Department further stated that the overall outcomes of the clinical studies conducted so far for
various diseases in human subjects using adult stem cells are debatable, hence, considered experimental

20
as of today and none other than bone marrow transplantation or hematopoietic stem cells are accepted
as standard line of treatment that can cure disorders in human beings.
13.4 The Committee takes note of the information furnished by the Department on the research
work going to understand the possible benefits of stem cells and observes that as of today, none
other than bone marrow transplantation or hematopoietic stem cells are accepted as standard
line of treatment that can cure disorders in human beings. However, the Committee feels that
the basic research work in this direction needs further push to explore the untapped potential
of stem cells in curing various disorders in human being in collaboration with the Institutes with
state-of-the-art facilities to facilitate such research works and recommends that adequate funds
be earmarked for the purpose so that financial constrains would not hinder the research work
in the country. The Committee is of the opinion that the advancements in biomedical research
in the field of stem cell would help in offering scientific solutions for treating a variety of disease
such as diabetes, cancer, cardiology, neurology, etc. The Committee, nonetheless, would also like
to caution the Department about the unscientific or unethical stem cell therapy that continues
to pose a threat. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to run an awareness
programme in the country under its CSR activities and reach out to the concerned stakeholders
apprising them about the rightful status of the stem cells and their applications on the basis of
scientific evidences. The Committee is of the considered opinion that this awareness programme
of the Department would help understanding the whole gamut of stem cell research in the
country.
14. PUBLIC HEALTH, FOOD & NUTRITION
14.1 The Department has informed the Committee through its Background Note on consideration of
Detailed Demands for Grants 2018-19 that the Public Health Food and Nutrition programme of the
Department focusses on addressal of micronutrient deficiencies, severe acute malnutrition, food fortification,
probiotics for human health and well-being, food safety, molecular detection of GM traits in foods,
development of low cost foods/supplements and utilisation of agricultural residues for value added
products and capacity building in Food Science and Nutrition Biology. During the period, a multi-centric
Pan India study on the prevalence and predictors of vitamin B12 deficiency has been initiated. Till date
data collection has been done in 4 states (Telangana, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Meghalaya) completed.
Estimation of most of the biochemical parameters completed for 3 states (Telangana, Madhya Pradesh,
Odisha) and 4th state (Meghalaya) is underway. Sample collection is ongoing in the 5th state (Gujarat).
Biochemical estimations are underway. The technology for iron fortified rice premix has been developed
along with the commissioning of demonstration unit for production of Iron Fortified Rice premix" in IIT-
Kharagpur. The available iron content in the iron fortified rice after employing different methods of
cooking was evaluated by National Institute of Nutrition (NIN), Hyderabad.
14.2 The Committee takes note of the multi-centric Pan India study on the prevalence and
predictors of vitamin B12 deficiency initiated by the Department and the progress achieved
thereon. The Committee, however, is little perturbed to note that the Department failed to

21
furnish the complete details like the total number of States identified for the study, time
schedule fixed for the completion of the task, physical targets envisaged, etc. in its Background
Note. The Committee is of the firm opinion that the Department should have been more cautious
and vigilant while submitting the information for the consideration of the Committee. The
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to furnish a detailed note in the matter for
the consideration of the Committee.
15. BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT
15.1 Responding to the query of the Committee about the societal development through the advancements
of biotechnology, the Department has informed that that the main objectives of the programme is to
promote the use of biotechnological processes and tools for the benefit of the disadvantaged section of
the society comprising women, rural population, SC/ST and weaker section. The programme aims to
create platform for self-employment generation among the target population through diffusion of proven
and field-tested technologies demonstration, training and extension activities. Key focus area of program
includes Agriculture and Allied Sector, Health, Nutrition & Sanitation, Value Chain and Post-Harvest,
Agripreneurship Development and Biodiversity conservation.
15.2 During the period, projects have been supported for the socio-economic upliftment of SC/ST
population, rural and women through promotion of various biotechnological interventions viz. bio-fertilizers,
bio-pesticides, sericulture, animal husbandry, aquaculture, mushroom cultivation, medicinal & aromatic
plants, bee keeping, organic farming, horticulture, value addition to food processing and product
development etc. These projects are aimed to benefit large number of beneficiaries for self-employment
and income generation.
15.3 The supported projects under this programme on bio-fertilizer production, vermicomposting, apiculture,
poultry farming, integrated fish farming, artificial insemination, mushroom cultivation, goat rearing, fruit
plant nurseries, sericulture, post-harvest processing technologies, hybrid seed production, use of quality
planting materials helped in creation of self-employment among the target population for livelihood
generation through diffusion of proven and field-tested technologies demonstration, training and extension
activities. Projects supported under women and child health care also benefitted the target community
for improvement of their health status.
15.4 The Committee notes the work being done by the Department for the societal development
with the help of its biotechnological interventions. The Committee, however, feels that the
submission of the Department lacks the factual data in terms of total numbers of self-employment
generation through diffusion of proven and field-tested technologies demonstration, training and
extension activities, total number of beneficiaries, number of projects supported under women
and child health care, etc. to support its claim. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
Department to furnish a complete data inter alia  including number of beneficiaries under its
various activities undertaken during the last three years by the Department under the
Biotechnology for Societal Programme.

22
(B) INDUSTRIAL  AND  ENTREPRENEURSHIP  DEVELOPMENT
(i) Biotechnology Parks and Bio-Clusters
15.5 The Committee has been informed that the Department in partnership with State Governments/State
Government Organisations/Central Government Organisations has supported Biotechnology Parks and
incubators in different parts of the country to facilitate biotech product development, entrepreneurship,
research and innovation. Following is the details of Biotech parks operative and facilitating startups and
entrepreneurs:
(i) Uttar Pradesh: Biotech Park, Lucknow
(ii) Assam: Guwahati Biotech Park
(iii) Kerala: Biotechnology Incubation Centre, Cochin
(iv) TICEL, Chennai
(v) Biotechnology Incubation Centre, Hyderabad
(vi) Bangalore Bioinnovation Centre, Bangalore
15.6 It has been informed that the Department has supported 3 Bio-clusters at NCR, Bangalore and
Kalyani to connect the discovery science and take it towards accelerated technology and product
development. Facilities for multidisciplinary sciences, engineering, medicine and agriculture including
advanced technology platforms are co-located with biotech entrepreneurship at these clusters. The Bio-
clusters are addressing major Missions. The Cryo-EM is installed and working in the B-Life bio-cluster.
It has been announced as a national facility from 1st Feb., 2018. During the year 2018-19, several users
from institutions outside of the cluster will come and use the facility. Three hands on workshops will
be conducted for training users in cryo-EM. Structural biology meetings will be conducted and collaborate
in running with other organisations example - with Electron Microscopy Society of India in July 2018.
(ii) Public Private Partnerships
15.7 Department has supported creation of infrastructure and several Public Private Partnership programs
to foster Bio-entrepreneurship through "Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC)",
a Public Sector Undertaking of DBT. The Department supports BIRAC for fostering and nurturing the
Biotech Enterprises specially start-ups and SME's for enhancing their innovation research capacities and
promoting affordable product development.
15.8 To serve various dimensions of its mandate, BIRAC operates mainly in 3 verticals  viz. :
- Investment: BIRAC as a core developmental agency has initiated several schemes, which
focuses on the entire product development chain from idea to proof of concept, to early stage
- late stage, validation scale up, right up to commercialization
- Entrepreneurship Development: Nurturing the ecosystem by providing the enabling environment,
BIRAC through its Bioincubators Nurturing Entrepreneurship for Scaling Technologies (BioNEST)

23
programme provides support for the establishment of bio-incubators. Through BioNEST,
BIRAC has supported 30 globally competitive incubators across India that house more than
300 biotech startups.
- Strategic Partnership group: Leveraging and fostering global and national partnerships for
meeting its mandate. Some important partnerships are:
• Grand Challenges India (GCI): A consortium of DBT, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation,
Wellcome Trust, USAID, and BIRAC, focussing on supporting innovations in the areas
of maternal and child health, agriculture and nutrition, sanitation and infectious diseases
• Indo-French Centre for the Promotion of Advanced Research (CEFIPRA): Support high
quality bilateral research, encourage and enable Indo-French collaboration between public,
private research groups, industry, clinicians and end-users in the domain of red
biotechnology
• Wellcome Trust, UK: Support innovations in translational medicine in the domain of
diagnostics for infectious diseases
15.9 The following table shows the BE, RE allocations and actual expenditure, year-wise, for the years
2015-16, 2016-17 and BE allocation for 2018-19 in respect of the scheme 'Industrial and Entrepreneurship
Development':-
(Rupees in crore)
Y ear Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual Expenditure
2015-16 69.00 69.00 69.61
2016-17 205.00 192.00 187.90
2017-18 203.00 222.82 191.12*
2018-19 249.24 -- --
* (up to 31st January 2018)
15.10 The Committee notes the continual increase in the RE budgetary allocation under the head 'Industrial
and Entrepreneurship Development' post 2015-16. On being enquired about the reason for the increase
in the BE allocation under this head in comparison to the RE allocation, the Department has informed
that there is about 10% increase in the allocation and it is required for meeting the committed enhanced
targets set out for the year 2018-19. The Committee has been informed that during the financial year
2017-18 the Department has provided support for establishment of 3 Bio-clusters and for undertaking
programs under Public Private Partnership to BIRAC. More than 400 entrepreneurs and startups and
small and medium enterprises have been provided support and 30 Bio-incubation centre have been
supported. During the year 2017-18, 20 technologies have been developed, 14 technologies transferred/
commercialized, 14 patent applications have been filed and 4 patents have been granted under the
Startups Innovation Research Program.

24
15.11 The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the fund utilisation capacity of the Department
under this head. The Committee further notes the action taken by the Department during the
year 2017-18. The Committee considering the fund utilisation of the Department under this head
is hopeful that the Department would continue its earnest efforts and make optimal utilisation
of the funds made available for the year 2018-19 and also make sincere efforts to achieve the
physical as well as financial targets envisaged.
15.12 Responding to the query of the Committee regarding the action plan prepared by the Department
for the year 2018-19, the Department informed the following:-
1. The Department will forge new partnerships to create new Biotechnology Parks in the country
to facilitate biotech product development, entrepreneurship, research and innovation in areas
where such facilities are not available and continue to support ongoing Biotech Parks in
accordance with their project duration. New clusters will be supported for biotech industry
and start-up.
2. To promote culture of innovation and entrepreneurship and to empower the Indian biotech
innovation ecosystem for Affordable Product Development. The Department will continue to
support innovation research mentorship and capacity programs through BIRAC.
3. The Department will continue to foster innovation by promoting entrepreneurship development
through support to the BIRAC for implementation of programs like- BIRAC BioNEST (BIRAC
- Bioincubation: Nurturing Entrepreneurs for Scaling up Technology), SITARE (Students
Innovations for Advancement of Research Explorations), eYUV A (Encouraging Youth for
Undertaking Innovative Research through Vibrant Acceleration), Social Innovation programme
for Products Affordable & Relevant to Societal Health (SPARSH), BIRAC Seed Fund.
4. The Department will work towards the following action points of Startup India Action point
and Make India Action plan:
(i) Scale up the number of Startups in the sector by nurturing approximately 300-500 new
Startups each year to have around 2,000 Startups by 2020.
(ii) Set up 50 Bio-Incubators and 150 technology transfer offices across India. (BIRAC has
already supported 30 Bioincubators till now).
(iii) Establish 5 Regional centres of BIRAC in the next 5 years. (3 Regional Centres are
operational)
(iv) Set up infrastructure for biopharma product development including facilities.
(v) 10 Bio-connect offices will be established and 10-15 Technology transfer offices will be
supported.
15.13 The Committee shares the ambitious and inspiring action plan prepared by the Department
for the year 2018-19. The Committee, however, is not very pleased with the numbers achieved

25
on count of startups, entrepreneurs and small & medium enterprises i.e. 220, 225 and 150
respectively supported by the Department during the year 2017-18. The Department, on the one
hand, aims to nurture approximately 300-500 new startups each year but, on the other hand, the
Department in the year 2017-18 could only manage to support a total of 220 startups which is
way too less than what the Department intends. The Committee is of the view that the Department
while providing financial support to the startups should also ensure the sustainability of the
supported startups. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to furnish a detailed
note including inter-alia details on the status of the startups supported by the Department during
the last 3 years, how many of them are in operation, etc.
15.14 Similarly, the Department has been taking action for establishment of 150 Technology
Transfer Offices across the country as a part of its strategy to achieve US$ 100 billion by 2025
under National Biotechnology Development Strategy and targets to establish 15 such offices
during the year 2018-19. The Committee feels that if the Department achieves this target of
establishing 15 Technology Transfer Offices during the year 2018-19 and continues to maintain
this pace year after year, it will be able to reach the figure of 150 only in 2027 and not by 2025.
15.15 The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that the Department should sets its
targets pragmatically on the basis of its performance during last few years.
16. ASSISTANCE TO AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS
16.1 The Committee notes that the Department provides support to 15 Autonomous Institutions and 1
International Institution and has 3 Public Sector Units, namely, (i) Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals
Corporation Limited (BIBCOL), (ii) Indian Vaccines Corporation Limited, and (iii) Biotechnology Industry
Research Assistance Council (BIRAC).
16.2 The following table presents the BE & RE allocations and actual expenditure, year-wise, for the
years 2015-16, 2016-17 and BE allocation for 2018-19 in respect of the scheme Budgetary allocation
under the head 'Assistance to Autonomous Institutions' for the year 2016-17 and 2017-18 is as under:-
(` in crore)
Y ear Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual Expenditure
2016-17 660.00 660.00 649.06
2017-18 708.53 724.53 556.4*
2018-19 748.98 -- --
* As on 31st January, 2018
16.3 The Committee notes that the budgetary allocation in BE 2018-19 under the head 'Assistance to
Autonomous Institutions' has been pegged to ` 748.98 crore which was `724.53 crore in RE 2017-18.
Responding to the query of the Committee about the projected demand made by the Department under

26
this head, the Department has submitted that it has submitted a projected requirement of `831 crore
against which ` 748.98 has been allocated in BE 2018-19.
16.4 Informing the Committee about the achievement of Autonomous Institutions for the year 2017-18,
the Department has submitted that the achievements consist of training of skilled manpower, collaboration
with various industries, publication of more than 800 research papers, filing of 30 patents, grant of 8
patents and development /transfer of 10 technologies. It has been informed that the Autonomous institutions
have forged several new partnerships with the industries and other research institutions. These institutions
have efficiently taken up their mandates in respective area of research and development, training and
other activities including services. Some of the scientific achievements made and leads developed during
the year 2017-18 by the autonomous institutions are given below:-
• Freeze-stable alum-adjuvanted vaccine formulation: a freeze-stable dry powder alum adsorbed
antigen having stability at frozen conditions was prepared. It was observed that the formulation
protects the alum adjuvanted vaccines from cold temperature shock.
• Fabrication of biodegradable composite scaffolds at room temperature for tissue engineering
applications: Composite scaffold blends of polymers PDLLA and Eudragit were developed
using the novel method of fusion of particles by treatment with methanol. Scaffold with
different surface charges can be fabricated, using this method, suitable for cellular interaction.
• Technology Transferred: Low calorie sugar (D-psicose) from fruit processing residues/ fructose
(Patent Appl. No. 201611003411) was transferred to Nagarjuna Fertilizers and Chemicals
Limited, Hyderabad and CIAB-NA VITA: Liquid Whey Health Drink (Patent Application No.
201711008368) was transferred to Diovita Foods Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi.
• Technologies developed viz. Fungal strain with impaired catabolite repression for lignocellulosic
degradation, Novel insecticidal molecules, compositions thereof, methods of preparing thereof,
Phytase enriched tomato fruit.
16.5 The Committee notes the increase in budgetary allocation under the head 'Assistance to
Autonomous Institutions' in BE 2018-19. The Committee hopes that the enhanced budgetary
allocation of `````748.98 crore will further help these Autonomous Institutions to manage their
financial requirements in a better way and also help them carrying out their mandate more
effectively and efficiently. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to ensure
that the budgetary allocation made in respect of these Autonomous Institutions is optimally
utilised and the financial as well as physical objectives/targets set for the year 2018-19 are
realised.
16.6 Responding to the query of the Committee regarding the financial assistance provided to these
Autonomous Institutions during the last three year, the Department has informed that total amount of
`561.60 crore, `649.05 crore and `724.53 crore has been released in favour of these Institutions for
the year 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18 respectively. The details of the release of funds to these

27
Autonomous Institutions along with the actual expenditure thereof during the last three years are as
under:-
(````` in crore)
Sl. No. Name 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual
Allocation Expenditure Allocation E xpenditure Allocation Expenditure*
1          2 3 4 5 6 7 8
1. National Institute of 52.55 53.86 61.00 58.01 67.00 53.73
Immunology,
New Delhi
2. National Centre for Cell 40.00 39.69 49.50 42.67 54.85 39.23
Science, Pune
3. Centre for DNA Finger 84.50 83.56 63.70 43.31 40.20 32.37
Printing & Diagnostics,
Hyderabad
4. National Brain Research 30.50 27.39 28.45 25.69 43.01 39.33
Centre, Gurgaon
5. National Institute for 28.60 27.20 31.19 31.48 38.00 26.64
Plant Genome Research,
New Delhi
6. Institute of Bioresources 9.79 10.28 29.71 21.86 27.00 34.60
& Sustainable
Development, Imphal
7. Institute of Life 35.89 36.27 37.44 37.02 59.40 42.00
Sciences, Bhubaneswar
8. Translational Health 29.00 29.24 30.00 24.31 34.00 23.06
Science & Technology
Institute, Faridabad
9. Rajiv Gandhi Centre for 38.70 39.41 55.00 46.19 65.66 59.62
Biotechnology,
Thiruvananthapuram
10. National Institute of 20.58 29.78 21.31 25.78 26.94 18.59
Biomedical Genomics,
Kalyani

28
1          2 3 4 5 6 7 8
11. Regional Centre for 29.30 30.10 23.27 21.59 25.65 18.44
Biotechnology, Faridabad
12. National Agri-Food 35.00 32.88 69.00 70.54 31.00 26.33
Biotechnology Institute,
Mohali
13. Institute for Stem Cell 45.09 45.89 68.70 45.42 87.36 41.20
Research and
Regenerative Medicine,
Bengaluru
14. National Institute of 30.70 29.91 35.28 35.85 75.50 59.82
Animal Biotechnology,
Hyderabad
15. Centre of Innovative 29.25 22.20 16.50 18.33 14.46 14.69
and Applied
Bioprocessing, Mohali
16. International Centre for 22.15 20.81 29.00 28.00 34.50 26.75
Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New
Delhi
T
OTAL 561.60 558.47 649.05 576.05 724.53 556.4
* As on 31st January, 2018
16.7 The Committee notes that some of the Autonomous Institutions of the Department failed
to utilise the budgetary supports fully made in their favour during the financial years 2016-17
and 2017-18. The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the underutilisation of the budgetary
support by these institutions. The utilisation in terms of per cent has continuously gone down
from 99.44% to 88.75% and from 88.75% to 76.79% during the year 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-
18 (till 31st January, 2018) respectively. The unsatisfactory financial performance of the
Autonomous Institution during the year 2016-17 and 2017-18 (till 31st January, 2018) is a
reflection of poor monitoring by the Department over these institutions. The Committee is of
the view that had the Department monitored the financial performance of these institutions on
account of the budgetary support made in their favour, the sub-optimal utilisation of funds could
have been avoided. The Committee is of the opinion that the Department needs to be proactive
in its approach and should not have the laid back attitude about the financial position of these
institutes.

29
16.8 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should put in place a robust
internal monitoring mechanism in order to monitor the financial performance of these autonomous
institutions on a regularly basis and take remedial and corrective preventive measures if
underutilisation is registered.
17. BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY RESEARCH ASSISTANCE COUNCIL (BIRAC)
17.1 The Department has informed the Committee that Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance
Council (BIRAC) is a not-for-profit public sector undertaking under the aegis of the Department. BIRAC,
being a unique organisation in the biotechnology ecosystem, works as an interface agency of the
Department of Biotechnology and has the mandate of fostering and nurturing the Biotech Enterprises
specially start-ups and SME's for enhancing their innovation research capacities and promoting affordable
product development. The Committee notes that BIRAC supports Industry-Academia interaction, serve
as a single window for the emerging biotech industry; helps establish connectivity with professional and
institutional networks; and provides financial support for quality innovation targeted at affordable solutions
and product development. All DBT's biotechnology industry and entrepreneurship Schemes including
Public Private Partnership Programmes are implemented by BIRAC. The Department has submitted that
today more than 1000 companies - large, small, medium and start-ups; and entrepreneurs are a part of
BIRAC's Innovators network. During the last three years 74 products and technologies are commercialised/
ready for commercialisation, 84 patent applications filed and 8 patents have been granted.
17.2 Budgetary allocation under the head 'Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council' (BIRAC)
for the year 2017-18 and 2018-19 is as under:-
(````` in crore)
Y ear Budget Estimates Revised Estimates
2017-18 30.00 30.00
2018-19 31.00 --
17.3 In reply to the query of the Committee about the proposed activities of BIRAC for the year
2018-19, the Department has informed that BIRAC will continue its programs under the (i) Investment
Schemes (ii) Fostering Innovation by Promoting Entrepreneurship Development (iii) Mentorship and
Capacity Building (iv) Supporting Ecosystem. In addition to the aforementioned activities which BIRAC
will continue, following are the new activities which will further strengthen and empower the emerging
Biotech enterprises:
• Product Commercialisation Unit and Regulatory Cell-BIRAC will facilitate its supported startups
and entrepreneurs to take their innovations from "bench to bedside". BIRAC will set up a
Product commercialisation fund for the startups and entrepreneurs.
• Entrepreneurial Support to more than 150 start-ups/entrepreneurs during 2018-19 through
funding and incubation.

30
• Infrastructural development-BIRAC will support and establish 10 new incubators during
2018-19 and plans to establish 2 new regional centers.
• More recently the Government has launched National Biopharma Mission which would be a
collective effort to accelerate biopharma market in India through industry academia collaboration.
This is being led by Department of Biotechnology and implemented by BIRAC.
• Anti-Microbial resistance-BIRAC along with Nesta had launched Discovery awards to tackle
the menace of AMR and to prepare Indian teams for the Longitude Prize. BIRAC will launch
more such calls in the field of AMR.
• Alliance with state Governments-BIRAC is planning to collaborate with State Government to
take up state specific challenges and find their solutions.
17.4 The Committee applauds the work being done by BIRAC in the advancement of biotechnology
sector in the country by way of fostering innovation and entrepreneurship, promotion of affordable
innovation, empowering start-ups and small and medium enterprises, helping in commercialisation
of biotechnological advancements.
17.5 The Committee hopes that the proposed activities of BIRAC for the year 2018-19 such as
setting up of a Product Commercialization Fund for the startups and entrepreneurs, establishment
of 10 new incubators and 2 new regional centers, etc. would be completed within the time
scheduled fixed for the purpose and the budgetary support of `````31.00 crore in BE 2018-19 would
prove to be adequate to cater to the financial needs of the Council and if not the Department
should seek more funds for the purpose at RE stage.
17.6 The Committee while taking note that 84 patent applications have been filed in the last
three years by BIRAC and 8 patents have been granted expresses its concerns over the not so
encouraging figure of patents gained during the said period. The Committee is of the considered
view that gaining patent on a technology is the acknowledgement of the novelty of the developed
technology which can further be scaled up by way of commercialising it. Thus, the Committee
strongly feels that BIRAC needs to be more proactive in its approach and revisit its strategy so
as to gain a higher number of patents in future.
18. PROMOTION OF BIOTECHNOLOGY IN NORTH EASTERN REGION (NER) OF INDIA
18.1 The Committee learns that since 2009-2010, DBT has been making concerted effort towards
development of North Eastern Region (NER) of India. With a mandate to spend 10% of its annual budget
towards development in North Eastern Region (NER) of India, DBT has adopted the approach of
proactively engaging with the scientific community of NER and facilitate their interaction with leading
institutions in the rest of the country. This approach has helped to evolve and implement the north eastern
region-specific biotech programmes (NERBP) that are aimed at harnessing the region's rich bio-resources
for the overall development of the region. Furthermore, DBT works in close co-operation with various
other Government Ministries/Departments/Agencies at the Central and State level along with universities

31
and R&D institutions towards the common goal of developing and implementing quality R&D and
extension biotech programmes, including human resource development (HRD), research capacity building,
training and entrepreneurship in NER.
18.2 The key focus areas for support are R&D activities in Agri-Biotechnology, Medical Biotechnology,
Aquaculture and Animal Biotechnology, Basic and Modern Biotechnology, Environment Biotechnology;
Infrastructure and HRD; Education and Training.
18.3 During last two years new initiatives have been started on Scented Rice, Banana, Integrating Herbal
Medicine for Metabolic Syndrome, MDR-TB, and Duck Improvement in NER, for Training Workshops
in Capacity Building. Fresh calls were given for long-term programmes which included Units of Excellence
and Visiting Research Professorship (VRP). Implementation of all other ongoing programmes was continued
and it included Twinning R&D in all six streams of biotechnology, Chemical Ecology, Biotech Hubs,
BLiSS, Overseas Associateship, etc.
18.4 18 projects on Scented Rice Programme were initiated and funding support provided. Out of 91
proposals received on Banana, 25 were recommended for funding. MDR-TB: 49 proposals were received
and 24 were shortlisted for further evaluation. U-Excel: 12 new Units of Excellence were recommended.
Subsequent release of funds was continued for the other ongoing programmes (Twinning, Biotech Hubs,
BLiSS, etc.)
18.5 Technology Incubation Centre for Entrepreneurship development on Mushroom culture and Farming
has been established at Bodoland University. It is imparting training to farmer entrepreneurs in the
Bodoland region of Assam
18.6 Overall achievements in the ongoing programmes are as below:
A. R&D Initiatives
• TWINNING R&D programme: More than 480 such networks projects have been implemented
so far for the benefit of this region.
• Under Units of Excellence programme, 32 mid-career scientists (below 45 years) with promising
track-record in NER have been supported with U-Excel for pursuing innovative research in
their respective fields of specialisation.
• A Unique Network Programme on Chemical Ecology of NER involving institutions from NER
and leading institutions (IISc, NCBS, UAS) from Bangalore has been initiated.
• Specific R&D programmes in a consortium mode on "NER-Scented Rice" Joha & Black Rice
has been implemented in NER.
• Network programme on yield enhancement and evaluation of medicinal value of NER Banana
has been initiated in NER.
• Network programme on "Orchid Bioresources of NER, Conservation, database development
and informatics network" has been implemented.

32
• A multi-centric network programme has been implemented for promoting Eco-friendly agriculture
practices in 14 districts across all 8 NE states, with emphasis upon the application of bio-
inputs (biopesticides, biofertilizers) for organic farming of key high value crops (HVCs) of
NER, mass multiplication of required bio-inputs and evaluation of their efficacy. Under this
programme training to nearly 1400 farmers in the use of bio inputs in organic farming of 9
target crops (5 spices, 2 fruits and 2 vegetable crops) was provided.
B. Human Resource Development
• Overseas Associateship: 170 Scientists from NER have been awarded through yet another
program of similar nature, 11 Scientists were provided National Associateship for advanced
training at leading institutions in India.
• M.Sc/M.Tech in Biotechnology has also been supported in five Universities (Assam Agricultural
University, Tezpur University, IIT Guwahati, NEHU, College of veterinary Sciences for Animal
Biotech) in NER. PDF program has also been implemented for the NER researchers.
• Establishment of DBT Biotechnology/Bioinformatics training centre for NER Researchers at
ACTREC, Mumbai. More than 50 researchers from NER have been trained at ACTREC.
• Specialised Training programme for "Enhancing Capacity building in genomics - driven research
in human health and disease in NER by NIBMG, Kalyani has been initiated. 50 Researchers
have been trained in NER.
• 40 researchers from NER have been trained at National Institute of High Security Animal
Diseases, Bhopal under Pathogen Discovery Initiatives.
• Establishment of Centre for Empowerment of Human Resources in NER at NEHU, Shillong.
• Special Biotech Industrial Training Program (BITP) for NER students is being organised every
year. 80 PG students have been trained under this programme at various industries.
• 15 colleges have been recognised so far as Star Colleges in NER.
• Establishment of Biotech Laboratories (BLiSS) at 88 Senior Secondary Schools in NER.
• 18 institutions of NER are part of a DBT e-Library Consortium (NER-DeLCON) which
provides access to more than 900 high impact e-journals.
• 30 bioinformatics Centres in the 8 states of the NER networked as NEBINet.
• Establishment of Centre for Empowerment of Human Resources in NER at NEHU, Shillong.
C. Infrastructure Development Programme in NER
• A regional level Animal House Facility is being established at RMRC, Dibrugarh, to support the
entire NER demand of using small animals for research.

33
• A DBT-NER Centre for "Advance Animal Disease Diagnostic and Management Consortium
(ADMaC)" is being established in NER involving all eight states and few specialised laboratories
from other parts of the country.
• To create an environment of training and research in Healthcare, the Department provided
support to 21 Principle Investigators of 11 medical colleges/institutions in NER States.
• A modern X-Ray Crystallography Facility has been established at IIT Guwahati as a regional
facility and being used by the NER researchers.
18.7 The Committee takes note of the R&D activities undertaken by the Department. The
Committee appreciates the implementation of a multi-centric network programme in 14 districts
of NER. The Committee, however, feels that the programme being of immense value needs to
be further extended and implemented in other districts of North Eastern Region as well so that
the fruits of this programme can also be shared with these left out districts.
18.8 The Committee further observes that a regional level Animal House facility at RMRC,
Dibrugarh to support the entire NER demand of using small animals for research and DBT-NER
Centre for "Advance Animal Disease Diagnostic and Management Consortium (ADMaC) are
being established by the Department under its Infrastructure Development Programme. The
Committee is of the view that establishment of these infrastructures will play a pivot role in
bridging the infrastructure gap in NER. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department
to complete the task of establishment of these two infrastructures in a time bound manner and
the budgetary support must be made available to avoid any dilly dallying.
18.9 Detail of budget utilisation under NER program during the last five years and budget estimates for
the BE 2018-19 are as follows:
(````` in crore)
Year Budget Utilisation
2013-14 148.50 136.00 (91.58%)
2014-15 150.00 140.00 (93.33%)
2015-16 160.00 150.00 (93.75%)
2016-17 180.00 172.00 (95.55%)
2017-18 145.00 110.00* (75.86%)
2018-19 159.93 --
*Upto 29th January, 2018

34
18.10 The Committee is displeased to note that during the year 2017-18, the Department
could not fully utilise the budgetary allocation earmarked for the North Eastern Region and only
75.86% of the total budgetary support could have been utilised. The Committee takes serious
note of the fact that against the total budgetary allocation of `````145.00 crore, the Department
managed to spend only `````110.00 crore. The Committee strongly believes that the NER has immense
potential to be converted into wealth for not only this Region but in the overall well being of our
nation. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the Department should make earnest
efforts to gauge the untapped potential of this Region with the help of its biotechnological
interventions and make optimal utilisation of the budgetary support earmarked for the purpose.

35
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
FINANCIAL  PERFORMANCE  OF  THE  DEPARTMENT  DURING  THE  LAST  FIVE  YEARS:
The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the funds utilisation capacity of the Department
during the last five years. Fund utilisation capacity of the Department is reflective of its financial
prudence and due diligence while making optimal utilisation of the budgetary allocation.
(Para 2.2)
BUDGET  ALLOCATION  FOR  THE  FINANCIAL  YEAR  2018-19
The Committee takes note of the Action Plan contemplated by the Department for the year
2018-19 and hopes that the Department would utilise the increased budgetary allocation of
`````2411.53 crore in BE 2018-19 optimally and ensure that the targets/objectives set for the year
2018-19 are fully achieved within the stipulated time frame. (Para 3.3)
The Committee is also of the opinion that timely completion/realisation of the targets/
objectives will certainly help the Department to improve its performance both physically as well
as financially and also help in reducing the overhead costs resulting from the delayed progress.
Thus, the Committee recommends the Department to strictly adhere to the time frame for the
targets/objectives set and keep a continuous vigil with the help of a robust internal monitoring
mechanism in order to ensure that the fixed timelines are met and the budgetary support
provided for the purpose is utilised judiciously and optimally. (Para 3.4)
The Committee while sharing the ambitious and inspiring targets/objectives envisaged by
the Department is of the considered view that the adequate financial support needs to be made
available by the Government for the realisation of these targets/objectives set by the Department.
The Committee, therefore, is of the firm view that the request made by the Department of
Biotechnology for the additional amount of `````1000.00 crore during the year 2018-19 is fully
justified. The Committee, therefore, desires the Department to share its view with the concerned
Ministry/Department of Government of India and impress upon them and seek the requisite
budgetary allocations at the RE stage for the successful implementation of its Mission Programmes.
(Para 3.7)
The Committee also applauds the Department for establishment of a Biotech-KISAN Farmer
Centric Mission at Himalayan Environmental Studies and Conservation Organization (HESCO),
Dehradun to cover the agro-climatic zone of Western Himalayan Region. The Committee further
takes note that the proposals for establishment of five more Biotech-KISAN Hubs in five agro-
climatic zones viz. Central Plain Zone, Lower Gangetic Plains Region, Southern Plateau and
Hills, Eastern Himalayan Region and East Coast Plains and Hills have also been developed by the
Department. (Para 3.8)
The Committee while taking note of the above mentioned proposals for establishing five
more Biotech-KISAN Hubs hopes that the Department would work in tandem with the respective
State Governments and the other stakeholders of these regions to establish these five Hubs and
completes the task in a time bound manner. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
35

36
Department to constitute a high level committee consisting members from the Department and
the respective State Governments to ensure that the deadlines fixed for the completion of these
hubs are strictly adhered to and zero tolerance policy be opted in the matter in order to maximise
the benefits of this programme for these regions. (Para 3.9)
BIOTECHNOLOGY RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes that in BE 2017-18, budgetary allocation of ````` 1250.58 crore was made
under this head which was insignificantly increased to ````` 1252.42 crore in RE 2017-18 of which
also the Department could only manage to spend `````850.11 crore i.e. 67.87% utilisation of the
funds allocated till the end of January, 2018 leaving `````402.31 crore to be spent only in 59 days.
(Para 4.4)
The Committee, thus, expresses its displeasure over the underutilisation of funds made
available to the Department under this head during the year 2017-18. The Committee feels that
the financial performance of the Department under the head Biotechnology Research and
Development is not very encouraging to note. The Committee firmly believes that the R&D
activities are in the core of all other activities and of the greatest importance for any technological
advancement to take place. Thus, under-utilisation of the budgetary allocation made for the
purpose is perturbing. The Committee is of the view that the Department should have aligned
its budgetary allocation with the activities undertaken during this period and it should have been
ensured that a constant vigil was taken while prioritising activities and funds utilisation thereon.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department should accord due focus and
recognition to its R&D activities while making earnest efforts to utilise the budgetary allocations
so made fully and optimally. (Para 4.5)
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes the work done and progress achieved by the Department during the
period 2016-17 and 2017-18 (upto 6th February, 2018). The Committee is also happy to note the
number of technologies, i.e. 65, developed during this period by the Department. The Committee,
however, is little dismayed to note the numbers of technologies which could actually be put to
commercialisation. The Committee is at a loss to figure out the reasons due to which rest of the
developed technologies of the Department could not reach to the stage of commercialisation if
they are well aligned with the technological requirements of the concerned industry and as per
its requirement. The Committee is also of the view that limited availability of well structured
framework to facilitate and undertake technology transfer and commercialisation and poor linkage
between the Department and the industry adding to the poor performance of the Department to
put its developed technologies to commercialisation on a much greater scale. The Committee,
therefore, recommends the Department to take necessary action in the matter and take on
board the concerned stakeholders as well while identifying its industry oriented research work
so that the developed technologies are best suited and able to cater to the technological
requirements of the concerned industry. The Department should also come out with a forward

37
linkage forum where the interface between the Department and the industry is further strengthened
which in turn would help the Department as well to keep pace with the latter's technological
requirements. (Para 5.3)
CROP BIOTECHNOLOGY
The Committee appreciates the efforts being undertaken and progress achieved by the
Department in the field of Crop Biotechnology during the year 2016-17 and 2017-18. The Committee
is hopeful that with its earnest efforts in this direction the Department would be able to fetch
the desired results. The Committee, however, feels that the institutional linkage between the
Department and the agricultural universities along with ICAR further needs to be strengthened.
The Committee is also of the view that the Department should collaborate with the International
institutes of repute working in these fields. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
Department to forge partnerships with such institutes to further intensify its research activities
in the field of agricultural biotechnology. (Para 6.4)
The Committee also notes that the Department has been supporting a research and
development proposal for development of rust resistant variety in Brassica juncea and a proposal
has also been supported for dissecting the molecular interface between the biotrophic pathogen
Sporisorium scitamineum and its host sugarcane. The Committee, however, feels that drought
resistance varieties of sugarcane, if made available, will ease out the problems, to a considerable
extent, being faced by the sugarcane growers in the country due to lack of irrigation facilities
and dependence on the vagaries of monsoon. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
Department to also start its research and development activities in the direction of developing
drought resistance varieties of sugarcane in the country. (Para 6.5)
The Committee expresses its displeasure over flie poor financial performance of the
Department in terms of utilisation of the budgetary support made available in respect of above
mentioned 19 yield improvement projects. It is disheartening and discouraging as well to note
that the Department though allocated `````37.33 crore for the purpose, could only spend `````22.22
crore which is just 59.52 per cent utilisation of the total financial support. The Committee is of
the considered view that the Department fails to attach the due importance to these projects and
could not take timely action to ensure that budgetary allocation is utilised fully and optimally.
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to furnish the detailed reasons for this
poor utilisation of budgetary allocation. (Para 6.7)
ANIMAL PRODUCTION
The Committee is appreciative of the progress made by the Department in the field of
Animal Production. The Committee, however, feels that the Department has a long way to go
in this direction considering the fact that Indian livestock production system still operates
significantly on the traditional knowledge. It is noteworthy that a large section of our livestock
has very dismal average productivity. The Committee is also of the considered view that to
deliver the technological advancements to the targeted group, the Department needs to further

38
strengthen its linkage with the stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
Department to start a systemic designed outreach campaign to popularise biotechnology among
livestock farmers. (Para 7.3)
The Committee also recommends the Department to come out with a strategy paper in the
matter and prepare a roadmap to enhance the production and productivity of livestock in the
country. (Para 7.4)
ANIMAL HEALTH (VACCINE & DIAGNOSTIC)
The Committee expresses its deep concerns over the loss to exchequer on count of Brucella
infection. The Committee, therefore, is of the considered opinion that given the quantum of
economic losses to public exchequer due to infection in animals and humans, the problem throws
a huge challenge to the Department of Biotechnology expecting biotechnological solution to this
problem. The Committee is happy to note that the Department is seized of the issue and in its
endeavour to address the issue making efforts in the form of implementation of 'Brucellosis Free
Villages Mission' on pilot scale in 50 villages of 10 States in phased manner . The Committee,
however, feels that the Department needs to further intensify this Mission Programme and reach
out to all the States where the cases of Brucella infections have been registered. (Para 8.5)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should make a database for
the purpose and roll out the implementation of 'Brucellosis Free Villages Mission' in rest of the
States as well in a time bound manner so as to not only provide the biotechnological solution to
the problem but also preventing the huge economic losses. (Para 8.6)
AQUACULTURE & MARINE BIOTECHNOLOGY
The Committee takes note of the work done/being done by the Department in the field of
Aquaculture and Marine Biotechnology. However, it observes that health, feed and nutrition are
the major challenges to be addressed in marine and aquaculture sector. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Department to prepare a roadmap for developing requisite and efficient diagnostics
and take prophylactic measures to address these issues. (Para 9.5)
The Committee also recommends that the Department should strive hard to complete the
task of setting up Centres of excellence in theme based areas of Aquaculture and Marine
Biotechnology to boost up the research and development activities in a time bound manner and
ensure that the time frame fixed for the purpose is strictly adhered to. (Para 9.6)
MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS
The Committee is of the considered view that medicinal and aromatic plants sector has the
immense potential and untapped opportunities. This sector in Committee's view can play a
significant role in helping diversified livelihood of poor and vulnerable section of our society. The
Committee, thus, appreciates the move of the Department and hopes that the financial support
of `````50.00 crore as earmarked for the Phyto-Pharma Plant Mission by the Department would be

39
adequate to cater to the financial requirements of the Mission and the objectives/targets would
be achieved both in terms of physical and financial targets as envisaged by the Department.
(Para 10.3)
INFECTIOUS DISEASES
The Committee appreciates the progress made by the Department in the direction of vaccine
development of diseases like malaria, dengue, Japanese encephalitis, etc. The Committee, however,
did not find any mention of the efforts being undertaken by the Department in the direction of
Chikungunya and as to what research and development activities have been undertaken by the
Department during last few years. The Committee is of the considered view that our country has
been facing severe health issues with regard to Chikungunya infection and the disturbing figures
of the deaths registered during last few years on account of this disease in our country. The
Committee feels that there is a need to control mosquito population which can to an extent be
an attributed factor in spreading Chikungunya infection. The Committee also feels that the
Department of Biotechnology can play an important role by finding biotechnological solutions to
keep mosquito population under control. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department
to intensify its R&D and product development activities for development of safe, efficacious and
inexpensive Chikungunya vaccine. (Para 11.4)
MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH
The Committee takes note of the efforts being made by the Department in the direction
of maternal and child health. The Committee, however, is concerned to note that anemia,
stunting, malnutrition and micronutrient malnutrition cases are widespread in the country and
the efforts being undertaken by the Department in the form of development of Iron fortified rice
i.e. IFR-1 (fortified with iron) and IFR-2 (fortified with iron, folic acid) is nothing less than a
drop in the ocean. The Committee is of the firm view that the Department has to come up with
out of box and innovative biotechnological solutions to these problems. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Department to chalk out a roadmap in this direction and make earnest efforts
in providing scientific solution to these health problems related to child health. (Para 12.4)
STEM CELL RESEARCH
The Committee takes note of the information furnished by the Department on the research
work going to understand the possible benefits of stem cells and observes that as of today, none
other than bone marrow transplantation or hematopoietic stem cells are accepted as standard
line of treatment that can cure disorders in human beings. However, the Committee feels that
the basic research work in this direction needs further push to explore the untapped potential
of stem cells in curing various disorders in human being in collaboration with the Institutes with
state-of-the-art facilities to facilitate such research works and recommends that adequate funds
be earmarked for the purpose so that financial constrains would not hinder the research work
in the country. The Committee is of the opinion that the advancements in biomedical research
in the field of stem cell would help in offering scientific solutions for treating a variety of disease

40
such as diabetes, cancer, cardiology, neurology, etc. The Committee, nonetheless, would also like
to caution the Department about the unscientific or unethical stem cell therapy that continues
to pose a threat. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to run an awareness
programme in the country under its CSR activities and reach out to the concerned stakeholders
apprising them about the rightful status of the stem cells and their applications on the basis of
scientific evidences. The Committee is of the considered opinion that this awareness programme
of the Department would help understanding the whole gamut of stem cell research in the
country. (Para 13.4)
PUBLIC HEALTH, FOOD & NUTRITION
The Committee takes note of the multi-centric Pan India study on the prevalence and
predictors of vitamin B12 deficiency initiated by the Department and the progress achieved
thereon. The Committee, however, is little perturbed to note that the Department failed to
furnish the complete details like the total number of States identified for the study, time
schedule fixed for the completion of the task, physical targets envisaged, etc. in its Background
Note. The Committee is of the firm opinion that the Department should have been more cautious
and vigilant while submitting the information for the consideration of the Committee. The
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to furnish a detailed note in the matter for
the consideration of the Committee. (Para 14.2)
BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes the work being done by the Department for the societal development
with the help of its biotechnological interventions. The Committee, however, feels that the
submission of the Department lacks the factual data in terms of total numbers of self-employment
generation through diffusion of proven and field-tested technologies demonstration, training and
extension activities, total number of beneficiaries, number of projects supported under women
and child health care, etc. to support its claim. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
Department to furnish a complete data inter alia including number of beneficiaries under its
various activities undertaken during the last three years by the Department under the
Biotechnology for Societal Programme. (Para 15.4)
(B) INDUSTRIAL AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEVELOPMENT
(i) Biotechnology Parks and Bio-Clusters
(ii) Public Private Partnerships
The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the fund utilisation capacity of the Department
under this head. The Committee further notes the action taken by the Department during the
year 2017-18. The Committee considering the fund utilisation of the Department under this head
is hopeful that the Department would continue its earnest efforts and make optimal utilisation
of the funds made available for the year 2018-19 and also make sincere efforts to achieve the
physical as well as financial targets envisaged. (Para 15.11)

41
The Committee shares the ambitious and inspiring action plan prepared by the Department
for the year 2018-19. The Committee, however, is not very pleased with the numbers achieved
on count of startups, entrepreneurs and small and medium enterprises i.e. 220, 225 and 150
respectively supported by the Department during the year 2017-18. The Department, on the one
hand, aims to nurture approximately 300-500 new startups each year but, on the other hand, the
Department in the year 2017-18 could only manage to support a total of 220 startups which is
way too less than what the Department intends. The Committee is of the view that the Department
while providing financial support to the startups should also ensure the sustainability of the
supported startups. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to furnish a detailed
note including inter-alia details on the status of the startups supported by the Department during
the last 3 years, how many of them are in operation, etc. (Para 15.13)
Similarly, the Department has been taking action for establishment of 150 Technology
Transfer Offices across the country as a part of its strategy to achieve US$ 100 billion by 2025
under National Biotechnology Development Strategy and targets to establish 15 such offices
during the year 2018-19. The Committee feels that if the Department achieves this target of
establishing 15 Technology Transfer Offices during the year 2018-19 and continues to maintain
this pace year after year, it will be able to reach the figure of 150 only in 2027 and not by 2025.
(Para 15.14)
The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that the Department should sets its
targets pragmatically on the basis of its performance during last few years. (Para 15.15)
ASSISTANCE  TO  AUTONOMOUS  INSTITUTIONS
The Committee notes the increase in budgetary allocation under the head 'Assistance to
Autonomous Institutions' in BE 2018-19. The Committee hopes that the enhanced budgetary
allocation of `````748.98 crore will further help these Autonomous Institutions to manage their
financial requirements in a better way and also help them carrying out their mandate more
effectively and efficiently. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to ensure
that the budgetary allocation made in respect of these Autonomous Institutions is optimally
utilised and the financial as well as physical objectives/targets set for the year 2018-19 are
realised. (Para 16.5)
The Committee notes that some of the Autonomous Institutions of the Department failed
to utilise the budgetary supports fully made in their favour during the financial years 2016-17
and 2017-18. The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the underutilisation of the budgetary
support by these institutions. The utilisation in terms of per cent has continuously gone down
from 99.44% to 88.75% and from 88.75% to 76.79% during the year 2015-16, 2016-17 and
2017-18 (till 31st January, 2018) respectively. The unsatisfactory financial performance of the
Autonomous Institution during the year 2016-17 and 2017-18 (till 31st January, 2018) is a
reflection of poor monitoring by the Department over these institutions. The Committee is of

42
the view that had the Department monitored the financial performance of these institutions on
account of the budgetary support made in their favour, the sub-optimal utilisation of funds could
have been avoided. The Committee is of the opinion that the Department needs to be proactive
in its approach and should not have the laid back attitude about the financial position of these
institutes. 16.8 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should put in place
a robust internal monitoring mechanism in order to monitor the financial performance of these
autonomous institutions on a regularly basis and take remedial and corrective preventive measures
if underutilisation is registered. (Para 16.7)
BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY RESEARCH ASSISTANCE COUNCIL (BIRAC)
The Committee applauds the work being done by BIRAC in the advancement of biotechnology
sector in the country by way of fostering innovation and entrepreneurship, promotion of affordable
innovation, empowering start-ups and small and medium enterprises, helping in commercialisation
of biotechnological advancements. (Para 17.4)
The Committee hopes that the proposed activities of BIRAC for the year 2018-19 such as
setting up of a Product Commercialisation Fund for the startups and entrepreneurs, establishment
of 10 new incubators and 2 new regional centers, etc. would be completed within the time
scheduled fixed for the purpose and the budgetary support of `````31.00 crore in BE 2018-19 would
prove to be adequate to cater to the financial needs of the Council and if not the Department
should seek more funds for the purpose at RE stage. (Para 17.5)
The Committee while taking note that 84 patent applications have been filed in the last
three years by BIRAC and 8 patents have been granted expresses its concerns over the not so
encouraging figure of patents gained during the said period. The Committee is of the considered
view that gaining patent on a technology is the acknowledgement of the novelty of the developed
technology which can further be scaled up by way of commercialising it. Thus, the Committee
strongly feels that BIRAC needs to be more proactive in its approach and revisit its strategy so
as to gain a higher number of patents in future. (Para 17.6)
PROMOTION OF BIOTECHNOLOGY IN NORTH EASTERN REGION (NER) OF INDIA
The Committee takes note of the R&D activities undertaken by the Department. The
Committee appreciates the implementation of a multi-centric network programme in 14 districts
of NER. The Committee, however, feels that the programme being of immense value needs to
be further extended and implemented in other districts of North Eastern Region as well so that
the fruits of this programme can also be shared with these left out districts. (Para 18.7)
The Committee further observes that a regional level Animal House facility at RMRC,
Dibrugarh to support the entire NER demand of using small animals for research and DBT-NER
Centre for "Advance Animal Disease Diagnostic and Management Consortium (ADMaC) are
being established by the Department under its Infrastructure Development Programme. The
Committee is of the view that establishment of these infrastructures will play a pivot role in

43
bridging the infrastructure gap in NER. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department
to complete the task of establishment of these two infrastructures in a time bound manner and
the budgetary support must be made available to avoid any dilly dallying. 18.10 The Committee
is displeased to note that during the year 2017-18, the Department could not fully utilise the
budgetary allocation earmarked for the North Eastern Region and only 75.86% of the total
budgetary support could have been utilised. The Committee takes serious note of the fact that
against the total budgetary allocation of `````145.00 crore, the Department managed to spend only
````` 110.00 crore. The Committee strongly believes that the NER has immense potential to be
converted into wealth for not only this Region but in the overall well being of our nation. The
Committee, therefore, is of the view that the Department should make earnest efforts to gauge
the untapped potential of this Region with the help of its biotechnological interventions and
make optimal utilisation of the budgetary support earmarked for the purpose. (Para 18.8)

MINUTES

VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 13th February, 2018 in Committee Room 'A',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
3. Shri Sharad Pawar
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. K. Gopal
6. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
7. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
Representatives of Department of Biotechnology
1. Prof. Ashutosh Sharma, Secretary
2. Dr. (Ms.) Renu Swarup, Scientist 'H'
3. Dr. S.R. Rao, Scientist 'H'
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Goyal, Joint Secretary
5. Shri J.B. Mohapatra, JS&FA
6. Shri Sumedh Nagrare, Statistical Adviser
7. Dr. T. Madhan Mohan, Scientist 'G'
8. Dr. A.S. Ninawe, Scientist 'G'
9. Dr. Suchita Ninawe, Scientist 'G'
47

48
10. Dr. Arvind Duggal, Scientist 'G'
11. Dr. Mohd. Aslam, Scientist 'G'
12. Dr. (Mrs.) Shailja V . Gupta, Scientist 'G'
13. Dr. (Mrs.) Alka Sharma, Scientist 'G'
14. Dr. (Mrs.) Meenakshi Munshi, Scientist 'G'
15. Shri Sundeep Sarin, Scientist 'G'
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, the Secretary and his team
of officers, Department of Biotechnology to the meeting. The Chairman sought to know the views of
the Secretary about the budgetary allocation for the year 2018-19, projected outlay, budgetary reduction,
if any, and its impact on the ongoing/new projected programmes/projects/activities of the Department,
targets envisaged for the next financial year, targets achieved during 2017-18, challenges faced by the
Department and the corrective measures taken thereon, internal monitoring mechanism, etc.
3. Secretary, Department of Biotechnology made a power point presentation giving the snap shot of
the major achievements of the Department; major schemes and activities undertaken in the area of human
resource development, basic and translational research and development, international-cooperation, support
to the North Eastern States etc. He informed that the first Biotech-KISAN Hub was established at
Dehradun covering agro-climatic zone of Western Himalayan Region and five more Biotech-KISAN Hubs
covering five agro-climatic zones viz. Central Plain Zone, Lower Gangetic Plains Region, Southern
Plateau and Hills, Eastern Himalayan Region and East Coast Plains and Hills are in pipeline. The Committee
was also apprised about the various varieties of Maize, Rice and Wheat developed in DBT sponsored
projects. The Committee was also informed about the Brucellosis Free Villages Mission and three new
Brucella diagnostic kits launched by the Department. The Secretary informed the Committee that the
Department has announced a Phyto-Pharma Plant Mission for conservation and cultivation of endangered
and threatened endemic medicinal plants available in North East India and discovery of new botanical
drugs for unmet medical needs using the rich traditional ethno-botanical knowledge and biodiversity of
these States with a cost of `50 crore. On the issue of Microbial Repositories, it was informed that the
Department has set up country's largest Microbial Culture Collection Centre at NCCS, Pune and another
Microbial Repository has also been set up at IBSD, Imphal, Manipur for collection of microbial resources
from North Eastern Region of the country. The Secretary also briefed the Committee about the Mission
Programmes of the Department and various activities undertaken by the Department in the direction of
Animal production & Health, Aquaculture & Marine Biotechnology, Infectious diseases, Maternal & child
health and Stem Cell research. While sharing the financial summary of the Department, the Secretary
informed that the Department had utilised 98.86 per cent of the budgetary allocation made for the year
2016-17 and, as on 31st January, 2018, the Department has managed to utilise 75.48 per cent of the
funds made available for the year 2017-18. The Secretary also assured the Committee that the expenditure
of the Department would reach 98 per cent plus mark by the end of the current financial year.

49
4. The Chairman and the Members of the Committee then raised certain issues such as contribution
of the Department in the area of vaccine development; status of research programme in dengue, malaria,
chikungunya, etc.; development of rust resistant variety of other crops including sugarcane; institutional
linkage between the Department, Agricultural Universities & ICAR; collaboration with the State
Governments, status of tech transfer office and bio-connect offices; commercialisation of technologies
developed by the Department, possible benefits of stem cell in brain surgery, spectrum disorders, autism,
dyslexia, repair of knees, hips, etc.; activities in the field of management of sickle cell anemia, issues
related to malnutrition; National Bio Pharma Mission Programme etc.
5. The Secretary and other representatives of Department of Biotechnology, while presenting their
views, also responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee.
The Chairman also directed the Secretary to furnish the written replies to some other queries/points/
issues raised by the Chairman and the Members of the Committee, which could not be replied during
the meeting, to the Secretariat within ten days.
6. The witnesses then withdrew and the Committee adjourned for tea break at 12.41 
P.M.
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
15. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 2.04 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

50
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 6th March, 2018 in Room No. '63', First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
7. Shri Daddan Mishra
8. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
9. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
10. Shri Nagendra Singh
11. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He informed
the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 309th, 310th, 311th,
312th, 313th, 314th and 315th reports on Demands for Grants 2018-19 of the Departments of
Biotechnology, Science & Fechnology, Scientific & Industrial Research, Space, Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change, Department of Atomic Energy and Ministry of Earth Sciences, respectively.
50

51
3. The Committee, after considering the recommendations made in the draft reports, adopted the draft
309th, 310th, 311th, 312th, 313th, 314th and 315th reports after some alterations/modifications suggested
by the Chairman of the Committee in the 314th Report of Department of Atomic Energy. The Committee
also decided to present/lay the reports to both the Houses of Parliament on 13th March, 2018.
4. The Committee also decided to nominate the Chairman and in his absence Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
and in her absence Shri Prasanna Acharya to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Dr. K. Gopal and
in his absence Shri Vikram Usendi to lay the reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th March, 2018.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3.40 
P.M.
***Related  to other matters.