PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 237
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2012/AGRAHAYANA, 1934 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWO HUNDRED TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT OF THE 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FOREST ON THE 
DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2012-13) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE 
AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 20  DECEMBER, 2012)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 20  DECEMBER, 2012)
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2012)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations Contained in the Two Hundred 
Twenty Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment 
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
 
REPORT NO. 
237
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations Contained in the Two Hundred
Twenty Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  20 th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on  20 th December, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—12
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 13—16

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2012-13)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil H. Lad
3. Shrimati Maya Singh
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri Alok Tiwari
6. Shri T. M. Selvaganapathi
7. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
8. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri K. C. Singh “Baba”
12. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
@13. Vacant
#14. V acant
15. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
16. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase
17. Dr. Ajay Kumar
18. Shri O. S. Manian
19. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
20. Shri Basori Singh Masram
21. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
22. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
23. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
25. Shri Yashvir Singh
#26. Vacant
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
30. Shri Ramakant Yadav
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
@ Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 14th December, 2012 on his resignation
from the Membership of the Committee.
# Shri Ninong Ering and Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon their
induction in the Union Council of Ministers w.e.f. 28
th October, 2012.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D. B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V . S. P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra,  Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Thirty Seventh Report on the Action Taken by the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty Seventh Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Seventh
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18
th May, 2012.
3. There were fifteen recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Seventh Report
of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received
from the Department on 29
th August, 2012.
4. In the meeting held on 17 th December, 2012, the Committee considered the Draft Action
Taken Report and adopted the same.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
17th December , 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests

(iv)
ACRONYMS
CCEA – Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
CEL – Central Electronics Limited
CTPL – CSIR T ech Private Limited
DIPP – Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion
GDP – Gross Domestic Product
JRF – Junior Research Fellowships
MSME – Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
NCAD – National Civil Aircraft Development Programme
NET – National Eligibility Test
NMITLI – New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative
PPP – Public Private Partnership
RFD – Results Framework Document
SCI – Science Citation Index
SPMF – Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Fellowships
TePP – Technopreneur Promotion Programme
TPDU – T echnology Promotion Development and Utilisation Programme

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Twenty
Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research, presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 18
th May, 2012.
There were fifteen recommendations in the Two Hundred and Twenty Seventh Report of the
Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the
Department on 29
th August, 2012.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee
on the Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research are set out in the
subsequent paragraphs:–
Recommendation (Para 3.3)
Mechanism to Monitor and Review the Ongoing Schemes
The Committee is happy to note that the Department has put in operation a monitoring
mechanism which has helped it to make almost full utilization of allocated funds. The
Committee appreciates the fact that the Department achieved very high composite value scores
of 95.84% and 95.97% consecutively in two years with Excellent grade which reflects the
degree to which the DSIR has been able to accomplish success in its programmes and
schemes. The Committee, however, hopes that the Department continues and maintains this
performance in future as well.
Action taken by Government
The Department notes the remarks of the Committee with satisfaction.
Department’s score in Results Framework Document (RFD) for the year 2011-12 has been
93.90%.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply given by the Department and hopes that in the years
to come the Department would not only maintain its good performance on Result
Framework Document (RFD) but would further improve it.
Recommendation (Para 4.2)
Performance in the Eleventh Five Year Plan
The Committee finds that the BE total allocation of Rs.13044.00 crore for the Department
for Eleventh Plan was enhanced to Rs.13,198.75 crore at R.E. stage implying an additional
availability of funds to the extent of Rs.154.75 crore and is happy to note that the Department was
able to utilize an amount of Rs.13,177.45 crore thus leaving only Rs.
 21.3 crore unutilized. The
Committee hopes that even in future the Department would continue making all out efforts to
gainfully utilize the allocation made to it.

2
Action Taken by Government
The Department appreciates the observations of the Committee and it would take all the
necessary steps towards gainful utilization of the funds allocated to it during the current year.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation (Para 4.4)
“The Committee is surprised to note that while the Plan outlay earmarked for the
Department for the Eleventh Five Year Plan was Rs.9000.00 crores, the actual allocation made was
curtailed to Rs.6959.00 crores – a cut of Rs.2041.00 crores, more than the outlay for anyone
financial year during the plan. The Committee observes that against the total outlay of Rs.9000.00
crores for entire plan allocation, the RE. allocation was to the tune of Rs.7150.00 indicating a
shortfall of Rs.8l50.00 crores. It is all the more surprising for the Committee because the
Department has been efficiently utilising the allocations made to it throughout the entire Plan period.
The Department was in fact able to utilise over 99 per cent of the allocated funds.”
Action Taken by Government
The Department notes the Committee’s comments.
Comments
The Department has not furnished any reason for reduction of its allocation at
Budgetary Estimate (B.E.) stage. The Committee, however, hopes that the Department would
make optimum utilisation of funds allocated to it.
Recommendation (Para 4.5)
The Committee expresses its anguish over such a huge cut resorted to by the Planning
Commission in plan outlays of the Department charged with the onerous responsibility of using
scientific innovation and interventions for catalyzing the industrial growth making possible
provisions of affordable health care for all and improving the living standards of people at the
bottom of economic pyramid. The Committee is of the opinion that such a step on the part of
Planning Commission is not justified. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such cut
measures should be avoided in future and it must be ensured that the entire outlay for the Twelfth
Five Year Plan is actually made available to the Department.
Action Taken by Government
The Department appreciates the concern of the Committee over cut imposed on plan outlay
of the Department.
Comments
The Committee desires that the Department should take up the issue of huge cut
in Plan outlays with the Planning Commission and impress upon the Commission to
realistically view the requirement of the Department in the Twelfth Five Year Plan and
bring the concern expressed by the Committee to the notice of the Planning
Commission.

3
ACHIEVEMENTS OF CSIR
Recommendation (Para 5.1.2)
While the Committee lauds CSIR for wining a number of prestigious awards at the national
level, the Committee desires that CSIR scientists should strive hard to make their presence felt even
at the international level by winning prestigious international awards as well. The Committee further
desires that with a good number of patents, CSIR should make efforts to help Indian Industry
develop more and more globally competitive products, for that alone will determine usefulness of
patents developed by CSIR scientists.
Action Taken by Government
The Department is thankful to the Committee for its appreciation for winning prestigious
awards. The Department is taking all the necessary steps to help Indian industry in developing
globally competitive products through transfer of technology and process know-how.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply but would like CSIR scientists to win prestigious
international awards and help Indian Industry to develop globally competitive products on
a regular basis. The Committee further observes that steps being taken in this regard
should have been spelt out in its Action Taken Note.
Recommendation (Para 5.10.2)
Technopreneur Promotion Programme
The Committee appreciates achievements of the Department both in high-end technology
and technologies for the societal benefits particularly in affordable healthcare during the Eleventh
Five Year Plan. The Committee, however, feels that a lot more needs to be done if the country
is to emerge as a technology driven economic superpower. The Committee, therefore, desires that
the Department should further intensify and galvanise its efforts during the Twelfth Plan to make
India a truly technology and innovation driven society.
Action Taken by Government
The Department is expanding the scope of the Technopreneur Promotion Programme
(TePP) in the twelfth five year plan to support innovations in the Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises (MSME) sector and start-up companies, besides individual innovators. Since MSME
sector accounts for 45% of the manufacturing output, 40% of exports, provides employment to
over 60 million people and constitutes more than 95% of the industrial units in the country, seeding
innovations in the MSME sector will help the country in becoming technology and innovation
driven society.
Comments
The Committee is happy to note the expansion of Technopreneur Promotion
Programme and hopes that Department would ensure that the programme achieves its goal
of making India a technology and innovation driven society.

4
Recommendation (Para 7.2)
Budgetary Allocation for the Twelfth Five Year Plan
The Committee finds it quite surprising that even when the Twelfth Five Year Plan has
started, Planning Commission is yet to finalise the Twelfth Plan allocations. The Committee feels
that such a delay could affect not only the Planning and distribution of resources of the Department
but also the physical and financial targets set by the Department. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Planning Commission should finalise the allocations for the Twelfth Five Year Plan
without any further delay so that the Department is clear on its long term and short term targets
to be achieved during the plan period.
Action Taken by Government
The Department appreciates the concern of the Committee.
Comments
The appropriate course of action for the Department was to bring the
recommendation of the Committee to the notice of the Planning Commission for necessary
action, but it has failed to do so. The Committee expects that now the Department will bring
to the notice of the Planning Commission the concern expressed by the Committee towards
delay in finalisation of Twelfth Plan allocations by the body. The Committee reiterates that
Planning Commission should finalise allocations for the Twelfth Five Year Plan of the
Department without any further delay.
Recommendation (Para 8.4)
OUTLAY PROPOSED AND ALLOCATION APPROVED FOR 2012-13
(i) The Committee is of the opinion that cuts would have an adverse effect on the CSIR vision
and strategies for 2022. Paucity of funds would compel the Department not only to tone
down targets set for the year but even adversely impact realisation of its long term
objectives. The shockingly high cuts indicate that scientific organizations are being given
step motherly treatment in allocation of resources. The Committee is of the opinion that the
axe of such a huge cut should not fall on scientific Departments as it adversely affects
Research and Development which is vital for the development and well being of the nation.
Action Taken by Government
The Department appreciates the concern of the Committee.
Comments
The Committee hopes that the Department will take up the matter with the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance for restoration of funds at Revised Estimate stage.
Recommendation (Para 8.5)
(ii) The Committee hopes Government would, while allocating funds at RE stage and for
subsequent years, adopt a more rational and judicious approach in allocation of funds and
would ensure that for good schemes, adequate funds are made available. The Committee
feels that support to cluster innovation centres, innovative proposals from MSMEs,

5
upgradation of photovoltaic module from 10 to 80 MW are important initiatives and making
them suffer from financial crunch would not be in the national interest. The Committee is
of the view that considering the conventional sources of energy like coal and petro products
are causing irreparable damage to the environment leading to climate change, it is high time,
that non-conventional sources of energy like Solar energy are encouraged and enhanced.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that Planning Commission must ensure that crucial
programmes like upgradations of photovoltaic module are not starved of funds and adequate
allocations be made to these programmes at the R.E. stage.
Action Taken by Government
Central Electronics Limited (CEL), a Public Sector Enterprise of the Department is
planning the upgradation of solar photovoltaic module production facility from 10 to 80 MW
during the twelfth five year plan, which will help it to make available cost effective solar modules
to the Indian consumers. The Department has requested CEL to submit its precise requirement
of funds for the project during the Financial Year 2012-13 and beyond. Department will request
the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance at the RE stage to ensure adequate fund allocation
for the project.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that Central Electronics
Limited (CEL) would make available cost effective Solar Photovoltaic Modules to Indian
consumers in a fixed time frame.
Recommendation (Para 8.6)
(iii) The Committee also hopes that DSIR would make optimum use of funds made available to
it and provide to the people of the country best returns for funds invested in it.
Action Taken by Government
Department notes the Committee’s observation for compliance.
Comments
The Committee notes the assurance of the Department.
Recommendation (Para 8.8)
While CSIR allocation accounted for as high as 49.95 per cent and 42.56 per cent
respectively in Third and Fourth Five Year Plan, it had come down to 11.04 per cent in Ninth,
10.18 in Tenth and 11.95 per cent in Elventh Five Year Plan. From Seventh Plan, when all the
existing scientific Departments, were in existence, the share of DSIR has decreased of from 18.29
per cent to 11.95 per cent in Eleventh Plan which indicates diminishing importance of DSIR
vis-a-vis other Scientific Departments. The DSIR, therefore, needs to introspect the reasons for
this state of affairs and must revitalize and gear itself to regain its lost importance. It must prove
its importance for the country by its achievements. The Committee, however, feels that a higher
allocation of plan funds for scientific Departments is absolutely essential for realisation of vision
of making India a knowledge based economy by the end of second decade of twenty first century.
The Committee, therefore, recommends higher overall availability of funds (as% share of plan) for
scientific organisations.

6
Action Taken by Government
The Department, with humble request, would like to add – “Figures are as given in the
Planning Commission website.” The Department notes the recommendation of the Committee.
Comments
The Committee expresses its displeasure over the casual manner in which the Action Taken
Note in the context of the above recommendation of the Committee has been prepared and
furnished to the Committee. Instead of introspecting reasons for diminishing importance of DSIR
in terms of Government funding vis-a-vis other Scientific Departments and taking up the matter
of higher allocation of Plan funds for the Department with the Planning Commission/Ministry of
Finance, the Department has opted to disown the figures. It is immaterial for the Committee
whether the figures are as given by the Planning Commission or the DSIR as both of them form
a part of Government of India and figures were given by the Department in its presentation
document (Page No. 13) on Demand for Grants 2012-13. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
recommendation and expects the Department to pursue with the Planning Commission/Ministry of
Finance for higher allocation of funds for the Department.
Recommendation (Para 9.1.4)
PROGRAMMES/SCHEMES OF THE DEPARTMENT
A. PROGRAMMES OF DSIR
Technology Promotion Development and Utilisation Programme (TPDU)
The Committee is aware that investment of over Rs.l 0000 crore in R&D had been reported
under this programme and DSIR had reported innovations in various fields like development of Fuel
Cell Bus; E-waste Recycling and Precious Metal Recovery; Indigenous Dialysis Device; Novel Plant
tissue culture medium from bio-waste-Fly Ash; Herbal Medicine for treatment of Asthma; and
A V AZ-Device for Cerebral Palsy through this programme. The programme has now been scrapped
as need for more innovative mechanism was felt for achieving significant results. The Committee
hopes that four new schemes now introduced would be able to produce significant and much better
results than obtained under TPDU and for the purpose, the Committee recommends that
Department should effectively monitor these schemes so that money invested in these schemes is
not only adequately justified but also provides the desired results.
Action taken by Government
The Department shall allocate the funds for the four new plan schemes judiciously and
monitor the progress of activities under the schemes effectively to achieve the planned targets.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that significant results
would be visible from the investment of over Rs. 10,000 Crores in R&D under programme.
Recommendation (Para 9.1.8)
(ii) The Committee feels that in view of budgetary constraints, there is a need for the
Department to devise innovative ways for funding these schemes. Public Private Partnership
(PPP) model, levy of appropriate user charges, funding from other beneficiaries, sharing of

7
profits arising from commercial exploitation of patents funded under scheme, etc. are some
of the known ways in which requisite funds for implementation of scheme can be
generated. The Committee hopes that the Department would be able to devise innovative
ways of funding the scheme and achieve the targets set for 2012-13 under these schemes.
The Committee, however, feels that Government should, to the extent necessary, provide
adequate funds for these schemes at RE stage, so that target set for 2012-13 under these
schemes get realized in toto .
Action Taken by Government
The Department is in the process of obtaining the necessary approvals for the schemes and
shall be able to mobilize the necessary funding for the same.
Comments
The Committee hopes that the Department would have by now obtained necessary approval
for its schemes and would be able to mobilise adequate funding for its projects.
Recommendations
B. PROGRAMMES OF CSIR
(I) National Laboratories Scheme
The Committee, in its 208
th Report, had recommended that the network of National
Laboratories should be extended to all the states of the country, with at least one laboratory in each
state so that there is equitable scientific progress in each State. The Committee had also
recommended that though the National Laboratories are doing a lot of ingenious work as regards
Research and Development in various scientific spheres but most of its achievements are not
reaching the common man. In fact, the Committee had felt that the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research could justify an increase in the budgetary allocation only if substantial benefits
reach the common man and had accordingly recommended that the Department should focus
towards transfer of technology from the National Laboratories to the society.
The Department, however, in its Action Taken Note defended its stand by saying the CSIR
transferred its developed technologies regularly to industries through its constituent laboratories.
Some technology transfers at that time included improved process for centchroman (a non-steroidal
oral contraceptive); treatment of Bio refractory wastewater without sludge and odor emission.
While the Committee appreciates the fact that transfer of some technologies had taken place but
transfer of just few technologies is not going to make the desired impact. The CSIR, with a large
scientific manpower at its command, needs to transfer innovative technologies in a large number
so as to help common man improve his living standard. The CSIR must pay rich dividends to the
common citizen of this country by way of transfer of appropriate technologies for every rupee
invested in its schemes.
Action Taken by Government
During Twelfth Five Year Plan, the Department proposes to establish five new institutes.
CSIR and its constituent laboratories are home to cutting edge scientific capabilities, talent,
know-how and IP. To further enhance the capability and to explore newer models of bringing
processes, products and services to the markets, an independent company named ‘CSIR Tech
Private Limited (CTPL)’ has been incorporated in Pune. CTPL would work closely with CSIR labs

8
to commercialize CSIR technologies and intellectual property through creation of spin-outs and
licensing opportunities based on scientific discoveries emanating from CSIR laboratories.
Comments
The Committee notes the initiative taken by the CSIR to explore and to further
enhance its capabilities by incorporating a company named ‘CSIR Tech Private Limited
(CTPL) and hopes that this new venture would result in effective commercialisation of CSIR
technologies.
Recommendations
II. National S&T Human Resource Development
The Committee observes that allocation made under this head was Rs.307.00 crore at B.E.
stage 2011-12 which got slightly reduced to Rs.305.00 crore in B.E. 2012-13. The Committee finds
that out of the allocated amount of Rs.307.00 crore at B.E. 2011-12, the Department could utilize
only Rs.285.00 crore. This may, perhaps be one of the reasons for lesser allocation has been made
this year under this head. The Committee hopes that Department shall be able to make full and
effective use of funds allocated to it this year.
The Committee notes that the CSIR has introduced 250 CSIR hand holding scholarship for
dyslexic (Attention Deficit Disorder) students to pursue higher education in science. The Committee
feels that this is a very praiseworthy initiative that needs to be further extended and expanded. The
Committee therefore, recommends that this scheme should not cover only dyslexic students but
those suffering from other serious physical disabilities as well.
The Committee feels that institution of greater number of scholarship for higher studies in
science shall to certain extent help in arresting the recent trend of large number of bright students
not opting science subjects for higher studies in view of attractive opportunities that have emerged
in other disciplines and which in turn is leading to shortage of scientific personnel in the country.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that there is a need for further increasing the number of
scholarships as also for making scholarship more attractive. The Committee, further, recommends
that a very transparent, fair and objective criteria be devised for awarding these scholarships so
that meritorious students alone get it.
Action Taken by Government
The initial allocation during the financial year 2011-12 was Rs.307.00 crore (Rs.197.00
crore under Plan and Rs.110.00 crore under Non-Plan) for this head. The Department could have
utilized the allocation of Rs.307.00 crore fully and effectively, however, Ministry of Finance
imposed a cut of Rs.1 00.00 crore on Plan allocation and Rs.58.18 crore on Non-Plan allocation
on the department. Accordingly the Department imposed a cut of Rs.22.00 crore (Rs.7.00 crore
on Plan and Rs.15.00 crore on Non-Plan) for this activity thereby reducing total budgetary
allocation to Rs.285.00 crore which has been fully utilized during financial year 2011-12. Efforts
are being made to utilize the full grant allocated during the financial year 2012-13.
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The students suffering from other
serious physical disabilities will also to be covered under this scheme subject to getting requisite
budgetary allocation.
Efforts are being made continuously by the Department to attract more number of bright
students to opt science subjects for higher studies through various fellowship schemes. CSIR has

9
increased the number of Junior Research Fellowships (JRF) by two folds during the Eleventh Five
Year Plan period (2007-12) over the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-07) through CSIR-UGC National
Eligibility Test (NET) scheme with regard to qualification and validity of CSIR JRF to widen the
scope of NET and to attract students at early stages of their career. CSIR has also increased the
number of Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Fellowships (SPMF) from the financial year 2012-13 which
is being offered to certain top ranking NET qualified candidates. Besides NET, CSIR has other
fellowship schemes such as JRF-GATE, Senior Research Fellowships, Research Associateships,
Senior Research Associateships and CSIR-Nehru Science Postdoctoral Research Fellowships for
attracting and retaining students in science.
A very transparent, fair and objective criterion is being followed to award the fellowships
through CSIR-UGC NET conducted twice a year with the objective to identify and nurture young
scientific talent to pursue Ph.D. programmes. NET qualified students are being sought by both
academic and R&D institutions across India.
Comments
The Committee is pleased to note that the Department has agreed to the proposal of the
Committee to widen the ambit of its 250 CSIR handholding scholarships to the students suffering
from other serious physical disabilities.
Recommendation
III. INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT
The Committee is happy to know that CSIR’s rate of licensing/commercialization of
Intellectual Property at about 9% is much better as compared to the global average of 3-4% and
compliments CSIR for it. The Committee, however, feels that there is a need for wider and more
effective dissemination of products/technologies developed by CSIR and patents registered by it so
that common man could be benefited from this knowledge. The Department may consider making
details of all products/technologies developed by it available on its website and organizing seminars
and exhibitions in different parts of the Country to make people aware of them. Advertisements/
handbills and poster campaigns can also be deployed appropriately to create awareness.
Action Taken by Government
The Department appreciates the compliments of the Committee regarding higher rate of
licensing/ commercialization of its IP vis-a-vis  global average. In most of CSIR laboratories,
advertisement and awareness with regard to patent/technology/know-how is usually carried out
through the Institute websites, publications such as annual reports, newsletters, special pamphlets
and brochures. Patent/business development related awareness programmes are sometimes included
in short term courses/Entrepreneur Development Programme undertaken by the lab, both for the
entrepreneurs as well as students. Patents filed and granted are available in the Annual report of
CSIR.
Technology awareness meets are also arranged and users/interested manufacturers are
invited in these meets for interaction with inventors/business development groups. Technology/
know-how developed are also displayed on the Institute website. Advertisement and awareness are
also arranged through Seminars/conferences/workshops, events/exhibitions, internet networking.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.

10
Recommendation
IV. NEW MILLENNIUM INDIAN TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP INITIATIVE (NMITLI)
The Committee finds that this programme was allocated Rs.70 crares at B.E. 2011-12 which
was reduced to Rs.50.00 crares at R.E. 2011-12 but again enhanced to Rs.60.00 crores at B.E. 2012-
13. Noting that programme is to be run on PPP model, the Committee hopes that the Department
would effectively leverage the funds allocated to obtain desired outcome under the scheme.
The Committee has been informed that the reason behind NMITLI Scheme not performing
as expected is that the country is not able to recognize and appreciate the concept of PPP for
Research & Development for R&D. In addition, there is no enabling mechanism to develop
seamless team between industry and publicly funded institutions. It has, further been informed that
the Department proposes to broaden the NMITLI scheme in the Twelfth Plan as per the Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approval.
The Committee is of the view that the Department should take necessary steps to dispel
the apprehensions about PPP mode and make sincere efforts to ensure success of this model.
Action Taken by Government
Fluctuations in NMITLI Budget over the years are due to following:
Funds under NMITLI are utilized timely and effectively. On occasions, Finance Ministry
imposes cut on Department’s budget at RE stage. This cut has to be borne by various programmes
of the Department including NMITLI. For example-Finance Ministry had imposed a cut of Rs.1 00
crore in the budget of CSIR at RE stage for the Financial Year 2010-11. Considering the same and
creating a possibility of funding some of the NMITLI projects in the beginning of the next Financial
year, a cut of Rs.25 crore was employed to NMITLI. It shifted thus taking up of some of newer
projects to Financial Year 2011-12 and utilized the funds within permissible time.
NMITLI is a robust Public Private Partnership (PPP) Scheme in the R&D domain in the
country. It has been able to network about 100 industry partners and about 300 R&D groups from
different institutions. Realizing the success of the model, other government departments are emulating
it. After NMITLI, PPP has become a buzz word in the echelon of Science & Technology. NMITLI
will take every possible step to further strengthen the scheme and ensure success of model.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that as assured, the Department would
further strengthen NMITLI Scheme.
Recommendation
V. CSIR 800
The Committee notes an allocation of Rs.50 crore to CSIR 800 scheme. The Committee,
however, feels that to make real impact on the lives of the poor people, hundreds of such
institutions/initiatives are required. The Committee hopes that the Department would gear itself to
meet this challenge and recommends that Government should extend adequate financial support to
the Department to meet it.
Action Taken by Government
CSIR has geared up itself to meet the challenges expected during the implementation of the
CSIR-800 Scheme. The allocated amount would be utilized in making concerted efforts for bringing
about quality, affordability and prosperity for all, through relevant S&T interventions and
technologies. The allocations would be utilized in establishing CSIR TECHVIL and for initiating new

11
projects in the seven focus domains: Value Added Agriculture, Waste to Wealth, Energy Efficiency,
Low Cost Housing, Affordable Health, Potable Water and Sustainable Energy. The TECHVIL and
associated projects are expected to augment income of individuals and improve quality of the life
during Twelfth plan period. A small part of allocation would be spent in establishing and supporting
new linkages and partnerships with different Line Ministries, Philanthropic Organizations, Financial
Institutions and Channel Partners like Non Government Organizations, V oluntary Organizations, Self
help Groups and Social Entrepreneurs, so as to reach the unreached.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that projects taken in seven focus domains
shall help augment income of people and improve quality of life with visible impact during
Twelfth Plan period.
Recommendation
VI. CSIR Scheme for open Innovation
The Committee, however, is pained to note that programme such as scheme for open
innovation which aims to provide affordable medicines for common man diseases has seen a cut
of Rs.93 crore in allocation. The Committee feels that reduction in allocation to a programme meant
to benefit common man should have been avoided. The Committee, further, recommends, adequate
allocation be made to this programme at R.E. stage so that the programme does not suffer for
want of adequate funds.
Action Taken by Government
The Department notes the recommendation of the Committee.
Comments
The Committee reiterates that sufficient funds be made available to the programme
at R.E. Stage and the Department should take up this matter with the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation
VII. NA TIONAL CIVIL AIRCRAFT DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NCAD)
The Committee hopes that formal Government approval for the programme would be
available soon and the programme would start in right earnest at the earliest. The Committee is also
of the view that this programme is of great national importance and sufficient funds be made
available to this programme so that our own indigenous 90 seater aircraft becomes a reality in a
short time from now.
Action Taken by Government
In order to identify an enabling (entity) structure for implementation of the National Civil
Aircraft Development (NCAD) programme, CSIR constituted two expert committees. The two
committees are as follows:
(i) Technical Committee to build NCAD programme: The said committee will examine the
feasibility Report and create a document for NCAD programme implementation. It will
also prepare a Cabinet note for obtaining ‘In-principle’ approval from the Government.
(ii) Joint Venture Creation Committee to interact and negotiate with the industry: This
committee will identify and discuss with industry for firming the Joint Venture with
equity participation in design and development and for setting up production facility
and marketing of 90 seater Civil Aircraft under NCAD programme.

12
Further, the NCAD programme will be taken up, in case desired partnerships are built and
due approvals are received.
Comments
The Committee hopes that the Department would be able to find a suitable partner
to take the National Civil Aircraft Development (NCAD) programme forward.
Recommendation
VIII. INTERACTION BETWEEN INDUSTRY AND CSIR
The Committee is happy to learn that CSIR has implemented all the recommendations of
Abid Hussain Committee. The Committee notes that share of public funding for R&D at 2-3 per
cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is at par with international norms. However, the share of
private funds for R&D at only 3 per cent of GDP in our country is very low as compared to
international norms of 1.3-1.4 of GDP. In France, Industry performs over 63 per cent (of all R&D)
and funds around 54 per cent projects while this figure is 69 per cent in Japan. In India
contribution of industries is estimated at around 25 per cent of national R&D expenditure which
needs to be enhanced to at least 50 per cent in the Twelfth Plan. The Committee feels that the
Department should give more and more incentive and form more partnerships with the private
sector companies of India in order to infuse more funds in R&D sector. In this regard, the
Committee fully supports the recommendations of the Planning Commission in its ‘approach paper
on Twelfth Five Year Plan-Faster, Sustainable and more Inclusive Growth’ wherein it has suggested
on interaction of Public S&T Institutions with CSIR at large.
Action Taken by Government
The Department is trying to bring industries on board in many plan projects being proposed
to be executed during Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that CSIR would soon
be able to work in partnership with other big industrial players in its endeavour to increase
the share of private funds for Research and Development activities.
Recommendation (Para 10.4)
Audit Objection
The Committee taking serious note of the above observations made by the CAG
recommends that these deficiencies need to be addressed by the Department in right earnest as
such cases bring bad repute to CSIR and this does not put DSIR in right stead. The Committee,
further, recommends that the Department should strengthen its monitoring mechanism so that
misuse of funds could be prevented.
Action Taken by Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
Comments
The Committee would like the Department to ensure such cases do not occur in
future and audit objection is duly settled to the satisfaction of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India.

13
MINUTES

14

15
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the 17 th December, 2012 in Committee Room.
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri M. Rama Jois
3. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
LOK SABHA
4. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
5. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
6. Shri O.S. Manian
7. Shri Basori Singh Masram
8. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
9. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
10. Shri Pradeep Tamta
11. Shri Joseph Toppo
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and
informed them that the Committee would consider and adopt its Draft 232
nd to 238 th Reports on
the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 222 nd to
228th reports on Demands for Grants (2012-13), pertaining to the Ministries/De partments of Atomic
Energy, Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, Space, Earth Sciences, Scientific and
Industrial Research and Biotechnology respectively.
2. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration, one by one, the Draft Action Taken
Reports and adopted the 232
nd to 238 th reports without any amendment.
15

16
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Committee, thereafter, decided to present/lay on the table of both the Houses of the
Parliament its 232 nd to 238 th Reports on 20 th December, 2012. The Committee authorised its
Chairman and in his absence Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra to present the Report in Rajya Sabha and
Shri Pradeep Tamta and in his absence Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde to lay the copy of the report
on the table of Lok Sabha.
The Committee, then, adjourned at 10.35 
A.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.