PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY THIRD REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Two Hundred Fifty-eighth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2015-16) of the Department of
Science & Technology
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)
273
REPORT NO.

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY THIRD REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Two Hundred Fifty-eighth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2015-16) of the Department of
Science & Technology
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-12
5. M INUTES ............................................................................................................... 13-16

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September , 2015)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
8. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
9. Shri Bhupinder Singh
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakraborty
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar

(ii)
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
30. Shri Vikram Usendi
31. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this Two Hundred Seventy-third report on the Action Taken by the Department of
Science & Technology on the recommendations contained in Two Hundred Fifty-eighth Report of the
Committee on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Department of Science & Technology, which was
presented/laid in both the Houses of Parliament on 7th May, 2015.
2. There were twenty recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Fifty-eighth Report of the
Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the
Department on 13th August, 2015.
3. In the meeting held on 15th January, 2016, the Committee considered the draft Report and adopted
the same.
N
EW D ELHI; ASHWANI KUMAR
January 15, 2016 Chairman,
Pausha 25, 1937 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
DST : Department of Science & Technology
DAE : Department of Atomic Energy
INO : India-Based Neutrino Observatory Project
C-DAC : Centre for Development of Advanced Computing
DeitY : Department of Electronics & Information Technology
GB : Governing Body
NSM-EB : National Supercomputing Mission Executive Board
SAIF : Sophisticated Analytical Instrument Facilities
PIs : Principal Investigators
SERB : S cience and Engineering Research Board
IP : Intellectual Property
IIGP : India Innovation Growth Programme
NMSHE : National Mission for Sustaining the Himalayan Ecosystem
NAPCC : National Action Plan for Climate Change
TF : Task forces
GBPIHED : GB. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment & Development
WII : Wildlife Institute of India,
WIHG : W adia Institute of Himalayan Geology,
NIH : National Institute of Hydrology
JNU : Jawaharlal Nehru University
SSTP : State S&T Programme
(iv)

REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Science &
Technology on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Fifty-eighth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
on the Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Department of Science & Technology, presented to both
the Houses of Parliament on 7th May, 2015. There were twenty recommendations in the Two Hundred
and Fifty-eighth Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee
were received from the Department on 13th August, 2015. The Department has intimated that it has
taken action in case of all the recommendations of the Committee. The Committee, on examination of
Action Taken Notes, however is not satisfied with action taken by the Department in respect of seven
recommendations (Para Nos. 7.6, 11.9, 14.10, 16.8, 17.9, 18.3, and 20.10) and would like the Department
to take further action in respect of such recommendations as indicated in the Report.
The Committee's recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the
Action Taken by the Department of Science & Technology are set out in the subsequent paragraphs:-
TREND OF UTILISATION IN THE LAST THREE YEARS
Recommendation
The Committee finds that though utilisation of allocated resources by the Department improved
considerably in the last three years, the allocation to some of the schemes was reduced due to delay in
seeking administrative approval. The Committee is of the view that grounds cited by the Department are
of routine administrative nature which could have been avoided by the Department as delay in completion
of infrastructure projects leads to time and cost overrun and affects research & development work. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the loopholes which led to underutilisation of funds should be
plugged and delay in seeking administrative approval should be avoided, and also responsibility for
delay should be fixed. (Para 7.6)
Action Taken by Government
The Department has noted the observations of the Committee. Department would make every effort
to seek administrative approvals as early as possible for new projects/schemes to ensure maximum
utilization of funds allocated.
Comments
While taking note of the reply the Committee feels that the Department has not provided any detail
of the steps/measures taken on plugging the loopholes to check underutilisation of funds and fixing
responsibility for delay. The Committee therefore as such reiterates its recommendation and would like
the Department to make a critical review of various factors that led to under-utilisation of funds by the
Department and take necessary concrete measures to plug the loopholes.
MECHANISM TO MONITOR AND REVIEW THE ONGOING SCHEMES
Recommendation
The Committee is of the opinion that a robust monitoring mechanism is essential for ensuring timely
completion of various projects to avoid time and cost overrun and to ensure full utilisation of the

2
allocated funds. The Committee notes the performance of the Department of Science & Technology
evaluated by third party under Result Framework Document and finds that there is a considerable scope
for improvement in the performance and the Department needs to further strengthen its monitoring
mechanism to make it more robust for timely completion of projects and optimum utilisation of funds
in the year 2015-16. (Para 8.3)
Action Taken by Government
The Department appreciates the concern of the Committee for a robust monitoring mechanism for
ensuring timely completion of various projects.
The Department has a sound mechanism for monitoring and evaluation of progress of implementation
of programmes/schemes with the help of external experts. As suggested by the Committee, the Department
would further strengthen the same to make it more robust for timely completion of projects and optimum
utilization of funds in the year 2015-16.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015-16
Recommendation
The Committee takes strong exception to the fact that despite Department's request for allocation
of more funds, the Ministry of Finance has not paid any heed to the matter in the past two years. Such
constraints only circumscribe the functioning of important projects undertaken by the Department. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that in future the Ministry of Finance should give a favourable
response to the request of the Department. (Para 9.6)
Action Taken by Government
Department has noted the concern of the Committee and would convey it to Ministry of Finance
that the Committee has recommended that the Ministry of Finance.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
MEGA FACILITIES FOR BASIC RESEARCH
Recommendation
It is noted that the Department has adopted and implemented the principle of reciprocity and parity
with regard to the use of mega-facilities in the basic research undertaken by our scientists. This much-
appreciated initiative of the Department is likely to work as an enabler in injecting greater confidence
in our scientists and would also lead to the acknowledgement of our scientific expertise at an international
level. The Committee values the partnership between the DST and the Department of Atomic Energy and
feels that such efforts would develop the much-needed capacity building in the university and academic
sector for building mega facilities for basic research. It will enable the Department to explore possibilities

3
of collaboration with other reputed scientific departments such as the Departments of Biotechnology,
Scientific Research, Space and Ministry of Earth Sciences. The Committee feels that such initiatives need
systematic attention and financial nurturing so that the perennial neglect of basic research in the country
is duly addressed and the systemic pitfalls are avoided. (Para 11.9)
Action Taken by Government
All the Mega Science Projects in progress at the present time are being jointly overseen by the
Secretaries of the DST and the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) on regular basis and necessary
resources are being made available. These will enable our scientists to make forays into advanced
scientific instrumentation at the very cutting edge and open up new and hitherto unexplored domains of
scientific studies. The DST-DAE Cooperation Model has inspired the Department to think of other such
inter-ministerial collaborations with MHRD, DBT, etc.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
INDIA-BASED NEUTRINO OBSERV ATORY PROJECT (INO)
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the joint initiative taken by the Departments of Science & Technology
and Atomic Energy in setting up the India-based Neutrino observatory for cutting-edge research in
Neutrino studies. The Committee wishes all the success to "Asia's first state-of-the-art facility" to provide
research facility in particle physics. Furthermore, the Committee recommends that necessary budgetary
provisions should be made available for the observatory.
The Committee hopes that in the years to come, the observatory will transform into an Observatory
Par Excellence setting international standards and provide high quality research facility to science
students across the country, and help them develop sophisticated detectors and electronics using their own
hands and producing new insights in Neutrino studies. (Para Nos. 12.5 & 12.6)
Action Taken by Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
THIRTY METRE TELESCOPE
Recommendation
The Committee believes that the proposed Thirty Metre Telescope has tremendous potential to
unravel the myriad mysteries of the universe. It is likely to become a tool for the Indian astronomy in
keeping up the level of excellence in research in astronomy and astrophysics of the country. The Committee
hopes that the TMT project would help the country to embark on world class, international science
collaborations and also help develop the required human resources in the field. (Para 13.7)

4
Action Taken by Government
The observation of the Committee has been noted.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
NATIONAL SUPERCOMPUTING MISSION
Recommendation
The Committee finds that India was a leader in Supercomputing till 2005 but it has now slipped
down in the global ranking to 14th place. The Committee is of the view that boosting indigenous efforts
in Supercomputing capability is in strategic interests of India, more so when Information Technology
capabilities of the country are recognised worldwide. The Committee hopes that the mission will help
India attain leadership and self-reliance in the field of Supercomputing. The Committee recommends that
considering the significance of Supercomputing, the Department should make every possible effort
including establishment of requisite ecosystem for the success of the Mission to successfully implement
the project in a time-bound manner. The Committee further recommends that the Department must ensure
that the allocated outlays for the scheme are fully utilised. (Para 14.10)
Action Taken by Government
Subsequent to the approval of the National Supercomputing Mission by CCEA on 25.03.2015, the
officials of the two Departments namely DST & DeitY had several meetings along with the implementing
Institutions namely Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) and Indian Institute of
Science, Bengaluru to finalise the action plan.
The recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee of S&T and E&F have been
accepted for further implementation. Both the Departments have coordinated with the implementation
agencies for success of the Mission within the approved time-lines and the following actions has been
taken:-
1. Administrative Approval for execution of the project entitled "National Supercomputing Mission
(NSM): Building Capacity & Capability" to be implemented jointly by Department of Science
& Technology (DST) and Department of Electronics & Information Technology (DeitY) was
issued on 9th April 2015.
2. A preoperative meeting of NSM co-chaired by Secretary, DeitY and Secretary, DST was held
on 6th May 2015 to discuss and finalize the administrative structure for implementation of the
mission. Officials of DeitY , DST and the two implementing agencies namely IISc and C-DAC
also participated in the meeting.
3. Submission of composition of the Governing Body (GB) by Hon'ble Prime Minister along with
inclusion of names of Scientists is under process for approval of respective Hon'ble Ministers
of both DST and DeitY . The constitution of the GB is under process and is likely to complete
by end of July, 2015.

5
4. The National Supercomputing Mission Executive Board (NSM-EB) has been constituted with
Secretary, DST and Secretary, DeitY as Co-Chairs and the OM has been issued on 04.06.2015.
The first NSM-EB meeting is scheduled for 9th July, 2015 in New Delhi.
5. The Department has already initiated the process for release of initial grant to both the
implementing agencies.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the action taken. The National Mission on Nano Science and
Technology
Recommendation
The Committee finds that fund utilisation under the Mission has been satisfactory in the last eight
years. However, the Committee recommends that the Department should inject the qualitative parameters
in terms of utilization of resources of the National Mission on Nano Science & Technology.
(Para 15.3)
Action Taken by Government
The Department humbly accepts the recommendations of the Committee and will work out details
of utilization of funds under the different objectives of Nano Mission.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to be apprised of the details of
qualitative parameters in terms of utilization of resources of the National Mission on Nano
Science & Technology during Demand for Grants 2016-17
Recommendation
The Committee notes with satisfaction that India holds the third rank in terms of publications of
papers on Nano science & technology. The Committee also takes cognisance of the performance of the
Department in the first phase of Nano Mission especially in fundamental sciences and human resources.
The Committee believes that the Department would take necessary steps to achieve the technological
aspects within a timeframe of two years in the second phase of the National Mission on Nano Science
& Technology. (Para 15.10)
Action Taken by Government
DST is grateful for the comments made by the PSC. DST is happy to inform the PSC that it has
already taken several steps to ramp up the technological aspects of Nano Mission in order to achieve
progress in this direction in the remaining duration of the second phase of the Nano Mission. These
include constitution of expert committees to look at projects directed at different stages of technology
development, designing of formats and advertisements for such projects, laying down principles of
cooperation between Nano Mission and Technology Development Board for projects involving loan to
industries, etc.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.

6
IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF RESEARCH IN THE UNIVERSITIES
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by the Department to increase institutional
capacity for Research in FIST, PURSE, CURIE and SAIF Programmes and the support extended to a
number of universities and colleges for carrying out cutting edge research in their respective field which
has resulted in improvement of performance of the universities. It has been observed that Indian
universities in general, and regional centers based in the hinterland in particular, are deprived of
requisite basic infrastructure and necessary wherewithal to undertake quality research. International
collaboration may be encouraged in such cases, both in terms of developing infrastructure and capacity
building of the personnel. (Para 16.7)
Action Taken by Government
The present ongoing initiatives like FIST, PURSE, SAIF and CURIE are mostly University centric
programmes towards strengthening S&T infrastructure capabilities at University Departments and associated
colleges. However programme like CURIE, PURSE are pro-active form of support to enhance the
research capacities at the Universities and exclusive for Universities. These include Universities of all
categories and represents from all parts of country. In fact, in last 2 years or so, a few sophisticated
Analytical Instrument Facilities (SAIF), have been set at 2nd tier Universities like GG Viswavidyalaya,
Bilaspur, Karnataka University, Dharward, Shivaji University Kolhapur, etc., for augmentation of research
facilities for the researchers at remote locations.
Similarly, in FIST Programme, nearly 2150 University Departments and more than 330 PG Colleges
have so far covered for support. However, a step up approach in respect of covering more PG Colleges
and Universities from less endowed places is being taken. In fact, all these initiatives have resulted in
increase in publication Share from University sector as well as positioning of currently more than 3330
(75% of 4500 INSPIRE Fellow) INSPIRE PhD. students under INSPIRE Fellowship of the DST at these
Universities and Colleges. The recommendation of the Committee for international collaborations in this
respect has been noted and efforts would be made to realise the same.
Comments
The Committee takes note of thereby.
Recommendation
The Committee notes the improvement in the performance of some major universities/colleges.
However, the Committee is of the view that qualitative improvement is needed to make Indian universities
and research institutes at par with the international standards. International Best Practices need to be
inculcated in the tertiary education and higher research in India. It is, therefore, recommended that the
Ministry should take steps to meet these objectives. Financial support, technical and technological know-
how and R&D support should not be confined to a few major cities, and the requisite expertise and
knowledge must be disseminated to the remote areas of the country as it would help capture the untapped

7
knowledge resources in the country. The Ministry needs to bring about uniformity in the quality of
research conducted in institutions and universities spread across the country preferably by the end of
XII Five Year Plan. (Para 16.8)
Action Taken by Government
Many ongoing initiatives like Schemes related to R&D programme, Scheme for young Scientists,
Empowerment and Equity opportunities for excellence in Science, R&D "infrastructure augmentation
programes are targeting towards improvements of research qualities" at the Universities and research
Institutes in the country. Emphasis is always given to reach remotest corner of the country. However,
attempts are being made to strengthen this by disseminating this information so that we could tap
maximum resources of the country.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee finds that many of the top universities have research Centres in collaboration with
other institutes in interdisciplinary fields. The Committee is of the view that many of the new technologies
coming out of these research centres would help in tackling the problems plaguing the country. In setting
up the Centres of Excellence, the Department should reach out to international institutions and seek more
project-based and targeted collaboration with foreign universities and research institutes. (Para 16.9)
Action Taken by Government
International collaborations with many academic institutions and research institutes of countries like
USA, UK, Japan, and France have already been made to initiate and implement joint collaborative research
activities. The research areas of collaboration are mostly Energy, Communication, and Bio-medical which
are interdisciplinary in nature. Efforts are being made to have more such collaborative projects with
International Partners.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
KNOWLEDGE INVOLVEMENT IN RESEARCH ADV ANCEMENT THROUGH NURTURING (KIRAN)
Recommendation
The Committee notes that there is a very small share of the women in the scientific R&D in the
country. The Committee feels that the Department and various institutes under it should also be forthcoming
in recruiting more female researchers and scientists into their organisation. While taking note of steady
increase in number of women scientists being supported under different schemes, the Committee feels that
the number is negligible. The Committee feels that the KIRAN being launched by the Department in place
of DISHA, should not only iron out the problems and difficulties but also empower women scientists to
develop and appropriate new technologies. (Para 17.6)

8
Action Taken by Government
KIRAN is not only handling problem and difficulties of women scientists but also empowering them
by implementing many more programmes in its ambit, such as, Women Scientist Scheme (covering R&D
Projects in basic Science and Engineering, societal based projects, and self employment), CURIE
(Consolidation of University Research through Innovation and Excellence in Women Universities)
Programme, Women Technology Parks, S&T for Women, Mobility Scheme etc.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee hopes that scheme for empowerment of women in its new form will not only iron
out the difficulties of women scientists but also address the crucial issues like mobility of women and
encourage them to pursue a career in scientific research as also for augmenting the women scientists pool
in the country. The Committee further notes that there has been a substantial increase in the amount of
fellowship for the women scientists under the KIRAN programme from 30,000 to 50,000 rupees. The
Committee observes that the fellowship under the new KIRAN scheme should be tax-free and should not
impose unnecessary pre-conditions in purchasing equipment and other products required for the research.
(Para 17.9)
Action Taken by Government
Department never put any pre-condition on Principal Investigators (PIs) of any project under
KIRAN for purchasing equipments, etc. Regarding Tax-free fellowship under KIRAN, the Department
is taking up the matter with Central Board of Direct Taxes, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance
for clarification/exemption.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
SCHOLARSHIPS FOR RETAINING RESEARCH TALENT AND PROMOTION OF SCIENCE IN
THE COUNTRY
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by the Ministry of Science & Technology that
have resulted in the inflow of accomplished researchers back to India. Measures taken by the three
Departments have led to the increasing reversal of flow of researchers. The Committee recommends that
further measures should be taken to retain bright Indian scientists coming back to India and attract the
young talents so that they find it more appealing to stay in India. For that purpose, the Department
should increase the scholarships and stipends provided to researchers. The Committee also recommends
that the research funding and grants should be linked to the potential and performance of the research
undertaken. The research undertaken should be incentivised, based on its utility and performance.
(Para 18.3)

9
Action Taken by Government
The Department is committed to attract the Indian brain from abroad and continue its attempt to
retain them to pursue world class research in Indian setting. The ongoing Ramanujan Fellowship of the
Department for brilliant scientists and engineers from all over the world to take up scientific research
positions in India has received utmost attention and the number of awards is increasing steadily. The
fellowship amount and the Research Grant had also been revised to make it more attractive. As viewed
by the Committee to increase the scholarship and stipend provided to researchers, the Government has
enhanced the fellowship of Junior Research Fellows, Senior Research Fellows and Research Associates
to the tune of 55.5% to 66.7% w.e.f. October, 2014. The Core Research Grant Scheme and Young
Scientist Project Scheme of the Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) are linked to the
potential and performance of the research undertaken; and substantial funding is provided under these
Schemes. Track based research funding Scheme of the SERB is designed to support active scientists
based on their performance and utility of research.
Ministry of Science and Technology is currently implementing three such schemes namely Ramanujan
(by the DST), Ramalingaswami (by the DST) and INSPIRE Faculty Award (by the DST). While the
Ramanujan and Ramalingaswami are specially designed to attract the bright Indian Scientist for coming
back to India, INSPIRE Faculty Award, one of the components of the INSPIRE Programme of the
Department of Science and Technology is also attracted the bright young scientist (up-to 32 years of
age) to come back to India and start their research at any academic/research institutions in the country.
Though the initial efforts in this direction by this Ministry are encouraging, efforts to attract more bright
young scientists are underway so that these scientists could be able to sustain their research in globally
competitive environment.
Comments
The Department has only provided details of existing fellowships of the Ministry of Science
& Technology. It has not made any comment on suggestions put forth by the Committee in Para
18.3 that research funding and grants should be linked to the potential and performance of the
research undertaken. The Department has not responded to the recommendation of Committee
to work out some mechanism to incentivise research based on its utility and performance. The
Committee therefore as such re-iterates its observation/recommendation.
Recommendation
The Committee notes with serious concern the decline in the number of research publications in
journals and publications of national and international repute in various areas of scientific research. The
Committee also believes that there is no incentive or concrete action plan to promote such publications
by our scientists and researchers. The Committee is not satisfied with the policies pursued by the
Department to encourage the commercialisation of patents registered by the innovators. Necessary incentives
to researchers/innovators and scientists for the purpose should be put in place and purposively implemented.
(Para 18.4)

10
Action Taken by Government
The number of research publications emanating from India in various areas of scientific research
has witnessed an increasing trend. India's scientific publication output increased from 37502 in 2005 to
73099 in 2010 and 102753 in 2013. Accordingly, India's rank globally increased from 12th in 2005 to
9th in 2010 and further to 6th in 2013.
In view of the above, the statement of the committee that there is a decline in India's scientific
research publications over the years does not hold true and hence not accepted.
There are several incentives available to researchers to publish. Publications form an important
criteria for various research awards/fellowships etc. as well as consideration for future grants. The
department is evolving a track-based research grant scheme through Science and Engineering Research
Board, which envisages continuous research funding for 10 years for researcher consistently publishing
in high impact journals.
The Department has been implementing Patent Facilitation Programme under which the researchers
are facilitated to file the patent free of cost. So far 409 Indian patents (107 granted) and 23 International
patents (7 granted) have been filed on behalf of researchers from academic institutions. A policy for
providing incentives to the researchers/innovators on filing of patents is being evolved by Department
of Industrial Policy and Promotion. This department has suggested inclusion of several incentives including
career progression, research funding etc. in the proposed policy to encourage researchers/scientists to
actively participate in whole chain of Intellectual Property (IP) creation to commercialization.
With reference to the recommendation 18.4 of Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee,
NEB inputs are placed below:-
The Department has initiated many programmes to tap, recognize and support innovations across
the country. It conducts programmes on innovation in Private Public Partnership Mode such as Power
of Ideas, India Innovation Growth Programme (IIGP) and Business Plan Competitions in various institutions
in the country.
The IIGP has successfully evolved over year and positioned itself well in the Indian innovation
ecosystem. The IIGP has brought significant commercial value to the innovator/entrepreneur community.
As per an impact analysis report by Ernst & Young, the programme has been able to create an economic
value of over INR 1500 crores during the 2007-12 period. Over 350+ business engagement agreements
have been facilitated between participating innovators and the industry.
The Department implements institutional mechanism to support innovations such as Innovation &
Entrepreneurship Development Centre to support student driven innovative products. It also implements
flagship programme of Technology Business Incubators which nurtures technology based innovative
ideas and enables its commercialization through start-up and new venture creation. There are more than
70 Technology Business Incubators supported by DST and work in the area of Information Technology,
Bio Technology, Nano Technology, Design, Agriculture, Materials, etc. Further, it also provides Seed
support to deserving innovative start-ups under incubation for faster product development, validation and
commercialization.

11
The Technology Development Board of the Department also provides soft Capital/loans to technology
based innovative companies enabling them to scale up in the market. In view of the above programme
and initiatives focusing on innovations, the Department does not accept the recommendations as given
in Para 18.4.
Further, the Department is also in advanced talks with NITI Aayog for putting up a framework for
supporting grand challenges and creation of innovation hubs and world class incubation facilities to
support innovations across the country.
Comments
The Committee take note of the reply.
INCREASING PRIV ATE SECTOR INVESTMENT IN R&D
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the Department is striving to synchronise the efforts made by the public
sector with the private sector in the scientific research domain. However, such syncing process must take
into account the security of the 'common goods' and environmental concerns. Rather than focussing on
exemptions at the input levels, outputs should be incentivised. The partnership should be result oriented
and the benefits should be linked with the performance. (Para 19.5)
Action Taken by Government
The Department has noted the observations of the committee.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
NATIONAL MISSION FOR SUSTAINING THE HIMALAYAN ECOSYSTEM
Recommendation
The Committee hopes that National Mission for Sustaining Himalayan Ecosystem, a part of National
Action Plan for Climate Change, will follow the Mission Document and its task forces will accomplish
the targets of the Mission. The Committee recommends that considering the enormous challenges of
Climate Change and fragile Himalayan ecology, this Mission should be adequately funded. (Para 20.8)
Action Taken by Government
The Department under its Climate Change Programme is coordinating National Mission for Sustaining
the Himalayan Ecosystem (NMSHE) under National Action Plan for Climate Change (NAPCC).
The point no. 20.8 of the recommendations of the PSC is accepted and following the NMSHE
document six nodal institutions have been identified to lead six thematic Task forces (TF). These are
TF-1 "Forest Resources and Plant Diversity" by G.B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment &
Development, (GBPIHED), Almora. TF-2 "Fauna and Wild Life Habitates" by Wildlife Institute of India,
(WII) Dehradun. TF-3 "Natural and Geological Wealth" by Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, (WHHG),

12
Dehra Dun. TF-4 "Water, Ice, Snow Resources including Glaciers" by National Institute of Hydrology,
(NIH), Roorkee. TF-5 "Traditional Knowledge System" by Jawaharlal Nehru University, (JNU), Delhi.
TF-6 "Himalayan Agriculture" by ICAR, New Delhi.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation
The focus of the Ministry of Science and Technology should be on endeavouring to acquire a global
leadership position in the frontier areas of sciences including material sciences, synthetic biology, genetics
and astrophysics, etc. International partnerships in these areas should be established with countries and
companies with known expertise and leadership in these and other areas of big ticket sciences.
(Para 20.9)
Action Taken by Government
Recommendation is accepted and necessary steps will be taken to comply.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Department should consider sharing their research and innovations with the state governments
and their instrumentalities so as to ensure a useful dissemination of knowledge throughout the country.
The Committee also recommends that special efforts should be made to disseminate information and
knowledge of the schemes of the Department in far-flung districts and particularly in the states of North
East. (Para 20.10)
Action Taken by Government
The Department is implementing State S&T Programme (SSTP) under which State S&T Councils
/Departments for Science and Technology (S&T) have been established in all States. The Department,
through this programme has been making conscious efforts to share scientific and technological outputs
emanating from DST's endeavour with State Governments through organizing All India/Regional meetings
of State Councils/Departments. The last all India meeting was organized by Gujarat State Council for
Science and Technology during 15th-16th September, 2014 at Gujarat Science City, Ahmedabad. Also,
a regional meeting on the specific issues of creation of Skill Development Centre for NE region was
organized at Assam State Council for Science and Technology, Guwahati on 21st January, 2015. Earlier
DST has shared technological outputs of Central S&T Agencies and Departments at the apex level in the
conferences of Chief Secretaries of States. A Technology Compendium on "Science, Technology and
Innovation-Potential uses for the State Governments" has also been prepared for dissemination to the
States. In line with the Parliamentary Standing Committee recommendation, the Department intends to
continue these activities vigorously to synergise efforts of DST and States. The next All India meeting
of State Councils/Departments has been planned in August, 2015 to disseminate the information and
knowledge of the schemes of the department to States/UTs.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.

13
MINUTES

VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Friday, the 15th January, 2016 in Committee Room 'A', Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C.P. Narayanan
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Shri Bhupinder Singh
5. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
6. Kum. Sushmita Dev
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Shri Laxman Giluwa
9. Dr. K. Gopal
10. Shri Daddan Mishra
11. Shri Nagendra Singh
12. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
** *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
***Relate to other matters.
15

16
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. The Committee then considered the draft 271st to 276th Reports of the Committee on Action Taken
by the Government on recommendations/observations contained in reports of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (2015-16) pertaining to Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy, Science &
Technology, Space, Earth Sciences, Scientific and Industrial Research and Biotechnology and adopted the
same.
14. * * *
15. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 5.29 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.