PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA                     162 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  &  TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT  &  FORESTS 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED - SIXTY SECOND REPORT 
 
ON 
 
DRUGS AND PHARMACEUTICALS RESEARCH PROGRAMME 
INCLUDING HERBAL MEDICINES 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 14TH DECEMBER, 2006) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK  SABHA ON THE 14TH DECEMBER, 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2006/AGRAHAYANA, 1928 (SAKA) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:rsc-st @sansad.nic.in 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  &  TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT  &  FORESTS 
  
 
 
ONE HUNDRED - SIXTY SECOND REPORT 
 
ON 
 
DRUGS AND PHARMACEUTICALS RESEARCH PROGRAMME 
INCLUDING HERBAL MEDICINES 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 14TH DECEMBER, 2006) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK  SABHA ON THE 14TH DECEMBER, 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI
 
DECEMBER, 2006/AGRAHAYANA, 1928 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE........................................................................................ (i)-(ii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................ (iii) 
3. R EPORT ..........................................................................................................................  
 C HAPTER I PREFACE ......................................................................................................... 1 
 C HAPTER II DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY ........................................................... 2-6 
 C HAPTER III DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH ............................................. 7-10 
 C HAPTER IV DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY ...................................................................... 11-13 
 C HAPTER V MINISTRY OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT .................................................................... 14-17 
 C HAPTER VI DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH ................................................................................... 18-20 
 C HAPTER VII GENERAL ASPECTS RELATING TO DRUG RESEARCH ............................................... 21-25 
 C HAPTER VIII COMMITTEES OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................. 26-32 
4. A NNEXURE .......................................................................................................................  33-36 
5. M INUTES ........................................................................................................................  57-58  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2006-2007) 
 1. Shri P.G.Narayanan    –-----    Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. Prabha Thakur 
 #3. Vacant 
 4. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya 
 5. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 
 6. Shri Kamal Akhtar 
 7. Shri Saman Pathak 
 8. Shri Jabir Husain 
 9. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
 10. Dr. Barun Mukherjee 
  LOK SABHA 
 11. Shri Jashubhai Dhanabhai Barad 
 12.  Dr. Sujan Chakraborty 
 13.  Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
 14.  Shri Pankaj Choudhary 
 15.  Shri Francis Fanthome 
 16.  Shri Babubhai K. Katara 
 17.  Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
 18.  Shri Brahmananda Panda 
 19.  Shrimati Neeta Pateriya 
 20.  Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil  
 21.  Shri Pratik Prakashbapu Patil  
 22.  Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat 
 23.  Shri K.C. Singh “Baba” 
 24.  Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
 25.  Shri Rakesh Singh 
 26.  Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli  
 27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar 
 28.  Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
 29.  Shri Mitrasen Yadav 
 30.  Shri Sita Ram Yadav 
*31. Shri Rampal Singh 
 
 SECRETARIAT   
 Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary  
 Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
 Shri Alok Kumar Chatte rjee, Deputy Secretary 
 Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Under Secretary 
 Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, 
Environment & Forests, have been authorized by the Comm ittee to present the Report on its  behalf, present this One 
Hundred-Sixty second Report on the Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research programme including Herbal Medicines. 
2.  The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests in 
its meeting held on 6th June, 2005, decided to take up Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Research including herbal medicines 
for examination and report thereon. Th e nodal Ministry for Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research programme in the 
Ministry of Science and Technology. Other Ministries/Departments involved in the programme are Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Research, Department of Biotechn ology, Ministry of Ocean Development and Department of 
AYUSH etc. In this regard the Committee heard the Secretaries of the various Mi nistries/Departments like Department 
of Science and Technology, Biotechnology, Scientific and Industrial Research, AYUSH and Ministries of Environment 
and Forests and Ocean Development. In addition of the Committee also heard Director-General, Indian Council of 
Medical Research and Drugs Controll er-General (India). The details of  the representatives of various 
Ministries/Departments who appeared before the Committee for oral evidence are given in Annexure. 
3.  The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the various Ministries/Departm ents for replying to the 
clarifications sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinize 
the same. 
4.  In the meeting held on 6 th November, 2006 the Committee considered the draft report and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
P. G. NARAYANAN 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman, 
6th November, 2006 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER - I 
l. PREFACE 
1.1  With global revenue of approximately US$ 535 billion in 2005, the healthcare industry is the world’s largest 
industry. Over the years, the Indian drugs and pharma indus try has made tremendous progress in this vital sector. The 
Indian Industry’s contribution stands at Rs. 50000 crores  (US $10 billion). The Indian  pharmaceutical sector has 
achieved global recognition as a low cost producer of qua lity drugs and formulation products. With the new patent 
regime coming into effect from January 2005, the Indian pharma industry and R&D sectors are reorienting themselves 
to face the challenges and exploit the opportunities arising therefrom. 
1.2  India has demonstrated its competence in the production  of bulk drugs and formulation. Indian companies export 
bulk and formulations to all major developed countries. The manufacturing competence and cost-competitiveness of 
India is unrivalled in bulk drugs and formulations. Now the country is emulating the example of information 
technology and climbing the pharmaceutical  value chain. The country has the o pportunity to do even better in drug 
development Biotechnology. 
1.3.  Further the country has endeavoured to emerge as low cost medical research hub and take an important place in 
global effort towards drug development. India’s strength includes availability of high-class human resource, vast 
scientific infrastructure, low cost-high quality clinical tria ls and efficient and well-established regulatory systems. 
India’s strength in medicinal chemistry and bio-informatics is an asset. 
1.4. The diseases of importance to our country are Lepros y, Malaria, Tuberculosis, Japanese Encephilitis, Syphilis, 
Leishmaniasis, Filariasis, HIV/AIDS, Tetanus, Measles, Drug re sistant enteric fever, Hepati tis-B, Skin disorders like 
Leucoderma and psoriasis, Gastrointestinal disorders lik e Diarrhoea and Cholera besi des infections leading to 
Trypansomiasis and Ascariasis, Diabetes, Hypertension, Cardiovascular disorders, Dengue and other prevalent 
infectious diseases besides neurological diseases like dementia and Parkinson’s Disease. 
1.5.  The challenge to pharma research and to pharma indust ry lies in providing adequate medicines at affordable cost 
to Indian population and that too under the prevailing socio-economic conditions. At the same time, the industry has to 
compete globally, cost and quality wise, for exports. 
1.6.  One of the key objectives underlined in the Draft National Pharmaceutical Policy 2006 is to promote greater 
research and development in the pharmaceuticals sector by  providing suitable incentives. India has a vast R&D 
infrastructure that includes the extensive network of nati onal labs, academic institutes and private R&D labs. It is 
essential to utilize the expertise of these institutions and make  them contribute not only in elimination of killer diseases 
but also to the development of industry and the national ec onomy. The mettle of Indian scientists is recognized the 
world over, and many research laboratories in advanced countries have benefited from our national resources that could 
not be effectively tapped, so far. Further, research in India is far more cost-effective than it is in the west. Therefore, we 
could well become a source for scientific innovation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER - II 
MINISTRY OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY) 
2.1.  The nodal Ministry for Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research programme is the Ministry of Science and 
Technology. Other Ministries/Departments involved in the programme are Department of Scientific and Industrial 
Research, Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Ocean Development and Department of  
AYUSH etc. The Committee was informed by the Secretary, Department of Science & Technology that the drug 
development is a long drawn process involving both risk a nd heavy investments. The Secretary informed that it takes 
twelve to fifteen years to bring out a new drug and requir es nearly US $ 900 million to US $ 1.0 billion with success 
rate just being one in ten thousand. Despite the odds, the S ecretary informed that several new chemical entities have 
been synthesized and important leads developed which may lead to new/novel drugs in the near future for treatment of 
various diseases like Tuberculosis, Malaria, Rheumatism, Ca rdio-vascular diseases, Cancer, Diabetes Leucoderma etc. 
The R&D efforts have been made both in Modern as well as Indian System of Medicine. 
2.2  When the Committee enquired about the risk factor  involved in pharmaceutical Research, the Secretary, 
Department of Science & Technology elaborated about two kinds of risk. The first risk factor is that when a lead is 
taken/identified, it is not that every lead results in success Half way through, finding that there are more failures than 
successes, it may be dropped. The number quoted is that one in 10000 studies is the success ratio. A large number of 
leads are tried before identifying one successful lead. A lot of money is spent for going through these 10000 studies and 
that has to be recovered from one success. The second risk factor is the possible side-effects. In spite of all the 
elaborate clinical trials, long-term side-effects are not kn own immediately. After sometime they become visible and 
then the drug has to be withdrawn from the market. These are two major risks which one faced in the industry. 
2.3.  The Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research Programme  (DPRP) is being managed by a Drug Development 
Promotion Board (DDPB) and Expert Committee. Representatives of the various concerned Ministries in ICMR, CSIR, 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals etc. are members of the Expert Committee, besides various Industrial 
Representatives. Hence, there is a continuous interaction between the various departments so that no overlap of 
activities occurs and concerted efforts are made towards purposeful development of drugs in Modern as well as in 
Indian Systems of Medicines. 
2.4 Infrastructure 
2.4.1 Infrastructure for research and development activities in the country could be cla ssified into two categories 
namely (i) infrastructure for funding R&D and (ii) infrastructure for undertaking R&D activities. Recognizing the 
profound influence of R&D on the prospects and opportunitie s for the growth of the Indian Drug Industry, a scheme 
titled “Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research Programme” was initiated in DST during 1994-95 for promoting Industry-
Institutional R&D collaborations in drugs and pharmaceutical sector. This programme aims at enhancing capabilities of 
institutions and the Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Industry  towards development of New Drugs in all Systems of 
Medicine. 
2.4.2  In the category of infrastructure for funding R&D fall various government departments, such as Departments of 
Science & Technology; Bio-Technology; Scientific and Indust rial Research; Indian Systems of Medicines and in the 
latter category i.e. infrastructure for undertaking R&D activities falls the scientific agencies like Council for Scientific 
and Industrial Research; Department of Ocean Developmen t; Indian Council of Medical Research, Central Council for 
Research in Unani Medicine; Central Council of Research in Ayurveda, Central Council for Research in Yoga and 
Naturopathy. 
 
 

2.5  Budgetary allocation for drug research 
2.5.1 The Committee was informed that the Department, recognizing the profound influence of R&D on the prospects 
and opportunities for the growth of th e Indian Drug Industry, initiated the scheme on Drugs and Pharmaceuticals 
Research in 1994-95 for promoting In dustry-Institutional Collaboration R&D in drugs and pharmaceuticals sector. The 
programme aims at enhancing capabilitie s of institutions and the Indian Dr ugs & Pharmaceuticals Industry towards 
development of new drugs in all systems of Medicine. The specific objectives of this scheme are: 
 To synergise the strengths of p ublicly funded R&D institutions an d Indian Pharmaceutical Industry in 
developing drugs in areas of national relevance. 
 To create an enabling, infrastructure, mechanisms and linkages to facilitate new drug development. 
 To stimulate skill development of human re sources in R&D for drugs and pharmaceuticals. 
2.5.2 During 2004-05, Pharmaceutical Research and Developm ent Support Fund (PRDSF) was set-up. Under this fund, 
the Government has created an initial corpus of Rs. 150 cror es The interest accrued on this corpus would be used for 
providing financial assistance to R&D pr ojects proposed by indus try/academic institutions/la boratories and also for 
creation of state-of-art facilities in the country, in addition to extending soft loan At simple interest of 3% per annum to 
non-profit making registered societies for undertaking R&D in Pharma sector. However, it was felt that with falling 
interest rates the interest component would not be enough to fund the activities. The Planning Commission agreed to 
provide Rs.150 crores for “Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research” subject to dissolution of corpus of the PRDSF. 
2 5.3 It was informed by the Secretary, Department of Science & Technology that during the financial year 2005-06, 
continued efforts have been made extensively for prom oting R&D in the Pharmaceutical Sector by financially 
supporting R&D projects which may lead to new drug developm ent in the area of diseases which are of relevance to 
our country besides development of new drug delivery systems and veterinary drug development. 
2.5.4 The Committee was further informed by the Secretary, Department of Science & Technology that the monitoring 
of the various projects and facilities which have completed their tenure and completed more than one year has been 
carried out and other miscellaneous jobs like conducting seminars, symposiums, brain storming sessions, interaction 
meets and expert committee meetings were also conducted du ring the year. During the financial year 2006-07, it is 
planned to continue efforts to support collaborative resear ch projects leading to new drug development in the area of 
diseases which are of importance to our country. 
2.5.5 Wide fluctuations were noticed in allocation made by the Department of Science & Technology for Drugs and 
Pharmaceutical Research. While the allocation stood at Rs 150.00 crores in B.E. 20 05-06, this was reduced to 
Rs.105.00 crores in R.E. 2005-06 and has been increased to Rs 130.00 crores in B.E. 2006-07. The Committee has been 
informed that the Government created a corpus of Rs. 15 0.00 crore for Drugs and Pharma Research during the year 
2004-05 The interest to be accrued on this corpus of the or der of Rs. 9.00 crores per annum was to be utilized for drug 
research. During the year 2005-06, Planning Commission recommended enhanced allocation of Rs. 150.00 crores 
under Annual Plan and conveyed that Rs. 150.00 crores allocated for Drug & Pharmaceutical Research would he 
operated only after the existing corpus for Pharmaceutical  Research & Development Su pport fund is dissolved. The 
Government, after adopting the entire process for seeking th e approval of CCEA, dissolved the Fund on 24.01 2006. 
Due to this, the allocation was reduced to Rs.105.00 crores in R.E. 2005-06. The programme will be able to utilize the 
budget provisions of Rs.130.00 cr ores (2006-07) from the begining of the financial year without any procedural delay. 
Such a variation, it is felt, will not have any major adverse effect. 
2.6 Structure of R&D Activities in India  
26.1 As in most countries in the world, R&D activities are done in India by Government R&D institutions, 
universities, colleges, and academic institutions and by the private sector. The Government is by far the largest sponsor 

of R&D in India. It was informed by the DST that the institutional sector comprising the Central and State 
Governments and the higher education sector accounted for 75 per cent (for Financial yealy 2002-03) of the R&D 
expenditure and the remaining comes from the private sector. 
2.6.2 The bulk of the Central government R&D expenditure is  spent through major scientific agencies such as Council 
of Scientific & Industrial Research (C SIR), Indian Council of Medical Research (JCMR), Department of Science & 
Technology (DST), and Department of Biotechnology (DBT), AYUSH, Department of Ocean Development etc. 
Especially after the adoption of the Resolution of Scientific Policy in 1958, a chain of national R&D laboratories have 
been created in India under these scientific agencies. Ther e are about 550 Central Government R&D institutions in the 
country. The remaining 17 per cent of the total Central Government expenditure is spent through the 
ministries/departments, such as Ministry of Health & Fam ily Welfare and the public sector enterprises within the 
administrative control of the concerned ministries. 
2 6.3  In addition to directly performing R&D activities, for example in laboratories under CSIR. the Government 
provides a number of push and pull incentives to promote R&D The fiscal incentives whic h are currently provided by 
the Government, includes direct tax incentive, such as deduction of both current and capital accounts R&D expenditure 
from taxable income, tax holidays and indirect tax incentives such as customs duty and excise duty exemptions. Under 
a number of schemes administered by the Department of Science & Technology., Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (DSIR) and Council of Scientifics Industred Research the Government also provides financial 
(loans/grants) and other assistance to R&D performers. Most of these schemes are of recent origin. An R&D 
programme specifically for the pharmaceutical industry was started in the mid - 1990s. 
2.6.4 According to Confederation of Indi an Industry (CII), there was a time when Indian companies used to invest just 
2-3% of their revenue in R&D, but of late, this figure has gone up to 10% in some cases. For instance, Gujarat based 
Pharma companies during 2004-05 spent Rs.205.6 crore or 9-10% of the total net sales on R&D. Similarly, Cadila 
Healthcare spent Rs.103 crore, or 9.2% of its total turnover. This is a healthy sign since increasing expenditure on R&D 
is urgently required by pharmaceutical companies not only to break new grounds in curing but also to face international 
competition in the coming years. It also highlighted the need to expand the R&D activities. 
2.7  Process of New Drug Development 
2.7.1 The drug research is resource and knowledge intensive, time consuming and full of uncertainties. It is estimated 
that nearly 900 million to 1 billion dollars are required to find a new molecule. It requires consistent efforts of 10 to 12 
years and synthesis of thousands of molecules to see the success of one drug commercially. At the same time, there are 
different stages of drug development i.e. Laboratory and Animal Studies (3 to 4 years) Phase I Clinical Studies (1 year), 
Phase 2 Studies (2) years), Phase 3 Clini cal Studies (3 years), Review by Drug Controlling Authority (2 to 3 years) 
where there is return on investment. Over and above, there is no guarantee for such a return. The chances of success are 
extremely low. There is no other industry, which can be co mpared with the drug industry  for such a long chain of 
efforts and such a high risk right from the stage of discovery of the molecule in the laboratory to the stage of approval 
of the newly developed drug by the Drug Controller General before reaching the market place for commercial sale. 
2.7.2  The country has adequate resources in terms of manufacturing base, scientific manpower and facilities to 
manufacture as well as to undertake R&D on bulk drugs. India has shown her strength in finding alternative route of 
manufacturing existing bulk drugs. This will facilitate introduction of all those drugs in the Indian market, which will 
be off the patent in the near future. It is expected that huge market is available from off the patent drugs. 
2.7.3  Since the development cost in the country is much lower than the development cost in the advanced countries and 
the country has sound base, venturing development of new molecules is within our reach. This would, however, require 
joint efforts of the industry, institutions and the government to augment resources both financial and technical 
2.7.4 The process of drug development is a long and elaborate process, which involves a variety of skills primarily 
from chemistry and biological sciences. To design and synthesize new promising molecules, both organic chemistry 

and medicinal chemistry skills are required to identify lead compounds which have some desirable properties to 
achieve the target, and of optimizing the efficacy/safety of the compounds. In ad dition the following skills are also 
required: 
 Target identification: basic biological skill to unde rstand how the disease works and to identify a specific 
target, the inhibition of which plays a crucial role in the particular disease. 
 Pre-clinical testing on animals and clinical trials to determine the efficacy and safety of the molecule. 
2.8 Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research Programme  
2.8.1 The Department has informed that the main objective of the Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research Programme is to 
support industry-institutional collaborative R&D Projects a nd establish State-of-the Art National Facilities in all 
Systems of Medicine including AYUSH, in  addition to extending so ft loan to Pharma industries for R&D projects at 
the rate of 3% simple interest per annum. 
2.8.2  During the last four years under this program, 42 collaborative projects, and 18 National facilities have been 
financially supported besides which loans were provided to 22  industries. Out of the 42 project supported so far during 
the last four years, 25 projects are related to the modern system of medicine, 9 are related to Ayurvedic system, 6 
projects are in the Siddha system of Medicine while one project has been supported in the Unani System of Medicine, 
and a project is related to a veterinary product-herbal based. Among the 22 pharmaceutical industries to whom loans 
are provided for conducting research and development in the pharma sector, 19 projects are related to the Modern 
System of Medicine while 3 are related to Indian System of Medicine (Herbal). 
2.8.3  Among the five industries to whom loans were provided for conducting R&D in the Pharma Sector, four Projects 
were related to the Modern System of Medicine while one was related to Ayurvedic System (Herbal). Financial grants 
have been sanctioned for conducting R&D in the Pharma Sector relating to development of new anti-tubercular 
compounds, novel anti-cancer agents, development of potential adjutants for Vaccines, new chemical entities as 
potential anti-fungal agents, novel anti-asthma agents, new drug delivery systems for sustained release of tubercular 
drugs, development of a novel herbal veterinary product (e ctoparasiticidal), Study of Safe ty and Efficacy Profile of 
Siddha Medicine (Kodiveli) used for rheumatoid arthr itis and another Siddha formulation (KARBOGI) used for 
lecuoderma. 
2.8.4  Other Projects supported under the PRDSF Programme  during 2004-05 are related to Development of Poly 
Lactide-co-Glycolide (PLG) for nano encapsulation of tuberculosis drugs for sustained release for drug delivery 
system, Development and standardization of herbal antimalarial drugs, identification and optimization of Lead 
Molecules for Development as anti cance r agents and Poly Lactide-co-glycolide nanoparticle based oral sustained 
release drug delivery system for treatment of MDR tuberculosis pre-clinical investigation in India on non-viral gene 
therapy of chronic wounds. Clinical and experimental evalua tion of renoprotective effect of some herbal compounds. 
Therapeutics for would healing, Development of Botanical immunomodulators as adjuvants for improving vaccine 
efficacy, Development of drugs for the medical therapy of Glaucoma using na tural products, Lead optimization and 
development of new orally active anti-malarial peroxides, Evaluation of the toxicity and Anti-Leishmanial efficacy of 
Liposomal Amphotericin-B (KALSOME) in mouse model, Synthesis of new chemical entities based on polyketide-
derived Meacrocyclic structures and their amide-linked analogue, using sugar amino acids and related building blocks 
and evaluation of their anti-microbial properties, Scientif ic evaluation of safety and efficacy profile of a Siddha 
tormulation advocated in the prevention and management of Coronary heart disease besides a proposal on development 
of an indigenous and cost effective CD4 and CD8 count assay for HIV/ AIDS (diagnostics) etc. 
 
 

CHAPTER - III 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH 
3.1  The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research has informed that the impressive growth by Indian drug 
industry, the share of which has reached US $ 10 billions, has been possible due to inputs of modern science and 
technology derived from industry and public funded R&D. CSIR  is one of the constituents of this R&D infrastructure 
and has contributed significantly in making the Indian drug industry self-reliant. 
3.2  The Committee was informed by the Secretary of the Depa rtment that R&D cost in India as compared to the west 
just one eighth; the manufacturing cost is one fifth; the fi xed assets cost of manufacturing facility is one fourth; man 
power cost ranges anywhere between one-third to one-eighth and clinical study cost is just one-tenth of that in the west. 
The key lies in identifying the right opportunities, matching them with our strengths and relentlessly pursuing the path 
of making India a preferred supplier of intellectual propert y in the area of Pharmaceutical research & development and 
global leader in the sector. It is possible to leverage th is factor and find ways of converting it into a source of 
competitive advantage. 
3.3  The drugs and pharmaceuticals form a major sector of  R&D in CSIR. A number of its laboratories are having 
world-class R&D facilities to suppor t researches in drugs an d pharmaceuticals. The major emphasis has been on 
discovering and developing drugs for diseases of national and global relevance. In the recent past CSIR laboratories 
have made valuable contributions to the industry and the society in this vital sector. These include several novel drugs, 
which have been successfully commercialized by  the industry, and are currently marketed ( e.g. Saheli, E-mal, 
Elubaquine, Promind, Asmon, etc.) and dozens of process technologies leading to commercial production of high-value 
drugs/drug intermediates (ephedrine, dextropropoxyphene hydrochloride, artemether, cetrizine, amlodipine, naltrexone, 
ciprofloxacin, streptokinase, etc.) and their import substituti on. A recent discovery is that of a novel anti-TB molecule, 
which has been found after sixty years since the last molecule discovered to treat this dreaded disease. 
3.4  The strengths and capabilities of CSIR in this sector lie in a network of its laboratories engaged in R&D activities 
and the world class research facilities established in the laboratories. In order to develop novel products, the CSIR 
laboratories have adopted new approaches and technologie s such as molecular biology, combinatorial chemical 
synthesis, structural biology, genomics, proteomics, bioinformatics, etc. For this, CSIR has established several state-of-
the-art facilities or upgraded the existing facilities to world class level. 
3.5  In the recent years CSIR has geared itself to face the challenges by taking several m easures such as priortisation 
of research programmes, induction of new talent and establishing linkages within CSIR and with other national 
agencies/ industry and creation of state-of-the-art fac ilities as detailed above. The projects networking of CSIR 
laboratories with other R&D institutions and industry is a major initiative undertaken by CSIR to capitalize on their 
combined strength especially in the area of new drugs discovery based on our traditional knowledge, biodiversity, 
marine resources etc. 
3.6  The R&D programmes in CSIR laboratories include a broad-spectrum of diverse areas. The problem areas taken 
up cover both regional concerns as well as problems of global importance, the latter provide a major opportunity to 
compete internationally. Thus the priorities relating to diseases / health risk cover a mission programme on Asthma and 
programmes principally concerned with reproductive health (a ntifertility agents), tropical infections (antimalarial, 
antitubercular, antimicrobial agents), age related disorders (antiosteoporotic, antidementia, anti.-stress, anti-.diabetic, 
antidyslipidemic agents), cataract, tumors and cancers. The other programmes relate to antifilarials, hepatoprotectives, 
anti-ulcer, anti-inflammatory, antihyperten sives, anti-arthritic, biocompatible materials, etc. The priorities relating to 
pathophysiology of diseases cover development of molecular targets, animal screening models, search for novel 
bioactive molecules and plant extracts, chemical characterization of active molecules, developmental mechanisms of 
action studies, novel drug delivery systems, quality control and standardization of product, process technology etc. 

3.7 A network programme on bioactives, involving 21 CSIR  laboratories, 13 universities and three well-known 
organizations Arya Vaidyasala (A VS), Kottakal; Tamil Nadu Medicinal Plant Farms and Herbal Medicine corporation 
Ltd (TAMPCOL), Chennaand Central Council for Resear ch in Unani Medicine (CCRUM), New Delhi in the 
traditional system of medicine, is being implemented far the last five years. It involves screening of Ayurvedic 
formulations, plants, fungi, microbes and insects against 14  disease areas including cancer, tuberculosis, filaria, 
malaria, ulcer, Parkinson’s and Alzheimer diseases, to identi fy new lead molecules. Several new chemical entities and 
new herbal formulations have been discovered by the dedicated discovery groups. For example, interesting leads have 
been obtained on hepatoprotective cum immunomodulation as well as memory enhancement. Two entirely new anti 
cancer preparations in the area of wome n’s cancer are being developed further in collaboration with an Indian firm. 
Also, work on short-term toxicity of two entirely new anti- ulcer preparations has been co mpleted and clinical trials 
protocols worked out. 
3.8  A mission mode programme on asthma has been launched for finding a cure for this disease following the 
realization of CSIR’s role as a nodal player in the field due  to the existing expertise in its allergy group promise shown 
by its herbal medicine (Asmon) developed by IICB. Studies carried out by CSIR have already led to significant 
increase in the understanding of the dis ease by its contributions in several area, viz., atopic nature of asthma, 
identification, purification and characterization of allergic pr oteins (pollen and fungal), identification of T-cell epitopes 
of allergens, development of in-vitro screening proced ure using human endothelial cell adhesion molecules, 
identification of the human lung surfactant proteins in resp iratory disorders, identification of SNPs (single nucleotide 
polymorphism) in few candidate genes for asthma, development and a mouse model of asthma. 
3.9  Predictive Medicine using Sing le Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNPs) 
3.9.1  Under this programme a consortium  of CSIR laboratories have networked with other national institutions. Aims 
have been initiated to study polymorphism of Indian population and create SNP database with the objective to discover 
new SNPs in various genes of importance among Indian population to study specific genetic diseases, and to delineate 
structural and functional relationship to develop appropriate tools of predictive medicines. 
3.10  Development of Drug targets of Pathogens  
3.10.1 The objective of the programme is to identify and ch aracterize differentially expressed genes and proteins of 
selected pathogenic organisms namely Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Plasmodium falciparum, Leishmania Donovan L 
C. albicans, A. fumigatus, V.  cholerae, S. dysenteree, H.  pylori. 
3.11 Development of Drug Targets Using In-Silico Biology  
3.11.1 The programme networks biologists and computational sc ientists have spread across CSIR laboratories to create 
and develop inhouse capability in drug target development using in-silico biology, design programmes for developing 
new software to enable identification of therapeutic targets, develop new tools for predicting toxicity and drug response 
in silica and generate qualified and trained IT professionals for pursuing research in the area of bioinformatics. 
Achievements under the project include discovery of new genes in the SARS virus using modern gene identification 
tools designed de novo and developed in house. 
3.11.2 The Committee during its visit to Regional Research Laboratory (RRL) in Jammu on 16th June, 2006, obtained 
written responses on the application of 3-D computer graphics and simulation in in-silico biology for development and 
design of new drugs and the extent to which it can reduce increased dependency on animal experimentation for testing 
of drugs. 
3.11.3 In reply the RRL has stated that use of in-vitro mammalian cell cultures are the system of choice for 
understanding the desired biological efficacy of test compounds in the development of therapeutic lead molecules, The 
in vitro systems may consist of tissue derived cells for primar y culture to continuous cultures or transformed cell lines. 
The cell lines may mimic in functions to the tissue of origin and are used for understanding the mechanism of action of 

test drugs. In this way not only our dependency on animals could be drastically reduced but it would also be cost and 
time-effective. The cells are also used for evaluating the toxicity of test compounds. Thus, the use of in- vitro 
mammalian cultures is indispensable in the early development of drugs. 
3.11.4 RRL, Jammu further stated that there are lots of so ftware available these days that can, to a great extent, 
simulate the drug-target interactions using computationa l methods. Using these software one can screen hundred 
thousands of compounds in a stipulated time which were out of  reach or to even think in wet lab studies. Screening of 
such a large database of compounds using 3-d computer grap hics and simulations filters out a large number of non-
potent compounds at the in silico level allowing hits to be evaluated by wet lab experiments in vitro and in vivo. 
3.12  Cost-effective processes for Generics  
3.12.1 CSIR has made significant contribution by developing and licensing technology to industry for manufacturing of 
pharmaceuticals and intermediates. The generic market is hi ghly competitive and rapidly growing. The CSIR is in a 
position to provide competiti ve technologies for drugs becoming off-patent’ besides technologies for chiral 
intermediates/bulk drugs of high value and new cost effective, environment friendly, catalytic processes. 
Processes/technologies have been developed for large number of drugs and passed on to industry for manufacture 
Several drug companies are manufacturing these. 
3.13 New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative (NMITLI)  
3.13.1 The programme envisages innovation centred S&T development to place the country as a global leader in 
selected niche areas in collaboration with CSIR and other institutions and industry. Projects being pursued in 
selected/niche areas relevant to the drugs and pharmaceutical s and herbal medicines are diagnostic kit for cancer; oral 
herbal formulation for treatment of psoriasis, gene based new targets and makers for cancer of head, neck, gall bladder 
and brain, new particle based advanced drug delivery systems for liver, cancer, diabetes etc. 
3.14 New Drugs developed by CSIR  
3.14.1 The new initiatives and mechanisms introduced by CS IR have led to development of a number of novel drugs. 
Some of these drugs have been passed on to industry fo r commercialisation or further development. The new drugs 
developed by CSIR laboratories during the last three years are: 
(i) First indigenous clot buster drug (streptokinase) released to Cadila Pharma Ltd. Ahmedabad. 
(ii) A new anti-TB molecule, Sudoterb released to Lupin Laboratories. 
(iii) Anti-cancer agents for breast, Cervix and ovarian cancer released to lndigene, USA 
(iv) Centchroman (once a week female contraceptive non-steroidal pill) to Lumen Marketing Co., Chennai, 
(v) CONSAP (contraceptive cream) released to Hindustan Latex Ltd. 
(vi) VIJAYSAR, a single plant based anti diabetic dr ug is under ulticentric clinical trials at ICMR. 
(vii) A mild anti-depressant agent and an anti-diabe tic agent released to Nicholas Piramal, Mumbai. 
(viii) Natural Calicitrol for skin disorders released to Genova Biotechniques, Hyderabad. 
(ix) Metal gluconates for calcium deficiency released to Prathista Industries Ltd., Secundrabad (AP.) 
(x) Herbal drugs and nutraceuticals for anti-cough, anti- cancer, anti-bacterial, anti-diabetic, wound healing, 
immunomodulators, memory enhancing etc. 
(xi) Antihyperglycemic, a lipid loweri ng agent to Cadila Pharmaceuticals, 
(xii) --Arteether (antimalarial) to IPCA Laboratories, 

3.15 National and International Collaboration 
3.15.1 In the newly competitive R&D environment especial 1y in the area of drugs a nd pharmaceuticals no single 
institution can compete globally effectively. CSIR has thus established partnerships with leading Indian R&D 
organisations and industry for development of drugs and pharmaceuticals. Besides the national R&D agencies/industry, 
CSIR labs are also partnering with leading foreign drug companies and international organisations. CSIR has active 
support and funding of research activities by Government department e.g. Department of Science & Technology 
(hepatitics vaccines, herbo mineral, immunomodulators, rheumatism, gynaecological disorders, vibrio cholerae, 
obesity, anticancer agents, anti-inflamm atory agents, human medullary carcinoma, mycobacteria); Department of 
Biotechnology (national animal centre, malaria, mycobact erium fortuitum, visceral leishmaniasis, mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, immunomodulatory agents, protein stability, antiosteoporotic agents, kala azar, leishmania donovani, ), 
Department of Ocean Development (drugs from sea), Indian  Council of Medical Research (hepatic amoebiasis, DNA 
ligase, malaria, anti-fungal peptides, antimycobacterial, an ti-osteoporosis, tuberculosis, kala-azar), and Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare (Antifertility) and AYUSH (herbal drugs). 
3.15.2 The international funding agencies like World Health  Organization, National Institute of Health, European 
Commission, Walter Reed Army Institute, etc. are funding some of the research schemes on malaria, Leishmaniasis, 
bacterial expressed P. vivax and p. cynmolgi, visceral leis hmaniasis in CSIR laboratories. CSIR is having fruitful 
partnerships with leading Indian and foreign companies which have led to development of a number of drugs. Some of 
the leading industries who have collaborated with CSIR in drug development are Dabur, Nicholas Piramal, Novo 
Nordisk (Denmark), Ecure, ZymoGenetics (USA) etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-IV 
DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
4.1 The Department of Bio-technology has informed that National policy to attract investors and promote technology 
transfer capability is well established for competing player and it is being continuously improved. Several large pharma 
companies such as Ranbaxy, Cadila, Nicolas Piramal, Reddy Laboratories etc. have already become global players, and 
are forging critical partnerships globally. This will e ffectively encourage our science capability with global 
technological competence and capacity for financial investment. 
4.2  It is also envisaged that in near future vast majority  of drugs for treatment will be off patent. Many of the useful 
drugs are expected to go off patent in near future. India’s R&D is adopting to the new circumstances, investment in 
R&D by the private sector has been substantially enhanced the public support for new product development. India will 
also use its knowledge in traditional medicine to develop drugs at affordable prices. 
4.3  The Department is supporting R&D projects/programmes in certain institutes/centers where desired level of 
expertise exists on drug development and allied areas. Besides, the Indian pharma and biotech companies have 
adequate expertise and R&D facilities for new drug discovery, bio-therapeutic molecules, and novel drug delivery 
systems. R&D activities towards development of novel drugs/compounds for leishmaniasis, osteoporosis, HIV/ AIDS, 
malaria, tuberculosis systemic mycosis, cancer, anti thrombosis etc. have been funded by the Department and 
significant leads have been obtained in these diseases. 
4.4  The Department has also supported programmes on genomics and proteomics for identification of genes and 
proteins, which could be the novel targets for drug development. A programme has been initiated towards identification 
and characterization of genes responsible for multi-drug resistance of Mycobacterium tuberculosis for providing a 
better understanding of drug resistance at IISc., Bangalore and CDRI, Lucknow. The Department has established Super 
Computing Facility for in silico studies in genomics, proteomics and drug design at the Indian Institute of Technology 
(IIT), Delhi with an aim to develop nov el scientific method and new software for protein structur e, prediction and 
active site directed drug design. Department is also supporting development of novel drug/antigens delivery systems 
using liposomes, neosomes, nanoparticles etc. at IICB, Kolk ata; Kakatiya University, Warangal; University of Delhi 
(South Campus), New Delhi. Projects have also been implemented towards development and standardization of process 
parameters for drugs and therapeutic molecules at IICB, Kolkata; Delhi University, Delhi; Institute of Microbial 
Technology (IMTECH), Chandigarh; Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU), New Delhi; University Department of 
Chemical Technology (UDCT), Mumbai. 
4.5  The following significant research leads of the completed projects supported by Department have been 
transferred to industry 
 Various immunomodulatory compounds have been isolated from plants: Piper longum, Azadirachta indica, 
Tinospora cordifolia and Berberis aristata. 
 Significant lead compounds isolated and identified from Momordica charantia (anti-diabetic novel peptide) 
and Azadirachta indica (anti-gastric, hyperacidity an d ulcer agents). Leads have been patented. Efforts 
initiated for cloning of gene for novel anti-diabetic peptide and also for technology transfer of anti-
gastric/hyperacidity agents to the industry. 
 Significant anti-oxidant properties in methonalic extract of bark of arjun (terminalia arjuna) established. It 
confers protection against oxidative stress associated with subsequent myocardial ischemic reperfusion 
injury. Two lead medicinal plant extracts (PS-OI and PS-02) have inhibitory effect on HIV-1 reverse 
transcriptase (HIV-1 RT) under in vitro conditions. Preliminary studies suggest lymphoproliferative and 
immunomodulatory potency of PS-02. Initial efforts have been made towards developing a herbal product. 
The following five technologies have been transferred to the industry: 

 An immunomodulatory agent (berberin)  from Berberis aristata to be used for septic shock in burn patients 
(NII, New Dehi to MIS Gufic Biosciences Ltd., Mumbai). 
 An improved agrotechnology for cultivation of Artemisia annua cv. Jeevan Raksha (CIMAP, Lucknow to 
M/S IPCA Laboratories Ltd., Mumbai). The industry has already started cultivation of A. annua cv. Jeevan 
Raksha In Uttaranchal state. 
 a nutraceutical product having immunomodulatory properties (Anna University, Chennai to M/S  Parry 
Nutraceuticals Ltd., Chennai). 
 Improved polyherbal formulation for management of atherosclerosis (BHU, Varanasi TO M/S Surya 
Pharmaceuticals, Varanasi). 
 Elite hybid lines of Mucuna pruriens with improved yield and high L-Dopa content (Zandu Foundation for 
Health Care, Vapi, Gujarat to M/S Zandu Pharmaceuti cals, Mumbai). The cultivation of these improved 
lines have been started by farmers in Gujarat with  by-back arrangement with M/s Zandu Pharmaceuticals, 
Mumbai. 
4.6 Cell-Culture production of Therapeutic Agents  
4.6.1 Efforts are in progress towards protocol development of  production of important therapeutic agents through cell 
culture methods such as podophyllotoxin from Podophyllum hexandrum and berberin from Coptis teeta, 
guggulsterones Z and E from Commiphora wightii and camptothecin from Ophiorrhyza spp. Four fast growing cell-
lines of P. hexandrum capable of synthesizing podophyllotoxin devoid of a-peltatins established. Process is being 
scaled up in bioreactor. A bioreactor facility (20-litre capacity) set up for up scaling of cell culture production of 
podophyllotoxin, anthraquinones and other therapeutic agents. 
4.7  Cell-based Screening  
4.7.1 In vitro bioscreens developed for screening plant extr acts having anti-cancer and anti-diabetic properties. Multi-
institutional project is in progress on using these bioscreens alongwith modern cell signal targets to identify anti-
diabetic, anti-cancer and immunomodulatory agents from plants that have been used in Indian traditional system. 
Screening system has been developed for screening of extrac ts from medicinal plants (used for amoebiosis in Indian 
traditional system of medicine) against Entamoeba histotyt ica trophozytes. Lead extracts have been identified for 
further standardization and product development 
4.8 Isolation and Characterization of New Bioactives/Therapeutic Agents  
4.8.1 Under multi-institutional project, after bio-activity based in vitro screening of 60 medicinal plants (used in Indian 
traditional system of medicine), a total of 35 lead molecules identified so far: 
  Anti-cancer-I5 
  Anti-diabetic-5 
  Immunomodulatory-I5 
 Two anti-cancer lead molecules (from Aegle marmelos and Phyllanthus urinaria) have been patented. Efforts are 
in progress for developing anti-cancer herbal product from lead extracts of Aegle marmel os, Phyllanthus urinaria and 
Vitex negundo 
4.8.2 Following three agreements have been sign ed with the industries under the above project: 
 Anna University with Ranbaxy, Gurgaon to take data on anti-diabetic and immunomodulatory agents for 
further investigation including pharmacological testing, pre-clinical toxicity, clinical trials. 
 Anna University with Nicholas Piramal, Mumbai on anti-cancer agents for higher level of investigations. 

 NII with Nicholas Piramal, Mumbai for further investigations of an antiinflammatory compound isolated 
from Alpinia galanga towards developing an anti-inflammatory drug. 
4.8.3 A new bioenhancer compound (niaziridin) has been isolated and identified from a medicinal plants which has 
been able to enhance in vitro activity of rifampicin by 2.5 to 3.00 folds against E.coli. Activity of niaziridin is being 
further investigated viz-a-via piperine An active principle (saturated fatty  acid) showing significant anti-proliferative 
activity against Entamoeba histolytica trophozoites has been id entified from Oxalis corniculata. The lead obtained is 
being further pursued toward development of herbal product. 
4.8.4 Efforts are in progress for isolation and charact erization of anti-cancer, antitubercular, anti-viral, 
hepatoprotective, and immunomodulatory agents from medicinal plants used in Indian traditional system of medicine. 
4.9 Development of Standardized  and Safe Herbal Products 
4.9.1 Multi-institutional programme has been initiated for developing herbal product for inflammatory arthropathy 
Projects supported for developing standardized and safe herbal products for osteoporosis from the leads available in 
traditional system. Based on leads already available, a projec t has been recently initiated to develop a standardized and 
safe herbal product from Terminalia arjuna for left ventricular dysfunction. Clinical trials is an integral component of 
this project. Projects for developing standardized herbal products for hepatoprotection and diabetes-type 2 is in 
progress. 
4.10 Pilot-Scale Process (s) Developmen t of High Value Therapeutic Agents 
4.10.1 An improved processing technology has been developed for isolation of 10-DAB from Taxus wallichiana on 1 
kg dry needles/batch scale. Process for the isolation of silymarine from Silybum marianum has been scaled-up to pilot 
plant level (40 kg seeds/batch). An improved scaled-upprocess (10 kg/batch scale) has been developed for the isolation 
of camptothecin from the twigs and stem of Nothapodytes foetida. 
4.11 New Initiatives  
4.11.1 A programme on development of standardized herbal products for veterinary health care has been developed. A 
programme on genomics and metabolomics of selected medi cinal and aromatic plants is being developed. The 
programme will aim to enhance the content of desired high value therapeutic agents in targeted medicinal and aromatic 
plants. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-V 
MINISTRY OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT 
(Renamed as Ministry of Earth Sciences) 
5.1 Drugs from Sea 
5.1.1 The National Project on “Development of Potentia l Drugs from Ocean” was taken up for implementation from 
1990-91 with a view to harnessing the potential marine flora and fauna for extraction of drugs for medicinal purposes. 
The research activities include  Systematic collection and identification of marine organisms, extraction and evaluation 
of medicinal properties of products derived from marine orga nisms till completion of clinical trials and development of 
product from the pure molecules. The nodal Institute; Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow has been entrusted the 
responsibility of coordination and implementation; reconfirmation of bioactivity encountered by the other participating 
Institutions 
5.1.2 The Ministry of Ocean Development has re-orientated this programme with the focus on Exploratory and Product 
Development activities, collection of wide range of marine organisms even from deep sea and islands and testing of 
anti-caner, anti-fungal and neurotoxic activities. The routine experiments and defined protocols both for preclinical and 
clinical studies are being carried. The assays for the drug/ metabolite(s) concentrations in bio-samples are developed 
and validated as per the international guidelines. 
5.1.3 The brief objectives of the programme are: 
 Exploratory work: 
 Systematic exploration of the entire  coastline and collections made from deep sea as well for identification 
of more flora and fauna having potential for extraction of drugs and chemicals. 
 Large-scale collection of active materials for characterization and structural determination follow-up studies 
with updating of the computerized database. Assess neurotoxic potential of marine organisms vis-/t-vis 
developing new pharmacological tool. 
 Collection, extraction and biological evaluation of 150 species, and evaluation of biologically potential 
organisms, leading to possible development of new drug (s). 
5.2 Product Development 
 Isolation of biuoactive constituents and development as possible drugs. 
 Development of suitable models for biological activity in certain priority areas. 
 Undertaking regulatory pharmacology and toxicology of 2-3 extracts. Initiation of clinical trials for drugs. 
 Development of herbal drugs from the samples and marketing. 
5.3 Industrial participation in Dr ug Development and Marketing 
5.3.1 During the Tenth Plan, the main activities include further investigation and release of new drugs developed from 
marine flora and fauna evaluated so far. The schedule/milestones of programme have been worked out in detail and are 
being implemented with respect to various activities listed below: 
 A. Activities identified for product development: 
i) Anti-diabetic 
ii) Anti-hyperlipidaemic 
Exploration work: 

i) Collection of new organisms. 
ii) Repeat collection of active organisms for confirmation of activity. 
iii) Large-scale collection of active materials for follow-up studies. 
iv) Characterization and structural determination of the active materials. 
v) Upgradation/additions of “in-vitro” and “in-vivo” test models for screening will continue. 
vi) Strengthening of information technology using database and other facilities will continue. 
vii). HRD training in bioassay and chemical analysis. 
5.3.2 In addition to the above developmental and ongoing activities, the following new activities are being carried out: 
 Introduction of new in-vitru test systems, enzymes assays and receptor binding studies, which will facilitate rapid 
biological screening and determination of possible mechanism of action of active compounds. 
 Development of new models for evaluation of wound healing specially healing of ischemic and immuno 
compromised wounds and expression/lack of expression of new proteins during healing process, molecular target based 
medium screening of antimyocobacterial activity, adaptogenic, anxiolytic, antiaging, memory & learning improvement 
& test system to evaluate reverse transcriptase inhibition. 
5.3.3 The nature has continuously provided mankind with structurally diverse arsenal of pharmacologically active 
compounds. Some of these have been utilized as effective drugs or have served as lead molecule for the development of 
novel synthetic drugs. The oceans are the source of a large group of novel chemical  entities and the serious attempts to 
tap the vast potential of marine organisms as a source of bi oactive compounds that may be utilized as drugs started in 
late 1960s. Now there are more than 10,000 compounds isolated from various marine organisms from a humble 
beginning 40 years ago. Recently a number of compounds ha ve been identified and that are undergoing at various 
phases of clinical trial mostly for the treatment of cancer. Details of some the strategic drugs are given below: 
5.4 Antidiabetic Drug (CDR-134): 
5.4.1 CDR-134 is a crude extract derived from a mangrove pl ant (halophyte) which grows only in coastal regions of 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Orissa, Tamil Nadu and Sundarban areas. This was initially subjected to detailed 
antidiabetic activity bioevaluaiton, a dose of 250 mg/per kg was found to be effective in streptozotacin model in rat. It 
was found safe in regulatory pharmacology studies. The chronic toxicity studies' of preparation was also found safe in 
rodents but when tested in monkeys quite a few of them died and the post mortem report indicated faecolith formation 
in large intestine as cause of death. This prompted to furthe r fractionate the extract to optim ize the antidiabetic activity 
and at the same time remove the toxic component causing harmful effect. The results were very encouraging and the 
efforts gave good dividends as the epicarp. extract (D-123) possess antidiabetic activity while mesocarp (D-125 proved 
to be an antidiarrhoeal preparation. The fruit seed 50 percent ethanolic extract showed promising antidislipdemic 
activity in hamster model. 
5.4.2 Quality control parameters using HPTLC and HPLC finger printings of its solvent extractions have been 
developed, sulphated ash content and its acid insoluble ash content, loss on drying had been standardized. HPLC 
method for the estimation of 0-123 active marker (Gedunin) had been developed. Further other 12 markers also have 
been identified. The antidiabetic fraction was found safe in four standard genotoxicity assays comprising reverse 
mutation, chromosomal aberration both in vitro and in vivo and micronucleus assay.  
5.4.3 The pharmacology and regulatory toxicity studies of D-123 were again carefully undertaken and found safe. This 
new preparation after necessary regulatory approval was ta ken up for phase-/clinical trial . The phase-/trial was 
completed on 31 volunteers and found safe. Now multiple dose efficacy clinical trial has been planned. 

5.5 Antidyslipedemic Product (CUOl/002/004)  
5.5.1 The puffer fish oil (PFO) has consistently produced lipid lowering activity in various models. The safety 
pharmacological studies clearly demonstrated its wide margin of safety in various organ systems. The chronic toxicity 
studies in rodents at 2.5-10 fold higher doses administered for 90 days were also devoid of any gross or microscopic 
abnormalities. The chronic toxicity studies of PFO in healthy young rhesus monkeys for 90 days also indicated that it 
did not affect the body, weight nor any change in texture of skin or mucosal membranes. Further the haematological 
parameters, blood biochemistry,  liver and kidney functions were within physiological limits of normalcy. There was a 
15-20% decrease in serum cholesterol an d triglyceride levels in all the treate d groups of monkeys at one month of 
treatment of PFO, which remained at lowered level upto the end of the study. Thus the antidyslipidemic product is 
quite safe on chronic administration. The bioactivity, regulatory and toxicity data is being compiled for obtaining 
DCGI permission for Phase-I clinical trial in humans. 
5.6 Antihyperglycemic Agent (CDR-134-D123-F194) 
5.6.1 Antihyperglycemic agent (CDR-134-D-123-F-194) is de rived from a mangrove angiospermic plant which grows 
in the inter-tidal regions of the coastal line in Andaman & Nicobar, Orissa, Tamil Nadu and Sundarban areas. The 
antidiabetic dose of 0-123 is reasonably high hence it lim its its acceptability for use in humans. This prompted to 
further fractionate it and the chloroform fraction F-194 exhibited significant glucose lowering profile with nearly one-
fourth dose of D-123. This fraction (FI 94) is now being developed as a better substitute for D-123. The detailed 
antihperglycemic bioactivity in SLM, STZ and db/db mouse model has been completed and effective dose worked out. 
5.6.2 The chloroform fraction also showed the presence of eight compounds and these have been structurally 
identified. The compound K-211 was found to be significantly active though less than F-194, hence, it was decided to 
take up F-194 for further development. The regulatory pharmacology of F-194 indicates its safety in all the test systems 
used. A 10 days toxicity studies in rodents also showed that the F-194 is safe. Further, chronic toxicity studies for 30 
days have been initiated. 
5.7 Antidyslipidemic Cum Antihy perglycemic Agent (CDR-267-F-018) 
5.7.1 The ethanolic extract of fruits of CDR-267 showed pr omising antihyperglycemic activity in STZ and db/db mice, 
The extract was found to be a potent lipid lowering agent in hamster model Both the bioactivities have been localized 
in the chloroform fraction (F-018). Eight pure substances  have been obtained from FO 18 but only K-30 has shown 
mild bioactivities In view of the poor activity in pure substances obtained, it was decided to pursue F018 in the product 
form in view of its dual bioactivities. The safety pharmacological profile is under examination and regulatory toxicity 
studies are also underway for developing a novel antihyperglycemic cum lipid lowering agent. 
5.8 Other Active Leads  
5.8.1 Twelve pure substances from CDR-181 were also isolated but as no significant bioactivity was observed, they 
have been dropped from further development. A new (CDR-258-A001) antifungal and spermicidal agent was 
discovered and pure compound was. isolated There was some interesting lead in the area of CNS diseases as a new 
NIO-450-K030 has shown significant anxiolytic activity. 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER -VI 
DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH 
6.1  Herbal Medicines  
6.1.1 Medicinal plants are being utilized in the preparation of  various modern durgs. The effectiveness of this system is 
contingent upon the proper use and sustained availability of genuine raw materials. There is growing importance in 
traditional health system in providing health care for a wider population Due to side effects of synthetic products, 
herbal medicinal products are gaining popularity in the world market. In  spite of well practiced knowledge of herbal 
medicines and availability of large nu mber of medicinal plants, the share of India in the global market is not 
satisfactory. 
6.1.2 Department of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha &Homoeopathy (AYUSH) deals with the 
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani & Homoeopathy systems of medicine and Yoga Naturopathy as drugless therapies. The 
medicines of these systems have major portion of plant based materials. About 95% medicine have only plant based 
ingredients and remaining 5% have al so mineral and metallic compounds. De partment of AYUSH has identified a few 
priority areas like quality education, R&D, development of  medicinal plants for raw ma terial and to ensure good 
quality standard of drugs. 
6.1.3 Standardization and quality control of AYUSH drugs is  one of the top priority areas of AYUSH Department. The 
Department has identified short-term and long terms stra tegies to ensure the quality ASU Drugs. As a long-term 
strategy, the Department has taken up the fundamental work of developing Pharmacopoeial monographs which 
emphasize on identity, purity and strength of AYUSH drugs . This work is being carried out with the help of 
Pharmacopoeia Committees separately set up for Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani & Homoeopathy comprising the experts of 
Botany, Chemistry, Phyto-Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Chemis try of respective systems of medicines. The scientific 
work on the monographs is carried out by Pharmac opoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicines (PLIM), and 
Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeial Laboratory (HPL), both at Ghaziabad. To develop pharmacopoeias of plant based drugs 
used in AYUSH system require high scientific work on Bo tany, Chemistry and Phyto-Chemistry and therefore, the 
work was outsourced to 30 laboratories belonging to Council of Scientific & Industrial Re search (CSIR), Universities, 
Central Council for Research in Ayur veda & Siddha (CCRAS), Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine 
(CCRUM) and other eminent scientific in stitutions in the country. These labor atories have helped to develop 150 
monographs on single drugs. Presently 20  Laboratories are working to develop standard operative processor (SOP) of 
manufacturing process, Pharmacopoeial standards and shelf life studies of Ayurveda Siddha Unani Drugs. 
6.1.4 The Department has achieved the first target of publishing official formularies and Pharmacopoeias which acts as 
mandatory guidelines for the manufactures to prepare medicines. Accordingly National Formulary for Ayurveda 2 
volumes, for Unani 3 volumes and for Siddha 1 volume have been published. These formularies contain the 
composition of the formulations, the proportion of the ingredie nts, method of preparation indications and dose etc. The 
work for more volumes is continuing. 
6.1.5 An other important landmark in the Ayurveda Siddha Unani drug development is the publication of the 
Pharmacopoeial monographs. The Official Pharmacopoeias describing identity, purity and strength of single drugs has 
been published. Ayurveda Pharmacopoeias of India 4 volumes has been published and 5th volume is under publication. 
Unani Pharmacopoeias of India one volume and Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeias in 8 volumes have been published. 
This is a scientific work of continuous nature and the Department is allocating sufficient budgetary provision as well as 
monitoring these activities regularly 
6.1.6 The main R&D work on drugs development Programme of AYUSH system is carried  out through its Research 
Councils i.e. Central Council for Research in Ayurveda  & Siddha (CCRAS); Central Council for Research in Unani 
Medicine (CCRUM) and Central Council for Research in  Homoeopathy (CCRH). Thes e Councils are carrying out 

research in the field in the clinical research, drug research  literary research and survey  & cultivation of medicinal 
plants. All these activities are inter-related and help in the validation and development of drugs of AYUSH system. 
6.1.7 The Department is undertaking R&D activities relating to drug development under 2 programmes. One relates to 
development of Pharmacopoeial Standards of Ayurveda, Siddha & Unani drugs on identity, purity and strength, 
developing SOP of manufacturing process and studying shelf life of ASU medicines. This activity is carried out 
through Pharmacopieial Laboratory for Indian Medicine (PLIM) and homoeopathy Pharmacopieial Laboratory (HPL) 
at Ghaziabad. 20 other CSIR institutions, universities and CCRAS laboratories are also engaged in this activity. They 
have been given the annual targets for the 3 year programme. SOPs of about 100 formulations has been worked out and 
the work is going on for different batches and different drugs. 
6.1.8 Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha is carrying out research on 19 disease conditions, which is 
a part of long term programme. The following new areas were focused as drug related research in the last 3 years: 
 An Oral contraceptive-Pippalyadi Yog is in the clinical  trial phase-III-at AIIMS, Ne w Delhi, PGI, Chandigarh, 
and JIPMER, Pondicherry. Drug standardization work, toxicity studies and biological activities of 8 coded drugs have 
been carried out. These drugs are : 
Coded drugs Indication 
Ayush Rasayana B Rasyana for elderly persons 
Ayush osteo Osteoporosis and fracture healing 
Ayush Liv Hepatitis A, B&C (Kamala) 
Ayush Manas Mental Retardation in Children (Manas Mandata) 
Ayush SL  Filariasis (Morbid cases of Slipada) 
Ayush QOL2 Supportive therapy for the improvement of  
 quality of life in HIV / AIDS and cancer patients 
Ayush RP  Sickle cell Anaemia 
Ayush M Migraine 
 
6.2 Extra Mural Research Scheme  
6.2.1 The Department has implemented a Central Scheme to support project based R&D activities on priority areas 
identified for the purpose in accredited medical and scientific institutions. The research findings of such projects lead to 
validation of claims and acceptability of the AYUSH approach and drugs. The aims and objectives of the Scheme are: 
(i) To develop evidence based support on th e efficacy of AYUSH remedies and therapies; 
(ii) To generate evidence on safety, stan dardization and quality of AYUSH products; 
(iii) To facilitate the validation of relevant and promisi ng practices and skills of traditional health practitioners 
and to further develop their utility for public benefit; 
(iv) To retrieve and revive th e rare classical literature and historical aspects of AYUSH; 
(v) To investigate the fundamental princi ples of Indian Systems of Medicine; 
(vi) To generate a data base on various aspects of AYUSH practices; 

(vii) To generate data on Heavy metals, pesticides residues, microbial load, Safety/Toxicity etc. in the raw drugs 
& finished ASU & H drugs.; 
(viii) To utilize appropriate technologies for development of single and Polyherbal/herbo-mineral products to 
make it globally acceptable. 
(ix) To develop the products those have IPR poten tials to attract national/multinational pharmaceutical 
complanies; 
(x) Human Resource Development especially to inculcate Scientific aptitude and expertise relation to AYUSH 
systems. 
The Scheme was initiated in the 9th Plan and so far 67 different projects have been supported. 
6.3 Clinical Evaluation Of Herbal  Remedies And Medicinal Plants 
6.3.1 For the herbal remedies and medicinal plants that are to be clinically evaluated for use in the Allopathic System 
and which may later be used in allopathic hospitals, the procedures laid down by the office of the Drugs Controller 
General of India for allopathic drugs should be followed. This does not pertain to guidelines issued for clinical 
evaluation of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani drugs by experts in  those systems of medicine, which may be used later in 
their own hospitals and clinics. All the general principles of clinical trials described earlier pertain also to herbal 
remedies. However, when clinical trials of herbal drugs  used in recognised Indian Systems of Medicine and 
Homeopathy are to be undertaken in Allopathic Hospitals, a ssociation of physicians from the concerned system as co-
investigators / collaborators / members of the expert group is desirable for designing and evaluating the study. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER- VII 
GENERAL ASPECTS RELATING TO DRUG RESERACH 
7.1 Use of animals for Drug Research  
7.1.1 The recent international trends in research demand ra tional use of animals and utili zation of emerging alternative 
technologies and approaches. The objective is to develop alternative/ internationally accepted animal models and 
transgenic and knockout animals for drug research and introduce cell-based system 
7.1.2 According to animal activists, any animal research pr oject implies a potential violation of widely subscribed 
moral norms and values. The breeding of animals under caged  conditions, feeding them prepared diets, handling them 
for experiments and sacrificing their lives are violations of  biological species-specific life. Inducing pain, causing 
suffering, anxiety, stress or impairing their psychological well-being are abuses which deviate even more from the 
norm of reverence to life. Induction of heritable deviations of the wild type genome-transgenic animals, genetically 
modified organisms, presents the latest class of violation against the normal norm. 
7.1.3 According to antivivisectionists, toxicity testing in animal do not confirm to good science practice. This is the 
most controversial of all animal proce dures because many people believe that it is unnecessary to test many of the 
compounds. Although not all animals used in toxicity suffer (eg control or low dose groups), a significant number do, 
because the intention of toxicity testing is to induce adverse effects in some of the animals. These tests are intended to 
identify which organs of the body, may be susceptible to damage by a particular chemical. 
7.1.4 The ultimate goal of any animal welfare measure is the elimination of all experiments on animals that are likely 
to cause pain or distress. But this can be only be a drea m at present since new and new diseases keep coming up and 
sometimes eliminating one may give way to another. So the next best measure is to think of strategies that can 
eliminate the use of higher mammals altogether or at leas t reduce the number as much as possible. The importance of 
this approach lies in its combination of animal welfare considerations along with good science and best practices. 
7.1.5 India enacted an animal law as early as 1960’s calle d the ‘Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act’ amended in 
1982 which provided for the prevention of cruelty to animals in general. Under Chapter 4 of the same Act there is 
provision for the control of experimentation on animals. The act also provides for the constitution of an Animal welfare 
board to take care of the welfare of an imals in general, and also provides th at the Animal Welfare Board constitute a 
Committee for the Control and Supervision of Experiments on Animals. This Committee is empowered to take care of 
the legal and ethical aspects of experime ntal animals being used in research an d enact preventive measures wherever 
there is violation of the law. The CP CSEA issued a Gazette Notification in December 98 called “Breeding of and 
experiment on Animals (Control) and (Supervision) Rules, 1998” and its amended notification in February 2001. 
7.1.6 Another area of concern is the use of large animals like cats, dogs and monkeys for experimental work. Unlike 
Western countries, there are very few animal facilities in the country, where controlled captive breeding is undertaken 
for these animals. With the longer duration of gestation, weaning and limited litter size (especially in monkeys) in these 
animals, enough animals cannot be raised by these limited an imal facilities for many of the experimental needs of the 
country. 
7.1.7 Since It is imperative that some selected studies and safety evaluation of certain drugs need to use cats, dogs, 
primates and other large animals, a programme for their captive breeding have to be initiated. This is very much true 
for primates and there is a need to estab lish 2 or 3 national centres of excellence  to breed primates in captivity and to 
undertake work related to reproductive biology, disease problems, behavioural status and population dynamics. We 
should try to preserve and facilitate the growth of a sustained populations of different species of primates unique to our 
country These centres should be large enough to meet the genuine needs of the work involving the use of primates. 
7.1.8 During its interaction with Departments of Biotechnology and Ocean Development, the Committee was informed 
that there were problems in importing animals for pre-clinical  trials. While the country is fast appearing as a low cost 

hub for clinical trials, researchers have to go abroad for pre- clinical trials. This not only increases the cost of research 
here but also cuts down the comparative advantage India has in pharmaceutical research. 
7.1.9 The Committee during its interaction with Department  of Ocean Development was informed that in January 
2002, the Department made requests for clearances of monkey trials for anti-hyperlipedemic drugs. But final clearances 
could only be obtained in February 2004 and that too for dogs. They have stated that such instances are demoralizing 
for the scientists and should not be allowed to happen in future. The time-gap for obtaining clearances should be 
reduced as far as possible. 
7.1.10 Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests assured the Committee that new guidelines adopted by the 
Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervision of Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA), which have become 
operational after 20th December, 2004, have effectively addressed the above concerns. Since then there has not been a 
single case in any court in India and no t one complaint has been received by th e Ministry or the CP CSEA either from 
the animal activists or medical researchers. 
7.2  Golden Triangle Partnership (GTP) Sc heme (AYUSH, CSIR & ICMR Partnership) 
7.2.1 The Golden Triangle Partnership Scheme is a new initiative by AYUSH, CSIR and ICMR and has been devised 
as an integrated technology mission for the development of Ayurveda using the latest scientific tools and technology 
with specific budgetary support. These departments will work together to achieve the objectives of (i) safe, effective 
and standardized classical Ayurvedic products for the id entified disease conditions; (ii) developing new Ayurvedic 
medicines effective in disease conditions of national/global  importance; (iii) utilizing appropriate technologies to 
develop single and poly-herbal mineral products. To start with diseases have been prioritized for which safe and 
effective ayurvedic products are to be developed in a time bound manner These are: 
i. Rasayana (Rejuvenators/Immunomodulators) for healthy ageing. 
ii. Joint disorders 
iii. Memory disorders 
iv. Menopausal syndrome 
v. Bronchial allergy 
vi. Fertility & infertility 
vii. Cardiac disorders (cardio-pr otective & anti-arteriosclerosis) 
viii. Sleep disorders 
ix. Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) 
x. Vision disorders 
xi. Urolithiasis & Benign Prostrate Hypertrophy (BPH)  
xii. Malaria/Filaria/Lieshmanissis 
xiii. Diabetes 
7.2.2 The Department in collaboration with CSIR and ICMR have undertaken a Golden Triangle Project from 2005-06 
onwards with budget provision of Rs.15 crore in current year for setting up integrated technology mission for scientific 
validation of classical, Ayurveda, Unani and Siddha drugs and development of new drugs of contemporary relevance. 
14 disease areas and safety evaluation of Bhasmas/herbo mineral formulations have been identified for R&D. In the 
first phase five task forces have been constituted respect ively for Rasayana, Urolithiasis/ BPH, joint disorders, sleep 
disorder, and cardiac disorders/atherosclerosis. The task fo rces have identified clinical conditions where gaps of 
treatment exist and corresponding formulations recommended by the experts for scientific validations and relevant 
R&D. These formulations have been forwarded to CSIR with details of the ingredients and references for taking up 

standardization and safety evaluation studies. A working group of experts from different disciplines has also been 
constituted to recommend to the Government of India regarding modes and modalities of undertaking safety evaluation 
of Bhasmas and Herbo mineral preparations under Golden Triangle Project. 
7.2.3 The Department is also involving reputed Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani companies in safety evaluation studies of 
Herbo-Mineral formulations under the Golden Triangle Project  with collaborative involvement of Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research and Indian Council of Medical Research. 
7.3 New Patent Regime and Drug Research 
7.3.1 The country has crossed the threshold of a new patent  regime, which has become effective for the pharmaceutical 
sector from January 1, 2005, that is after completion of th e ten years’ transitory period, under the TRIPs. This has 
started a new chapter as patents on produc ts also, in addition to patents on pr ocesses, in the pharmaceutical sector 
would be granted. This will necessitate  innovation and inventio n and make reverse engin eering inadequate. R&D will 
have to be taken up in the right earnest. Researchers have to  apply their creative skills to producing new inventions. 
The Pharmaceutical industry will have to focus its resources and efforts on value-added innovation and development of 
new drugs. 
7.3.2 The Indian Patent Act of 1970, did not have the syst em of patenting “products” in the pharmaceutical sector. 
Only process patents were recognized. By virtue of this, Indian Pharmaceutical Industry was able to adopt different 
processes and thus manufacture a product, which was earlier invented elsewhere in the world. This helped in various 
drugs being available in one therapeutic group, and thereby, also helped in making the prices competitive and cheap. 
But fallout of this system has been that it has not encouraged investments on basic Research and Development (R&D) 
in the Indian Pharmaceutical Sector, as desired. It is un derstood that while on an averag e, companies spend 15-16 per 
cent of their sales turnover on R&D in the U.S and Europe, in India, it is between 1-2 per cent only. 
7.4 Public Private Partnership for Development of New Drugs In India 
7.4.1 A significant change which has taken place in India in recent years is a particular form of Public-Private 
Partnership (PPP). Traditionally , CSIR laboratories such a CDRI did not have much interaction with the 
pharmaceutical industry so far as R&D for new drugs was c oncerned. Neither the MNC’s nor the Indian companies 
were interested in the drugs developed by the publicly funded laboratories. In the previous patent regime, the Indian 
companies actually were more interested in developing pr ocesses for the new drugs and so far as this activity is 
concerned, the Indian companies did co llaborate with the CSIR laboratories. The situation has now changed with the 
Indian companies starting R&D for NCEs. 
7.5 Increase in Human Resource in S&T  
7.5.1 Science and Technology are the drivers of economic grow th, and science education is the backbone of all Science 
& technology efforts in any country. The role of scientific  manpower is critical and there exists a close relationship 
between human resources in Science & Technology and economic growth. For socio-economic development it is 
essential to evaluate how this pool of skilled human resource is utilized. 
7.5.2 The Committee was informed that in the last deca de while improvement in infrastructure has been on a 
reasonable scale, a critical mass of scie ntific leaders has not been achieved so  far specially in the non-engineering 
sectors. This is causing a severe obstacle at a time when  innovation is required on an unprecedented scale, following 
the introduction of the new IPR regime. The current decision making process is fragmented and the different Ministries 
involved do not have a synergistic view of the policy of sc ientific leadership creation. An additional concern is the 
declining interests of students in taking up science as a career. 
7.5.3 As per the Indian Science Report (2005) the national literacy level has increased from 42.4% in 1991 to 59.7% in 
2004. The percentages of students in science at different levels of education are approximately between 25 and 30. Of 

the 48.7 million graduates and higher degree holders (excluding diploma holders) approximately 25% have a science 
background. Out of the 39.2 million graduates 22.3% are from science; out of 9.3 million postgraduates 19.4% are from 
the science stream; and out of 0.3 million doctorates-33% are with a science background. 
7.5.4 A matter of concern however is that in 2000-01, of th e 8.44 million students enrolled at graduate/post graduate 
level only a little over 1% enrolled for Ph.D. The interest in science gradually declines from classes 6-8 to 11-12 (22%-
13.4%). One of the reasons attributed to this is the increas ed dissatisfaction with the teaching quality and the lack of 
interest in the subject. To attract the best students to S&T, we need to begin early. It is therefore essential to analyze the 
problem and find solutions starting from primary level educat ion right upto Ph. D/Post Doc. The main factors which 
require attention are: 
 * Adequate resources/infrastructure 
 * Content and quality of teaching/teachers 
 * Building an evidence based system of job opportunities 
 * Allowing greater mobility in knowledge related jobs 
 * Motivation/incentives 
7.6 Adverse Drug Reactions (ADR)  
7.6.1 In response to a written querry on adverse drugs reaction and monitoring of the same, the RRL Jammu has stated 
that the physician should take into consideration the geneti c make up of the patient and prescribe the drug accordingly. 
ADR can be monitored using molecular biology tools. They also stated that they had developed major programme on 
bioenhancers and bioefficacy enhancers and the objective of the study was to reduce the drug intake by increasing the 
bioavailability of drug by increasing its bioefficacy of drug. In either condition, the drug intake would reduce thereby 
reducing the Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR). 
7.6.2 When asked about the role of comprehensive A dverse Drug Reaction (ADR) Pharmaco Vigilance Monitormg 
Programme in reducing the number of cases relating to illness and deaths among patients, the RRL Jammu replied that 
Pharmaco Vigilance Programme was absolutely necessary to  monitor ADR since it was a process of keeping strict 
watch on a drug released after Phase III studies for human use. Adverse Drug Reactions, reported or noticed were 
properly studied by clinicians and scientists together to  properly document such adverse activities and were passed on 
to the regulatory agencies for further necessary action 
7.7 Nano Technology a nd its Role in Drug Development & Research 
7.7.1 The Committee during its meeting with Agarkar Research Institute at Pune on 28th September, 2005, inter-alia 
held discussions on the role of nanotechnology and its usefulness in the development of various drugs. The Committee 
was apprised that an important research work was being done in the Institute in this connection and the results of nano 
technology was also being confirmed regarding the extent of its usefulness for drug development. Apart from this, 
certain other Institutes like Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute of Medical Sciences, Bose Institute and National Chemical 
Laboratory were also undertaking consider able research in the field of nanotechnology and a detailed plan was also 
being developed to harness the basic usefulness of nanotechnology in various fields. 
7.7.2 The RRL Jammu while responding to a written querry of the Committee on the role of nano-technology for drug 
research and development, replied that Dip-pen nanolithography  can create arrays of antibodies that retain their ability 
to bind to their biological substrates. Nano-structured hydrophobic Active Ph armaceutical Ingredients (APls) hence 
improve oral bioavailability in vivo models to assess the formulability of engineered powders to improve the chances 
of clinical success and commercialization of poorly so luble new chemical entities (NCEs) and APls. Nanoscale 
constructs can serve as customizable, targeted drug delivery vehicles capable of ferrying large doses of 
chemotherapeutics and thereby reducing undesirable toxicities of chemotherapeutic agent. 

CHAPTER - VIII 
COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
8.1 The Committee is of the opinion that  central focus of drug research shou ld be to develop drugs mainly to 
fight common diseases like tuberculosis, leprosy, kalazar, malaria, diarrhoea, dysentery, stress related disorders, 
thoracic diseases, cholera, etc , particularly preval ent among poorer sections of  society lacking purchasing 
power. The Committee feels that strategic public investme nt by Govel’l1ment in the field will be the right 
answer since such investment in drugs will primarily be undertaken with the objective of providing drugs to the 
poor at low cost without profit motive. 
8.2 During the course of evidence, the Committee has b een informed by the Secretaries of Departments of 
Biotechnology and Scientif ic and Industrial Research that despit e India being a low cost hub for drug 
development, drugs remain unaffordable by the poor. This requires further intervention by the Government. 
8.3 The Committee also notes that major chronic diseases  like blood pressure, diabetes, Asthma etc. have 
treatments in the nature of control and not cure. Wi th the growing incidence of  young populat ion getting 
affected by such life style diseases and the continuation  of life-long medication to control such diseases, the 
Committee, even while recognizing the complexity of the affliction, is of the view that we should start looking for 
cures, keeping in mind the increasing number of such patients, their decrea sing quality of life and the side-
effects of the medicines. 
8.4 The Committee hopes that the procedural complexities will become thing of the past. Drug research being 
a long-drawn and costly affair, the f unds should be provided on a long-t erm basis and without spreading them 
too thin. Collaboration with industry is a good idea in not only sharin g of risk but also for commercial viability 
of the product. Besides, there is a need to continue fo cus on diseases, which acquire epidemic proportions in 
backward areas. 
8.5 During the course of evidence, Secretaries of the De partment of Biotechnology and the Ministry of Ocean 
Development highlighted the need for meaningful netw orking, besides focused research. The Committee, after 
hearing officials of various Departments, has felt the need for a more focused appr oach. What is required is 
concentration on our core co mpetencies and focus areas where results can be excellent rather than doing too 
many things without fruitful achievem ents. The Committee is of the view th at due to lack of coordination 
between different departments and int er departmental research groups/insti tutes, repetition of work often 
results wastage of time and money. The Committee, th erefore, emphasizes for strong coordination among the 
various departments/ research institutes to increase efficiency in drug research. 
8.6  The Committee was informed that development of a new molecule involves about US $1 billion and 10-12 
years time, with lot of uncertainties. So, considering th e current pharmaceutical scenario, strategies must be 
designed to have medicines for common diseases within  a short time span and for this Government should 
concentrate on developing new molecules as a long-term strategy. 
8.6.1 On herbal research, as a short term strategy, th ere is a need to develop medicines to combat most 
prevalent diseases like Gastric problems, Arthritis, Di abetes, Stress Related Disorders, Thoracic Diseases, etc., 
for which a well thought strategy requires to be evolved. Time bound research on herbal drugs may be a suitable 
option. It was informed that a larg e number of ISM drugs are being used for a long time, having no acute 
toxicity. But long-term toxici ty on these drugs must be established. A few more experiments could be done in 
scientific manner to make it more meaningful. Public sect or units may be utilized for production of these drugs 
for mass consumption. 
8.6.2 Compilation of a compendium & con ducting clinical trial, which is a long term strategy, must also be 
evolved. Although work is progressing in different parts of India, in a bid to search and isolate effective plant 

medicines, there is a lack of co-ordination among the groups. This often leads to  many miscommunications, 
work repetitions, use of different contradictory methods of study, and missing out on important information. By 
having good networking among these gr oups much time, effort and cost coul d be saved. For this, there is a need 
for a standard data bank on the stud y conducted on traditional medicine a nd information gathered. It would be 
useful to compile a compendium of plants and herbs of traditional medicinal value for easy reference and 
standard data. More emphasis should be given on herbal research focusi ng on development of drugs for the 
diseases commonly prevailing in the country. 
8.6.3 On the Non Herbal research, isolation of a new le ad molecule and designing of Novel Drug ‘Delivery 
System (NDDS) can be done. Also, the classical method s involving extraction, isolation, identification, 
characterization, pre clinical & clinical trials could be considered. As a short term strategy, Developing NDDS is 
the easiest way to compete in the p resent patent regime involving low capi tal investment. Patent expired drugs 
could be considered for developing NDDS  to enhance its bioavailability, safe ty and efficacy. It will take lesser 
time than that of developing new molecule. 
8.6.4 In the Long term strategy emphasi s should be given for the developmen t of new molecule. Though this is 
the area to compete in the world market, it is a toug h process and only a few comp anies could venture out for 
this project. However, it is a fact the some of the Indian companies are investing even 10 per cent of the turnover 
in drug research. A few successes have already been achieved in this regar d. Government funded laboratories 
should frame long term research schemes for developing new molecules. 
8.7 The Committee recommends that an audit report on drug development be prep ared. The audit should 
include the organizational structure, time taken and expenditure since incepti on of the project/research and the 
outcome of the research including produc tivity and effectiveness of the produc t. This audit be completed within 
eight months and a report be made available by August /September 2007. 
8.8 The Committee is concerned about safety of herbal p reparations as far as thei r metallic components and 
toxicity is concerned. The pr oblem of standardization and validation of  drugs has not been resolved yet. This 
needs to be done as early as possible so as to avoid recent instances which highlighted that some of the Indian 
medicines, samples of which were collected in foreign countries, contained metallic contents above permissible 
limits. Such instances underline the importance of regulatory mechanism and genuine certification. 
8.9 Quality control of raw materials is the prime concern  in manufacturing herbal products. Quality control 
of finished products especial ly polyherbal products is a great concern, which requires to be resolved. Quality of 
medicines of herbal origin mainly depends on quality of raw materials. Presently, a major part of the raw 
materials are procured from wild origin, having almost no  control on parameters of cultivation, collection and 
content of active constituents etc. Co ntrolled cultivation could be a crucia l parameter of the quality control. If 
Good Cultivation Practice & Good Harvesting Practices  are developed and implemented raw materials of good 
quality can be ensured. European Guid elines for Good Agricultural Pr actice (G.A.P.) of Medicinal and 
Aromatic Plants, Good Agricultural and Collection Practice for Medicinal Plants (GACP), Japan, Good 
Agricultural Practice for Traditional Chinese Medicinal Materials, People’s  Republic of China etc. have been 
published for this purpose. Recently World Health Or ganization has also published Good Agricultural & 
Collection Practice (GACP) which could be practised in case of cultivation and collection of medicinal plants. 
8.10 The Committee is of the view that  quality control of herbal drugs ha s not been developed sufficiently, 
especially for combination product.  Research on developing standard ization methods involving modern 
instrumentation is urgently required . Though a few attempts have already been made, more emphasis is 
required in this area. Monographs of  more plants require to be incorp orated in the existing Ayurvedic 
Pharmacopoiea. More stringent spec ifications, including use of sophist icated instruments, are to be 
incorporated. Research & developmen t  of marker compounds & Metabolo mics are the ord er of the day and 
stress must be laid in this area. 

8.11 The Committee also feels that ISM products are generally compared wi th herbal products from abroad. 
The Committee is of the opinion that lack  of adequate scientific data has b een a serious lacuna in the field of 
such comparisons. Hence, there is a need, in the opinion of the Commi ttee, for developing comprehensive 
database for providing  a strong impetus to promote research in ISM plants and raw materials as finished 
products. The Department of Science and Technology, therefore, should initiate a plan to control the quality and 
rigours of such work so that the st andard of ISM medicines could be suffi ciently raised to bring them in a 
comparable position with the herbal medicines from  abroad and could be po pularised in the Indian 
pharmaceutical market. 
8.12 The Committee is further given to understand that a number of countries like Germany, France, Canada, 
U.S.A. and China are registering standard ised plant extracts of proven clinic al efficacy and sa fety option from 
natural source as herbal drug s or dietary supplements. However, in sp ite of the fact that India has a vast 
resource of drugs of natural origin, the country is una ble to tap effectively the vast world market primarily 
because it is not having a satisfacto ry system of quality control and registr ation of ISM and herbal drugs. The 
Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that on account of the increasing number of herbal drugs, multiple 
procedures and practices including regi stration of the patenting, etc., it may be necessary to create a separate 
division/cell to regulate the quality of such drugs and provide proper fo cus on related aspects of drug 
development. The Committee, therefore, recommends th at a proper system of reg istration with acceptable 
standards and quality control needs to be  put in position in order to deri ve the maximum benefit from herbal 
drugs. 
8.13 When the Committee enquired from the Department  of AYUSH about procedure/mechanism to get 
feedback about the efficacy of a medicine for a partic ular disease, the Committee was informed that Central 
Council for Research in Ayurveda & Si ddha (CCRAS), is adopting good clin ical practice guidelines and WHO 
guidelines along with Ayurveda and Si ddha guidelines for standardized resea rch for evaluation of efficacy of 
treatment of all the patients for a particular disease. The Committee was further info rmed that as far as the 
Central Council for Research in Un anai Medicine(CCRUM) is concerned , there is a third party assessment 
system about the efficacy of different drugs in clinic al research and general OPD programme. Each Clinical 
Research Unit has been provided with the services of  bio-statistician. Central Council for Research in 
Homoeopathy has an elaborate system for ‘Drug Proving’  which is the essence of Homoeopathy. It is now 
observing the effect of a particular homoeopathy drug  on the health of indivi duals. The Committee is not 
satisfied with the procedure adopte d by various Departments regarding feedbacks on efficacy of drugs 
developed by them. The Committee woul d like the concerned Departments to generate easily comprehensible 
and effective data regarding the effica cy of various developed drugs which mi ght be of help both to the medical 
practitioners as well as to the patients while making a choice regarding administration of drugs. 
8.14 The Committee observes that with the introduction of patent laws, the Indian pharmaceutical companies 
and research organizations have been prompted to speed up their research activities for development of new 
drugs. However, there were complaints from the scient ific community regarding restrictions on the use of 
animals for research purpose. With th e inordinate delay and unrealistic de mands in the process of getting 
clearance for animal experimentation, the research acti vity has become a victim of animal activism. The 
guidelines laid down by the Committe e for the Purpose of Control and Sup ervision of Experiments on Animals 
(CPCSEA) have in some cases stalle d major research in the field. While some of the institutes and private 
pharmaceutical companies have done their studies abroad at higher co st, the government funded institutes find 
it difficult to pursue their research. Th e CPCSEA should initiate steps to provide quick approvals and make the 
system more transparent. The Committee hopes that this will be effective in checkin g irrational delays and 
saving precious man-hours of quality research. 
8.15 The Committee also recommends that  if the above-mentioned guidelines  are found effective, they should 
be incorporated in the Prevention  of Cruelty to Animals Act and in  the relevant rules thereunder. The 

Committee also feels that the scientific community needs to  be adequately informed ab out the new guidelines so 
that projects which have been hangin g in balance for want of approval can be taken up in right earnest. 
Moreover, it was reported to the Committ ee that restriction on the use of anim als is putting inordinate delay in 
research activities. The Committee, therefore, feels that th ere is a need for rethinking  about the composition of 
CPCSEA. More representatives from scientific community  needs to be inducted which can lead to finding a 
rational solution of eliciting maximum scientific results with minimal animal specimen usage considering animal 
welfare. 
8.16 The Committee feels that in-vitro experimentations sh ould be encouraged more to avoid testing of drugs 
on animals and use of 3-D computer graphics by downl oading lead molecule structu res from protein data bank 
and then modifying the same accordingly to the software to design new treatments through new drugs should be 
given more emphasis so that minimum number of animals are used for drug testing. The in-vitro method and 
computer simulation could be taken as a preliminary test for drugs prior to their confirmation on animals. 
8.17 The Committee would, therefore, like to conclude that  since thousands of animals suffer and die during 
drug development testing every year and while experime nts on animals cannot be 10 0 per cent relied upon to 
produce valid results, particularly about the toxicity e ffects on humans, the drug te sting policy needs to be 
reviewed in such a manner as to de vote more attention and resource to al ternative forms of drug testing 
instruments like in-vitro experimentation. 
8.18 The Committee is of the view that an ideal regime of intellectual prop erty rights has to strike a balance 
between the private incentives for i nnovators and the public interest of maximizing access to the fruits of 
innovations. This balance is reflected  in article 27 of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which 
recognizes that “Everyone has the right to the protection of the moral and material interest resulting from any 
scientific, literacy or artistic production of which he is the author” and that “Everyone has the right... to share in 
scientific advancement and its benefits”. 
8.19  The Committee feels the need to promote public pr ivate partnership in ord er to increase funding for 
frontier areas of scientific and technological research in drug development. The Committee is of the view that in 
the world of stiff competition and expe nsive nature of research activity, Indus try has to be involved at least at 
the late stage which is much more expensive than the pr incipal research stage. Public research has to strike a 
balance between Principal research and late stage resea rch. The Small Business Rese arch Initiative (SBRI) 
model has been a huge success in US and Israel and the same could be experimented in India. 
8.20 The Committee is of the view that in culcating scientific temper among the school children is the need of the 
hour to attract more students in opting science as their career which may bring more human resource in the 
research field. Moreover, to check the declining trend in studen ts’ preference to opt science as their career, the 
curriculum for science at all levels should keep pace with developments in the sphere of science education, 
particularly experiment base d and skill based learning st rategies. Besides, there is a need for more interaction 
between the Universities and public funded research instit utes so that the supply and quality of human resource 
needed for high-end research is ma intained. The Committee st rongly recommends impr oving and integrating 
the university system and improving the quality of human resource in researc h. Moreover, the present funding 
for research activities’ is li mited only to few universities involved in  drug research. The Committee is of the 
opinion that more universities should be funded to bring more talent in the field of scientific research. 
8.21 The Committee is of the considered  view that the Human resource de velopment policy for the Science & 
technology sector should be to create sc ience leaders in diverse disciplines a nd to make it easy for Indian Post 
Doctoral and mid career scientists to return home. The way to address this could be to create a National pool of 
at least 1000-1500 central pool of jobs with central support to attract the best scientists from overseas and retain 
the good scientists who are attracted overseas. These scie ntists could be placed at the Centers of Excellence, 
University Science Centers, etc. based on their area of specialization and could be engaged in research full time. 

The details regarding their cadre cont rolling authority, career growth, mob ility/remuneration pattern etc. need 
examination. 
8.22 The Committee also feels the need of  devising flexible ways  of hiring young scient ists and reversing brain 
drain. During its interaction with  the Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Ocean Development and 
AYUSH, the Committee was informed about the need for creating incentives for scientists who presently worked 
on fixed salaries and lacked good promotion scheme. Different  methods/criteria were being presently followed 
by ICMR, CSIR etc. in promotional schemes which needed to be streamlined. 
8.23 The Committee during its interaction wi th officials of Department of Biotechnology and Ministry of Ocean 
Development has been informed about the prevailing  red-tape and regulatory bottle-necks which delay 
commercialization of dr ug products. The Committee is of the opinio n that de-bureaucratization of Science & 
Technology institutions should be ensured and their academic autonomy assured. 
8.24 The Committee while agreeing with the observation of Regional Research Laboratory (RRL) Jammu on 
Drug Delivery System feels that knowledge in the field of Proteomics, Genomics and Bio- Technology should be 
harnessed in such a manner that coul d be designed for developing impres sive drug delivery mechanism with 
precision. Drug Delivery Technique ca n enable patients to derive opti mum benefits from different drugs 
administration. The Committee feels that innovative Drug Delivery System will not only increase the safety and 
efficacy level of the drugs but it can also improve the overall performance of a drug. The precision drug delivery 
system can offer additional advantages, such as easy administration of drugs, in creased patient compliance, 
decreased side effects and considerable reduction in the cost of the development of drugs. The Committee is of 
the opinion that emphasis should be given on deve loping Novel Drug Delivery Systems (NDDS) e.g., 
Nanotechnology, Liposome, Transdermal Drug Delivery System (TDDS) etc. which is a feasible area for India to 
play in the Global market in the new patent regime, apart from its therapeutic advantages. 
8.25 The Committee feels that following tw o things need to be done to de al with the adverse drug reaction 
cases: 
(a) A comprehensive Adverse Drug Reaction Pharma co Vigilance Monitoring  Programme should be 
formulated and should be implemented under capacity building project; and 
(b) The Adverse Drug Reaction Monitoring should be of high quality, done  through a special unit 
manned by experts. 
8.26 The Committee would like to draw the attention of  the Department of Science & Technology to the 
important role of Nanotechnology in the field of drug development and res earch. The Committee strongly feels 
that under the aegis of the Department  of Science & Technology, Institutes  like Agarkar Research Institute, 
Bose Institute, Advanced Research  Centre and Powder Metallurgy and Ne w Materials, Sree Chitra Tirunal 
Institute of Medical Sciences and RRL,  Jammu should try to develop, in joint collaboration, national nano-
missions so that the basic tools of na notechnology could be beneficially ex ploited and utilized in a productive 
way for developing new drugs with precision technology. 
8.27 The Committee would like to draw the attention of th e Department of Science and Technology that the 
Ministry of Earth Sciences has essentially worked on sh oreline mangrove plantation  and puffer fish extracts. 
These research projects could be handled  by the CSIR and the Ministry of Earth Sciences focus on Ocean flora 
/fauna for research studies and examine whether orga nism found in the deep sea and remote areas (arctic 
region) could be the source of medicinal products. The Ministry of Earth Sciences  may prepare a feasibility 
study report for this project based on data available from various sources located in remote region. 
8.28 The Committee appreciates the Golden Triangle Partn ership Scheme which is a new initiative by AYUSH, 
CSIR and ICMR. This scheme should be pursued with all seriousness to- 

 develop safe, effective and standardized herbal products for identified diseases, 
 develop new herbal medicines effective in di sease conditions of national/ global concern, 
 utilize appropriate technologies to develop single and poly-herbal mineral products. 
8.29 The Committee in its 146th report opin ed “that the traditional medicine is popular, accepted and used by 
most of the country’s population. Mo reover, there is growing importance in traditional health systems in 
providing health care for wi der population. Inspite of the Department’s  efforts in formulating Golden Triangle, 
there is a need for giving boost to the herbal medicines. The Committee feels that with the abundant resources of 
medicinal plants all over the country, there is a need to set up an Herbal Research and Development Institute in 
a location where all the variation of our biodiversit y can be tapped.” The Committee reiterates its earlier 
recommendation and feels that development of drugs of herbal origin needs specialized manpower having a 
modern mind set. This Institute will not only depend on classical theory of ISM, but will also have scientific basis 
and approach. 
8.30 The National Institute of Pharma ceutical Education and Research (NIP ER), an autonomous body set-up 
under the aegis of Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, is  a national level Institute in pharmaceutical sciences 
with the objective of becoming a centre of excellence for advanced st udies and research in pharmaceutical 
sciences and toning up the level of pharmaceutical e ducation and research by training the future teachers, 
research scientists and managers for the industry and profession. The Committ ee feels that the potential of this 
premier institute should be utilized efficiently for drug research in the country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE 
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE VARIOUS MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS WHO APPEARED 
BEFORE THE COMMITTEE FOR ORAL EVIDENCE. 
SL No. Date of Meetings                             Witness 
1        2                                3 
  Department of Science & Technology 
1. 05.07.2005 1. Prof V.S. Ramamurthy, Secretary 
  2. Shri K.P. Pandian, J.S. & F.A 
  3. Dr. Laxman Prasad, Scientist ‘G’ 
  4. Dr. G.J. Samathanam, Scientist ‘F’ 
  5 Dr. (Mrs.) S.N. Khan, Scientist ‘F’ 
  Department of Bio- Technology 
2. 05.07.2005 1. Dr. M.K Bhan, Secretary 
  2. Shri U.N. Behera, Joint Secretary 
  3. Shri K.P. Pandian, J.S.& F.A. 
  4. Dr. S. Natesh, Scientist ‘H’ 
  5. Dr. K.K. Tripathi, Scientist ‘G’ 
  6. Dr. (Mrs.) Seem a Wahab, Scientist ‘G’ 
  7. Dr. T.S. Rao, Scientist ‘F’ 
  8. Shri S. Sinha, Scientist ‘F’ 
  9. Dr. (Ms.) Renu Swarup, Scientist ‘F’ 
  10. Shri Virendra Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
  Department of Scientific & Industrial Research 
3. 20.09.2005 1. Dr. R.A. Mashelkar, Secretary 
  2. Dr. C.M. Gupta, Director, CDRI 
  3. Dr. J.S. Yadav, Director, IICT 
  4. Dr. G.N. Qazi, Director, RRL 
  5. Dr. R.R. Abhyankar, Adviser, DSIR 
  6. Dr. S.N. Sharma, Head, RDPD, CSIR  
  7. Dr. D.Y. Rao, Head, TNBD, CSIR 
  8. Dr. Rajinder Prasad, Head, ISTAD, CSIR  
  9. Dr. J.S. Khan, Scientist, CSIR 
  Ministry of Ocean Development 
4. 21.09.2005 1. Dr. P.S. Goel, Secretary, 
  2. Shri S.K. Das, Scientist ‘G’ 

  3. Shri Ajai Saxena, Director 
  4. Dr. Ram Raghubir, CDRI, Lucknow 
  Department of AYUSH 
5. 28.10.2005 1. Shri Shiv Basant, Joint Secretary 
  2. Dr. S.K. Sharma, Adviser, Ayurveda 
  3. Dr. S.P. Singh, Adviser, Homeopathy  
  4. Prof A.A. Ansari, Adviser, Unani  
  5. Shri Bala Prasad, Director 
  6. Dr. G.S. Lavekar, Director 
  7. Dr. Khalid Siddiqui, Director 
  8. Dr. C. Naik, Director 
  9. Dr. B.T.C. Murthy, Director 
  10. Dr. D.C. Katoch, Dy. Advisor 
  Ministry of Environment & Forests 
6 10.01.2006 1. Dr. Prodipto Ghosh, Secretary 
  2. Shri Naresh Dayal, Additional Secretary  
  3. Shri D.D. Verma, Joint Secretary 
  Drugs Controller-General of India 
7. 30.01.2006  Shri Ashwani Kumar, Drugs Controller General (India) 
  Indian Council of Medical Research 
8. 10.02.2006 1. Prof N.K. Ganguly, Director-General, ICMR 
  2. Dr. Vasantha Muthuswamy, Senior  
   Deputy Director-General (BMS) 
  3. Dr. S.D. Seth, Ch air (Pharmacology), ICMR 
  4. Dr. A.K. Gupta, Deputy Director-General & 
   Chief, Traditional Medicine Unit 
  5. Dr. Vijay Kumar, Additional Director-General 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
  The Conm1ittee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 5th July, 2005 in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor. 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1. Shri P.G.Narayanan    ––    Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Prof Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 3. Shri Dilip Singh Judev 
 4. Shri Birabhadra Singh 
 5. Smt. Kum Kum Rai 
  LOK SABHA 
 6. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty 
 7. Shri Pankaj Chaudhery 
 8. Shri Anantrao Gudhe 
 9. Shri Babubhai Katara 
 10. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
 11. Shri Brahmananda Panda  
 12. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya 
 13. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat  
 14. Shrimati Jayaben Thakkar  
 15. Shri V. Aruna Kumar  
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty  
  Shri Alok Kumar Cha tterjee, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri CB.Rai. Under Secretary 
  Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
  Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Committee Officer 
2. * * * 
3. The Committee then considered its future programme a nd decided to take-up for its consideration the following 
subjects in order of priority (i) Drugs & Pharmaceutical Re search Programme with particular reference to Herbal 
Research (ii) *** (iii) *** (i v) *** . The Committee also directed the Secretariat to obtain relevant information/papers 
on the first two subjects, in the first instance from the concerned Ministries/Departments. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 11.55 
A.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XIX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 5th July, 2005 in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1. Shri P.G.Narayanan    ––    Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Prof Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 3. Dr. Prabha Thakur 
 4. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
 5. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
 6. Shrimati Kum Kum Rai 
 7. Shri Birabhadra Singh 
  LOK SABHA 
 8. Shri Anantrao Gudhe 
 9. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
 10. Shri Brahmananda Panda  
 11. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya 
 12. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat  
 13. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh  
 14. Shri V. Aruna Kumar  
 15. Shri Francis Fanthome 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty  
  Shri Alok Kumar Cha tterjee. Deputy Secretary 
  Shri C.B. Rai. Under Secretary 
  Shri S. Rangarajan. Committee Officer 
  Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES 
  REPRESENTATIVES OF  THE DEPARTMENT OF  SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY 
  1. Prof V.S. Ramamurthy, Secretary 
  2. Shri K.P. Pandian, J.S. & F.A. 
  3. Dr. Laxman Prasad, Scientist ‘G’  
  4. Dr. G.J. Samathanam, Scientist -F’  
  5. Dr. (Mrs.) S.N. Khan, Scientist ‘F’ 
  REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF  BIO-TECHNOLOGY 
  1. Dr. M. K. Bhan, Secrctary 
  2. Shri U. N. Behera, Joint Secretary 
  3. Shri K.P. Pandian, J.S. & F.A. 
  4. Dr. S. Natesh, Scientist ‘H’ 
  5. Dr. K.K. Tripathi, Scientist ‘G’ 
  6. Dr. (Mrs.) Seema Wahab. Scientist ‘G’ 

  7. Dr. T.S. Rao, Scientist ‘F’ 
  8. Shri S. Sinha, Scientist ‘F’ 
  9. Dr. (Ms.) Renu Swarup, Scientist ‘F’ 
  10. Shri Virendra Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
2.  At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the Department of Science & 
Technology and requested the Secretary to make a presentation on the aspects related to the Drugs and Pharmaceuticals 
Programme, including Herbal Medicines. The Secretary made a visual presentation of the Programme of the 
Department and explained the different activities under the programme. The Members then sought clarifications on 
points arising out of the presentation. The Secretary replied to them. 
  The officials then withdrew. 
3.  The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 12.20 
P.M. for tea and re-assembled at 12.45 P.M. to hear the Secretary, 
Department of Biotechnology. 
4.   The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the Department of Biotechnology and 
requested the Secretary to make a presentation on the as pects related to the Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Programme, 
including Herbal Medicines. The Secretary made a visual  presentation of the Programme of the Department and 
explained the different activities under the programme. The Members then sought clarifications on points arising out of 
the presentation. The Secretary replied to them. 
  The officials then withdrew. 
  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5.  The Committee then adjourned at 1.45 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

II 
SECOND MEETING 
  The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 29th August, 2005 in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1. Shri P.G.Narayanan    ––    Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Prof Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 3. Shri Birabhadra Singh 
  LOK SABHA 
 4. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad 
 5. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty 
 6. Shri Anant Gudhe 
 7. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
 8. Shri Brahmananda Panda 
 9. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya 
 10. Shrimati Jayaben Thakkar 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty  
  Shri Alok Kumar Cha tterjee. Deputy Secretary 
  Shri C.B. Rai. Under Secretary 
  Shri S. Rangarajan. Committee Officer 
  Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Committee Officer 
2.  The Committee considered its  future programme And recalled that in the meeting held on 6
th June, 2005, it had 
identified the subject matter of Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research including Herbal Medicines for its examination. In 
this regard, it heard the views of the Secretaries of the Department of Science & Technology and Department of Bio-
technology, in its meeting held on 5
th July, 2005. The Committee decided to hear the views of the Secretaries of other 
two departments, namely, Department of Scientific & I ndustrial Research and Department of Ocean Development on 
20th and 21st September, 2005 respectively. 
3.  The Committee further decided to undertake study visit to Mumbai, Pune and Goa from 26 th September to 4 th 
October, 2005 to examine the aspects related to Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Programme including Herbal Medicines by 
visiting some of the Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Labs. The Committ ee also decided to utilize the opportunity to visit, at 
the places of visit, certain institutes/bodies/centers etc., falling within the administrative control of the 
Ministries/Departments attached with the Committee, to acquaint itself with their functioning and also to analyse 
problems being faced be them. The committee directed the Secretariat to take necessary action accordingly. 
4.  The Committee than adjourned at 3.30 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 20
th September, 2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

III 
THIRD MEETING 
  The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 20th September, 2005 in Committee Room A, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1. Shri P.G.Narayanan   ––   Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz  
 3. Shri Birabhadra Singh 
  LOK SABHA 
 4. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty  
 5. Shri Francis Fanthome  
 6. Shri Anant Gudhe 
 7. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
 8. Shri Brahmananda Panda 
 9. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya 
 10. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
 11. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat  
 12. Shrimati Jayaben Thakkar 
 13. Shri SitaRam Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary 
  Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
  REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH 
 1. Dr. R. A. Mashelkar, Secretary 
 2. Dr. C.M. Gupta, Director, CDRI 
 3. Dr. J.S. Yadav, Director, IICT 
 4. Dr. G.N. Qazi, Director, RRL 
 5. Dr. R.R. Abhyankar, Adviser, DSIR 
 6. Dr. S.N. Sharma, Head, RDPD, CSIR 
 7. Dr. D.Y. Rao, Head, TNBD, CSIR 
 8. Dr. Rajinder Prasad, Head, IST AD, CSIR  
 9. Dr. J.S. Khan, Scientist, CSIR 
2.  The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other repres entatives of the Department of Scientific & Industrial 
Research and requested the Secretary to make a presenta tion on the aspects related to the Drugs and Pharmaceuticals 
Programme, including Herbal Medicines. The Secretary made a visual presentation of the Programme of the 
Department and explained the different activities under the programme. The Members then sought clarifications on 
points arising out of the presentation. The Secretary replied to them. 
  The officials then withdrew. 
  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept 

3.  The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the  
21st September, 2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 21st September, 2005 in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1. Shri P.G.Narayanan   ––   Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz  
 3. Shrimati Kum Kum Rai 
  LOK SABHA 
 4. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty 
 5. Shri Pankaj Choudhary 
 6. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
 7. Shri Brahmananda Panda 
 8. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya 
 9. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
 10. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat  
 11. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh 
 12. Shrimati Jayaben Thakkar 
 13. Shri D. Venugopal 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
  Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
  REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT 
  1 . Dr. P.S. Goel, Secretary 
  2. Shri S.K. Das, Scientist ‘G’ 
  3. Shri Ajai Saxena, Director 
  4. Dr. Ram Raghubir, CDRI, Lucknow 
2.  The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other repr esentatives of the Department of Ocean Development and 
requested the Secretary to make a presentation on the as pects related to the Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Programme, 
including Herbal Medicines. The Secretary made a visual  presentation of the Programme of the Department and 
explained the different activities under the programme. The Members then sought clarifications on points arising out of 
the presentation The Secretary replied to them. 
3.  During the course of discussion, the Committee also discussed the process of obtaining clearance in respect of 
animal trial in connection with medical research for drug development. The Secretary informed the Committee that it is 
mandatory to get clearance from the Committee for the purpose of Control and Supervision on Experiments on 
Animals (CPCSEA), which is a part of animal welfare division of the Ministry of Environment & Forests. He further 
informed that the CPCSEA, however, restri ct the use of animals for medical res earch and takes much time to grant the 
approval for animal experimentation needed for drug development. The Committee expressed its serious concern over 
the problem and decided to take up the matter for discussion in its future meetings 

  The officials then withdrew. 
4.   The Committee also decided to ca ll the Secretary of the Department of AYUSH and representatives of Indian 
Council of Medical Research; National Institute of Phar maceutical Education & Resear ch; Committee for the purpose 
of Control and Supervision on Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA) and Drug Controller General of India to hear their 
views on the subject matter of Drugs Pharmaceutical Programme. 
  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5.  The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

V 
FIFTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 28th October, 2005 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1. Shri P.G. Narayanan   ––    Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Prof Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 3. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
 4. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
 5. Shrimati Kum Kum Rai 
 6. Shri Birabhadra Singh 
 7. Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha 
  LOK SABHA 
 8. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty  
 9. Shri Francis Fanthome 
 10. Shri Anantrao Gudhe 
 11. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
 12. Shri Brahmananda Panda 
 13. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
 14. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat  
 15. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
 16. Shri Rakesh Singh 
 17. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh 
 18. Shri D. Venugopal 
 19. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
  Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri C. B. Rai, Under Secretary 
  Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
  REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF AYURVEDA, YOGA & NATUROPATHY, 
  UNANI, SIDDHA AND HOMOEOPATHY (AYUSH) 
  1. Shri Shiv Basant, Joint Secretary 
  2. Dr S.K. Sharma, Adviser Ayurveda 
  3. Dr. S. P. Singh, Adviser, Homeopathy 
  4. Prof. A.A. Ansari. Adviser, Unani 
  5. Shri Bala Prasad, Director 
  6. Dr. G.S. Lavekar, Director 
  7. Dr. Khalid Siddiqui, Director 
  8. Dr. C. Naik, Director 
  9. Dr. B.T.C. Murthy, Director 

  10. Dr. D.C. Katoch, Dy. Advisor 
2.  * * * 
3.  The Chairman informed the Committee that due to pre- occupation of the Secretary of the Department of AYUSH 
and on her request, he had permitted the Joint Secretary, Shri Shiv Basant to express the Department’s views on the 
Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Programme including Herbal Medicines. 
4.   The Chairman, then, welcomed the Joint Secretary and other representatives of the Department of AYUSH and 
requested the Joint Secretary to make a presentation on th e Programme. The Joint Secretary and other officials of the 
Department made a visual presentation of the Programme of the Department and explained the various ongoing and 
proposed activities under the programme. The Members then  sought clarifications on points arising out of the 
presentation. The officials replied to them. 
  The officials then withdrew. 
  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5.  * * * 
6.  The Committee adjourned at 1.15 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 20th December, 2005 in Room No. 121 (Committee Chairman's 
Room), First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT  
 1. Shri P.G. Narayanan    —    Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Prof. Saif-ud-din Soz 
 3. Dr. Prabha Thakur 
 4. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
 5. Smt. Kum Kum Rai 
  LOK SABHA 
 6. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty 
 7. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad 
 8. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
 9. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
 10. Shri Rakesh Singh 
 11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
  Shri Alok Kumar Cha tterjee, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri C. B. Rai, Under Secretary 
  Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
2. * * * 
3. * * * 
4. The Committee, then, decided to hear the oral evidence of  the representatives of the Ministry of Environment  and 
forests in respect of control and supe rvision on experiments on Animals for the purpose of Drugs and Pharmaceutical 
Research, in its next meeting to be held on the 10
th January, 2006. The Committee al so decided to hear the Drugs 
Controller General of India and representatives of Indian Council of Medical Research in the matter in its future 
meetings. 
5.The Committee then adjourned at 4.35 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

IX  
NINTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 10th January, 2006 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT  
 1. Shri P.G. Narayanan     —     Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
 3. Shrimati Kum Kum Rai 
 4. Shri Birabhadra Singh 
  LOK SABHA 
 5. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty 
 6. Shri Pankaj Choudhary 
 7. Shri Francis Fanthome 
 8. Shri Anant Gudhe 
 9. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
 10. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya 
 11. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
 12. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat  
 13. Shrimati Jayaben Thakkar 
 14. Shri Sita Ram Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
  Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary  
  Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
  REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
  1. Dr. Prodipto Ghosh, Secretary 
  2. Shri Naresh Dayal, Additional Secretary 
  3. Shri D.D. Verma, Joint Secretary 
2.   The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other repr esentatives of the Ministry of Environment & Forests and 
requested the Secretary to clarify certain  points regarding experimentation on an imals for medical research and aspects 
relating to conservation of medicinal plants under th e Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Programme. The Secretary gave 
clarifications on the points raised by th e Chairman. The Members then sought clarifications on points arising out of the 
presentation. The Secretary replied to them. 
2A.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3.  The Committee then decided to hear the Drugs Controller General of India at its next meeting to be held on the 
25th January, 2006 to hear his views on the subject. 
4.  The Committee then adjourned at 3.10 
P.M. 
 
 
 

X 
TENTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 30th January, 2006 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1. Shri P.G.Narayanan    —    Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
 3. Shri Birabhadra Singh 
  LOK  SABHA 
 4. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty  
 5. Shri Francis Fanthome  
 6. Shri Anant Gudhe 
 7. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat  
 8. Shri Rakesh Singh 
 9. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh 
 9. Shri D. Venugopal 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
  Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary  
  Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
  Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
  REPRESENTATIVE OF THE OFFICE OF DRUGS CONTROLLER GENERAL (INDIA)  
  Shri Ashwani Kumar, Drugs Controller General (India) 
2.  * * * 
3.  * * * 
4.  The Chairman then welcomed the Drugs Controller General (India) and requested him to make a presentation on 
the aspects related to the Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Resear ch, including Herbal Medicines. The Drugs Controller 
General made a visual presentation on the role of his office on the subject and explained the various activities under the 
programme. The Members then sought clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation. The Drugs Controller 
General replied to them. 
  The official then withdrew. 
4A.   A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5.  The Committee then decided to hear the Director Gene ral, Indian Council of Medical Research at its next 
meeting to be held on the 10th February, 2006. It also decided to have an internal discussion on the same day on the 
Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2005, which has been referred to the Committee by the Hon’ble Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha for examination and report. 
6.  The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 
P.M. 

XI 
ELEVENTH  MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 10th February, 2006 in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1. Shri P.G. Narayanan    —     Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 2. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
 3. Shri Birabhadra Singh 
  LOK SABHA 
 4. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty 
 5. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
 6. Shri Francis Fanthome 
 7. Smt Neeta Pateriya 
 8. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat  
 9. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
 10. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh 
 11. Jayaben B. Thakkar 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
  Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary  
  Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
  REPRESENTATIVES OF THE INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH 
 1. Prof. N.K. Ganguly,  Director-General, (ICMR) 
 2. Dr. Vasantha Muthuswamy, Senior Deputy Director- General(BMS)  
 3. Dr. S.D. Seth, Chai r (Pharmacology), ICMR 
 4. Dr. A.K. Gupta, Deputy Dir ector-General & Chief, Traditional 
  Medicine Unit 
 5. Dr. Vijay Kumar, Additional Director-General 
2.   The Chairman welcomed the Director-General and other representatives of the Indian Council of Medical 
Research and requested the former to make a presentation on the aspects rela ted to the Drugs and Pharmaceuticals 
Research, including Herbal Medicines. The Director-General  made a visual presentation on the role of ICMR on the 
subject and explained the various activities under the programme. The Members then sought clarifications on the points 
arising out of the presentation. The Director- General replied to them. 
  The officials then withdrew. 
2A.   A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3.   The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 1.00 
P.M. for tea and reassembled at 1.20 P.M. 
4.  * * * 
5.   The Committee, then, adjourned at 2.15 P.M. 

II 
SECOND MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 27th September, 2006 in Committee Room ‘A’ Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat    —— In the Chair 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Dr. Prabha Thakur 
 3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
 4.  Shri Suryak antbha Acharya  
 5. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 
 6. Shri Kamal Akhtar 
 7. Shri Saman Pathak 
 8. Dr. Barun Mukherjee 
  LOK SABHA 
 9. Shri Pankaj Choudhary 
 10. Shri Francis Fanthome 
 11. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
 12. Shri Brahmananda Panda  
 13. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya 
 14. Shri Pratik Prakashbapu Patil  
 15. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh 
 16. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar  
 17. Shri Mitrasen Yadav 
 18. Shri Sita Ram Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
  Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary  
  Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
2.  In the absence of the Chairman, Shri Ba chi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat chaired the meeting. 
3.  The Committee took-up for consideration its draft One Hundred Sixty-second Report on Drugs & 
Pharmaceuticals Programme including herbal medicines. After some discussion on the said report, the Committee 
observed that there is a need to seek some more clarifications regarding certain points and it, hence, directed the 
Secretariat to obtain further clarifications from the Mini stry of Earth Sciences and Department of Science & 
Technology. * * * 
4.  The Committee then adjourned at 11.40 
A.M. to meet again on Monday, the 16th October, 2006. 
 
 
 
 

III  
THIRD MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 16th October, 2006 in Committee Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT  
 1. Shri P.G. Narayanan     ––   Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Shri Suryakantbha Acharya 
 3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi  
 4. Shri Saman Pathak  
 5. Dr. Barun Mukherjee 
  LOK SABHA 
 6. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty 
 7. Shri Pankaj Choudhary 
 8. Shri Francis Fanthome 
 9. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
 10. Shri Brahmananda Panda 
 11. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya 
 12. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil  
 13. Shri Pratik Prakashbapu Patil  
 14. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat 
 15. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba” 
 16. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli  
 17. Shri Mitrasen Yadav 
 18. Shri Sita Ram Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
  Shri Alok Kumar Chatte rjee, Deputy Secretary  
  Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
  Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
2.   The Committee took-up further consideration of draft One Hundred Sixty-second Report on Drugs & 
Pharmaceuticals Programme including herbal medicines. After some discussion on the said report, some members 
suggested to add/ modify certain recommendations in the report. The Committee directed the Secretariat to do the 
needful. 
3.  * * * 
4.  The Committee then adjourned at 12.05
P.M. to meet again at 11.00A.M. on Monday, the 6th November, 2006. 
 
 
 
 

IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 6th November, 2006 in Committee Room ‘B’ Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat      — In the Chair. 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Dr. Prabha Thakur 
 3. Shri Suryakantbha Acharya  
 4. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 
 5. Shri Jabir Husain 
 6. Dr. Barun Mukherjee 
  LOK SABHA 
 7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty 
 8. Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
 9. Shri Pankaj Choudhary 
 10. Shri Francis Fanthome 
 11. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
 12. Shri Brahmananda Panda 
 13. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya 
 14. Shri Pratik Prakashbapu Patil  
 15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
  Shri C. B. Rai, Under Secretary 
  Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
2.   In the absence of the Chairman, Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat chaired the meeting. 
3.   The Committee took-up further consideration of its draft One Hundred Sixty-second Report on Drugs & 
Pharmaceuticals Programme including herbal medicines. Some  members suggested certain modifications in the report 
which were carried out. The Committee, thereafter, adopted the report. 
4.   The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

V 
FIFTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 12th December, 2006 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1. Shri P.G. Narayanan    ——     Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 
 3. Shri Saman Pathak 
 4. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
 5. Dr. Barun Mukherjee 
  LOK SABHA 
 6. Shri Francis Fanthome 
 7. Shri Brahmananda Panda  
 8. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli 
 9. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar  
 10. Shri Mitrasen Yadav 
 11. Shri Sita Ram Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
  Shri Alok Kumar Chatte rjee, Deputy Secretary  
  Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary 
  Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
2.  * * * 
3.  The Committee decided to present *** the 162
nd report which was adopted by it in its meeting held on 6th 
November, 2006. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy to 
present the reports in Rajya Sabha and to lay the copies of the reports on the table of Lok Sabha by Shri Francis 
Fanthome and in his absence by Shri Brahmananda Panda. 
4.  * * * 
4.  The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 P.M. 
 
 
 
 