 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
April, 2022/ Vaisakha, 1944 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2021 
 
VOLUME – II 
MEMORANDA SUBMITTED BY INDIVIDUALS/EXPERTS/INSTITUTIONS 
 
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on the 21st April, 2022) 
(Forwarded to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on the 21st April, 2022) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st  July, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21st July, 2022) 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
365 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
 
 

 
 
LIST OF INSTITUTIONS AND INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE SUBMITTED WRITTEN 
COMMENTS ON THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2021 
 
Individuals on behalf of institutions 
 
1. Shri Praveen Bhargav, Wildlife First, Bengaluru 
2. Shri Ritwick Dutta, Legal Initiative for Forest & Environment, New Delhi 
3. Shri T.R. Shankar Raman et al, Nature Conservation Foundation, Mysuru 
4. Shri Sanjay Molur, Zoo Outreach Organisation, Coimbatore 
5. Shri Varun Goswami, Conservation Initiatives, Guwahati 
6. Smt.  Vidya Athreya, Wildlife Conservation Society-India, Bengaluru 
7. Shri  M.D. Madhusudan, NCBS, Bengaluru 
8. Shri Bivash Pandav, BNHS, Mumbai 
9. Shri Ravi Singh, WWF India, New Delhi 
10. Smt. Suparna Ganguly, WRRC, Bengaluru 
11. Shri Shibaji Charan Nayak, Wild Orissa, Bhubaneswar 
12. Shri Abi Tamim Vanak, ATREE, Bengaluru 
13. Shri Debaditya Sinha, Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy, New Delhi 
14. Shri Samir Kumar Sinha, Wildlife Trust of India, New Delhi 
15. Shri Shubhobroto Ghosh, World Animal Protection, New Delhi 
16. Shri Alok Hisarwala Gupta, Justice for Animal India, 
17. Smt. Debi Goenka, Conservation Action Trust, Mumbai 
18. Humane Society International India, Hyderabad 
19. Shri Shailendra Singh, Turtle Survival Alliance-India, Lucknow 
20. True Conservation Alliance Foundation, 
21. Elsie Gabriel, Young Environmentalists Programmes Trust, Mumbai 
22. Smt. Nikita Dhawan, Youth for Animals 
23. G. Rajesh, Paramekkavu Devaswon, Thissur 
24. C. Vijayan, Thriuvambady Devaswom, Thrissur 
 
Eminent Conservationists/retd IFS officers/retd officials/Academics 
 
1. Shri M.K. Ranjitsinh, New Delhi 
2. Shri Rom Whitaker, Chennai 
3. Shri H.S. Pabla, Bhopal 
4. Shri Akula Kishan, Guntur 
5. Shri S.K. Khanduri, Dehradun 
6. Shri Sanjay Kumar Srivastava, Chennai 
7. Shri R.S. Bhadauria, Lucknow 
8. Shri B.M.T. Rajeev, Bengaluru 
9. Smt. Prerna Singh Bindra, New Delhi 
10. Shri Dr. E.K. Easwaran, Aruvikkara, Kerala 
11. Shri V.G. Bhandi, Sirsi 
12. Shri L.A.K. Singh, Bhubaneswar 
13. Shri K. Sivakumar, Pudhucherry 
 
3

 
 
 
 
Hon’ble Members of Parliament 
 
1. Shrimati Hema Malini, Lok Sabha 
2. Shrimati Navneet Ravi Rana, Lok Sabha 
3. Shri K. Muraleedharan, Lok Sabha 
4. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan, Lok Sabha 
5. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze, Lok Sabha 
6. Shri Dhairyasheel S. Mane, Lok Sabha 
 
Concerned Citizens 
 
1. Shri Manish Vaidya, Ahmedabad 
2. Shri Subir Mario Chowlin, Pauri 
3. Shri Dhiraj Umesh Mirajkar, Maharashtra  
4. Shri Arvind Jain, New Delhi 
5. Shri Bhaskar Asthana, Lucknow 
6. Smt. Jhinku Banerjee, Howrah, West Bengal 
7. Shri Milind Vaman Karkhanis, Panaji 
8. Shri Manan Mehta, Mumbai 
9. Shri Navneet Chahal, New Delhi 
10. Smt. Pankti Desai 
11. Shri Sanjay Kumar Singh, Rohini, Delhi 
12. Shri Yogesh Kumar 
13. Shri Mathen Mathew, Telangana 
14. Shri Sandeep Chakrabarti, Bengaluru 
 
Concerned Citizens with identical representations 
 
1. Shri Adnan Khan, Bengaluru 
2. Shri Dinesh Kallahalli 
3. Shri P. Vijayan, Salem 
4. Smt. S. Jayachandran, Ooty, Tamil Nadu 
5. Shri K.R. Purandara, Bengaluru  
6. Shri Rajendra Prasad, Mandya, Karnataka 
7. Shri Ratheesh Pisharody, Bangaluru 
8. Shri Sharada Ganesh, Bengaluru  
9. Shri Shreekumar, Udupi, Karnataka  
10. Shri K.J. Siddharth, Bengaluru 
11. Shri Srinathmba 
12. Shri S. Subbaiah, Bengaluru 
13. Shri Sumanas Koulagi, Mandya, Karnataka 
14. Shri Sundarmuthanna, Bengaluru 
15. Shri T. Vijayendra, Hyderabad, Telangana 
4

 
 
Memoranda submitted by Individuals on behalf of institutions 
 
1. Shri Praveen Bhargav, Wildlife First, Bengaluru 
2. Shri Ritwick Dutta, Legal Initiative for Forest & Environment, New 
Delhi 
3. Shri T.R. Shankar Raman et al, Nature Conservation Foundation, Mysuru 
4. Shri Sanjay Molur, Zoo Outreach Organisation, Coimbatore 
5. Shri Varun Goswami, Conservation Initiatives, Guwahati 
6. Smt.  Vidya Athreya, Wildlife Conservation Society-India, Bengaluru 
7. Shri  M.D. Madhusudan, NCBS, Bengaluru 
8. Shri Bivash Pandav, BNHS, Mumbai 
9. Shri Ravi Singh, WWF India, New Delhi 
10. Smt. Suparna Ganguly, WRRC, Bengaluru 
11. Shri Shibaji Charan Nayak, Wild Orissa, Bhubaneswar 
12. Shri Abi Tamim Vanak, ATREE, Bengaluru 
13. Shri Debaditya Sinha, Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy, New Delhi 
14. Shri Samir Kumar Sinha, Wildlife Trust of India, New Delhi 
15. Shri Shubhobroto Ghosh, World Animal Protection, New Delhi 
16. Shri Alok Hisarwala Gupta, Justice for Animal India, 
17. Smt. Debi Goenka, Conservation Action Trust, Mumbai 
18. Humane Society International India, Hyderabad 
19. Shri Shailendra Singh, Turtle Survival Alliance-India, Lucknow 
20. True Conservation Alliance Foundation, 
21. Elsie Gabriel, Young Environmentalists Programmes Trust, Mumbai 
22. Smt. Nikita Dhawan, Youth for Animals 
23. G. Rajesh, Paramekkavu Devaswon, Thissur 
24. C. Vijayan, Thriuvambady Devaswom, Thrissur 
 
 
 
5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NO.1235, FIRST FLOOR  
26TH ‘A’ MAI N ROAD  
4TH ‘T’ BLOCK, JAYANAGAR  
BANGALORE - 560 041, INDIA 
TEL:  0 8 0 - 2 6 5 3 5 7 6 3  
FAX:  0 8 0 - 2 6 5 3 5 8 1 1  
EMAIL: wildlifefirst@gmail.com 
WEBSITE: www.wildlifefirst.info 
05.01.2022 
 
To: 
The Hon’ble Chairman and Members 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & 
Forests and Climate Change 
Parliament House 
New Delhi – 110 001 
 
Chairman and Members:  
 
Sub: Memorandum on the Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill 2021 
Ref: File No.LAFEAS-ST15011/1/2021-Comm Sec(S&T)-RSS dt.4.01.2021 
 
In response to the referred letter inviting me to share my views on the Wildlife 
(Protection) Amendment Bill 2021 , I ’m pl eased to submit a detailed 
Memorandum containing the following -  
  
i. Specific clause -by-clause suggestions  with justif ication for seeking 
amendments of many provisions as contained in the Bill under examination; 
 
ii. A detailed analy sis and suggestions seeking ame ndments in  Schedule I  
and II including lists of species that have been downgraded  but which should 
be included in Schedule I.  
 
These submissions are based on over two dec ades of conducting train ing 
programs on the Wildlife Act for Forest and Police officers and Sensitization 
programs for Judicial Officers at various State Judicial Academies. Pragmatic 
suggestions encapsulated in this Memorandum are based on these 
interactions and detailed debates with those who are at the cutting edge of 
law enforcement. Some of suggestions are also based on the book Wildlife 
Law for Rangers that I have authored.   
 
I request the Hon ’ble Committee to kindly consider these suggestions and 
views and ensure that appropriate amendments are recommended.  
 
Sincerely 
 
Praveen Bhargav 
Trustee & Former Member – National Board for Wildlife 
Author – Wildlife Law for Rangers 
Member-Elephant Corridor Committee constituted by Hon’ble Supreme Court 
 
 
 
 
6

1 
 
AS  INTRODUCED IN  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 159 of 2021 
 
THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2021  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
53 of 1972. 
 
A 
 
BILL 
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2021. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In the preamble of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), for the words "protection of wild animals, birds and plants", the words 
"conservation, protection and management of wild life" shall be substituted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
preamble. 
Comment [U1]:  
Suggestions of Praveen Bhargav 
Former Member – NBWL 
 
Editing Notes: 
 
i. Words inserted in Green are suggested 
Inclusions; 
 
ii. Words suggested for deletion are in 
red and struck-out; 
 
iii. Justification for the suggestions and  
suggested insertion of Proviso etc. are 
in Comment Boxes on the right 
 
7

2 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of  section 5A. 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of  section 5B. 
 
 
Insertion of 
new section 
6A. 
Standing 
Committee of 
Board. 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in clause (5), for the words and figures "Schedule I, Schedule II, Schedule III 
or Schedule IV", the words and figures "Schedule I or Schedule II" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (15), after the words "wild animal", the words "or specified plant" 
shall be inserted; 5 
(c) after clause (16), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
'(16A) "invasive alien species" means a species of animal or plant which is 
not native to India “including domestic feral dogs” and whose introduction or 
spread may threaten or adversely impact wild life or its habitat;'; 
(d) in clause (18A), for the words and figures "Schedules I to V", the words and 10  
figures "Schedules I, II and IV" shall be substituted; 
(e) in clause (19), for the words and figures "Schedules I to V and VI", the words 
and figures "Schedules I, II and III" shall be substituted; 
(f) for clause (24), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
'(24) "person" shall include any firm or company or any authority or 15  
association or body of individuals whether incorporated or not;'; 
(g) after clause (26), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
'(26A) "Schedule" means a Schedule appended to this Act;'; 
(h) in clause ( 27), for the word and figures "Schedule VI", the word and figures 
"Schedule III" shall be substituted; 20  
(i) for clause (34), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: 
'(34) "vermin" means any wild animal “specified in Schedule II and” 
notified under section 62;'; 
(j) in clause (36), for the words and figures "Schedules I to IV", the words and 
figures "Schedule I or Schedule II" shall be substituted; 
(k) for clause (39), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 25  
'(39) "zoo" means an establishment whether stationary or mobile, where 
captive animals are kept for exhibiting to the public or ex-situ conservation and 
includes a circus and off-exhibit facilities such as rescue centres and conservation 
breeding centres, but does not include an establishment of a licensed dealer in 
captive animals.'. 30  
4. In section 5A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for clause (d), the following 
clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
"(d) Member, NITI Aayog in-charge of Environment, Forest and Climate Change;". 
5. In section 5B of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words "in proper 
discharge of functions assigned to it", the words "on such terms and conditions as may be 35  
prescribed for proper discharge of functions assigned to it under the Act'' shall be substituted. 
6. After section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
 
"6A. (1) The Board may constitute a Standing Committee for the purpose of 
exercising such powers and performing such duties as may be delegated to it by the 40  
Board. 
(2) The Standing Committee shall consist of the Vice -Chairperson, the 
Member-Secretary, and not more than ten members, to be nominated by the 
Vice-Chairperson, from amongst the members of the Board. 
Comment [U2]:  
This amendment is suggested  
due to the increasing threat of 
domestic feral dogs including 
hunting of natural prey of wild 
carnivores, spread of diseases  
like Canine Distemper Virus…  
Comment [U3]:  
This amendment is suggested 
to ensure that wild animals  
specified in Schedule I are not 
notified as vermin  
Comment [U4]:  
i. Suggest deletion since functions  
are specified S 5C (1) and (2) to be  
performed as ‘it thinks fit’.  
  
ii. “as prescribed” can be used to 
 interfere with the functions  
  as specified. 
 
8

3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 of 1894. 
(3) The Board or its Standing Committee referred to in sub -section (1) may, 
constitute committees, sub-committees or study groups, as may be necessary, from 
time-to-time, for proper discharge of the functions assigned to it.". 
7. In section 9 of the principal Act, for the words and figures "Schedules I, II, III and 
5 IV", the words and figures "Schedules I and II" shall be substituted. 
8. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (b), the words and 
figures ", Schedule III, or Schedule IV," shall be omitted. 
9. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (b), for the words and 
figures "Land Acquisition Act, 1894", the words and figures "Right to Fair Compensation 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of section 9. 
 
Amendment 
of  section 11. 
 
Amendment 
of  section 24. 
30 of 2013. 10  
 
 
 
1 of 1894. 
 
30  of  2013. 15  
 
 
 
 
 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
30 of 2013. 
 
 
 
 
 
30  
 
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
40  
 
 
 
 
 
 
45  
2 of 2007. 
and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013" shall be 
substituted.  
10. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),— 
(a) in clause (a), for the words and figures "Land Acquisition Act, 1894", the 
words and figures "Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clauses ( b) and (c), for the word and figure "section 9", the word and 
figures "section 21" shall be substituted; 
(c) in clause (d), for the words and figures "section 18" and "Part III", the words 
and figures "section 64" and "Chapter VIII" shall respectively be substituted; 
(d) in clause (e), for the words "the Court", the words "the Authority" shall be 
substituted;  
(e) after clause ( f), the following Explaination shall be inserted, namely: — 
'Explanation.—The expression "Authority" referred to in clause (e), shall 
mean the Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Authority established 
under section 51 of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.'. 
11. In section 28 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (b), after the word 
"photography", the words "and “documentary” film-making without making any change 
in the habitat or causing any adverse impact to the habitat or wild life" shall be inserted.   
12. In section 29 of the principal Act,— 
(a) for “after” the word "Board", the word s “and” National Board" shall be    
inserted substituted; 
(b) for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
"Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, grazing or movement of 
livestock permitted under clause (d) of section 33, or hunting of wild animals 
under a permit granted under section 11 or hunting without violating the 
conditions of a permit granted under section 12,  or the exercise of any rights 
permitted to continue under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 24, or the 
bona fide use of drinking and household water by local communities, shall not 
be deemed to be an act prohibited under this section.". 
13. In section 33 of the principal Act,— 
(a) after the words "manage and maintain “protect” all sanctuaries", the words, 
brackets and figures "in accordance with such management plans for the sanctuary 
approved by him as per the guidelines issued by the Central Government ,after seeking 
public comments , including the Gram Sabha, in  accordance with provisions of 
Chapter IV and in case the sanctuary also falls under the Scheduled Areas or areas 
where the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of 
Forest Rights) Act, 2006 is applicable, in accordance with the management plan 
for such sanctuary prepared after due consultation with the Gram Sabha 
concerned" shall be inserted; 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of  section 25. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of  section 28. 
 
 
Amendment 
of  section 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of  section 33. 
Comment [U5]: After sub-section (1)  
insertion of the following  
Proviso is suggested – 
“Provided that no permission  
for commercial  
feature film-making  
shall be granted and use of  
electric generators, erection  
of sets with props, lights and 
 such other equipment  
shall not be permitted”.  
 
Comment [U6]:  
It is submitted that this will provide  
unbridled power to Chief Wildlife  
Wardens of preparing plans, approving  
them, executing the works and releasing  
funds, literally making them Judge, Jury  
and Executioner. This will have 
dangerous  
ramifications for Wildlife.  
Comment [U7]: This amendment has 
been 
suggested to ensure that the  
present procedure of NBWL  
appraisal of proposals is after  
the SBWL decision   
Comment [U8]:  
In Section 32 of the Principal Act: -  
the words “including mechanical  
earth moving equipment” be inserted  
after the words “other substances”.  
This safeguard is to ensure that  
rampant use of bulldozers etc for  
lucrative earth moving activity, due to  
huge budgets, is curbed to prevent 
huge negative impact to fragile habitats 
caused by forest departments themselves.  
 
9

4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of  section 34. 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of  section 35. 
 
 
Amendment 
of section 
36D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 38. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of section 
38L. 
 
Insertion of 
new section 
38XA. 
Provisions of 
Chapter to be in 
addition to 
provisions 
relating to 
sanctuaries and 
National Parks. 
(b) in clause (a), in the proviso, for the words "commercial tourist lodges", the 
words "tourist lodges, including Government lodges, for commercial purposes" shall 
be substituted. 
14. In section 34 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(4) No renewal of any licence under the Arms Act, 1959, shall be granted to any 
person residing within ten kilometres of a sanctuary except under the intimation to 
‘without prior concurrence of’ the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer.". 
15. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub -section (8), for the words and figures 
"sections 27 and 28", the words, figures and letter "sections 18A, 27 and 28" shall be 
substituted.  
16. In section 36D of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
(a) for the words "five representatives", the words "not less than five  
representatives" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(2A) Where a community reserve is declared on private land under 
sub-section (1) of section 36C, the community reserve management committee 
shall consist of the owner of the land, a representative of the State Forests or 
Wild Life Department under whose jurisdiction the community reserve is located 
and also the representative of the Panchayat concerned or the tribal community, 
as the case may be.". 
17. In section 38 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in the marginal heading, after the words "National Parks", the words "or 
conservation reserves" shall be inserted; 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(2A) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the conditions 
specified in sub-section (1) of section 36A are fulfilled in relation to any area 
referred to in sub-section (1), declare such area, by notification, to be a 
conservation reserve and the provisions of sections 36A and 36B shall apply in 
relation to such conservation reserve as they apply in relation to a conservation 
reserve declared by the State Government."; 
(c) in sub-section (3),— 
(i) after the words "or National Park", the words "or conservation reserve" 
shall be inserted; 
(ii) for the words, brackets and figures "sub- sections (1) and ( 2)", the 
words, brackets, figures and letter "sub -sections (1), ( 2) and ( 2A)" shall be 
substituted.  
18. In section 38L of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (o), for the words 
"Inspector General of Forests or an officer of the equivalent rank", the words "an officer not 
below the rank of Inspector General of Forests" shall be substituted. 
19. After section 38X of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
 
“38XA.The provisions contained in this Chapter shall be in addition to, and not 
in derogation of, the provisions relating to sanctuaries and National Parks (whether 
included and declared, or are in the process of being so declared) included in a tiger 
reserve under this Act.”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
54 of 1959. 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15  
 
 
 
 
 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
 
 
 
 
 
30  
 
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
40  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45  
Comment [U9]:  
The suggested amendment will  
ensure that prior concurrence of 
the Chief Wildlife Warden is  
mandatory for grant of new arms 
licences under the existing  
sub-section (3) and renewal under 
the new sub-section (4) in the Bill.  
Mere intimation as contained in 
the Bill is not a sufficient safeguard 
in my considered opinion  
10

5 
 
20. In Chapter IVC of the principal Act, in the heading, for the words "TIGER AND 
OTHER ENDANGERED SPECIES", the words "WILD LIFE" shall be substituted. 
 
21. In section 38Y of the principal Act,— 
(a) in the marginal heading, for the words "Tiger and other Endangered Species", 
5 the words "Wild Life" shall be substituted; 
(b) in the opening portion, the words "Tiger and other Endangered Species 
Crime Control Bureau to be known as the" shall be omitted; 
(c) in clause (e), for the words "Central Excise", the words "Central Goods and 
Services Tax" shall be substituted. 
10  22. In section 39 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(4) Where any such Government property is a live animal, the State Government 
Authorised Officer shall ensure that it is housed and cared for by a recognised zoo or 
rescue centre where it can not be released to its natural habitat. 
15  (5) Any such animal article, trophy or uncured trophy or meat derived from any 
wild animal, as referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) may be disposed of by the State 
Government or the Central Government, as the case may be, in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government: 
Provided that such disposal shall not include any commercial sale or auction 
20 and no certificate of ownership shall be issued for such disposal.". 
23. In section 40 of the principal Act, the words and figures "or Part II of Schedule II" 
wherever they occur shall be omitted. 
24. In section 40A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words and figures "or 
Part II of Schedule II" shall be omitted. 
25  25. In section 41 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (b), the words and 
figures "and Part II of Schedule II" shall be omitted. 
26. After section 42 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
"42A. (1)Any person having a certificate of ownership in respect of any captive 
30 animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy, meat or ivory imported into India or an 
article made from such ivory, and who is not desirous of keeping it in his control, 
custody or possession may, after giving notice of seven working days to the Chief 
Wild Life Warden, surrender the same to him and any such certificate of ownership 
shall stand cancelled from the date of such surrender. 
35  (2) No compensation shall be payable to any person for surrender of  
any such animal, article, trophy, meat or ivory to the Chief Wild Life Warden under 
sub-section (1). 
(3) Any such animal, article, trophy, meat or ivory surrendered under this section 
shall become the property of the State Government and the provisions of section 39 
40 shall apply.". 
27. In section 43 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(4) This section shall not apply to the transfer or transport of any live elephant 
by a person having a certificate of ownership, where such person has obtained prior 
45 permission from the State Government on fulfilment of such conditions as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.". 
 
Amendment 
of heading of 
Chapter IVC. 
 
Amendment of 
section 38Y. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 39. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 40. 
 
Amendment of 
section 40A. 
 
Amendment of 
section 41. 
 
Insertion of 
new section 
42A. 
Surrender of 
captive 
animals, 
animal article, 
etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 43. 
Comment [U10]:  
Section 50(6) already  
contains a Provision  
for such disposal. Hence 
deletion is suggested. Power 
to effect such seizures flows 
from Section 50 and therefore 
the said sections need to be 
read together.  
 
11

6 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 48. 
 
Amendment of 
section 49A. 
 
Insertion of 
new Chapter 
VB. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions. 
28. In section 48 of the principal Act, in clause (b), in sub-clause (ii), the words and 
figures "or Part II of Schedule II" shall be omitted. 
29. In section 49A of the principal Act, the words and figures "or Part II of Schedule II" 
at both the places where they occur, shall be omitted. 
30. After Chapter VA of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted, 5 
namely:— 
'CHAPTER VB 
REGULATION OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE IN ENDANGERED SPECIES OF 
WILD FAUNA AND FLORA AS PER CONVENTION ON INTERNATIONAL 
TRADE IN ENDANGERED SPECIES OF WILD FAUNA AND FLORA 10  
49D. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) "artificially propagated" means plants which have been grown 
under controlled conditions from plant materials grown under similar 
conditions; 
(b) "bred in captivity" means produced from parents in captivity; 15  
(c) "Convention" means the Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora signed at Washington D.C., 
in the United States of America on the 3rd of March, 1973, and amended at 
Bonn on the 22nd of June, 1979, its appendices, decisions, resolutions 
and notifications made thereunder and its amendments, to the extent 20  
binding on India; 
(d) "export" means export from India to any other country of a 
specimen; 
(e) "import" means import into India from any other country of a 
specimen; 25  
(f) "introduction from the sea" means transportation into India of 
specimens of any species which were taken from the marine environment 
not under the jurisdiction of India or any other country; 
(g) "Management Authority" means the Management Authority 
designated under section 49E; 30  
(h) "plant" means any member, alive or dead, of the plants listed in 
Schedule IV including seeds, roots and other parts thereof; 
(i) "readily recognisable part or derivative" includes any specimen 
which appears from an accompanying document, the packaging or a mark 
or label, or from any other circumstances, to be a part or derivative of an 35  
animal or plant of a species listed in Schedule IV; 
(j) "re-export" means export of any specimen that has previously 
been imported; 
(k) "Scientific Authority" means a Scientific Authority designated 
under section 49F; 40  
(l) "scheduled specimen" means any specimen of a species listed in 
Appendices I, II or III of the Convention and incorporated as such in 
Schedule IV; 
(m) "species" means any species, sub -species, or geographically 
separate population thereof; 45  
Comment [U11]:  
It is suggested that this entire chapter  
be deleted for the following properly  
justified reasons – 
 
i. The Principal Act is a Restrictive law 
which prohibits various activities deemed 
detrimental to protection of wildlife. The  
CITES chapter VB contains provisions 
that are enabling in nature and thus  
dilutes the Principal Act;  
 
ii. Schedule IV Appendix I includes  
species specified in Schedule I as well. 
Eg.  
Entry No.69 – Panthera leo (Asiatic 
Lion);  
Entry No.71 – Panthera pardus 
(Leopard);  
Entry No.72 – Panthera tigris (Tiger)  
By virtue of Chapter VB being 
introduced  
in the Principal Act, the clarification  
contained in Section 49R that  
“the provisions of this Act…” shall apply 
to  
those species listed in Schedule IV as well 
as Schedule I & II can be interpreted as  
provisions contained in Chapter VB as 
well.  
  
iii. Section 49 N (1) in Chapter VB, if 
enacted,  
will then enable breeding or artificially  
propagating Lions, Tigers, Leopards and 
several such endangered species found in  
India which was hitherto not permitted.  
 
iv. The provisions contained in Section  
49 M(1) to (8) contains various enabling  
clauses that can be potentially exploited 
to  
facilitate transfer, breeding, birth of  
offspring etc all of which have potentially  
serious ramifications. A careful reading 
of  
sub-section (8) of Section 49M will reveal 
that  
this will apply to issues connected with  
breeding and transfer of tigers, etc 
overriding  
the strict prohibition contained in  
Section 39, Section 49B of the Principal 
Act. 
 
v. Section 49E(1) intends to empower an  
officer as the Management Authority to  
exercise powers under this Act. However,  
Section 3 of the Principal Act mandates 
the appointment of The Director of 
Wildlife Preservation in the Central 
Government  
and the Chief Wildlife Warden at the 
level 
of State Government as Statutory 
authorities. Creation of such multiple 
authorities with overlapping power and 
jurisdiction,   
particularly in a situation where several 
 “enabling” provisions in Chapter VB  
are in conflict / derogation of the  
“restrictive” provisions in the Principal 
Act  
will fatally alter the current legal 
structure ...
12

7 
 
(n) "specimen" means— 
(i) any animal or plant, whether alive or dead; 
(ii) in the case of an animal,— 
(A) for species included in Appendices I and II of 
5 Schedule IV, any readily recognisable part or derivative thereof; 
(B) for species included in Appendix III of Schedule IV, 
any readily recognisable part or derivative thereof specified 
in Appendix III of Schedule IV in relation to the species; and 
(iii) in the case of a plant,— 
10  (A) for species included in Appendix I of Schedule IV, 
any readily recognisable part or derivative thereof; 
(B) for species included in Appendices II and III of 
Schedule IV, any readily recognisable part or derivative thereof 
specified in Appendices II and III of Schedule IV in relation to 
15 the species; 
(o) "trade" means export, re-export, import and introduction from 
the sea. 
49E. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, designate an officer 
not below the rank of an Additional Director General of Forests as the 
20 Management Authority for discharging the functions and exercising the powers 
under this Act. 
(2) The Management Authority shall be responsible for issuance of permits 
and certificates for trade of scheduled specimens in accordance with the 
Convention, submission of reports, and shall perform such other functions as 
25 may be necessary to implement the provisions of the Convention. 
(3) The Management Authority shall prepare and submit annual and  
biennial reports to the Central Government. 
(4) The Central Government may appoint such officers and employees as 
may be necessary to assist the Management Authority in discharging  its 
30 functions or exercising its powers under this Chapter, on such terms and  
conditions of service including salaries and allowances as may be prescribed. 
(5) The Management Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central 
Government, delegate its functions or powers, to such officers not below the 
rank of the Assistant Inspector General of Forests, as it may consider necessary 
35 for the purposes of this Chapter. 
49F. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, designate one or 
more institutes engaged in research on species as Scientific Authority for the 
purposes of this Chapter, for fulfilling the functions under the Convention. 
(2) The designated Scientific Authority shall advise the Management 
40 Authority in such matters as may be referred to it by the Management Authority. 
(3) The Scientific Authority shall monitor the export permits granted for 
specimens of species listed in Appendix II of Schedule IV and the actual export 
of such specimens. 
(4) Whenever a Scientific Authority is of the opinion that the export of 
45 specimens of such species requires to be limited in order to maintain that species 
throughout its range at a level consistent with its role in the ecosystems in 
which it occurs and well above the level at which that species might become 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Designation of 
Management 
Authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Designation of 
Scientific 
Authority. 
13

8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Directions of 
Central 
Government. 
 
 
 
International 
trade in 
scheduled 
specimen and 
restriction in 
respect 
thereof. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conditions for 
export of 
scheduled 
specimens.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conditions for 
import of 
scheduled 
specimens.  
eligible for inclusion in Appendix I of the Convention, it shall advise the 
Management Authority to take such appropriate measures to limit the grant of 
export permits for specimens of that species as the Scientific Authority may 
deem necessary for said purpose. 
49G. The Management Authority and the Scientific Authorities, shall, while 5 
performing their duties and exercising powers under this Chapter, be subject to 
such general or special directions, as the Central Government may, from time to 
time, give. 
49H. (1) No person shall engage in trade of scheduled specimens except 
as provided for under this Chapter. 10  
(2) The Central Government shall prescribe the conditions and procedures 
by which the exemptions contained in Article VII of the Convention may be 
availed. 
(3) Every person engaging in trade of a scheduled specimen shall report 
the details of the scheduled specimen and the transaction to the Management 15  
Authority or the officer authorised by it in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(4) Every person engaging in trade of a scheduled specimen, shall present 
it for clearance to the Management Authority or the officer authorised by it or a 
customs officer only at the ports of exit and entry as may be specified by the 
Central Government. 20  
49-I. (1) The export of any specimen of species included in Appendices I 
or II of Schedule IV shall require the prior grant and presentation of an export 
permit. 
(2) The export of any specimen of species included in Appendix III of 
Schedule IV shall require the prior grant and presentation of an export permit if 25  
the species has been listed in Appendix III of the Convention by India or a 
certificate of origin in other cases. 
(3) An export permit shall not be granted unless— 
(a) the Management Authority is satisfied that the specimen 
concerned has not been obtained in contravention of any law for the time 30  
being in force relating to protection of fauna and flora; 
(b) the Management Authority is satisfied that any living specimen 
will be so prepared and shipped as to minimise the risk of injury, damage to 
health or cruel treatment; 
(c) in the case of a specimen of a species listed in Appendices I or II 35   
of Schedule IV, the Scientific Authority has advised that the export will not 
be detrimental to the survival of that species; and 
(d) in the case of specimens of species listed in Appendix I of 
Schedule IV, an import permit has been granted by the competent authority 
of the country of destination. 40  
49J. (1) The import of any specimen of a species included in Appendix I of 
Schedule IV shall require the prior grant and presentation of an import permit 
and either an export permit or a re-export certificate from the country of export. 
14

9 
 
(2) An import permit for a specimen of a species listed in Appendix I of 
Schedule IV shall not be granted unless— 
(a) the Management Authority is satisfied that the specimen 
concerned will not be used for primarily commercial purposes; 
5  (b) the Scientific Authority has advised that the import will be for 
purposes which are not detrimental to the survival of the species; and 
(c) the Scientific Authority is satisfied that the proposed recipient of 
a living specimen is suitably equipped to house and care for it. 
(3) The import of any specimen of a species included in Appendix II of 
10 Schedule IV shall require the prior presentation of either an export permit or a 
re-export certificate issued by the country of export. 
(4) The import of any specimen of a species included in Appendix III of 
Schedule IV shall require the prior presentation of— 
(a) a certificate of origin; or 
15  (b) in the case where the import is from a country which has included 
the species in Appendix III of the Convention, an export permit; or 
(c) a re-export certificate granted by the country of re-export. 
49K. (1) The re-export of any specimen of species included in 
Appendices I or II of Schedule IV shall require the prior grant and presentation 
20 of a re-export certificate. 
(2) A re-export certificate shall not be granted unless— 
(a) the Management Authority is satisfied that any specimen to be 
re-exported was imported in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter 
and of the Convention; 
25  (b) the Management Authority is satisfied that any living specimen 
will be so prepared and shipped as to minimise the risk of injury, damage to 
health or cruel treatment; and 
(c) in the case of any living specimen of species listed in Appendix I 
of Schedule IV, the Management Authority is satisfied that an import 
30 permit has been granted. 
49L. (1) The introduction from the sea of a specimen of a species included 
in Appendices I or II of Schedule IV shall require the prior grant and presentation 
of a certificate of introduction from the sea. 
(2) A certificate of introduction from the sea shall not be granted unless— 
35  (a) the Scientific Authority has advised that the introduction of any 
specimen will not be detrimental to the survival of the species; 
(b) in the case of a specimen of a species listed in Appendix I of 
Schedule IV, the Management Authority is satisfied that it is not to be 
used for primarily commercial purposes and that the proposed recipient of 
40 any living specimen is suitably equipped to house and care for it; and 
(c) in the case of a living specimen of a species listed in Appendix II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conditions for 
re-export of 
scheduled 
specimens.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conditions for 
introduction 
from sea of 
scheduled 
specimens.  
15

10 
 
 
 
 
 
Possession, 
transfer and 
breeding of 
living 
scheduled 
animal 
species. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Application 
for 
registration by 
breeders of 
Appendix I 
species. 
of Schedule IV, the Management Authority is satisfied that it will be so 
handled as to minimise the risk of injury, damage to health or cruel treatment. 
49M. (1) Every person possessing a living specimen of an animal species 
listed in Schedule IV shall report the details of such specimen or specimens in 
his possession to the Management Authority or the authorised officer: 5 
Provided that the Central Government may exempt one or more specimens 
of any animal species included in Schedule IV from such declaration for such 
quantity and for such period as it may deem fit. 
(2) The Management Authority or the authorised officer may, on being 
satisfied that a person was in possession of a living specimen of an animal 10  
species listed in Schedule IV which had not been obtained in contravention of 
any law relating to protection of fauna and flora, issue a registration certificate 
allowing the owner to retain such specimen. 
(3) Any person who transfers possession, by any means whatsoever, of 
any living specimen of an animal species listed in Schedule IV shall report the 15  
details to the Management Authority or the authorised officer. 
(4) The Management Authority or the authorised officer shall register all 
transfers of living specimens of animal species listed in Schedule IV and issue 
the transferee with a registration certificate. 
(5) Any person in possession of any living specimen of an animal species 20  
listed in Schedule IV which bears any offspring shall report the birth of such 
offspring to the Management Authority or the authorised officer. 
(6) The Management Authority or the authorised officer shall on receipt 
of the report under sub-section (5) register any offspring born to any living 
specimen of an animal species listed in Schedule IV and issue the owner with a 25  
registration certificate. 
(7) Any person in possession of any living specimen of an animal species 
listed in Schedule IV which dies shall report such death to the Management 
Authority or the authorised officer. 
(8) No person shall possess, transfer or breed any living specimen of any 30  
animal species listed in Schedule IV except in conformity with this section and 
the rules made by the Central Government in this behalf. 
(9) The form, manner and period for reporting possession, transfers, and 
births, deaths, and registration of the same under this section shall be as 
prescribed by the Central Government. 35  
49N. (1) Every person who is engaged in breeding in captivity or artificially 
propagating any scheduled specimen listed  in  Appendix  I  of  Schedule  IV 
shall make, within a period of ninety days of the commencement of the Wild Life 
(Protection) Amendment Act, 2021, an application for registration to the Chief 
Wild Life Warden. 40  
(2) The form and manner of the application to be made to the Chief Wild 
Life Warden under sub-section (1), the fee payable, the form of certificate of 
registration, the procedure to be followed in granting or cancelling the certificate 
of registration shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
16

11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
 
52 of 1962. 
 
 
 
 
30  
 
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40  
49-O. (1) On receipt of application under sub-section (1) of section 49N, 
the Chief Wild Life Warden shall, if— 
(a) the application is in the prescribed form; 
(b) the resolutions of the Convention relating to breeding in captivity 
or artificial propagation of species listed in Appendix I of Schedule IV are 
satisfied; and 
(c) the provisions of the Act and rules made thereunder have been 
duly complied with, 
record an entry of the statement in a register and grant the applicant a certificate 
of registration. 
(2) The Chief Wild Life Warden shall, if the provisions or resolutions of 
the Convention or this Act and any rules made hereunder have not been complied 
with, or if a false particular is furnished, refuse or cancel the registration as the 
case may be after providing the applicant with an opportunity of being heard. 
(3) The certificate of registration under sub-section (1) shall be issued for 
a period of two years and may be renewed after two years on payment of such 
fee as may be prescribed. 
(4) Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the Chief Wild Life Warden or 
cancellation of registration under sub -section (2) may prefer an appeal to the 
State Government within a period of sixty days in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
49P. No person shall alter, deface, erase or remove a mark of identification 
affixed upon the scheduled specimen or its package. 
49Q. (1) Every species or scheduled specimen, in respect of which any 
offence against this Act or rules made thereunder has been committed, shall 
become th e property of the Central Government and the provisions of 
section 39 shall, without prejudice to the Customs Act, 1962, apply, mutatis 
mutandis, in relation to species and scheduled specimens as they apply in 
relation to wild animals, captive animals and animal articles. 
(2) Where a living specimen of a species listed in Schedule IV has been 
seized under this Act or the Customs Act, 1962 or any other law for the time 
being in force as a result of import into India in contravention of this Act, the 
Management Authority shall, after consultation with the country of export, return 
the specimen to that country at the expense of that country, or ensure that it is 
housed and cared for by a recognised zoo or rescue centre in case it cannot be 
returned to the country of export. 
(3) The Management Authority may for such purposes consult the 
Scientific Authority as it deems appropriate. 
49R. Where the same species is listed in Schedule I or II and Schedule IV, 
then, the provisions of this Act applicable to such species listed in Schedule I or 
II and the rules made thereunder shall apply.'. 
 
Registration 
of breeders of 
Appendix I 
species. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prohibition on 
alteration, etc. 
 
Species and 
scheduled 
specimens to 
be 
Government 
property. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Application of 
provisions of 
Act in respect 
of  species 
listed in 
Schedule I  or 
II  and 
Schedule IV. 
17

12 
 
 
Amendment 
of  section 50. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of  section 51. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 51A. 
 
Amendment of 
section 54. 
 
Amendment of 
section 55. 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 57. 
 
Amendment of 
section 61. 
 
Amendment of 
section 62. 
31. In section 50 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),— 
(i) after the words "the Director or any other officer authorised by him in this 
behalf ", the words "or the Management Authority or any officer authorised by the 
Management Authority" shall be inserted; 
(ii) after the words "a sub-inspector", the words "or any customs officer not 5 
below the rank of an inspector or any officer of the coast guard not below the rank of 
an Assistant Commandant" shall be inserted; 
(iii) in clauses (a) and (c), after the words "derivative thereof ", the words "or 
scheduled specimen" shall be inserted. 
32. In section 51 of the principal Act,— 10  
(a) in sub-section (1),— 
(i) for the words "twenty -five thousand rupees", the words "one lakh 
rupees" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in the first proviso,— 
(A) the words and figures "or Part II of Schedule II" shall be omitted; 15  
(B) after the words "boundaries of a sanctuary or National Park", 
the words and figures "or where the offence relates to a specimen of a 
species listed on Appendix I of Schedule IV" shall be inserted; 
(C) for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "twenty -five 
thousand rupees" shall  be substituted; 20  
(iii) in the second proviso, for the words "twenty-five thousand rupees", 
the words "one lakh rupees" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (1A), for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "twenty- 
five thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 
33. In section 51A of the principal Act, the words and figures "or Part II of Schedule II" 25  
shall be omitted. 
34. In the section 54 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the words "twenty-five 
thousand rupees", the words "five lakh rupees" shall be substituted. 
35. In section 55 of the principal Act, after clause (ac), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:— 30  
"(ad) the Management Authority or any officer, including an officer of theWild 
Life Crime Control Bureau, authorised in this behalf by the Central Government; or". 
36. In section 57 of the principal Act, after the words "derivate thereof" at both the 
places where they occur, the words "or Scheduled specimen" shall be inserted. 
37. In section 61 of the principal Act, for the word "add", the words "amend any 35  
Schedule or add" shall be substituted. 
38. In section 62 of the principal Act,— 
(a) the words and figures "and Part II of Schedule II" shall be omitted; 
(b) the words and figure "and so long as such notification is in force, such wild 
animals shall be deemed to have been included in Schedule V" shall be omitted. 40  
Comment [U12]:  
In Section 55 of the Principal Act: - 
 
(a) After the words “except on the” 
 the words “Police Report, or” 
 
(b) In clause (b) after the words 
 “Chief Wildlife Warden, or any  
other officer” the words  
“or any Police Officer” be inserted.   
 
Comment [U13]:  
In Section 50, of the Principal Act, 
the following key amendments  
are suggested -  
 
i. In sub-section (4), after the words 
 “before a Magistrate” the words 
 “after registering a Wildlife Offence  
Report duly entered in such book  
and form along with the Case Diary 
 as prescribed,” be inserted. 
 
ii. In sub-section (8) of Section 50,  
after the words “Assistant  
Conservator of Forests” the words  
“or an Officer in charge  
of a Police Station” be inserted;  
 
 
 
 
 
Comment [U14]:  
The following additional amendment 
is suggested –  
 
After the words – “custody or control  
of any” the words “wild animal,” be  
inserted;  
 
After the words – “control of such” the 
Words “wild animal,” be inserted 
18

13 
 
39. After section 62 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, 
Namely:— 
 
 
"62A. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, regulate or prohibit the 
import, trade, possession or proliferation of invasive alien species which pose a threat 
5 to the wild life or habitat in India. 
(2) The Central Government may authorise the Director or any other officer to 
seize and dispose of, including through destruction, the species referred to in the 
notification issued under sub-section (1). 
62B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the Central Government 
10 may call for any information or report from a State Government or any such other 
agency or body or issue any direction to a State Government or any such other agency 
or body for effective implementation of the provisions of the Act for the protection, 
conservation and management of wild life in the country.". 
40. In section 63 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),— 
15 (a) after clause (ai), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(aii) terms and conditions of the committee, sub -committees or study 
groups under sub-section (3) of section 5B;"; 
(b) after clause (gvi), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(gvii) the manner of disposal of Government property under 
20 sub-section (5) of section 39; 
(gviii) the conditions for transfer or transport of live alaphant under 
sub-section (4) of section 43;"; 
(c) after clause (j), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(ji) the terms and conditions of service including salaries and allowances 
25 for appointment of the officers and employees of the Management Authority 
under sub-section (4) of section 49E; 
(jii) the conditions and procedures subject to which any exemption 
provided for in Article VII of the Convention may be availed under sub-
section (2) of section 49H; 
30  (jiii) the reporting of details of scheduled specimens and the transaction 
as per sub-section (3) of section 49H; 
(jiv) the matters provided for in sub-sections (8) and (9) of section 49M; 
(jv) the form and manner of the application, the fee payable, the form of 
certificate of registration, and the procedure to be followed in granting or 
35 cancelling a certificate of registration as per sub-section (2) of section 49N; 
(jvi) the fee payable for renewal of certificates of registration as per 
sub-section ( 3), and manner of making appeal under sub- section ( 4), of 
section 49-O; 
(jvii) any other matter for proper implementation of the Convention as may 
40 be required under Chapter VB;". 
41. For Schedules I, II, III, IV, V and VI to the principal Act, the following Schedules 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
Insertion of 
new sections 
62A  and 62B. 
 
 
Regulation or 
prohibition of 
import, etc., 
of invasive 
alien species. 
 
 
 
 
Power to issue 
directions. 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 63. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of Schedules. Comment [U15]:  
A detailed analysis and specific 
Suggestions on species to be  
Included or those which need to 
be moved from Schedule II to  
Schedule I etc is presented at  
Annexure -A of the Memorandum.   
19

1 
 
              ANNEXURE - A 
Suggested Amendments / additions to Reptiles, Amphibians and Mammal 
species listed in Schedule I and II 
 
Overview:  
A careful analysis of Reptiles and Amphibian and Mammalian species specified in Schedule I and II of the 
Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 (in short, the Bill) was carried out by Shekar Dattatri in 
consultation with experts Ashok Captain and Dipani Sutaria respectively and the following are the key 
findings:   
1. Other than the 18 species of snakes included in the revised Sch edule I and Schedule II, none of 
the others have accorded any protection. In the Principal Act, all species of snakes not included 
in Sch I and Part II of Sch II have been included family-wise in Schedule IV. A similar approach is to 
be followed in the revised Schedules in Bill. 
2. There is no logic for deleting the loggerhead sea turtle from the Schedules. There exists ecological 
justification to include it in Schedule I along with the other 4 species of sea turtles found in Indian 
waters. 
3. The two species of bull frogs and the Indian green frog are heavily exploited for their meat and 
should be moved up from Schedule II to Schedule I. 
4. The three species of pythons,  viz, Indian, Burmese and reticulated have been downgraded and 
should be moved back from Schedule II to Schedule I of the revised Schedules due to their rarity 
and potential demand for their skins. The red sand boa, which is heavily exploited, and the Indian 
egg eating snake, which is quite rare, should also be moved up to Sch I. 
5. In many places in the Schedules in the Bill, no space has been provided between the name of the 
genus and the name of the species. The binomial Latin name (scientific name) is alwa ys written 
with a space between the name of the genus and the name of the species. Eg. Echis carinatus and 
not Echiscarinatus.  
Specific Suggestions:  
Reptile Species downgraded to Schedule II in the Bill, be moved to Schedule I 
 
Indian Rock Python   Python molurus  
Burmese Python   Python bivittatus 
Reticulated Python   Malayopython reticulatus 
Red sand boa    Eryx johnii 
Indian egg eating snake    Boiga westermanni 
 
Reptile species missing in Schedule I and II to be included in Schedule I 
Loggerhead sea turtle     Caretta caretta 
 
20

2 
 
 
Amphibian species to be moved from revised Schedule II to Schedule I 
Asian bullfrog / Indian bullfrog    Hoplobatrachus tigerinus  
Jerdon’s/South Indian bullfrog   Hoplobatrachus crassus 
Indian Green/Indian five-fingered frog  Euphlyctis hexadactylus 
 
Mammal Species downgraded to Schedule II in the Bill, be moved to Schedule I 
4. Bharal/Blue Sheep     Pseudo isnayaur 
24. Large Indian Civet     Viverra zibetha 
25. Small Indian Civet     Viverricula indica 
28. Stone/Beech Marten    Martes foina 
29. Himalayan Yellow-throated Marten   Martes flavigula 
30. Nilgiri Marten     Martes gwatkinsii 
31. Ermineor Short-tailed Weasel   Mustela erminea 
32. Siberian Weasel     Mustela sibirica 
33. Yellow-bellied Weasel    Mustela kathiah 
39. Indian/Bengal Fox     Vulpes bengalensis 
40. Asiatic Jackal     Canis aureus 
41. Jungle Cat      Felis chaus 
Note: Numbers indicated are as provided in Schedule II in the Bill 
 
Mammal species left out of the Schedules but which need to be added: 
1. Omura's whale     Balaenoptera omurai 
2. Deraniyagala's beaked whale    Mesoplodon hotaula  
3. Longman's beaked whale    Mesoplodon pacificus 
4. Indian ocean humpback dolphin   Sousa plumbea  
5. Common bottlenose dolphin -   Tursiops truncates 
 
It is therefore suggested that these important amendments in Schedule I and II of the Bill under 
review be considered and accepted. 
 
 
 
 
21

3 
 
 
Suggested Amendments to Bird species listed in Schedule I and II 
 
Overview:  
A careful analysis of the bird species specified in Schedule I and II of the  
Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill , 2021 (in short, the Bill) was carried out by 
Ramki Sreenivasan, Vikram Hiresavi and Chandrashekar Bandi and the following 
are the key findings:   
1. A total of 1341 birds listed in a comprehensive checklist viz. 
(https://www.indianbirds.in/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/India_checklist_v5_1.xlsx ) 
were reviewed.  
 
2. The Bill includes only 903 species. A total of 451 species are therefore suggested 
for inclusion in Schedule I & II.  
 
3. A total of 112 species already specified in Schedule I, and requires no change 
 
4. A total of 864 species are  specified in Schedule II . O f these, 72 species are 
duplicate entries. After deletion, Schedule II will contain 792 species.  
 
5. 04 species are specified in both schedules. They need to be deleted from Schedule 
II to avoid duplication. One species has been duplicated in Schedule I (Gypaetus 
barbatus) 
 
6. A total of 451 species are not listed in either schedule or might be covered in family-
level listings in Schedule IV, which require a thorough review.  
Specific Suggestions:  
Species downgraded from Schedule I of the Act in force to Schedule II in the Bill 
under review 
 
There is no valid ecological justification to do so. For Eg. In the case of the Indian Swiftlet, 
this downgrade will result in reduced penalties and making it a compoundable offence. 
This reduces the level of protection and can potentially lead to increased illegal trade in 
‘white nests ’ which  are harvested for consumption as food, tonics, aphrodisiacs, 
medicines and other commercial purposes. Because of their alleged aphrodisiacal 
properties, they fetch a very high commercial value in the South-East Asian countries.  
858 Indian Swiftlet Aerodramus unicolor 
795 White Stork Ciconia ciconia 
606 Southern Hill Myna Gracula indica 
Numbers in column 1 are as mentioned in the Bill on page 45, 49 & 50 
 
  It is therefore suggested that these three species currently in Schedule I of the 
Act should be moved from Schedule II of the Bill under review, to Schedule I.   
 
22

4 
 
  It is therefore suggested that these four species need to be retained in    
Schedule I and deleted in Schedule II in the Bill in order to avoid duplication.   
 
2. Species listed in both Schedule I & II. To Be deleted in Schedule II 
 
The following species are listed in both schedules in the Bill by oversight / minor changes 
in the common names. and requires to be corrected. All the species are endangered and 
require the highest protection. 
42 & 576 Nicobar Megapode Megapodius nicobariensis 
43 & 685 Nicobar Pigeon Caloenas nicobarica 
59 & 332 Red-necked Falcon Falco chicquera 
53 & 569 Lord Derby's Parakeet Psittacula derbiana 
Numbers in column 1 are as mentioned in the Bill on page 17,18,40, 45 & 47 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Species to be transferred from Schedule II to Schedule I in the Bill (93 species) 
 
Species that are not listed as Least Concern by the IUCN needs to be accorded the 
highest protection. The following 93 species listed under Schedule II in the Bill, meet this 
criterion. This includes one ‘Data Deficient’ IUCN status species (Sillem’s Rosefinch, 
Carpodacus sillemi). 
297 Lesser White-fronted Goose Anser erythropus 
292 Red-breasted Goose Branta ruficollis 
315 Falcated Duck Mareca falcata 
321 Andaman Teal Anas albogularis 
305 Marbled Teal Marmaronetta angustirostris 
307 Common Pochard Aythya ferina 
309 Ferruginous Duck Aythya nyroca 
308 Baer's Pochard Aythya baeri 
298 Long-tailed Duck Clangula hyemalis 
288 White-headed Duck Oxyura leucocephala 
523 Chestnut-breasted Partridge Arborophila mandellii 
522 White-cheeked Partridge Arborophila atrogularis 
533 Manipur Bush Quail Perdicula manipurensis 
538 Swamp Francolin Francolinus gularis 
493 Horned Grebe Podiceps auritus 
251 Yellow-eyed Pigeon Columba eversmanni 
255 Nilgiri Wood Pigeon Columba elphinstonii 
256 Pale-capped Pigeon Columba punicea 
257 Andaman Wood Pigeon Columba palumboides 
258 European Turtle Dove Streptopelia turtur 
269 Andaman Green Pigeon Treron chloropterus 
267 Ashy-headed Green Pigeon Treron phayrei 
154 Macqueen's Bustard Chlamydotis macqueenii 
153 Little Bustard Tetrax tetrax 
23

5 
 
787 Great Thick-knee Esacus recurvirostris 
788 Beach Thick-knee Esacus magnirostris 
655 Eurasian Oystercatcher Haematopus ostralegus 
728 Northern Lapwing Vanellus vanellus 
729 River Lapwing Vanellus duvaucelii 
733 Sociable Lapwing Vanellus gregarius 
207 Eurasian Curlew Numenius arquata 
208 Bar-tailed Godwit Limosa lapponica 
209 Black-tailed Godwit Limosa limosa 
211 Great Knot Calidris tenuirostris 
212 Red Knot Calidris canutus 
216 Curlew Sandpiper Calidris ferruginea 
219 Spoon-billed Sandpiper Calidris pygmaea 
220 Red-necked Stint Calidris ruficollis 
224 Buff-breasted Sandpiper Calidris subruficollis 
226 Asian Dowitcher Limnodromus semipalmatus 
230 Wood Snipe Gallinago nemoricola 
233 Great Snipe Gallinago media 
239 Grey-tailed Tattler Tringa brevipes 
79 Black-legged Kittiwake Rissa tridactyla 
108 Black-bellied Tern Sterna acuticauda 
102 River Tern Sterna aurantia 
78 Indian Skimmer Rynchops albicollis 
794 Woolly-necked Stork Ciconia episcopus 
796 Black-necked Stork Ephippiorhynchus asiaticus 
790 Lesser Adjutant Leptoptilos javanicus 
789 Greater Adjutant Leptoptilos dubius 
791 Painted Stork Mycteria leucocephala 
247 Oriental Darter Anhinga melanogaster 
657 Spot-billed Pelican Pelecanus philippensis 
658 Dalmatian Pelican Pelecanus crispus 
73 Chinese Egret Egretta eulophotes 
494 Black-headed Ibis Threskiornis melanocephalus 
639 Nicobar Scops Owl Otus alius 
857 Ward's Trogon Harpactes wardi 
333 Red-footed Falcon Falco vespertinus 
572 Alexandrine Parakeet Psittacula eupatria 
565 Grey-headed Parakeet Psittacula finschii 
567 Blossom-headed Parakeet Psittacula roseata 
574 Nicobar Parakeet Psittacula caniceps 
570 Long-tailed Parakeet Psittacula longicauda 
715 Mangrove Pitta Pitta megarhyncha 
587 Andaman Cuckooshrike Coracina dobsoni 
503 Andaman Treepie Dendrocitta bayleii 
852 White-naped Tit Machlolophus nuchalis 
132 Grey-headed Bulbul Brachypodius priocephalus 
127 Yellow-throated Bulbul Pycnonotus xantholaemus 
115 Nicobar Bulbul Ixos nicobariensis 
12 Rufous-throated Wren Babbler Spelaeornis caudatus 
24

6 
 
  It is therefore suggested that these 93 species be transferred from   
Schedule II to Schedule I in the Bill in order to provide greater protection 
13 Mishmi Wren Babbler Spelaeornis badeigularis 
15 Naga Wren Babbler Spelaeornis chocolatinus 
18 Tawny-breasted Wren Babbler Spelaeornis longicaudatus 
31 Snowy-throated Babbler Stachyris oglei 
29 Sikkim Wedge-billed Babbler Stachyris humei 
30 Cachar Wedge-billed Babbler Stachyris roberti 
832 Grey-sided Thrush Turdus feae 
400 Nilgiri Sholakili Sholicola major 
401 White-bellied Sholakili Sholicola albiventris 
410 Nicobar Jungle Flycatcher Cyornis nicobaricus 
421 Rusty-bellied Shortwing Brachypteryx hyperythra 
435 Firethroat Calliope pectardens 
446 Kashmir Flycatcher Ficedula subrubra 
475 Stoliczka's Bushchat Saxicola macrorhynchus 
476 Hodgson's Bushchat Saxicola insignis 
863 Finn's Weaver Ploceus megarhynchus 
3 Green Munia Amandava formosa 
699 Nilgiri Pipit Anthus nilghiriensis 
347 Sillem's Rosefinch Carpodacus sillemi 
147 Yellow-breasted Bunting Emberiza aureola 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Species to be transferred to Schedule I due to its Endemic Status 
 
The following 31 species are considered Least Concern by the IUCN, and listed under 
Schedule II currently. However, due to their endemic status , they require greater 
protection. 
540 Red Spurfowl Galloperdix spadicea 
541 Painted Spurfowl Galloperdix lunulata 
531 Rock Bush Quail Perdicula argoondah 
532 Painted Bush Quail Perdicula erythrorhyncha 
265 Andaman Cuckoo Dove Macropygia rufipennis 
268 Grey-fronted Green Pigeon Treron affinis 
616 Andaman Nightjar Caprimulgus andamanicus 
162 Andaman Crake Rallina canningi 
52 Andaman Barn Owl Tyto deroepstorffi 
634 Andaman Scops Owl Otus balli 
627 Andaman Hawk Owl Ninox affinis 
626 Hume's Hawk Owl Ninox obscura 
47 Malabar Barbet Psilopogon malabaricus 
43 White-cheeked Barbet Psilopogon viridis 
571 Malabar Parakeet Psittacula columboides 
577 White-bellied Minivet Pericrocotus erythropygius 
25

7 
 
  It is therefore suggested that these 31 endemic species be transferred from   
Schedule II to Schedule I in the Bill in order to provide greater protection 
501 White-bellied Treepie Dendrocitta leucogastra 
563 Malabar Lark Galerida malabarica 
564 Sykes's Lark Galerida deva 
131 Andaman Bulbul Brachypodius fuscoflavescens 
121 Flame-throated Bulbul Rubigula gularis 
22 Indian Scimitar Babbler Pomatorhinus horsfieldii 
598 White-headed Starling Sturnia erythropygia 
394 Andaman Shama Copsychus albiventris 
403 White-bellied Blue Flycatcher Cyornis pallidipes 
418 Nilgiri Flycatcher Eumyias albicaudatus 
433 Malabar Whistling Thrush Myophonus horsfieldii 
456 Black-and-orange Flycatcher Ficedula nigrorufa 
386 Nilgiri Flowerpecker Dicaeum concolor 
801 Crimson-backed Sunbird Leptocoma minima 
810 Vigors's Sunbird Aethopyga vigorsii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Species, missing in Schedule I and II in the Bill, which qualify to be included in 
Schedule I due to its Threatened and / or Endemic Status (57 species) 
 
The following 57 species (51 threatened and 6 endemic) are missing from both schedules. 
These need to be included in Schedule I due to their threatened status or data deficiency 
on current status.  
Threatened Species 
Japanese Quail Coturnix japonica 
Lesser Flamingo Phoeniconaias minor 
Nicobar Imperial Pigeon Ducula nicobarica 
Blyth’s Swift Apus leuconyx 
Dark-rumped Swift Apus acuticauda 
Masked Finfoot Heliopais personatus 
Swinhoe's Storm-petrel Oceanodroma monorhis 
Barau's Petrel Pterodroma baraui 
Jouanin's Petrel Bulweria fallax 
Streaked Shearwater Calonectris leucomelas 
Flesh-footed Shearwater Ardenna carneipes 
Christmas Island Frigatebird Fregata andrewsi 
White-eared Night Heron Gorsachius magnificus 
Legge's Hawk Eagle Nisaetus kelaarti 
Austen's Brown Hornbill Anorrhinus austeni 
Malabar Grey Hornbill Ocyceros griseus 
Malabar Pied Hornbill Anthracoceros coronatus 
Blyth's Kingfisher Alcedo hercules 
26

8 
 
  It is therefore suggested that these 57 threatened and/or endemic species 
be included in Schedule I, without which they will have no legal protection 
under the Wildlife Act. 
Brown-winged Kingfisher Pelargopsis amauroptera 
Yellow-rumped Honeyguide Indicator xanthonotus 
Great Slaty Woodpecker Mulleripicus pulverulentus 
Andaman Woodpecker Dryocopus hodgei 
Scarlet Minivet Pericrocotus speciosus 
Hooded Crow Corvus cornix 
Indian Black-lored Tit Machlolophus aplonotus 
Grey-crowned Prinia Prinia cinereocapilla 
Large-billed Reed Warbler Acrocephalus orinus 
Long-billed Bush Warbler Locustella major 
Broad-tailed Grassbird Schoenicola platyurus 
Bristled Grassbird Schoenicola striatus 
Hill Swallow Hirundo domicola 
Tytler's Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus tytleri 
Jerdon's Babbler Chrysomma altirostre 
Black-breasted Parrotbill Paradoxornis flavirostris 
Rufous-vented Grass Babbler Laticilla burnesii 
Swamp Grass Babbler Laticilla cinerascens 
Marsh Babbler Pellorneum palustre 
Indian Grassbird Graminicola bengalensis 
Slender-billed Babbler Argya longirostris 
Chestnut-backed Laughingthrush Pterorhinus nuchalis 
Banasura Laughingthrush Montecincla jerdoni 
Nilgiri Laughingthrush Montecincla cachinnans 
Palani Laughingthrush Montecincla fairbanki 
Ashambu Laughingthrush Montecincla meridionalis 
Yunnan Nuthatch Sitta yunnanensis 
Beautiful Nuthatch Sitta formosa 
Malabar Starling Sturnia blythii 
Nilgiri Thrush Zoothera neilgherriensis 
Zappey's Flycatcher Cyanoptila cumatilis 
Andaman Flowerpecker Dicaeum virescens 
Rustic Bunting Emberiza rustica 
 
Endemic Species 
Malabar Woodshrike Tephrodornis sylvicola 
Spot-breasted Fantail Rhipidura albogularis 
West Himalayan Bush Warbler Locustella kashmirensis 
Rufous Babbler Argya subrufa 
Wayanad Laughingthrush Pterorhinus delesserti 
Indian Spotted Creeper Salpornis spilonota 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27

9 
 
6. Species missing in Schedule I & II which deserve inclusion in Schedule II 
 
The following 400 species (IUCN status- Least Concern) are not found in either 
Schedule I or II but qualify for inclusion in Schedule II.  
 
Lesser Whistling Duck Dendrocygna javanica 
Red Junglefowl Gallus gallus 
Black-necked Grebe Podiceps nigricollis 
Horsfield's Bronze Cuckoo Chrysococcyx basalis 
White-rumped Spinetail Zoonavena sylvatica 
White-throated Needletail Hirundapus caudacutus 
Silver-backed Needletail Hirundapus cochinchinensis 
Brown-backed Needletail Hirundapus giganteus 
Plume-toed Swiftlet Collocalia affinis 
Himalayan Swiftlet Aerodramus brevirostris 
Alpine Swift Tachymarptis melba 
Common Swift Apus apus 
Pacific Swift Apus pacificus 
Indian House Swift Apus affinis 
Nepal House Swift Apus nipalensis 
Asian Palm Swift Cypsiurus balasiensis 
Crested Treeswift Hemiprocne coronata 
Ibisbill Ibidorhyncha struthersii 
American Golden Plover Pluvialis dominica 
Greater Painted-snipe Rostratula benghalensis 
Crab-plover Dromas ardeola 
Cream-coloured Courser Cursorius cursor 
Indian Courser Cursorius coromandelicus 
Collared Pratincole Glareola pratincola 
Oriental Pratincole Glareola maldivarum 
Small Pratincole Glareola lactea 
South Polar Skua Stercorarius maccormicki 
Brown Skua Stercorarius antarcticus 
Pomarine Skua Stercorarius pomarinus 
Arctic Skua Stercorarius parasiticus 
Long-tailed Skua Stercorarius longicaudus 
White-tailed Tropicbird Phaethon lepturus 
Red-billed Tropicbird Phaethon aethereus 
Red-tailed Tropicbird Phaethon rubricauda 
Red-throated Diver Gavia stellata 
Black-throated Diver Gavia arctica 
Wilson's Storm-petrel Oceanites oceanicus 
White-faced Storm-petrel Pelagodroma marina 
Black-bellied Storm-petrel Fregetta tropica 
Cory's Shearwater Calonectris borealis 
Wedge-tailed Shearwater Ardenna pacifica 
Short-tailed Shearwater Ardenna tenuirostris 
28

10 
 
Tropical Shearwater Puffinus bailloni 
Persian Shearwater Puffinus persicus 
Lesser Frigatebird Fregata ariel 
Great Frigatebird Fregata minor 
Masked Booby Sula dactylatra 
Brown Booby Sula leucogaster 
Red-footed Booby Sula sula 
Javan Pond Heron Ardeola speciosa 
Black-winged Kite Elanus caeruleus 
European Honey Buzzard Pernis apivorus 
Oriental Honey Buzzard Pernis ptilorhynchus 
Rough-legged Buzzard Buteo lagopus 
Common Hoopoe Upupa epops 
Indian Grey Hornbill Ocyceros birostris 
Common Kingfisher Alcedo atthis 
Blue-eared Kingfisher Alcedo meninting 
Oriental Dwarf Kingfisher Ceyx erithaca 
Stork-billed Kingfisher Pelargopsis capensis 
Ruddy Kingfisher Halcyon coromanda 
White-throated Kingfisher Halcyon smyrnensis 
Black-capped Kingfisher Halcyon pileata 
Collared Kingfisher Todiramphus chloris 
Crested Kingfisher Megaceryle lugubris 
Pied Kingfisher Ceryle rudis 
Blue-bearded Bee-eater Nyctyornis athertoni 
Green Bee-eater Merops orientalis 
Blue-throated Bee-eater Merops viridis 
Blue-cheeked Bee-eater Merops persicus 
Blue-tailed Bee-eater Merops philippinus 
European Bee-eater Merops apiaster 
Chestnut-headed Bee-eater Merops leschenaulti 
Indochinese Roller Coracias affinis 
Eurasian Wryneck Jynx torquilla 
Speckled Piculet Picumnus innominatus 
White-browed Piculet Sasia ochracea 
Heart-spotted Woodpecker Hemicircus canente 
Brown-capped Pygmy Woodpecker Yungipicus nanus 
Grey-capped Pygmy Woodpecker Yungipicus canicapillus 
Yellow-crowned Woodpecker Leiopicus mahrattensis 
Brown-fronted Woodpecker Dendrocoptes auriceps 
Rufous-bellied Woodpecker Dendrocopos hyperythrus 
Fulvous-breasted Woodpecker Dendrocopos macei 
Freckle-breasted Woodpecker Dendrocopos analis 
Stripe-breasted Woodpecker Dendrocopos atratus 
Darjeeling Woodpecker Dendrocopos darjellensis 
Great Spotted Woodpecker Dendrocopos major 
Himalayan Woodpecker Dendrocopos himalayensis 
Sind Woodpecker Dendrocopos assimilis 
Crimson-breasted Woodpecker Dryobates cathpharius 
29

11 
 
Bay Woodpecker Blythipicus pyrrhotis 
Greater Flameback Chrysocolaptes guttacristatus 
White-naped Woodpecker Chrysocolaptes festivus 
Rufous Woodpecker Micropternus brachyurus 
Pale-headed Woodpecker Gecinulus grantia 
Himalayan Flameback Dinopium shorii 
Common Flameback Dinopium javanense 
Black-rumped Flameback Dinopium benghalense 
Lesser Yellownape Picus chlorolophus 
Streak-throated Woodpecker Picus xanthopygaeus 
Scaly-bellied Woodpecker Picus squamatus 
Grey-headed Woodpecker Picus canus 
Greater Yellownape Chrysophlegma flavinucha 
White-bellied Woodpecker Dryocopus javensis 
Long-tailed Broadbill Psarisomus dalhousiae 
Silver-breasted Broadbill Serilophus lunatus 
Large Cuckooshrike Coracina macei 
Black-headed Shrike-babbler Pteruthius rufiventer 
Himalayan Shrike-babbler Pteruthius ripleyi 
Blyth's Shrike-babbler Pteruthius aeralatus 
Green Shrike-babbler Pteruthius xanthochlorus 
Black-eared Shrike-babbler Pteruthius melanotis 
Clicking Shrike-babbler Pteruthius intermedius 
White-bellied Erpornis Erpornis zantholeuca 
Mangrove Whistler Pachycephala cinerea 
Ashy Woodswallow Artamus fuscus 
White-breasted Woodswallow Artamus leucorynchus 
Malabar Woodshrike Tephrodornis sylvicola 
Large Woodshrike Tephrodornis virgatus 
Common Woodshrike Tephrodornis pondicerianus 
Bar-winged Flycatcher-shrike Hemipus picatus 
White-throated Fantail Rhipidura albicollis 
Spot-breasted Fantail Rhipidura albogularis 
White-browed Fantail Rhipidura aureola 
Black-naped Monarch Hypothymis azurea 
Amur Paradise-flycatcher Terpsiphone incei 
Blyth's Paradise-flycatcher Terpsiphone affinis 
Indian Paradise-flycatcher Terpsiphone paradisi 
Red-backed Shrike Lanius collurio 
Red-tailed Shrike Lanius phoenicuroides 
Isabelline Shrike Lanius isabellinus 
Brown Shrike Lanius cristatus 
Burmese Shrike Lanius collurioides 
Bay-backed Shrike Lanius vittatus 
Long-tailed Shrike Lanius schach 
Grey-backed Shrike Lanius tephronotus 
Great Grey Shrike Lanius excubitor 
Lesser Grey Shrike Lanius minor 
Masked Shrike Lanius nubicus 
30

12 
 
Woodchat Shrike Lanius senator 
House Crow Corvus splendens 
Large-billed Crow Corvus macrorhynchos 
Pied Crow Corvus albus 
Yellow-bellied Fantail Chelidorhynx hypoxanthus 
Grey-headed Canary-flycatcher Culicicapa ceylonensis 
White-crowned Penduline Tit Remiz coronatus 
Common Tailorbird Orthotomus sutorius 
Dark-necked Tailorbird Orthotomus atrogularis 
Striated Prinia Prinia crinigera 
Black-throated Prinia Prinia atrogularis 
Hill Prinia Prinia superciliaris 
Rufous-fronted Prinia Prinia buchanani 
Rufescent Prinia Prinia rufescens 
Grey-breasted Prinia Prinia hodgsonii 
Graceful Prinia Prinia gracilis 
Jungle Prinia Prinia sylvatica 
Yellow-bellied Prinia Prinia flaviventris 
Ashy Prinia Prinia socialis 
Plain Prinia Prinia inornata 
Zitting Cisticola Cisticola juncidis 
Golden-headed Cisticola Cisticola exilis 
Thick-billed Warbler Arundinax aedon 
Booted Warbler Iduna caligata 
Sykes's Warbler Iduna rama 
Black-browed Reed Warbler Acrocephalus bistrigiceps 
Moustached Warbler Acrocephalus melanopogon 
Sedge Warbler Acrocephalus schoenobaenus 
Paddyfield Warbler Acrocephalus agricola 
Blunt-winged Warbler Acrocephalus concinens 
Blyth's Reed Warbler Acrocephalus dumetorum 
Great Reed Warbler Acrocephalus arundinaceus 
Oriental Reed Warbler Acrocephalus orientalis 
Clamorous Reed Warbler Acrocephalus stentoreus 
Striated Grassbird Megalurus palustris 
Rusty-rumped Warbler Helopsaltes certhiola 
Lanceolated Warbler Locustella lanceolata 
Brown Bush Warbler Locustella luteoventris 
Chinese Bush Warbler Locustella tacsanowskia 
Grasshopper Warbler Locustella naevia 
Baikal Bush Warbler Locustella davidi 
West Himalayan Bush Warbler Locustella kashmirensis 
Spotted Bush Warbler Locustella thoracica 
Russet Bush Warbler Locustella mandelli 
Scaly-breasted Wren Babbler Pnoepyga albiventer 
Nepal Wren Babbler Pnoepyga immaculata 
Pygmy Wren Babbler Pnoepyga pusilla 
Grey-throated Martin Riparia chinensis 
Sand Martin Riparia riparia 
31

13 
 
Pale Martin Riparia diluta 
Eurasian Crag Martin Ptyonoprogne rupestris 
Dusky Crag Martin Ptyonoprogne concolor 
Barn Swallow Hirundo rustica 
Wire-tailed Swallow Hirundo smithii 
Pacific Swallow Hirundo tahitica 
Red-rumped Swallow Cecropis daurica 
Striated Swallow Cecropis striolata 
Streak-throated Swallow Petrochelidon fluvicola 
Northern House Martin Delichon urbicum 
Asian House Martin Delichon dasypus 
Nepal House Martin Delichon nipalense 
Cachar Bulbul Iole cacharensis 
Wood Warbler Phylloscopus sibilatrix 
Ashy-throated Warbler Phylloscopus maculipennis 
Buff-barred Warbler Phylloscopus pulcher 
Yellow-browed Warbler Phylloscopus inornatus 
Hume's Warbler Phylloscopus humei 
Brooks's Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus subviridis 
Chinese Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus yunnanensis 
Lemon-rumped Warbler Phylloscopus chloronotus 
Sichuan Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus forresti 
Sulphur-bellied Warbler Phylloscopus griseolus 
Tickell's Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus affinis 
Dusky Warbler Phylloscopus fuscatus 
Smoky Warbler Phylloscopus fuligiventer 
Plain Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus neglectus 
Buff-throated Warbler Phylloscopus subaffinis 
Willow Warbler Phylloscopus trochilus 
Mountain Chiffchaff Phylloscopus sindianus 
Common Chiffchaff Phylloscopus collybita 
White-spectacled Warbler Phylloscopus intermedius 
Grey-cheeked Warbler Phylloscopus poliogenys 
Green-crowned Warbler Phylloscopus burkii 
Grey-crowned Warbler Phylloscopus tephrocephalus 
Whistler's Warbler Phylloscopus whistleri 
Green Warbler Phylloscopus nitidus 
Greenish Warbler Phylloscopus trochiloides 
Two-barred Warbler Phylloscopus plumbeitarsus 
Large-billed Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus magnirostris 
Sakhalin Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus borealoides 
Arctic Warbler Phylloscopus borealis 
Chestnut-crowned Warbler Phylloscopus castaniceps 
Yellow-vented Warbler Phylloscopus cantator 
Western Crowned Warbler Phylloscopus occipitalis 
Blyth's Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus reguloides 
Claudia's Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus claudiae 
Grey-hooded Warbler Phylloscopus xanthoschistos 
Pale-footed Bush Warbler Urosphena pallidipes 
32

14 
 
Asian Stubtail Urosphena squameiceps 
Grey-bellied Tesia Tesia cyaniventer 
Slaty-bellied Tesia Tesia olivea 
Chestnut-crowned Bush Warbler Cettia major 
Grey-sided Bush Warbler Cettia brunnifrons 
Chestnut-headed Tesia Cettia castaneocoronata 
Cetti's Warbler Cettia cetti 
Yellow-bellied Warbler Abroscopus superciliaris 
Rufous-faced Warbler Abroscopus albogularis 
Black-faced Warbler Abroscopus schisticeps 
Mountain Tailorbird Phyllergates cucullatus 
Broad-billed Warbler Tickellia hodgsoni 
Manchurian Bush Warbler Horornis canturians 
Brownish-flanked Bush Warbler Horornis fortipes 
Hume's Bush Warbler Horornis brunnescens 
Aberrant Bush Warbler Horornis flavolivaceus 
White-browed Tit Warbler Leptopoecile sophiae 
Crested Tit Warbler Leptopoecile elegans 
White-cheeked Tit Aegithalos leucogenys 
Black-throated Tit Aegithalos concinnus 
White-throated Tit Aegithalos niveogularis 
Black-browed Tit Aegithalos iouschistos 
Garden Warbler Sylvia borin 
Asian Desert Warbler Curruca nana 
Barred Warbler Curruca nisoria 
Lesser Whitethroat Curruca curruca 
Eastern Orphean Warbler Curruca crassirostris 
Common Whitethroat Curruca communis 
Fire-tailed Myzornis Myzornis pyrrhoura 
Golden-breasted Fulvetta Lioparus chrysotis 
Yellow-eyed Babbler Chrysomma sinense 
Brown-throated Fulvetta Fulvetta ludlowi 
White-browed Fulvetta Fulvetta vinipectus 
Manipur Fulvetta Fulvetta manipurensis 
Great Parrotbill Conostoma aemodium 
Brown Parrotbill Cholornis unicolor 
Grey-headed Parrotbill Psittiparus gularis 
White-breasted Parrotbill Psittiparus ruficeps 
Rufous-headed Parrotbill Psittiparus bakeri 
Spot-breasted Parrotbill Paradoxornis guttaticollis 
Lesser Rufous-headed Parrotbill Chleuasicus atrosuperciliaris 
Fulvous Parrotbill Suthora fulvifrons 
Black-throated Parrotbill Suthora nipalensis 
Striated Yuhina Staphida castaniceps 
White-naped Yuhina Yuhina bakeri 
Whiskered Yuhina Yuhina flavicollis 
Stripe-throated Yuhina Yuhina gularis 
Rufous-vented Yuhina Yuhina occipitalis 
Black-chinned Yuhina Yuhina nigrimenta 
33

15 
 
Chestnut-flanked White-eye Zosterops erythropleurus 
White-hooded Babbler Gampsorhynchus rufulus 
Yellow-throated Fulvetta Schoeniparus cinereus 
Rufous-winged Fulvetta Schoeniparus castaneceps 
Rufous-throated Fulvetta Schoeniparus rufogularis 
Rusty-capped Fulvetta Schoeniparus dubius 
Puff-throated Babbler Pellorneum ruficeps 
Spot-throated Babbler Pellorneum albiventre 
Buff-breasted Babbler Pellorneum tickelli 
Eyebrowed Wren Babbler Napothera epilepidota 
Long-billed Wren Babbler Napothera malacoptila 
Abbott's Babbler Malacocincla abbotti 
Streaked Wren Babbler Gypsophila brevicaudata 
Brown-cheeked Fulvetta Alcippe poioicephala 
Nepal Fulvetta Alcippe nipalensis 
Striated Laughingthrush Grammatoptila striata 
Himalayan Cutia Cutia nipalensis 
Jungle Babbler Argya striata 
Yellow-billed Babbler Argya affinis 
Common Babbler Argya caudata 
Striated Babbler Argya earlei 
Large Grey Babbler Argya malcolmi 
Rufous Babbler Argya subrufa 
White-crested Laughingthrush Garrulax leucolophus 
Lesser Necklaced Laughingthrush Garrulax monileger 
Spot-breasted Laughingthrush Garrulax merulinus 
Greater Necklaced Laughingthrush Pterorhinus pectoralis 
White-throated Laughingthrush Pterorhinus albogularis 
Rufous-necked Laughingthrush Pterorhinus ruficollis 
Yellow-throated Laughingthrush Pterorhinus galbanus 
Wayanad Laughingthrush Pterorhinus delesserti 
Rufous-vented Laughingthrush Pterorhinus gularis 
Grey-sided Laughingthrush Pterorhinus caerulatus 
White-browed Laughingthrush Pterorhinus sannio 
Mount Victoria Babax Pterorhinus woodi 
Moustached Laughingthrush Ianthocincla cineracea 
Rufous-chinned Laughingthrush Ianthocincla rufogularis 
Spotted Laughingthrush Ianthocincla ocellata 
Streaked Laughingthrush Trochalopteron lineatum 
Bhutan Laughingthrush Trochalopteron imbricatum 
Striped Laughingthrush Trochalopteron virgatum 
Scaly Laughingthrush Trochalopteron subunicolor 
Brown-capped Laughingthrush Trochalopteron austeni 
Blue-winged Laughingthrush Trochalopteron squamatum 
Elliot's Laughingthrush Trochalopteron elliotii 
Variegated Laughingthrush Trochalopteron variegatum 
Black-faced Laughingthrush Trochalopteron affine 
Chestnut-crowned Laughingthrush Trochalopteron erythrocephalum 
Assam Laughingthrush Trochalopteron chrysopterum 
34

16 
 
Rufous Sibia Heterophasia capistrata 
Grey Sibia Heterophasia gracilis 
Beautiful Sibia Heterophasia pulchella 
Long-tailed Sibia Heterophasia picaoides 
Silver-eared Mesia Leiothrix argentauris 
Red-billed Leiothrix Leiothrix lutea 
Red-tailed Minla Minla ignotincta 
Rufous-backed Sibia Leioptila annectens 
Red-faced Liocichla Liocichla phoenicea 
Hoary-throated Barwing Actinodura nipalensis 
Streak-throated Barwing Actinodura waldeni 
Rusty-fronted Barwing Actinodura egertoni 
Blue-winged Minla Actinodura cyanouroptera 
Chestnut-tailed Minla Actinodura strigula 
Goldcrest Regulus regulus 
Wallcreeper Tichodroma muraria 
Indian Nuthatch Sitta castanea 
Chestnut-bellied Nuthatch Sitta cinnamoventris 
Chestnut-vented Nuthatch Sitta nagaensis 
Kashmir Nuthatch Sitta cashmirensis 
White-tailed Nuthatch Sitta himalayensis 
White-cheeked Nuthatch Sitta leucopsis 
Velvet-fronted Nuthatch Sitta frontalis 
Hodgson's Treecreeper Certhia hodgsoni 
Bar-tailed Treecreeper Certhia himalayana 
Rusty-flanked Treecreeper Certhia nipalensis 
Sikkim Treecreeper Certhia discolor 
Hume's Treecreeper Certhia manipurensis 
Indian Spotted Creeper Salpornis spilonota 
Eurasian Wren Troglodytes troglodytes 
Spotted Elachura Elachura formosa 
White-throated Dipper Cinclus cinclus 
Brown Dipper Cinclus pallasii 
Red-billed Starling Spodiopsar sericeus 
Japanese Thrush Turdus cardis 
Naumann's Thrush Turdus naumanni 
Himalayan Shortwing Brachypteryx cruralis 
Finsch's Wheatear Oenanthe finschii 
Bohemian Waxwing Bombycilla garrulus 
Grey Hypocolius Hypocolius ampelinus 
Alpine Accentor Prunella collaris 
Altai Accentor Prunella himalayana 
Robin Accentor Prunella rubeculoides 
Rufous-breasted Accentor Prunella strophiata 
Brown Accentor Prunella fulvescens 
Black-throated Accentor Prunella atrogularis 
Maroon-backed Accentor Prunella immaculata 
Spanish Sparrow Passer hispaniolensis 
Sind Sparrow Passer pyrrhonotus 
35

17 
 
  It is therefore suggested that these 400 species be included in Schedule II, 
since some protection is required due to hunting pressures. 
Russet Sparrow Passer cinnamomeus 
Eurasian Tree Sparrow Passer montanus 
Yellow-throated Sparrow Gymnoris xanthocollis 
Rock Sparrow Petronia petronia 
Pale Rockfinch Carpospiza brachydactyla 
Black-winged Snowfinch Montifringilla adamsi 
White-rumped Snowfinch Onychostruthus taczanowskii 
Rufous-necked Snowfinch Pyrgilauda ruficollis 
Blanford's Snowfinch Pyrgilauda blanfordi 
Meadow Pipit Anthus pratensis 
Pale Rosefinch Carpodacus stoliczkae 
Three-banded Rosefinch Carpodacus trifasciatus 
Crimson-winged Finch Rhodopechys sanguineus 
Desert Finch Rhodospiza obsoleta 
Eurasian Siskin Spinus spinus 
 
 
36

Wildlife 
Protection 
Amendment 
Bill, 2021
Legal Initiative for Forest and Environment
Comments on
37

LIFE’s Comments on Wildlife Protection Amendment Bill, 2021
January 2022
2
The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 (Bill No 159 of 2021) is the most substantial amendment 
of the Act after the amendments made in 2003. On the positive part, it is intended to ensure that provisions 
with respect to Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species is part of the domestic law. 
Besides, the Bill aims to also make the law simple by streamlining the schedules. However, it there are 
issues of concern which needs to be addressed. 
The Bill introduces ‘Alien Invasive Species’ with the scope of the Act, which is a positive development. 
Under Section 62 A (i) The Central Government has the power to regulate or prohibit the import, trade, 
possession or proliferation of invasive alien species which pose a threat to the wildlife or habitat in India
As per the existing Act, the State Board for Wildlife is headed by the Chief Minister as chairperson and the 
Minister in Charge of Forest and Wildlife as Vice Chairperson. In addition to official members it has ten 
persons who are eminent conservationist, ecologists and environmentalist. All statutory functions are to 
be exercised by the Board as a whole.
The Amendment Bill (Section 6A) however proposes to set up a ‘Standing Committee’ of the State Board 
for Wildlife which is to be headed by the Vice Chairperson i.e Forest Minister and ‘not more than ten 
members to be nominated by the Forest Minister. This in effect means that the Standing Committee can 
function with just two member i.e the forest minister and a member. The State Board will be a defunct 
body.
The Bill therefore intends to replicate the model of the National Board for Wildlife and its Standing 
Committee. It is pertinent to point out that the National Board for Wildlife headed by the Prime Minister 
has not met since 2014; all its statutory functions are carried out by the Standing Committee of headed 
by the Environment Minister with no accountability to the Board.
At present the State Boards by virtue of their composition are still able to speak in the interest of wildlife. 
This will no longer be the case once the Standing Committee of the State Board is constituted.
However, the definition of ‘invasive alien species’ is not the correct scientific definition. As per the definition 
given in the Bill, an alien species is one ‘which is not native to India’.  The Convention on Biological Diversity 
defines it as follows:
Thus, the focus is that a species is alien to the ecosystem. It does not matter whether it is Indian or not. 
Thus Spotted Deer (Axis axis) though an Indian species is an alien invasive species when it comes to the 
Andamans and Nicobar Islands. 
As per the IUCN
‘(16A) “invasive alien species” means a species of animal or plant which is not native to India 
and whose introduction or spread may threaten or adversely impact wild life or its habitat;’;
Invasive alien species are plants, animals, pathogens and other organisms that are non-native 
to an ecosystem, and which may cause economic or environmental harm or adversely affect 
human health. In particular, they impact adversely upon biodiversity, including decline or 
elimination of native species - through competition, predation, or transmission of pathogens - 
and the disruption of local ecosystems and ecosystem functions.
An alien species is a species introduced outside its natural past or present distribution; if this 
species becomes problematic, it is termed an invasive alien species (IAS).
1. Inadequate Provision with Regard Alien Invasive Species 
2. State Board for Wildlife to be rendered Defunct.
38

LIFE’s Comments on Wildlife Protection Amendment Bill, 2021
January 2022
3
The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 specifically prohibits trade in Wild Animals including captive and 
wild elephants. Section 40 of the Act prohibits any person from acquiring, receiving, keeping  in one’s  
control, custody or possession, sell, offer for sale or otherwise transfer or transport any animal specified 
in Schedule I and Part II of Schedule II except with the previous permission of the Chief Wildlife Warden. 
Thus not only is sale prohibited: even an offer for sale is prohibited without prior approval of the CWLW. 
The Chief Wildlife Warden’s power are however restricted in view of proviso 2 (A) and 2 (B) which states 
that that only way one can acquire, receive, keep in control, custody and possession is through the mode 
of inheritance. Thus one could inherit Ivory, Tiger Skin Rhino horn Antlers etc of scheduled species after 
prior approval of CWLW but cannot acquire or receive the same through any other manner other than 
inheritance. Thus inheritance is the sole method through which one can acquire Scheduled animal and 
animal article.   However, the proviso to Sub Section 2 (A) and 2 (B) states that it the inheritance clause 
will not apply to elephants. This means that elephants could be acquired through mode other than 
inheritance.
However, Section 43 of the Act however limits the power of the CWLW by stipulating that any such 
transfer, even if allowed cannot be of  a commercial nature. Section 43 reads:
A combined reading of existing Section 40 and 43 leads to the following conclusion with respect to a live 
elephant:
The Amendment Bill however, inserts a new subsection (4) to section 43 which reads: 
Thus an exception has been carved out by excluding ‘live elephant’ from the general prohibition contained 
in Section 43. The implication of the same is that commercial sale and purchase is no longer prohibited, 
under the Act.
The Amendment Bill therefore allows for commercial trade in elephants.
3. The Bill Will Allow For Commercial Trade In Live Elephants 
No person having in his possession captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy in 
respect of which he has a certificate of ownership shall transfer by way of sale or offer for sale 
or by any other mode of consideration of commercial nature, such animal or article or trophy 
or uncured trophy.
Transfer, acquiring and receiving of a live captive elephant is permissible under the existing 
legal provision with the prior approval of the Chief Wildlife Warden. 
However, such transfer, acquisition and   receiving of an elephant should not involve any 
commercial transaction. Thus sale, purchase and offer for sale or purchase is explicitly 
prohibited under the provisions of the Act.
“(4) This section (section 43) shall not apply to the transfer or transport of any live elephant 
by a person having a certificate of ownership, where such person has obtained prior 
permission from the State Government on fulfilment of such conditions as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.”
➢
➢
In Section 29 of the Act, the Explanation has been substituted by adding the following:  
‘Bona fide use of drinking and houselhold water by local communities, shall not be deemed to be an act 
prohibited under this Section’
While, this is a positive development, it is important to ensure that such exercise of bonafide use is 
recorded in Management Plan of the Sanctuary. It is pertinent to point out that water holes, streams 
and other water sources are also use by wild animals, birds and reptiles as well as constitute a habitat 
for fishes. It is imperative to ensure that such exercise of bonafide rights is done in a manner which 
harmonizes the need of local communities with that of wildlife.
4. Use of Water in Sanctuaries and National Park
39

LIFE’s Comments on Wildlife Protection Amendment Bill, 2021
Section 33 of the Act with respect to Management Plan for Sanctuaries. 
It introduces Management Plans for Sanctuary ad that states that all Sanctuaries and states that the 
Management Plan shall be ‘approved by him’ which means that it will have to be approved by the Chief 
Wildlife Warden
However, it has been observed that the position of CWLW is only an administrative post with no fixed 
tenure. There is no requirement of the holder of the office to have any specialized training in wildlife. 
Therefore, it is imperative that the Management Plan should be reviewed by the Wildlife Institute of India 
or any other competent body. The draft Management Plan should be made public for inviting public 
comments.  It must be placed before the State Board for Wildlife for its approval. 
Once a wild animal is declared as vermin, it enjoys no legal protection and has the same status as a 
domestic animal. It can be killed, traded and tamed. 
Under the existing Act, the Central Government can issue a Notification declaring a Species as a Vermin 
so long as the Species is not listed in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II. Thus, species such Civets, 
Common Fox, Jackal, Martens, Andaman Wild Pig among others could not be declared as Vermin under 
the Act in view of the statutory protection. However, as Bill amends Section 62 by stating thaht only 
species listed in Schedule I cannot be declared as vermin, while species listed in Schedule II can be 
declared as Vermin.  Schedule II in the Bill includes the following among other species which if declared 
a vermin can pose serious threat to their existence in the wild. 
Striped Hyena
Andaman Wild Pig
Indian Fox
Bengal Fox
Jungle Cat
Asiatic Jackal
It needs to be pointed out that declaration of species as vermin till date has been without any scientific 
study or assessment and is more a result of political pressure. It is also important to highlight that 
declaration of one wild animal as a vermin has serious consequence on other species eg. Traps laid 
for wild boars leads to killing of leopard, tiger and other unintended species. Similarly, poison used for 
killing monkeys and other such animals invariably kills other species who eat the same. There is also 
no assessment as to how such declaration of vermin could lead to ecological imbalance and increase 
human animal conflict eg. Killing of wild boars would deplete prey base of leopards and tigers which in 
turn are likely to depend more on livestock. 
5. Excessive Delegation and Unrestricted Power of Central Government to
    Declare Species as Vermin
REGIONAL OFFICE
AC-160, Sector-1, Salt Lake
Kolkata - 700064
Phone: 033-40607481
PRINCIPAL OFFICE
N-71, LGF, Greater Kailash 1
New Delhi – 110048
Phone: +91-11-49537774
E-mail: Info@lifeindia.net.in
Website: www.thelifeindia.org.in
40

 
‘Amritha’, 1311, 12th A Main, Vijayanagar 1st Stage, 
Mysore 570 017, Karnataka, INDIA 
Web: www.ncf-india.org 
E-mail: ncf@ncf-india.org 
Tel.: +91 821 2515601; Fax +91 821 2513822 
 
 
 
 
9 January 2022  
 
To, All Honourable Members & The Secretariat  
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment and Forests and Climate 
Change 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 110 001  
 
Subject: Comments on the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 (Bill No 159 of 2021 as 
introduced in the Rajya Sabha) to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act of 1972  
 
Dear Sir or Madam,  
 
This is to bring to your attention our specific comments and concerns on the Wild Life (Protection) 
Amendment Bill, 2021 (hereafter referred to as the Amendment) tabled before the Rajya Sabha recently to 
amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act 1972 (hereafter referred to as the WP Act). Our comments are 
organised under the following broad sections: A. General Concerns and Major Comments, B. Specific 
suggestions on each Amendment Clause, C. Existing Sections that require amendment, and D. 
Suggested Modifications to Schedules - rectification of errors, proposed additions. 
 
Our organization, Nature Conservation Foundation (NCF), has been working in the field of wildlife 
research and conservation across India since 1996. As a national organization involved in scientific 
research, on-ground conservation, and policy support, we have also served as a member on the National 
Board for Wildlife (2010 – 13) and engaged with State and Central Governments, local communities, and 
other scientific research institutions in carrying out our work. NCF is recognized as a scientific research 
institution and as a centre for doctoral research by Manipal Academy of Higher Education, and our 
significant track record of research and technical projects and publications is available on our website, 
www.ncf-india.org.  
 
We urge your careful and immediate attention on the substantive concerns and aspects raised in this letter. 
We are also happy to depose before the committee, if required. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
 
 
TR Shankar Raman, Mayuresh Gangal, Aparajita Datta,  
 
 
 
 
Praveen Jayadevan, P. Jeganathan, Ashwin Viswanathan 
 
 
On behalf of the Students and Scientists of the Nature Conservation Foundation, Mysore. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41

 2 
 
A. General Concerns and Major Comments  
 
1. Inclusion of invasive alien species in Wildlife Protection Act 
Amendment Clause 39 (page 12), Section 62A introduces a new section in the Act related to the inclusion of 
invasive alien species. This is a welcome addition as invasive alien species are widely recognised as a 
significant threat to wildlife and habitats in many parts of India, but there is no existing policy or regulation 
to address the issue. However, these are the following major concerns related to this amendment: 
 
(a) As per Amendment Clause 3 (Section 16A), the definition of invasive alien species to be adopted is: 
"invasive alien species" means a species of animal or plant which is not native to India and whose 
introduction or spread may threaten or adversely impact wild life or its habitat. This definition is 
not aligned with internationally accepted definitions such as that of the IUCN or the Convention of 
Biological Diversity. Specifically, invasive alien species may not be just restricted to those from 
outside India, but may include species that are native to a particular region or ecosystem of India, 
which when introduced into other regions can become invasive and thus can also be a concern (e.g., 
Himalayan cherry Prunus cerasoides in Western Ghats, chital Axis axis in Andamans). The CBD 
defines Alien Species as A species, subspecies or lower taxon, introduced outside its natural past or 
present distribution; includes any part, gametes, seeds, eggs, or propagules of such species that 
might survive and subsequently reproduce and Invasive Alien Species as An alien species whose 
introduction and/or spread threaten biological diversity (Source: 
https://www.cbd.int/invasive/terms.shtml). 
 
(b) Under the proposed amendment, it is unclear as to what process will be followed in how species 
will be listed and whether both plants and animals will be included. There needs to be a well-
considered scientific and transparent process for proposing, evaluating, listing, and delisting 
invasive alien species, along with enabling provisions directing the formulation of specific 
management measures.  
 
(c) Finally, a thorough listing of invasive species is needed based on a comprehensive definition. 
Comprehensive recent assessments of alien species of India and identification of invasive aliens are 
available, which can be referred to as reliable resources and need to be used as the scientific basis 
for notification of invasive aliens. Two key resources include the following: 
(i) Vidushi Pant, Chinmay Patwardhan, Kshitij Patil, Amiya Ranjan Bhowmick, Abhishek 
Mukherjee, Achyut Kumar Banerjee. ILORA: A database of alien vascular flora of India.  
Ecological Solutions and Evidence, First published: 21 October 2021, https://doi.org/10.1002/2688-
8319.12105  
(ii) Sankaran K V, Khuroo A A, Raghavan R, Molur S, Kumar B, Wong L J, Pagad S (2021). 
Global Register of Introduced and Invasive Species - India. Version 1.5. Invasive Species 
Specialist Group ISSG. Checklist dataset https://doi.org/10.15468/uvnf8m accessed via GBIF.org 
on 2022-01-09. 
 
2. Notification of species as Vermin under the WP Act 
Amendment Clause 3 applicable to Section 3 (i), wherein species are not declared as Vermin under 
Schedule V as earlier, but only as notified under Section 62 for any area and for such period as specified, is 
welcome. We note that there was no scientific basis or rationale for notifying species or entire groups (such 
as fruit bats) as Vermin under Schedule V in the existing WP Act. There are however some significant 
concerns related to Vermin in the WP Act:  
 
(a) We suggest that the word Vermin itself be dropped from the WP Act due to its derogatory and 
negative connotations. A more neutral phrasing or single word/term that captures the status of these 
kinds of species can be used instead: such as Animal Damage Control (ADC) Species. This 
phrasing or term may be defined under Definitions and replace the mention of Vermin in relevant 
sections of the Act, particularly Section 62.  
 
42

 3 
(b) The Amendment and the existing WP Act does not specify the rationale or scientific basis for listing 
(or delisting) species under this provision. These kinds of species could be defined as very abundant 
or common animal species which are identified on the basis of scientific assessments as causing 
significant damage to human lives, crops, or property including livestock, through disease, injuries 
or loss of life, or damage to property. As in the case of invasive alien species, there needs to be a 
well-considered scientific and transparent process for proposing, evaluating, listing, and 
delisting species. Section 62 should include additional enabling provisions directing the 
formulation of specified or permitted management measures for such species, and not merely 
direct lethal control.  
 
(c) Although this change is just a result of the proposed rationalisation of Schedules, it is highly 
problematic that many animal species, including those listed in Schedule II, can potentially be 
notified as Vermin under the new amendment. Given that there is no specification of criteria 
based on which species may be notified as Vermin, this amendment may lead to negative 
consequences on such species. 
 
(d) We propose the terminology of Animal Damage Control as it brings focus on the need to 
control potential damage caused by the species through specified or permitted management 
measures, as in clause (b) above, rather than merely remove protections and expose species 
listed as Vermin to lethal control, trade and transport, capture, use as meat etc. under various 
sections of the WP Act (e.g., Sections 9, 44, 48A, 29 etc). Even if a species is listed under Section 
62 as Vermin or ADC species, there is no reason why it should also be automatically exposed to 
trade, use as meat, captivity etc. with no protections. This indicates that all sections of the WP Act 
related to Vermin need a careful re-appraisal. 
 
 
3. The rationalisation of Schedules and revision of names in Schedules 
Amendment of the Schedules under Amendment Clause 41 (page 13) to rationalise the schedules and use 
updated taxonomy is welcome. The Schedules have been reduced from six to three along with the inclusion 
of a new Schedule IV for the regulation of trade for species that are listed under CITES. The gaps and errors 
in the Schedules in the WP Act earlier were a matter of concern and therefore amendment to update the 
Schedules is welcome and much needed. However, even with the proposed amendments, there are 
several gaps, errors, and exclusions in the new Schedules. We have pointed out these gaps and errors 
below and in Sections D. There is also a lack of clarity on the criteria or basis for inclusion of species 
in these Schedules and the reasons for exclusion of many species and entire groups. As this is a highly 
significant and critical part of the Act, this revision of Schedules requires wide public consultation, 
preferably under the aegis of a sub-committee of the NBWL constituted as per Sec 5B (3) of the Act. 
We strongly urge that the final Schedules be adopted only after this comprehensive consultative 
process is undertaken and completed within a fixed time frame of 6 months to a year.  
 
Other major concerns related to the Schedules include the following: 
 
a. The rationale on which the Schedules are based should be made explicit and a transparent, 
scientifically rigorous, and consultative process of listing and delisting species in Schedules 
should be evolved. 
 
i. While there has been some welcome changes and additions in the listing given in 
Schedules, the basic criteria for inclusion of a species to be listed is not provided. For 
instance, the US Endangered Species Act of 1973 specifies the following criteria to 
determine if a species should be listed as threatened or endangered under the act: (A) the 
present or threatened destruction, modification, or curtailment of its habitat or range; (B) 
overutilization for commercial, recreational, scientific, or educational purposes; (C) 
disease or predation; (D) the inadequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms; or (E) other 
natural or manmade factors affecting its continued existence. 
43

 4 
ii. There are national assessments for some taxonomic groups (CAMP assessments, India Red 
Data Lists etc.) that could be used to justify inclusion in either of the two Schedules, or in 
the absence of our own system of assessment, there are other global assessments (e.g., 
IUCN Red List of Threatened Species) that could be used to assess status and place species 
in appropriate Schedules. As detailed below, large numbers of species and entire faunal 
groups are missing in Schedule I or II, including some species that are Critically 
Endangered or of high conservation concern, and it is unclear on what basis this was 
done. 
iii. There is a need to evolve a transparent, scientifically rigorous, and consultative 
process of listing and delisting species in Schedules. Models from other countries such as 
the US Endangered Species Act (ESA) can be examined and adopted with suitable 
modifications. The ESA allows petitions, including from citizens, scientific institutions, and 
government authorities, for listing species, followed by a rigorous review and appraisal 
process (https://www.fws.gov/endangered/what-we-do/listing-petition-process.html).    
iv. Within each of the faunal groups in Schedule I and II, it would be better to arrange 
species in taxonomic order systematically based on Family, rather than a general listing. 
 
b. Many species / species groups are missing from the Schedules 
 
i. Apart from mammals, most other faunal groups are incompletely listed, especially 
amphibians and reptiles. In addition, the basis or criteria for inclusion/exclusion is not 
clear. In Schedule 1, only 1 amphibian and 43 species of reptiles are included. While in 
Schedule II, only 5 amphibians and 12 reptiles are listed.  There are many remarkable 
discoveries of new species, range extensions, re-discoveries of herpetofauna and more 
extensive documentation of herpetofauna in the last decade that are available in the public 
domain and the knowledge and expertise among different experts/institutions as well as 
public databases should be used to include relevant herpetofaunal species.   
ii. Even among mammals, certain groups like bats and arboreal and terrestrial forest 
rodents are incompletely listed. Contrary to popular perception, ‘rats’ (rodents) are a 
diverse group and include many species that are endemic or threatened/rare. Recent 
research and surveys have also enhanced our understanding of bat diversity and their 
distribution. This knowledge needs to reflect in the Schedules I and II.  
iii. For birds, 446 species of birds known to occur in India are missing from either of the 
Schedules. These bird species need to be added to one of the Schedules as it otherwise 
exposes a large fraction of India’s birds to a situation with no protection from hunting or 
other threats. The State of India’s Birds 2020 Report (SoIB 2020, available at 
https://www.stateofindiasbirds.in/) can be used as a scientific basis to identify which 
species needs to be listed in Schedule I or II, along with other resources such as the IUCN 
Red List of Threatened Species.  
iv. In Schedule I, under invertebrates, only five groups are partially included, namely 
insects - only 63 butterflies, molluscs (10), corals (388), crabs (3), and sea cucumbers 
(32) in Schedule I. No other invertebrates are listed in the Schedules at all. This is a big 
omission, given the huge diversity and importance of these species and groups and existing 
knowledge and expertise that exists in the country as well as some national/regional or 
global assessments. 
v. In Schedule II (Part E), under insects, only 57 species of butterflies and 1 species of 
dragonfly are included. Among other invertebrates, only 14 molluscs and 10 sponges 
are included. There is much knowledge now on several invertebrate groups from across the 
country, especially on butterflies, moths, spiders, odonates and some other groups that 
needs to be used to identify species from these groups for inclusion in these Schedules. 
vi. There are only 18 plant species listed under Schedule III and the basis is unclear and 
arbitrary. In the previous Act in which plants were under Schedule VI, only 6 plants were 
listed. The basis and criteria for only these plant species being included is not clear and 
44

 5 
appears arbitrary. There are many other plant species that are threatened (categorized under 
IUCN Red List as Critically Endangered, Endangered, Vulnerable and Near Threatened) 
that need to be included. The Botanical Survey of India’s list of threatened plants of India 
should be consulted to include more species, as well as through consultation with botanical 
experts in the country and by consulting the IUCN Red List and sources such as Kameswara 
Rao, C.; Geetha, B.L.; Suresh, Geetha (2003). Red list of threatened vascular plant species 
in India. Ministry of Environment and Forests. While many plant species have not been 
assessed globally, expert knowledge can be used to determine which species needs 
inclusion. The listing of plant species in Schedule III should also include Bryophytes, 
Pteridophytes, Gymnosperms and Angiosperms and be arranged systematically family-wise 
within each of these larger main plant groups.  
vii. Some groups like algae, lichen and fungi are missing entirely and consultation is needed 
with experts on these groups to determine species that need to be included. 
viii. Please find the detailed list of species for which we suggest modification of the Schedules 
in the section “Schedule Modification” in Section D of this submission. 
 
4. Recognition of Forest Rights Act (FRA) 2006 and regulation of tourist lodges  
Amendment Clause 13 applicable to Section 33 of the Act includes wording on preparation of management 
plan as per Central Government guidelines and "...in case the sanctuary also falls under the Scheduled 
Areas or areas where the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest 
Rights) Act, 2006 is applicable, in accordance with the management plan for such sanctuary prepared after 
due consultation with the Gram Sabha concerned". This is a welcome recognition that the forest authorities 
would be required to manage wildlife sanctuaries in consultation with the Gram Sabha in such areas. It now 
incorporates that management should be as per management plan prepared as per central guidelines, or in 
areas under FRA, with involvement of Gram Sabha. Clause b of the same Amendment Clause 13 also will 
prevent Chief Wildlife Warden from allowing all tourist lodges, including Government lodges for 
tourism/commercial purposes to be built without NBWL clearance. 
 
5. Renewal of firearm licences in and around Protected Areas 
Amendment Clause 14 (page 4), Section 34 brings a new provision regarding renewal of firearms licences 
to any person residing within 10 km of a wildlife sanctuary. This is a welcome addition to the existing 
provisions which only covered issual of new licences to such persons. However, we note that this may lead 
to conflicts or practical problems in implementation in certain regions such as North-east India where 
people can bear arms subject to permits and renewals. In such states, there may be a need to align existing 
local laws/practices with this change in the WP Act.  
 
6. WLPA should recognise State Fisheries Department regulations  
Most of the freshwater and marine fish species and invertebrates in the Indian waters are managed and 
governed by State-level Inland Fisheries Acts, state level Marine Fisheries Regulation Acts (MFRAs) and 
National Marine Fisheries Acts. These acts recognise amendments under the Wildlife Protection Act. We 
suggest that there is a need for a separate amendment in the Wildlife Protection Act which explicitly 
recognises regulatory and management provisions amended under State-level Inland Fisheries Acts, State 
level Marine Fisheries Regulation Acts (MFRAs) and National Marine Fisheries Acts.  
 
 
7. No direct protection for habitats  
 
We note that although the term Habitats is defined under the WP Act, the main approach to wildlife 
protection is through (a) creation of Protected Areas, and (b) listing of protected species in Schedules. India 
has a number of habitats, including non-forest habitats such as grasslands, semi-desert, unique wetlands, and 
Himalayan high altitude ecosystems, that remain outside the Protected Area network which covers only 5% 
of the land area. These habitats are vital for conservation of species such as the Critically Endangered Great 
Indian Bustard and Lesser Florican, which cannot be protected merely by listing in Schedules. Animal 
corridors between Protected Areas are another category of habitat that require better recognition and 
protection. As these areas are often in private ownership or under agriculture or other land uses, provisions 
to protect habitat need to involve and incentivize local communities, landowners, and other stakeholders for 
their protection. A better/wider framework for protection of habitats that are important for wildlife is 
required but currently missing from the Act. 
45

 6 
 
8. Rendering State Boards for Wildlife defunct 
A new Amendment Clause 6 seeks to insert a new section 6A allowing the State Board for Wild Life to 
constitute a Standing Committee to exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be delegated to it 
by the Board. It provides for the membership of such a Standing Committee to be the Vice-Chairperson, the 
Member-Secretary, and not more than ten members, to be nominated by the Vice-Chairperson, from 
amongst the members of the Board. It further provides for such a Standing Committee to constitute 
committees, sub-committees or study groups as may be necessary.  
The State Boards of Wildlife (SBWL) would be rendered defunct due to the amendment suggested for 
creation of the Standing Committee in the states. This has already happened with the National Board for 
Wildlife (NBWL). This is not desirable as this will dilute the scrutiny, evaluation and assessment that 
proposed projects are given. There should also be a stipulation that the main SBWL and NBWL should meet 
at least twice a year. 
 
9. Allowing commercial trade in live elephants 
Earlier, the transfer, acquisition and receiving of a live captive elephant was permitted under a legal 
provision only with prior approval by the CWLW. However, no commercial transactions were allowed. A 
new amendment in Section 43, now makes an exception stating that the prohibition on transfer/transport of 
live captive elephants does not apply to any person having a certificate of ownership and/or having 
permission from the State Government. This exception thus effectively allows for the commercial sale and 
purchase of live elephants, which is a serious undesirable amendment to the Act that will have negative 
consequences for captive and wild elephant populations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Specific suggestions on each Amendment Clause 
 
1/7 
Amendment Clause: 2 
Section (sub-section): Preamble 
Proposed text of 
amendment 
In the principal Act for the words "protection of wild animals, birds and plants", 
the words "conservation, protection and management of wildlife" shall be 
substituted. 
Suggested 
modifications  
In the principal Act for the words "protection of wild animals, birds and plants", 
the words "conservation, protection, research and management of wildlife and 
habitats" shall be substituted.  
Rationale  It is crucial to include research in the Preamble as sound management and 
conservation cannot be carried out without scientific basis and must be based on 
scientific research and monitoring. It is also essential to include wildlife habitats 
within the scope of the Act, as Habitat is already defined in the Act. 
 
2/7 
Amendment Clause: 3 (e) 
Section (sub-section): 2 (19) 
46

 7 
Proposed text of 
amendment 
in Clause (19), for the words and figures "Schedules I to V and VI", the words 
and figures "Schedules I, II and III" shall be substituted; 
Suggested 
modifications  
in Clause (19), for the words and figures "Schedules I to V and VI", the words 
and figures "Schedules I, II, III and IV" shall be substituted; 
Rationale  We think the definition of “manufacturer” should also apply to species coming 
under CITES provisions (new Schedule IV) and not just to Schedule I to III 
species as referred in Section 44 and 49. 
 
3/7 
Amendment Clause: 3 (i) 
Section (sub-section): 2 (34) 
Proposed text of 
amendment 
"vermin" means any wild animal notified under Section 62 
Suggested 
modifications  
"Animal Damage Control (ADC) species" or "Notified / Managed species" 
means any wild animal notified under Section 62; 
Rationale  We suggest the word Vermin itself should be dropped from the act due to its 
derogatory and negative connotation. Recent research on human-wildlife 
conflict and coexistence on so-called ‘problem’ species indicates that reduction 
of conflicts requires management measures related to the location rather than 
merely directed at lethal population control of the species (e.g., predator proof 
corrals, early warning systems). We propose the term Animal Damage Control 
(ADC) species or, alternatively, some other neutral term like Notified or 
Managed species be used in the WP Act. This term should also be clearly linked 
to a framework to specify and notify allowed management measures for such 
species (which need not merely be lethal control). See Section A-2 of this 
submission for further details. 
 
 
4/7 
Amendment Clause: 5 
Section (sub-section): 5B (3) 
Proposed text of 
amendment 
In section 5B of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words "in proper 
discharge of functions assigned to it", the words "on such terms and conditions 
as may be prescribed for proper discharge of functions assigned to it under the 
Act'' shall be substituted 
Suggested 
modifications  
 
Rationale  We suggest that this amendment should not be made as it takes away agency 
from the study group or sub-committee of such species. See Section A-2 of this 
submission for further details. 
 
 
5/7 
Amendment Clause: 11 
47

 8 
Section (sub-section): 28 (1) 
Proposed text of 
amendment 
In Section 28 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (b), after the 
word "photography", the words "and film-making without making any change in 
the habitat or causing any adverse impact to the habitat of wildlife" shall be 
inserted. 
Suggested 
modifications  
Although the amendment is concerned only with photography and film-making, 
we would like to point out the need for more enabling provision related to 
research as well. We therefore suggest that the provision for issue of permit 
under Section 28 of the principal act, in sub-section (1) (c) be revised suitably. 
We specifically suggest that permission for research be dealt with as a separate 
clause with the stipulation that permits shall be issued in a timely manner within 
3 months from the date of application and reasons for any denial of permit are 
recorded in writing after giving an opportunity for the applicant to be heard or to 
submit a revised proposal. 
Rationale  As research is a key requirement for conservation and management of wildlife, a 
more enabling provision for research is required in the WP Act. It should not be 
equated and treated on the same basis as tourism and photography. As long as 
research is conducted within legal bounds respecting laws of the land, retaining 
discretionary power the Chief Wildlife Warden in terms of what research should 
be permitted in the protected area may be arbitrary and could be biased. Given 
that much ecological research is seasonally sensitive and time-bound, delay in 
the permit granting process can have a serious effect on the ability to conduct 
research in the first place.   
 
Although the Environment Ministry has issued  Guidelines for Scientific 
Research in the Wildlife Protected Areas this is not reflected in the main Act 
through enabling provisions. 
 
 
6/7 
Amendment Clause: 12 
Section (sub-section): 29 
Proposed text of 
amendment 
for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
"Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, grazing or movement of 
livestock permitted under clause (d) of section 33, or hunting of wild animals 
under a permit granted under section 11 or hunting without violating the 
conditions of a permit granted under section 12, or the exercise of any rights 
permitted to continue under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 24, or the 
bona fide use of drinking and household water by local communities, shall not 
be deemed to be an act prohibited under this section." 
Suggested 
modifications  
(b) for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
"Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, grazing or movement of 
livestock permitted under clause (d) of section 33, or hunting of wild animals 
under a permit granted under section 11 or hunting without violating the 
conditions of a permit granted under section 12, or the exercise of any rights 
permitted to continue under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 24, or the 
bona fide use of drinking and household water by local communities, 
48

 9 
subsistence fishing or any other rights provided under The Scheduled 
Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest 
Rights) Act, 2006, shall not be deemed to be an act prohibited under this 
section." 
Rationale  Given that The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (FRA) seeks to correct omissions in 
recognition of rights during the process of PA notification, which has been a 
rather common occurrence, it only stands to reason that any rights lawfully 
recognised under the FRA must be honoured under the WLPA. 
 
7/7 
Amendment Clause: 16 (a) 
Section (sub-section): 36D (2) 
Proposed text of 
amendment 
for the words "five representatives", the words "not less than five 
representatives" shall be substituted 
Suggested 
modifications  
for the words "five representatives", the words "not less than five representatives 
including at least one representative of a local wildlife organisation or 
Chairperson of the local Biodiversity Management Committee constituted 
under the Biological Diversity Act (2002)" shall be substituted 
Rationale  The amendment recognises the need to constitute a committee of local members 
but fails to stipulate that the committee should include any member with 
experience on wildlife and biodiversity of the areas. Hence the suggestion. 
 
 
 C. Existing Sections that require amendment  
 
Section (sub-
section) 
Existing text in WP 
Act 
Suggested 
modifications  
Rationale  
Chapter 1, point 
no. 2 
Definitions 
The Act defines an 
animal - only as 
amphibians, birds, 
mammals, or reptiles 
and their young and in 
the case of birds and 
reptiles, also their 
eggs.  
 
It should define an 
animal - as species that 
are invertebrates, 
amphibians, reptiles, 
birds and mammals and 
their young and their 
eggs, in the case of 
oviparous species. 
 
This is an incorrect 
biological definition as it 
completely excludes all 
invertebrates. It also 
assumes that all amphibians 
are not egg-laying, which is 
not true. 
Chapter 3, Sec 
12; Grant of 
permit for 
special purposes  
..which shall entitle 
the holder of such 
permit to hunt subject 
to such conditions as 
may be specified 
therein, any wild 
animal specified in 
such permit for the 
purpose of a) 
education, b) scientific 
research, bb) scientific 
management.. 
The word hunt should 
be replaced with catch 
or capture with 
appropriate, accepted 
and ethical methods 
It is inappropriate and 
incorrect to use the word 
hunt with respect to 
catching/capture and 
handling of animals for 
education, research and 
scientific management. We 
therefore suggest that 
appropriate terminology 
such as capture and 
handling of animals is 
defined under the Act and 
49

 10 
the Section 12 suitably 
modified.   
 
 
39 (3) Any such animal 
article, trophy or 
uncured trophy or 
meat derived from any 
wild animal, as 
referred to in sub-
sections (1) and (2) 
may be disposed of by 
the State Government 
or the Central 
Government, as the 
case may be, in such 
manner as may be 
prescribed by the 
Central Government 
Any such animal article, 
trophy or uncured 
trophy or meat derived 
from any wild animal, 
as referred to in sub-
sections (1) and (2) may 
be disposed of by the 
State Government or the 
Central Government, as 
the case may be, in such 
manner as may be 
prescribed under 
guidelines or protocols 
by the Central 
Government 
We suggest that proper 
guidelines and protocols 
need to be issued for the 
various cases and situations 
as different animal articles 
may require different 
protocols. In our opinion 
Section 39 (3) should be re-
amended making 
provisions for setting up 
such guidelines or 
protocols and not just 
through mere notification or 
orders that may be 
prescribed from time to 
time. 
62 the words and figure 
"and so long as such 
notification is in force, 
such wild 
animals shall be 
deemed to have been 
included in Schedule 
V" shall be omitted. 
 
 We strongly suggest that 
designation of species as 
Vermin should happen with 
explicit stipulation of 
reasons, basing it on 
scientific evidence by 
involvement of an advisory 
or supervisory scientific 
body. Also there should be 
provision of periodic 
tracking of the fate of 
animal’s population as a 
result of such notification. 
Considering the 
requirements of such 
processes we recommend 
that this section should be 
re-amended. We also 
provide further comments in 
Section A-2 of this 
submission. 
 
 
D. Suggested modifications to Schedules (rectification of errors, proposed 
additions etc.) 
 
1. General comments  
 
a. Due to some formatting errors, many species’ scientific names (Latin binomials) are not separated 
by a space between the genus name and species epithet, which can lead to confusion. It also looks 
shoddy in a document that is so important. 
b. About 446 bird species known to occur in India (https://www.indianbirds.in/india/) are not listed in 
any of the Schedules. In addition, the Schedules are not designed to incorporate new discoveries and 
new range extensions, we thus recommend that all birds that are seen in the wild (excluding alien 
species) within the political boundaries of India fall under Schedule II, unless they fall under 
50

 11 
Schedule I or have been explicitly declared as Vermin (or Animal Damage Control species as 
proposed in this submission). 
c.  Any species that is listed by IUCN as "Critically Endangered", or "Endangered" and “Vulnerable” 
category should by default be included in Schedule I. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Suggested changed in Schedules for animals (except birds)  
 
Current 
Schedule 
Part Comments  
Schedule I Part A - 
Mammals 
Following mammal species should be listed in Schedule I 
1. Leaf deer Muntiacus putaoensis, 
2. Gongshan muntjac Muntiacus gongshanensis  
3. Arunachal Macaque Macaca munzala 
4. White-cheeked macaque Macaca leucogenys 
5. Mechuka Giant Flying Squirrel Petaturista mechukaensis 
6. Mishmi Giant Flying Squirrel Petaurista mishmiensis 
Schedule I Part H - 
Corals 
As many scientific names are incorrect and taxonomic nomenclature 
keeps on changing, we recommend that part H of Schedule I just 
mentions “all corals” without specifying family names 
Schedule I  Part J - 
Holothurians  
1. Most of the Holothurians are endangered because of the export 
demand 
2. Holothurians are fast growing and quick maturing and 
sustainable harvest models of Holothurians exist in other parts 
of the word 
3. In Schedule IV, in appendix II only three holothurians are 
mentioned and many species which are commonly found in 
India do not have any mention in appendix II 
Considering these points, we recommend that MoEFCC should make 
an active effort in listing all the Indian Holothurians in CITES 
appendices. Once that is achieved Holothurians can be shifted to 
Schedule IV. Until that time all the Holothurians may be listed in 
Schedule II. 
Schedule I, 
Part D 
 A single species of amphibian (Himalayan Salamander) is included in 
Schedule I. This is completely insufficient. It excludes entire Anura 
and Gymnophiona (caecilians). At the very least, Indian CAMP 
assessments or IUCN Red List should be used to identify species 
requiring protection. 
Schedule II Mammals Javan Mongoose - This species is not reported in India and needs to 
be removed. 
 
 
2. Birds: Suggested changes in the Schedules 
 
There is no apparent rationale for listing various birds in Schedule I or Schedule II. In addition, among the 
birds which were reported from India, around 446 birds are missing in either of the Schedules. Fortunately, 
there is ample reliable information available about Indian birds in the form of the global IUCN Red List and 
criteria used there and the “Status of Conservation Concern” criteria put together in the ‘The State of India’s 
Birds’ report which was published in 2020 (https://www.stateofindiasbirds.in/). 
 
Based on these criteria, we have suggested following changes in the listing/ classification of birds in the new 
amendment. We would like to emphasize here that just like we have suggested for birds, similar knowledge-
51

 12 
based status assessments are possible for the other taxa and we strongly recommend that the committee uses 
available scientific knowledge/expertise and information in listing/classification of all the taxa in different 
schedules in a more systematic and comprehensive manner which provides a strong and clear basis for 
inclusion or exclusion in any of the Schedules. 
 
a. Bird species additions required in Schedule I  
 
Some of the bird species which show a high conservation priority, according to the State of India’s Birds 
report or which are classified as Critically Endangered, Endangered or Vulnerable categories by IUCN are 
either missing from Schedule II or not listed at all in the new amendments. Many species of conservation 
concern were identified by the State of India’s Birds 2020 report. Therefore, based on these criteria, we 
propose the following species should be added in Schedule I.  
 
Sr. 
No. 
English name Scientific name Current 
classification 
(as per 
proposed 
amendments) 
IUCN 
Category 
Status of 
Conservation 
Concern 
(SoIB) 
1 Baer's Pochard Aythya baeri Schedule II Critically 
Endangered 
NA 
2 White-headed 
Duck 
Oxyura 
leucocephala 
Schedule II Endangered NA 
3 Manipur Bush 
Quail 
Perdicula 
manipurensis 
Schedule II Endangered High 
4 Masked Finfoot Heliopais 
personatus 
Not listed  Endangered NA 
5 Sociable 
Lapwing 
Vanellus 
gregarius 
Schedule II Critically 
Endangered 
High 
6 Great Knot Calidris 
tenuirostris 
Schedule II Endangered High 
7 Spoon-billed 
Sandpiper 
Calidris pygmaea Schedule II Critically 
Endangered 
NA 
8 Black-bellied 
Tern 
Sterna acuticauda Schedule II Endangered High 
9 Indian 
Skimmer 
Rynchops 
albicollis 
Schedule II Endangered High 
10 Greater 
Adjutant 
Leptoptilos dubius Schedule II Endangered High 
11 Christmas 
Island 
Frigatebird 
Fregata andrewsi Not listed  Critically 
Endangered 
NA 
12 White-eared 
Night Heron 
Gorsachius 
magnificus 
Not listed  Endangered NA 
13 Swamp Grass 
Babbler 
Laticilla 
cinerascens 
Not listed  Endangered High 
14 Banasura 
Laughingthrush 
Montecincla 
jerdoni 
Not listed  Endangered High 
15 Nilgiri 
Laughingthrush 
Montecincla 
cachinnans 
Not listed  Endangered High 
16 Nilgiri 
Sholakili 
Sholicola major Schedule II Endangered High 
17 Finn's Weaver Ploceus 
megarhynchus 
Schedule II Endangered High 
18 Yellow-
breasted 
Bunting 
Emberiza aureola Schedule II Critically 
Endangered 
High 
52

 13 
19 Marbled Teal Marmaronetta 
angustirostris 
Schedule II Vulnerable NA 
20 Swamp 
Francolin 
Francolinus 
gularis 
Schedule II Vulnerable High 
21 Yellow-eyed 
Pigeon 
Columba 
eversmanni 
Schedule II Vulnerable High 
22 Pale-capped 
Pigeon 
Columba punicea Schedule II Vulnerable High 
23 Dark-rumped 
Swift 
Apus acuticauda Not listed  Vulnerable High 
24 Wood Snipe Gallinago 
nemoricola 
Schedule II Vulnerable NA 
25 Great Slaty 
Woodpecker 
Mulleripicus 
pulverulentus 
Not listed  Vulnerable High 
26 Grey-crowned 
Prinia 
Prinia 
cinereocapilla 
Not listed  Vulnerable High 
27 Black-breasted 
Parrotbill 
Paradoxornis 
flavirostris 
Not listed  Vulnerable High 
28 Mishmi Wren 
Babbler 
Spelaeornis 
badeigularis 
Schedule II Vulnerable High 
29 Naga Wren 
Babbler 
Spelaeornis 
chocolatinus 
Schedule II Vulnerable High 
30 Marsh Babbler Pellorneum 
palustre 
Not listed  Vulnerable High 
31 Slender-billed 
Babbler 
Argya longirostris Not listed  Vulnerable High 
32 Ashambu 
Laughingthrush 
Montecincla 
meridionalis 
Not listed  Vulnerable High 
33 Beautiful 
Nuthatch 
Sitta formosa Not listed  Vulnerable High 
34 White-bellied 
Sholakili 
Sholicola 
albiventris 
Schedule II Vulnerable High 
35 Hodgson's 
Bushchat 
Saxicola insignis Schedule II Vulnerable High 
36 Green Munia Amandava 
formosa 
Schedule II Vulnerable High 
37 Nilgiri Pipit Anthus 
nilghiriensis 
Schedule II Vulnerable High 
38 Common 
Pochard 
Aythya ferina Schedule II Vulnerable Moderate 
39 Nilgiri Wood 
Pigeon 
Columba 
elphinstonii 
Schedule II Vulnerable Moderate 
40 River Tern Sterna aurantia Schedule II Vulnerable Moderate 
41 Lesser Adjutant Leptoptilos 
javanicus 
Schedule II Vulnerable Moderate 
42 Malabar Grey 
Hornbill 
Ocyceros griseus Not listed  Vulnerable Moderate 
43 Malabar Pied 
Hornbill 
Anthracoceros 
coronatus 
Not listed  Near 
Threatened 
Moderate 
44 Indian Courser Cursorius 
coromandelicus 
Not listed  Least 
Concern 
Moderate 
45 Rufous-vented 
Grass Babbler 
Laticilla burnesii Not listed  Near 
Threatened 
Moderate 
46 Ibisbill Ibidorhyncha 
struthersii 
Not listed  Least 
Concern 
NA 
53

 14 
47 Blyth's 
Kingfisher 
Alcedo hercules Not listed  Near 
Threatened 
NA 
48 Yellow-rumped 
Honeyguide 
Indicator 
xanthonotus 
Not listed  Near 
Threatened 
Moderate 
49 Indian Eagle 
Owl 
Bubo bengalensis Schedule II Least 
Concern 
NA 
50 Spot-bellied 
Eagle Owl 
Bubo nipalensis Schedule II Least 
Concern 
NA 
51 Eurasian Eagle 
Owl 
Bubo bubo Schedule II Least 
Concern 
NA 
52 Brown Fish 
Owl 
Ketupa 
zeylonensis 
Schedule II Least 
Concern 
Low 
53 Tawny Fish 
Owl 
Ketupa flavipes Schedule II Least 
Concern 
NA 
54 Buffy Fish Owl Ketupa ketupu Schedule II Least 
Concern 
NA 
55 Mottled Wood 
Owl 
Strix ocellata Schedule II Least 
Concern 
NA 
56 Brown Wood 
Owl 
Strix 
leptogrammica 
Schedule II Least 
Concern 
NA 
57 Common Barn 
Owl 
Tyto alba Schedule II Least 
Concern 
NA 
58 Andaman Barn 
Owl 
Tyto deroepstorffi Schedule II Least 
Concern 
NA 
59 Northern Long-
eared Owl 
Asio otus Schedule II Least 
Concern 
NA 
60 Short-eared 
Owl 
Asio flammeus Schedule II Least 
Concern 
Low 
 
 
b. Bird species that need re-classifying or moving from Schedule I to Schedule II 
 
Some species which are classified/ listed under Schedule I according to the current amendments are 
classified as “Least Concern” species in IUCN category and also have “Low” status of conservation concern 
according to the State of India’s Birds report. Thus, we suggest that these species should be moved from 
Schedule I to Schedule II. 
 
Sr. No. English name Scientific name IUCN category Status of 
Conservation 
Concern 
(SoIB) 
1 Eurasian Spoonbill Platalea leucorodia Least Concern Low 
2 Crested Serpent Eagle Spilornis cheela Least Concern Low 
3 Black Eagle Ictinaetus malaiensis Least Concern Low 
4 Booted Eagle Hieraaetus pennatus Least Concern Low 
5 Bonelli's Eagle Aquila fasciata Least Concern Low 
6 Western Marsh 
Harrier 
Circus aeruginosus Least Concern Low 
7 Shikra Accipiter badius Least Concern Low 
8 Black Kite Milvus migrans Least Concern Low 
9 Brahminy Kite Haliastur indus Least Concern Low 
10 Common Buzzard Buteo buteo Least Concern Low 
11 Himalayan Buzzard Buteo refectus Least Concern Low 
54

 15 
12 Long-legged Buzzard Buteo rufinus Least Concern Low 
13 Grey-faced Buzzard Butastur indicus Least Concern NA 
14 Red Kite Milvus milvus Least Concern NA 
 
 
c. Bird species to be added to Schedule II 
 
There are 446 species of birds which are reported from India, but which are not listed in either of the 
Schedules. We have proposed that 21 of them need to be included in Schedule I. We recommend that the 
remaining 425 birds should be included in Schedule II. 
 
Sr. No. English Name Scientific Name 
1 Japanese Quail Coturnix japonica 
2 Red Junglefowl Gallus gallus 
3 Lesser Flamingo Phoeniconaias minor 
4 Black-necked Grebe Podiceps nigricollis 
5 Nicobar Imperial Pigeon Ducula nicobarica 
6 Horsfield's Bronze Cuckoo Chrysococcyx basalis 
7 White-rumped Spinetail Zoonavena sylvatica 
8 White-throated Needletail Hirundapus caudacutus 
9 Silver-backed Needletail Hirundapus cochinchinensis 
10 Brown-backed Needletail Hirundapus giganteus 
11 Plume-toed Swiftlet Collocalia affinis 
12 Himalayan Swiftlet Aerodramus brevirostris 
13 Alpine Swift Tachymarptis melba 
14 Common Swift Apus apus 
15 Pacific Swift Apus pacificus 
16 Blyth’s Swift Apus leuconyx 
17 Indian House Swift Apus affinis 
18 Nepal House Swift Apus nipalensis 
19 Asian Palm Swift Cypsiurus balasiensis 
20 Crested Treeswift Hemiprocne coronata 
21 American Golden Plover Pluvialis dominica 
22 Greater Painted-snipe Rostratula benghalensis 
23 Crab-plover Dromas ardeola 
55

 16 
24 Cream-coloured Courser Cursorius cursor 
25 Collared Pratincole Glareola pratincola 
26 Oriental Pratincole Glareola maldivarum 
27 Small Pratincole Glareola lactea 
28 South Polar Skua Stercorarius maccormicki 
29 Brown Skua Stercorarius antarcticus 
30 Pomarine Skua Stercorarius pomarinus 
31 Arctic Skua Stercorarius parasiticus 
32 Long-tailed Skua Stercorarius longicaudus 
33 White-tailed Tropicbird Phaethon lepturus 
34 Red-billed Tropicbird Phaethon aethereus 
35 Red-tailed Tropicbird Phaethon rubricauda 
36 Red-throated Diver Gavia stellata 
37 Black-throated Diver Gavia arctica 
38 Wilson's Storm-petrel Oceanites oceanicus 
39 White-faced Storm-petrel Pelagodroma marina 
40 Black-bellied Storm-petrel Fregetta tropica 
41 Swinhoe's Storm-petrel Oceanodroma monorhis 
42 Barau's Petrel Pterodroma baraui 
43 Jouanin's Petrel Bulweria fallax 
44 Streaked Shearwater Calonectris leucomelas 
45 Cory's Shearwater Calonectris borealis 
46 Flesh-footed Shearwater Ardenna carneipes 
47 Wedge-tailed Shearwater Ardenna pacifica 
48 Short-tailed Shearwater Ardenna tenuirostris 
49 Tropical Shearwater Puffinus bailloni 
50 Persian Shearwater Puffinus persicus 
51 Lesser Frigatebird Fregata ariel 
52 Great Frigatebird Fregata minor 
53 Masked Booby Sula dactylatra 
54 Brown Booby Sula leucogaster 
56

 17 
55 Red-footed Booby Sula sula 
56 Javan Pond Heron Ardeola speciosa 
57 Black-winged Kite Elanus caeruleus 
58 European Honey Buzzard Pernis apivorus 
59 Oriental Honey Buzzard Pernis ptilorhynchus 
60 Legge's Hawk Eagle Nisaetus kelaarti 
61 Rough-legged Buzzard Buteo lagopus 
62 Common Hoopoe Upupa epops 
63 Indian Grey Hornbill Ocyceros birostris 
64 Common Kingfisher Alcedo atthis 
65 Blue-eared Kingfisher Alcedo meninting 
66 Oriental Dwarf Kingfisher Ceyx erithaca 
67 Brown-winged Kingfisher Pelargopsis amauroptera 
68 Stork-billed Kingfisher Pelargopsis capensis 
69 Ruddy Kingfisher Halcyon coromanda 
70 White-throated Kingfisher Halcyon smyrnensis 
71 Black-capped Kingfisher Halcyon pileata 
72 Collared Kingfisher Todiramphus chloris 
73 Crested Kingfisher Megaceryle lugubris 
74 Pied Kingfisher Ceryle rudis 
75 Blue-bearded Bee-eater Nyctyornis athertoni 
76 Green Bee-eater Merops orientalis 
77 Blue-throated Bee-eater Merops viridis 
78 Blue-cheeked Bee-eater Merops persicus 
79 Blue-tailed Bee-eater Merops philippinus 
80 European Bee-eater Merops apiaster 
81 Chestnut-headed Bee-eater Merops leschenaulti 
82 Indochinese Roller Coracias affinis 
83 Eurasian Wryneck Jynx torquilla 
84 Speckled Piculet Picumnus innominatus 
85 White-browed Piculet Sasia ochracea 
57

 18 
86 Heart-spotted Woodpecker Hemicircus canente 
87 Brown-capped Pygmy Woodpecker Yungipicus nanus 
88 Grey-capped Pygmy Woodpecker Yungipicus canicapillus 
89 Yellow-crowned Woodpecker Leiopicus mahrattensis 
90 Brown-fronted Woodpecker Dendrocoptes auriceps 
91 Rufous-bellied Woodpecker Dendrocopos hyperythrus 
92 Fulvous-breasted Woodpecker Dendrocopos macei 
93 Freckle-breasted Woodpecker Dendrocopos analis 
94 Stripe-breasted Woodpecker Dendrocopos atratus 
95 Darjeeling Woodpecker Dendrocopos darjellensis 
96 Great Spotted Woodpecker Dendrocopos major 
97 Himalayan Woodpecker Dendrocopos himalayensis 
98 Sind Woodpecker Dendrocopos assimilis 
99 Crimson-breasted Woodpecker Dryobates cathpharius 
100 Bay Woodpecker Blythipicus pyrrhotis 
101 Greater Flameback Chrysocolaptes guttacristatus 
102 White-naped Woodpecker Chrysocolaptes festivus 
103 Rufous Woodpecker Micropternus brachyurus 
104 Pale-headed Woodpecker Gecinulus grantia 
105 Himalayan Flameback Dinopium shorii 
106 Common Flameback Dinopium javanense 
107 Black-rumped Flameback Dinopium benghalense 
108 Lesser Yellownape Picus chlorolophus 
109 Streak-throated Woodpecker Picus xanthopygaeus 
110 Scaly-bellied Woodpecker Picus squamatus 
111 Grey-headed Woodpecker Picus canus 
112 Greater Yellownape Chrysophlegma flavinucha 
113 White-bellied Woodpecker Dryocopus javensis 
114 Andaman Woodpecker Dryocopus hodgei 
58

 19 
115 Long-tailed Broadbill Psarisomus dalhousiae 
116 Silver-breasted Broadbill Serilophus lunatus 
117 Orange Minivet Pericrocotus flammeus 
118 Black-headed Shrike-babbler Pteruthius rufiventer 
119 Himalayan Shrike-babbler Pteruthius ripleyi 
120 Blyth's Shrike-babbler Pteruthius aeralatus 
121 Green Shrike-babbler Pteruthius xanthochlorus 
122 Black-eared Shrike-babbler Pteruthius melanotis 
123 Clicking Shrike-babbler Pteruthius intermedius 
124 White-bellied Erpornis Erpornis zantholeuca 
125 Mangrove Whistler Pachycephala cinerea 
126 Ashy Woodswallow Artamus fuscus 
127 White-breasted Woodswallow Artamus leucorynchus 
128 Malabar Woodshrike Tephrodornis sylvicola 
129 Large Woodshrike Tephrodornis virgatus 
130 Common Woodshrike Tephrodornis pondicerianus 
131 Bar-winged Flycatcher-shrike Hemipus picatus 
132 White-throated Fantail Rhipidura albicollis 
133 Spot-breasted Fantail Rhipidura albogularis 
134 White-browed Fantail Rhipidura aureola 
135 Black-naped Monarch Hypothymis azurea 
136 Amur Paradise-flycatcher Terpsiphone incei 
137 Blyth's Paradise-flycatcher Terpsiphone affinis 
138 Indian Paradise-flycatcher Terpsiphone paradisi 
139 Red-backed Shrike Lanius collurio 
140 Red-tailed Shrike Lanius phoenicuroides 
141 Isabelline Shrike Lanius isabellinus 
142 Brown Shrike Lanius cristatus 
143 Burmese Shrike Lanius collurioides 
144 Bay-backed Shrike Lanius vittatus 
145 Long-tailed Shrike Lanius schach 
59

 20 
146 Grey-backed Shrike Lanius tephronotus 
147 Great Grey Shrike Lanius excubitor 
148 Lesser Grey Shrike Lanius minor 
149 Masked Shrike Lanius nubicus 
150 Woodchat Shrike Lanius senator 
151 House Crow Corvus splendens 
152 Hooded Crow Corvus cornix 
153 Large-billed Crow Corvus macrorhynchos 
154 Pied Crow Corvus albus 
155 Yellow-bellied Fantail Chelidorhynx hypoxanthus 
156 Grey-headed Canary-flycatcher Culicicapa ceylonensis 
157 Indian Black-lored Tit Machlolophus aplonotus 
158 White-crowned Penduline Tit Remiz coronatus 
159 Common Tailorbird Orthotomus sutorius 
160 Dark-necked Tailorbird Orthotomus atrogularis 
161 Striated Prinia Prinia crinigera 
162 Black-throated Prinia Prinia atrogularis 
163 Hill Prinia Prinia superciliaris 
164 Rufous-fronted Prinia Prinia buchanani 
165 Rufescent Prinia Prinia rufescens 
166 Grey-breasted Prinia Prinia hodgsonii 
167 Graceful Prinia Prinia gracilis 
168 Jungle Prinia Prinia sylvatica 
169 Yellow-bellied Prinia Prinia flaviventris 
170 Ashy Prinia Prinia socialis 
171 Plain Prinia Prinia inornata 
172 Zitting Cisticola Cisticola juncidis 
173 Golden-headed Cisticola Cisticola exilis 
174 Thick-billed Warbler Arundinax aedon 
175 Booted Warbler Iduna caligata 
60

 21 
176 Sykes's Warbler Iduna rama 
177 Black-browed Reed Warbler Acrocephalus bistrigiceps 
178 Moustached Warbler Acrocephalus melanopogon 
179 Sedge Warbler Acrocephalus schoenobaenus 
180 Paddyfield Warbler Acrocephalus agricola 
181 Blunt-winged Warbler Acrocephalus concinens 
182 Blyth's Reed Warbler Acrocephalus dumetorum 
183 Large-billed Reed Warbler Acrocephalus orinus 
184 Great Reed Warbler Acrocephalus arundinaceus 
185 Oriental Reed Warbler Acrocephalus orientalis 
186 Clamorous Reed Warbler Acrocephalus stentoreus 
187 Striated Grassbird Megalurus palustris 
188 Rusty-rumped Warbler Helopsaltes certhiola 
189 Lanceolated Warbler Locustella lanceolata 
190 Brown Bush Warbler Locustella luteoventris 
191 Chinese Bush Warbler Locustella tacsanowskia 
192 Long-billed Bush Warbler Locustella major 
193 Grasshopper Warbler Locustella naevia 
194 Baikal Bush Warbler Locustella davidi 
195 West Himalayan Bush Warbler Locustella kashmirensis 
196 Spotted Bush Warbler Locustella thoracica 
197 Russet Bush Warbler Locustella mandelli 
198 Broad-tailed Grassbird Schoenicola platyurus 
199 Bristled Grassbird Schoenicola striatus 
200 Scaly-breasted Wren Babbler Pnoepyga albiventer 
201 Nepal Wren Babbler Pnoepyga immaculata 
202 Pygmy Wren Babbler Pnoepyga pusilla 
203 Grey-throated Martin Riparia chinensis 
204 Sand Martin Riparia riparia 
205 Pale Martin Riparia diluta 
61

 22 
206 Eurasian Crag Martin Ptyonoprogne rupestris 
207 Dusky Crag Martin Ptyonoprogne concolor 
208 Barn Swallow Hirundo rustica 
209 Wire-tailed Swallow Hirundo smithii 
210 Hill Swallow Hirundo domicola 
211 Pacific Swallow Hirundo tahitica 
212 Red-rumped Swallow Cecropis daurica 
213 Striated Swallow Cecropis striolata 
214 Streak-throated Swallow Petrochelidon fluvicola 
215 Northern House Martin Delichon urbicum 
216 Asian House Martin Delichon dasypus 
217 Nepal House Martin Delichon nipalense 
218 Wood Warbler Phylloscopus sibilatrix 
219 Ashy-throated Warbler Phylloscopus maculipennis 
220 Buff-barred Warbler Phylloscopus pulcher 
221 Yellow-browed Warbler Phylloscopus inornatus 
222 Hume's Warbler Phylloscopus humei 
223 Brooks's Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus subviridis 
224 Chinese Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus yunnanensis 
225 Lemon-rumped Warbler Phylloscopus chloronotus 
226 Sichuan Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus forresti 
227 Tytler's Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus tytleri 
228 Sulphur-bellied Warbler Phylloscopus griseolus 
229 Tickell's Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus affinis 
230 Dusky Warbler Phylloscopus fuscatus 
231 Smoky Warbler Phylloscopus fuligiventer 
232 Plain Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus neglectus 
233 Buff-throated Warbler Phylloscopus subaffinis 
234 Willow Warbler Phylloscopus trochilus 
235 Mountain Chiffchaff Phylloscopus sindianus 
236 Common Chiffchaff Phylloscopus collybita 
62

 23 
237 White-spectacled Warbler Phylloscopus intermedius 
238 Grey-cheeked Warbler Phylloscopus poliogenys 
239 Green-crowned Warbler Phylloscopus burkii 
240 Grey-crowned Warbler Phylloscopus tephrocephalus 
241 Whistler's Warbler Phylloscopus whistleri 
242 Green Warbler Phylloscopus nitidus 
243 Greenish Warbler Phylloscopus trochiloides 
244 Two-barred Warbler Phylloscopus plumbeitarsus 
245 Large-billed Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus magnirostris 
246 Sakhalin Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus borealoides 
247 Arctic Warbler Phylloscopus borealis 
248 Chestnut-crowned Warbler Phylloscopus castaniceps 
249 Yellow-vented Warbler Phylloscopus cantator 
250 Western Crowned Warbler Phylloscopus occipitalis 
251 Blyth's Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus reguloides 
252 Claudia's Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus claudiae 
253 Grey-hooded Warbler Phylloscopus xanthoschistos 
254 Pale-footed Bush Warbler Urosphena pallidipes 
255 Asian Stubtail Urosphena squameiceps 
256 Grey-bellied Tesia Tesia cyaniventer 
257 Slaty-bellied Tesia Tesia olivea 
258 Chestnut-crowned Bush Warbler Cettia major 
259 Grey-sided Bush Warbler Cettia brunnifrons 
260 Chestnut-headed Tesia Cettia castaneocoronata 
261 Cetti's Warbler Cettia cetti 
262 Yellow-bellied Warbler Abroscopus superciliaris 
263 Rufous-faced Warbler Abroscopus albogularis 
264 Black-faced Warbler Abroscopus schisticeps 
265 Mountain Tailorbird Phyllergates cucullatus 
266 Broad-billed Warbler Tickellia hodgsoni 
267 Manchurian Bush Warbler Horornis canturians 
63

 24 
268 Brownish-flanked Bush Warbler Horornis fortipes 
269 Hume's Bush Warbler Horornis brunnescens 
270 Aberrant Bush Warbler Horornis flavolivaceus 
271 White-browed Tit Warbler Leptopoecile sophiae 
272 Crested Tit Warbler Leptopoecile elegans 
273 White-cheeked Tit Aegithalos leucogenys 
274 Black-throated Tit Aegithalos concinnus 
275 White-throated Tit Aegithalos niveogularis 
276 Black-browed Tit Aegithalos iouschistos 
277 Garden Warbler Sylvia borin 
278 Asian Desert Warbler Curruca nana 
279 Barred Warbler Curruca nisoria 
280 Lesser Whitethroat Curruca curruca 
281 Eastern Orphean Warbler Curruca crassirostris 
282 Common Whitethroat Curruca communis 
283 Fire-tailed Myzornis Myzornis pyrrhoura 
284 Golden-breasted Fulvetta Lioparus chrysotis 
285 Yellow-eyed Babbler Chrysomma sinense 
286 Jerdon's Babbler Chrysomma altirostre 
287 Brown-throated Fulvetta Fulvetta ludlowi 
288 White-browed Fulvetta Fulvetta vinipectus 
289 Manipur Fulvetta Fulvetta manipurensis 
290 Great Parrotbill Conostoma aemodium 
291 Brown Parrotbill Cholornis unicolor 
292 Grey-headed Parrotbill Psittiparus gularis 
293 White-breasted Parrotbill Psittiparus ruficeps 
294 Rufous-headed Parrotbill Psittiparus bakeri 
295 Spot-breasted Parrotbill Paradoxornis guttaticollis 
296 Lesser Rufous-headed Parrotbill Chleuasicus atrosuperciliaris 
297 Fulvous Parrotbill Suthora fulvifrons 
64

 25 
298 Black-throated Parrotbill Suthora nipalensis 
299 Striated Yuhina Staphida castaniceps 
300 White-naped Yuhina Yuhina bakeri 
301 Whiskered Yuhina Yuhina flavicollis 
302 Stripe-throated Yuhina Yuhina gularis 
303 Rufous-vented Yuhina Yuhina occipitalis 
304 Black-chinned Yuhina Yuhina nigrimenta 
305 Chestnut-flanked White-eye Zosterops erythropleurus 
306 White-hooded Babbler Gampsorhynchus rufulus 
307 Yellow-throated Fulvetta Schoeniparus cinereus 
308 Rufous-winged Fulvetta Schoeniparus castaneceps 
309 Rufous-throated Fulvetta Schoeniparus rufogularis 
310 Rusty-capped Fulvetta Schoeniparus dubius 
311 Puff-throated Babbler Pellorneum ruficeps 
312 Spot-throated Babbler Pellorneum albiventre 
313 Buff-breasted Babbler Pellorneum tickelli 
314 Eyebrowed Wren Babbler Napothera epilepidota 
315 Long-billed Wren Babbler Napothera malacoptila 
316 Abbott's Babbler Malacocincla abbotti 
317 Streaked Wren Babbler Gypsophila brevicaudata 
318 Indian Grassbird Graminicola bengalensis 
319 Brown-cheeked Fulvetta Alcippe poioicephala 
320 Nepal Fulvetta Alcippe nipalensis 
321 Striated Laughingthrush Grammatoptila striata 
322 Himalayan Cutia Cutia nipalensis 
323 Jungle Babbler Argya striata 
324 Yellow-billed Babbler Argya affinis 
325 Common Babbler Argya caudata 
326 Striated Babbler Argya earlei 
327 Large Grey Babbler Argya malcolmi 
328 Rufous Babbler Argya subrufa 
65

 26 
329 White-crested Laughingthrush Garrulax leucolophus  
330 Lesser Necklaced Laughingthrush Garrulax monileger 
331 Spot-breasted Laughingthrush Garrulax merulinus 
332 Greater Necklaced Laughingthrush Pterorhinus pectoralis 
333 White-throated Laughingthrush Pterorhinus albogularis 
334 Rufous-necked Laughingthrush Pterorhinus ruficollis 
335 Chestnut-backed Laughingthrush Pterorhinus nuchalis 
336 Yellow-throated Laughingthrush Pterorhinus galbanus 
337 Wayanad Laughingthrush Pterorhinus delesserti 
338 Rufous-vented Laughingthrush Pterorhinus gularis 
339 Grey-sided Laughingthrush Pterorhinus caerulatus 
340 White-browed Laughingthrush Pterorhinus sannio 
341 Mount Victoria Babax Pterorhinus woodi 
342 Moustached Laughingthrush Ianthocincla cineracea 
343 Rufous-chinned Laughingthrush Ianthocincla rufogularis 
344 Spotted Laughingthrush Ianthocincla ocellata 
345 Streaked Laughingthrush Trochalopteron lineatum 
346 Bhutan Laughingthrush Trochalopteron imbricatum 
347 Striped Laughingthrush Trochalopteron virgatum 
348 Scaly Laughingthrush Trochalopteron subunicolor 
349 Brown-capped Laughingthrush Trochalopteron austeni 
350 Blue-winged Laughingthrush Trochalopteron squamatum 
351 Elliot's Laughingthrush Trochalopteron elliotii 
352 Variegated Laughingthrush Trochalopteron variegatum 
353 Black-faced Laughingthrush Trochalopteron affine 
354 Chestnut-crowned Laughingthrush Trochalopteron erythrocephalum 
355 Assam Laughingthrush Trochalopteron chrysopterum 
356 Palani Laughingthrush Montecincla fairbanki 
357 Rufous Sibia Heterophasia capistrata 
358 Grey Sibia Heterophasia gracilis 
359 Beautiful Sibia Heterophasia pulchella 
360 Long-tailed Sibia Heterophasia picaoides 
66

 27 
361 Silver-eared Mesia Leiothrix argentauris 
362 Red-billed Leiothrix Leiothrix lutea 
363 Red-tailed Minla Minla ignotincta 
364 Rufous-backed Sibia Leioptila annectens 
365 Red-faced Liocichla Liocichla phoenicea 
366 Hoary-throated Barwing Actinodura nipalensis 
367 Streak-throated Barwing Actinodura waldeni 
368 Rusty-fronted Barwing Actinodura egertoni 
369 Blue-winged Minla Actinodura cyanouroptera 
370 Chestnut-tailed Minla Actinodura strigula 
371 Goldcrest Regulus regulus 
372 Wallcreeper Tichodroma muraria 
373 Indian Nuthatch Sitta castanea 
374 Chestnut-bellied Nuthatch Sitta cinnamoventris 
375 Chestnut-vented Nuthatch Sitta nagaensis 
376 Kashmir Nuthatch Sitta cashmirensis 
377 White-tailed Nuthatch Sitta himalayensis 
378 White-cheeked Nuthatch Sitta leucopsis 
379 Yunnan Nuthatch Sitta yunnanensis 
380 Velvet-fronted Nuthatch Sitta frontalis 
381 Hodgson's Treecreeper Certhia hodgsoni 
382 Bar-tailed Treecreeper Certhia himalayana 
383 Rusty-flanked Treecreeper Certhia nipalensis 
384 Sikkim Treecreeper Certhia discolor 
385 Hume's Treecreeper Certhia manipurensis 
386 Indian Spotted Creeper Salpornis spilonota 
387 Eurasian Wren Troglodytes troglodytes 
388 Spotted Elachura Elachura formosa 
389 White-throated Dipper Cinclus cinclus 
390 Brown Dipper Cinclus pallasii 
391 Malabar Starling Sturnia blythii 
67

 28 
392 Red-billed Starling Spodiopsar sericeus 
393 Nilgiri Thrush Zoothera neilgherriensis 
394 Japanese Thrush Turdus cardis 
395 Naumann's Thrush Turdus naumanni 
396 Zappey's Flycatcher Cyanoptila cumatilis 
397 Finsch's Wheatear Oenanthe finschii 
398 Bohemian Waxwing Bombycilla garrulus 
399 Grey Hypocolius Hypocolius ampelinus 
400 Andaman Flowerpecker Dicaeum virescens 
401 Alpine Accentor Prunella collaris 
402 Altai Accentor Prunella himalayana 
403 Robin Accentor Prunella rubeculoides 
404 Rufous-breasted Accentor Prunella strophiata 
405 Brown Accentor Prunella fulvescens 
406 Black-throated Accentor Prunella atrogularis 
407 Maroon-backed Accentor Prunella immaculata 
408 Spanish Sparrow Passer hispaniolensis 
409 Sind Sparrow Passer pyrrhonotus 
410 Russet Sparrow Passer cinnamomeus 
411 Eurasian Tree Sparrow Passer montanus 
412 Yellow-throated Sparrow Gymnoris xanthocollis 
413 Rock Sparrow Petronia petronia 
414 Pale Rockfinch Carpospiza brachydactyla 
415 Black-winged Snowfinch Montifringilla adamsi 
416 White-rumped Snowfinch Onychostruthus taczanowskii 
417 Rufous-necked Snowfinch Pyrgilauda ruficollis 
418 Blanford's Snowfinch Pyrgilauda blanfordi 
419 Meadow Pipit Anthus pratensis 
420 Pale Rosefinch Carpodacus stoliczkae 
421 Three-banded Rosefinch Carpodacus trifasciatus 
422 Crimson-winged Finch Rhodopechys sanguineus 
68

 29 
423 Desert Finch Rhodospiza obsoleta 
424 Eurasian Siskin Spinus spinus 
425 Rustic Bunting Emberiza rustica 
- Rock Pigeon (Wild-type) Columba livia (See next section) 
 
d. Removal from both Schedule I and II 
  
Feral Pigeons (Columba livia) are wild-breeding birds that originated from domesticated pigeons. They have 
successfully established in all cities and towns and are turning into a nuisance. Residents are forced to try 
different ways to keep them off buildings, windows, and lofts. Such efforts may be curtailed if Feral Pigeon 
were to figure in any Schedule. However, this will exclude truly cliff-nesting populations of wild Rock 
Pigeons that will remain under Schedule II. 
 
Reference cited: 
Praveen J., Jayapal, R., & Pittie, A., 2021. Checklist of the birds of India (v5.1). Website: 
http://www.indianbirds.in/india/ [Date of publication: 31 October, 2021]. 
 
 
 
 
69

Comments on the Wildlife (Protection) Act  Amendment Bill 2021   Submitted to The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change Parliament of India  13 January 2022  Sanjay Molur, PhD Ashritha Anoop Priyanka Iyer with help from Supriya Samanta, Arpan Joshi, and Shweta Madgulkar   Zoo Outreach Organization 12 Thiruvannamalai Nagar Saravanampatti Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu 641035    
70

 2 
Dr Sanjay Molur is the Executive Director of Zoo Outreach Organization Ashritha Anoop is a Fellow of the Ram Hattikudur Advanced Training in Conservation 2021–22 at Zoo Outreach Organization Priyanka Iyer is a researcher at Zoo Outreach Organization  Supriya Samanta, Arpan Joshi & Shweta Madgulkar are Fellows of the Ram Hattikudur Advanced Training in Conservation 2021–22 at Zoo Outreach Organization   For correspondence regarding this document, write to: zooreach@zooreach.org    
71

 3 
Comments on the Wildlife (Protection) Act amendment 2021  On invertebrates and aquatic species along with comments on definitions and other provisions.    Subject WPA 1972 WPA 2021 bill Comments by ZOO 
Definition of ‘Scheduled animal’ ‘scheduled animal’ means an animal specified for the time being in Sch. I or Part II of Sch. II 
‘scheduled animal’ means an animal specified for the time being in Sch. I 
Suggestion: Rename ‘scheduled animal’ as ‘Schedule I animal’ 
Definition of ‘Wildlife’ “wildlife” includes any animal, bees butterflies, crustacean, fish and moths; and aquatic or land vegetation which forms part of any habitat 
No amendments suggested Suggested definition: Wildlife includes any species or taxa from the animal kingdom and plant kingdom. 
Definition of ‘wild animal’  “wild animal” means any animal found wild in nature and includes any animal specified in Schedule I, Schedule II, Schedule, IV or Schedule V, wherever found 
No amendments suggested Suggested definition: Any native animal found wild in nature (not including feral animals or escaped domestic animals) and those listed under Schedules I, II, and IV 
Definition of ‘Invasive alien species’ Not defined  "invasive alien species" means a species of animal or plant which is not native to India and whose introduction or spread may threaten or adversely impact wildlife or its habitat 
Suggested definition: An alien species is a species introduced outside its natural past or present distribution; if the species becomes problematic ecologically or its spread may threaten or adversely impact wildlife or its habitat, it is termed an invasive alien species. This should be at the bio-geographical level (E.g., Western Ghats or Himalaya) and not at the political level (i.e., Country-wise or State-wise). 
72

 4 
Vermin “vermin” means any wild animal specified in Sch.V. Section 62 - Declaration of certain wild animal to be vermin. - The Central Government may by notification, declare any wild animal other than those specified in Sch. I and part II of Schedule II to be vermin for any area and for such period as may be specified therein and so long as such notification is in force, such wild animal shall be deemed to have been included in Sch.V. 
"vermin" means any wild animal notified under section 62.  Declaration of certain wild animal to be vermin. - [8The Central Government] may by notification, declare any wild animal other than those specified in Sch. I to be vermin for any area and for such period as may be specified therein. 
The category/ term vermin must be deleted. Chapter III on hunting of wild animals specifically section 11 with all its subsections and clauses should take care of problem animals.  
Nomenclature (Scientific names of species, subspecies, genera and/or family) 
Outdated, with spelling mistakes, and other typographical errors. Outdated, with spelling mistakes, and other typographical errors. 
Needs to be modified and updated as per current scientific names 
Provision for dynamism in the WPA for updating nomenclature, systematics, and taxonomic changes proposed by taxonomists. 
Does not have the provision, making the lists outdated and prone to various interpretations. 
Does not address this issue yet again and continues to complicate the interpretation. 
The amendment requires the provisions for taxonomic / nomenclatural changes that keep the list scientifically current, dynamic, and therefore less prone to misinterpretations. 
Wildlife Schedules No clear rationale on species listed in Schedules I, II, III, IV, V and VI. 
No clear rationale on species listed in Schedules I, II and III. Needs a clear rationale for listing species in different schedules for better understanding and transparency based on science and policy.        
73

 5 
Invertebrate list from the Wildlife (Protection) Act Amendment Bill 2021  CORALS (Schedule I – Part H) 1. The WPA amendment lists 388 corals of which only 246 are actually present in India, 115 species are not present in India and there are no data available on 05 species.  2. Of the 246 species present in India, 19 species have incorrect scientific names.  The following Table summarises the details of the corals listed under Schedule I, Part H of the WPA amendment bill 2021 with the corrections and comments based on World Register of Marine Species (WoRMS database) and Ocean Biodiversity Information System (OBIS database). Sl No Scientific name_WPA Amendment Bill 2021 Correct name Comments 1 Acropora abrotanoides Acropora abrotanoides Not present in India 2 Acropora anthocersis Acropora anthocersis Not present in India 3 Acropora aspera Acropora aspera Present in India 4 Acropora austera Acropora austera Not present in India 5 Acropora awi Acropora awi Present in India 6 Acropora brueggemanni Isopora brueggemanni Genus name incorrect, not present in India 7 Acropora carduus Acropora carduus Not present in India 8 Acropora caroloniana Acropora caroliniana Species spelling incorrect, not present in India 9 Acropora cerealis Acropora cerealis Not present in India 10 Acropora chesterfieldensis Acropora chesterfieldensis Present in India 11 Acropora clathrata Acropora clathrata Not present in India 12 Acropora cophodactyla Acropora cophodactyla Not present in India, validity of taxon in question 13 Acropora copiosa Acropora muricata Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), Present in India 14 Acropora cytherea Acropora cytherea Present in India 15 Acropora desatwii Acropora desalwii Species spelling in incorrect, not present in India 16 Acropora digitifera Acropora digitifera Present in India 17 Acropora divaricata Acropora divaricata Present in India 18 Acropora efforescens Acropora cytherea Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), Present in India 19 Acropora fastigata Acropora fastigata Not present in India 20 Acropora florida Acropora florida Present in India 
21 Acropora formosa Acropora muricata Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), repeated list, Present in India 22 Acropora forskali Acropora forskali Present in India, validity of taxon in question 
74

 6 
23 Acropora gemmifera Acropora gemmifera Not present in India 24 Acropora glauca Acropora glauca Not present in India 25 Acropora globiceps Acropora globiceps Not present in India 26 Acropora gomezi Acropora gomezi   27 Acropora grandis Acropora grandis Not present in India 28 Acropora granulosa Acropora granulosa Present in India 29 Acropora haimei Acropora haimei Not present in India, validity of taxon in question 30 Acropora hemprichii Acropora hemprichii Present in India 31 Acropora horrida Acropora horrida Not present in India 32 Acropora humilis Acropora humilis Present in India 33 Acropora hyacinthus Acropora hyacinthus Present in India 34 Acropora inermis Acropora microphthalma Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), Present in India 35 Acropora insignis Acropora selago Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), Present in India 36 Acropora kimbeensis Acropora kimbeensis Not present in India 37 Acropora latistella Acropora latistella Not present in India 38 Acropora longicyathus Acropora longicyathus Not present in India 39 Acropora loripes Acropora loripes Not present in India 40 Acropora lutkeni Acropora lutkeni Not present in India 
41 Acropora massawensis Acropora polystoma Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), not present in India 42 Acroporamicroclados Acropora microclados Not present in India 
43 Acropora micropthalma Acropora microphthalma Species spelling in incorrect, repeated species, present in India 44 Acropora millepora Acropora millepora Present in India 45 Acropora mirabilis Acropora mirabilis Not present in India, validity of taxon in question 46 Acropora monticulosa Acropora monticulosa Present in India 47 Acropora multiacuta Acropora multiacuta Present in India 48 Acropora nana Acropora nana Not present in India 49 Acropora nasuta Acropora nasuta Present in India 50 Acropora natalensis Acropora natalensis Not present in India 51 Acropora nobilis Acropora robusta Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), Present in India 52 Acropora ocellata Acropora humilis Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), Present in India 53 Acropora palifera Isopora palifera Genus name incorrect, present in India 54 Acropora palmerae Acropora palmerae Not present in India 55 Acropora papillare Acropora papillare Not present in India 
75

 7 
56 Acropora pharaonis Acropora pharaonis Present in India 57 Acropora plantaginea Acropora plantaginea Not present in India, validity of taxon in question 58 Acropora polystoma Acropora polystoma Not present in India 59 Acropora pulchra Acropora pulchra Present in India 60 Acropora robusta Acropora robusta Repeated species, present in India 61 Acropora roseni Acropora roseni Not present in India 62 Acropora rudis Acropora rudis Not present in India 63 Acropora samoensis Acropora samoensis Not present in India 64 Acropora schmitti Acropora digitifera Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), Present in India 65 Acropora secale Acropora secale Present in India 66 Acropora selago Acropora selago Present in India 67 Acropora solitaryensis Acropora solitaryensis Not present in India 68 Acropora spicifera Acropora spicifera Present in India 69 Acropora squarrosa Acropora squarrosa Present in India 70 Acropora striata Acropora striata Not present in India 71 Acropora subglabra Acropora subglabra Not present in India 72 Acropora subulata Acropora subulata Not present in India 73 Acropora tanegashimensis Acropora tanegashimensis Not present in India 74 Acropora tenuis Acropora tenuis Not present in India 75 Acropora teres Acropora teres Present in India, validity of taxon in question 
76 Acropora torresiana Acropora samoensis Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), not present in India 77 Acropora tutuilensis Acropora abrotanoides Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in India 78 Acropora valenciennesi Acropora valenciennesi Present in India 79 Acropora valida Acropora valida Present in India 80 Acropora variolosa Acropora variolosa Not present in India 81 Acropora vaughani Acropora vaughani Not present in India 82 Acropora verweyi Acropora verweyi Not present in India 
83 Acropora wallaceae Acropora samoensis Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), not present in India 84 Acropora yongei Acropora yongei Not present in India 85 Astreoporacucullata Astreopora cucullata Not present in India 86 Astreoporagracilis Astreopora gracilis Present in India 87 Astreoporalisteri Astreopora listeri Present in India 88 Astreoporamyriophthalma Astreopora myriophthalma Present in India 89 Astreoporasuggesta Astreopora suggesta Not present in India 
76

 8 
90 Montiporaaquituberculata Montipora aequituberculata Present in India 91 Montiporacaliculata Montipora caliculata Not present in India 92 Montipora capitata Montipora capitata Present in India 93 Montiporacebuensis Montipora cebuensis Not present in India 94 Montiporadanae Montipora danae Present in India 95 Montiporadelicatula Montipora delicatula Not present in India 96 Montipora digitata Montipora digitata Present in India 97 Montiporafoliosa Montipora foliosa Present in India 98 Montipora grisea Montipora grisea Not present in India 99 Montiporahemispherica Montipora hemispherica Not present in India 100 Montiporahispida Montipora hispida Present in India 101 Montiporainformis Montipora informis Present in India 102 Montiporameandrina Montipora maeandrina Present in India 103 Montiporamollis Montipora mollis Present in India 104 Montiporamonasteriata Montipora monasteriata Present in India 105 Montiporapeltiformis Montipora peltiformis Present in India 106 Montiporatuberculosa Montipora tuberculosa Present in India 107 Montiporaturgescens Montipora turgescens Present in India 108 Montiporavenosa Montipora venosa Present in India 109 Montiporaverrilli Montipora verrill Present in India 110 Montiporaverrucosa Montipora verrucosa Present in India 111 Montiporaverruculosus Montipora verruculosa Present in India 112 Montiporavietnamensis Montipora vietnamensis Present in India 113 Gardineroseris plannulata Gardineroseris planulata Present in India 114 Leptoseris cucullata Helioseris cucullata Not present in India 115 Leptoseris explanata Leptoseris explanata Present in India 116 Leptoseris hawaiensis Leptoseris hawaiiensis Present in India 117 Leptoseris incrustans Leptoseris incrustans Present in India 118 Leptoseris mycetoseoides Leptoseris mycetoseroides Present in India 119 Leptoseris papyracea Leptoseris papyracea Present in India 120 Leptoseris scabra Leptoseris scabra Present in India 121 Pachyseris gemmae Pachyseris gemmae Present in India 122 Pachyseris foliosa Pachyseris foliosa Not present in India 123 Pachyseris rugosa Pachyseris rugosa Present in India 124 Pachyseris speciosa Pachyseris speciosa Present in India 125 Pavona bipartite Pavona bipartita Present in India 126 Pavona cactus Pavona cactus Present in India 127 Pavona clavus Pavona clavus Present in India 128 Pavona decussata Pavona decussata Present in India 129 Pavona duerdeni Pavona duerdeni Present in India 
77

 9 
130 Pavona explanulata Pavona explanulata Present in India 131 Pavona gigantea Pavona gigantea Not present in India 132 Pavona minuta Pavona minuta Present in India 133 Pavona varians Pavona varians Present in India 134 Pavona venosa Pavona venosa Present in India 135 Madracis kirbyi Madracis kirbyi Not present in India 136 Styloceniella armata Stylocoeniella armata Present in India 137 Styloceniella guentheri Stylocoeniella guentheri Present in India 138 Dendrophyllia robusta Dendrophyllia robusta Not present in India 139 Tubastrea coccinia Tubastraea coccinea Present in India 140 Tubastrea diaphana Tubastraea diaphana Not present in India 141 Tubastrea micranthus Tubastraea micranthus Present in India 142 Turbinaria mesenterina Turbinaria mesenterina present in India 143 Turbinaria peltata Duncanopsammia peltata Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 144 Turbinaria reniformis Turbinaria reniformis Present in India 145 Turbinaria stellulata Turbinaria stellulata Present in India 146 Euphyllia ancora Fimbriaphyllia ancora Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 147 Euphyllia divisa Fimbriaphyllia divisa Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 148 Euphyllia glabrescens Euphyllia glabrescens Present in India 149 Physogyra lichtensteini Physogyra lichtensteini Present in India 150 Pleurogyra sinulosa Plerogyra sinuosa Present in India 151 Barabattoia amicorum Dipsastraea amicorum Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 152 Barabattoia laddi Dipsastraea laddi Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 153 Cyphastrea japonica Cyphastrea japonica Present in India 154 Cyphastrea microphthalma Cyphastrea microphthalma Present in India 155 Cyphastrea ocellina Cyphastrea ocellina Present in India 156 Cyphastrea serailia Cyphastrea serailia Present in India 157 Diploastrea helipora Diploastrea heliopora Present in India 158 Diploria strigosa Pseudodiploria strigosa Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 159 Echinopora fruticulosa Echinopora fruticulosa Present in India 160 Echinopora gemmacea Echinopora gemmacea Present in India 161 Echinopora horrida Echinopora horrida Present in India 162 Echinopora lamellosa Echinopora lamellosa Present in India 163 Favia albidus Dipsastraea albida Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 164 Favia favus Dipsastraea favus Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 
78

 10 
165 Favia helianthoides Dipsastraea helianthoides Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 166 Favia lacuna Dipsastraea lacuna Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 167 Favia matthaii Dipsastraea matthaii Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 168 Favia danae Dipsastraea danai Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 169 Favia maxima Astraeosmilia maxima Not present in India 170 Favia lizardensis Dipsastraea lizardensis Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 171 Favia pallida Dipsastraea pallida Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 172 Favia speciosa Dipsastraea speciosa Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 173 Favia stelligera Goniastrea stelligera Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 174 Favia truncatus Dipsastraea truncata Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 175 Favites abdita Dipsastraea truncata Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 176 Favites acuticollis Favites acuticollis Present in India 177 Favites chinensis Favites chinensis Present in India 178 Favites complanata Favites complanata Present in India 179 Favites flexuosa Favites flexuosa Present in India 180 Favites halicora Favites halicora Present in India 181 Favites micropentagona Favites micropentagonus Present in India 182 Favites spinosa Favites spinosa Present in India 183 Favites pentagona Favites pentagona Present in India 184 Favites vasta Favites vasta Present in India 185 Goniastrea aspera Coelastrea aspera Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 186 Goniastrea australensis Paragoniastrea australensis Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 187 Goniastrea edwardsi Goniastrea edwardsi Present in India 188 Goniastrea minuta Goniastrea minuta Present in India 189 Goniastrea peresi Paramontastraea peresi Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 190 Goniastrea pectinata Goniastrea pectinata Present in India 191 Goniastrea retiformis Goniastrea retiformis Present in India 192 Leptoria irregularis Leptoria irregularis Present in India 193 Leptoria phrygia Leptoria phrygia Present in India 194 Leptastrea purpurea Leptastrea purpurea Present in India 195 Leptastrea transversa Leptastrea transversa Present in India 
79

 11 
196 Montastrea annuligera Astrea annuligera Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 197 Montastrea colemani Favites colemani Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 198 Montastrea curta Astrea curta Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 199 Montastrea valenciennesi Favites valenciennesii Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 200 Oulophyllia bennettae Oulophyllia bennettae Present in India 201 Oulophyllia crispa Oulophyllia crispa Present in India 202 Oulophyllia levis Oulophyllia levis Present in India 203 Oulastrea crispata Oulastrea crispata Present in India 204 Platygyra acuta Platygyra acuta Present in India 205 Platygyra daedalea Platygyra daedalea Present in India 206 Platygyra lamellina Platygyra lamellina Present in India 207 Platygyra verweyi Platygyra verweyi Present in India 208 Platygyra pini Platygyra sinensis Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 209 Platygyra sinensis Platygyra sinensis Present in India, repeated species 210 Cycloseris costulata Cycloseris costulata Present in India 211 Cycloseris cyclolites Cycloseris cyclolites present in India 212 Cycloseris hexagonalis Sinuorota hexagonalis Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 213 Cycloseris patelliformis Cycloseris fragilis Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 214 Cycloseris sinensis Cycloseris sinensis present in India 215 Cycloseris somervillei Cycloseris somervillei present in India 216 Ctenactis crassa Ctenactis crassa present in India 217 Ctenactis albitentaculata Ctenactis albitentaculata Not present in India 218 Ctenactis echinata Ctenactis echinata present in India 219 Diaseris distorta Cycloseris distorta present in India 220 Fungia concinna Lithophyllon concinna present in India 221 Fungia corona Danafungia scruposa Complete name change, present in India 222 Fungia danai Danafungia horrida Complete name change, present in India 223 Fungia fralinae Heliofungia fralinae Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 224 Fungia fungites Fungia fungites present in India 225 Fungia granulosa Pleuractis granulosa Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 226 Fungia horrida Danafungia horrida Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 227 Fungia klunzingeri Danafungia horrida Complete name change, present in India 
80

 12 
228 Fungia moluccensis Pleuractis moluccensis Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 229 Fungia paumotensis Pleuractis paumotensis Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 230 Fungia repanda Lithophyllon repanda Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 231 Fungia scutaria Lobactis scutaria Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 232 Fungia scruposa Danafungia scruposa Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 233 Fungia scabra Lithophyllon scabra Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 234 Fungia seychellensisi Pleuractis seychellensi Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 235 Fungia taiwanensis Pleuractis taiwanensis Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 236 Halomitra pileus Halomitra pileus Not present in India 237 Herpolitha limax Herpolitha limax Present in India 
238 Herpolitha weberi Herpolitha limax Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 239 Lithophyllon lobata Lithophyllon undulatum Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 240 Lithophyllon undulatum Lithophyllon undulatum Present in India 241 Podabacia crustacea Podabacia crustacea Present in India 242 Podabacia lanakensis Podabacia lankaensis Present in India 243 Polyphyllia talpina Polyphyllia talpina Present in India 244 Sandalolitha robusta Sandalolitha robusta Present in India 245 Hydnophora exesa Hydnophora exesa Present in India 246 Hydnophora grandis Hydnophora grandis Present in India 247 Hydnophora microconos Hydnophora microconos Present in India 248 Hydnophora pilosa Hydnophora pilosa Present in India 249 Hydnophora rigida Hydnophora rigida Present in India 250 Merulina ampliata Merulina ampliata Present in India 251 Merulina scabricula Merulina scabricula Present in India 252 Scapophyllia cylindrica Merulina cylindrica Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 253 Acanthastrea echinata Acanthastrea echinata Present in India 254 Acanthastrea hemprichii Acanthastrea hemprichii Present in India 255 Acanthastrea hillae Homophyllia bowerbanki Complete name change, present in India 256 Acanthastrea ishigakiensis Lobophyllia ishigakiensis Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 257 Cynarina lacrymalis Cynarina lacrymalis Present in India 258 Lobophyllia corymbosa Lobophyllia corymbosa Present in India 
81

 13 
259 Lobophyllia hemprichii Lobophyllia hemprichii Present in India 260 Lobophyllia robusta Lobophyllia robusta Not present in India 261 Symphyllia agaricia Lobophyllia agaricia Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 262 Symphyllia radians Lobophyllia radians Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 263 Symphyllia recta Lobophyllia recta Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 264 Symphyllia valenciennesii Lobophyllia valenciennesii Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 265 Scolymia vitiensis Lobophyllia vitiensis Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 266 Mycetophyllia danaana Mycetophyllia danaana Not present in India 267 Australomussa rowleyensis Lobophyllia rowleyensis Not present in India 268 Galaxea acrhelia Galaxea acrhelia Present in India 269 Galaxea astreata Galaxea astreata Present in India 270 Galaxea fascicularis Galaxea fascicularis Present in India 270 Echinophyllia aspera Echinophyllia aspera Present in India 272 Echinophyllia echinata Oxypora echinata Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 273 Echinophyllia echinoporoides Echinophyllia echinoporoides Present in India 274 Mycedium elephantotus Mycedium elephantotus Present in India 275 Mycedium robokaki Mycedium robokaki Not present in India 276 Oxypora lacera Oxypora lacera Present in India 277 Oxypora crassispinosa Oxypora crassispinosa Present in India 278 Pectinia alcicornis Pectinia alcicornis Present in India 279 Pectinia lactuca Pectinia lactuca Present in India 280 Pectinia paeonia Pectinia paeonia Present in India 281 Pectinia teres Pectinia teres Present in India 282 Trachyphyllia geoffroyi Trachyphyllia geoffroyi Present in India 283 Alvopora catalai Alveopora catalai Present in India 284 Goniopora columna Goniopora columna Present in India 285 Goniopora lobata Goniopora lobata Present in India 286 Goniopora minor Goniopora pedunculata Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in india 287 Goniopora norfolkensis Goniopora norfolkensis Not present in India 288 Goniopora pandoraenis Goniopora pandoraensis Present in India 289 Goniopora planulata Goniopora planulata Present in India 290 Goniopora stokesi Goniopora stokesi Present in India 291 Goniopora tenuidens Goniopora tenuidens Present in India 292 Porites annae Porites annae Present in India 293 Porites arnaudi Porites arnaudi Not present in India 
82

 14 
294 Porites compressa Porites compressa Present in India 295 Porites cylindrica Porites cylindrica Present in India 296 Porites eridani Porites eridani Present in India 297 Porites evermanni Porites evermanni Present in India 298 Porites harrisoni Porites harrisoni Not present in India 299 Porites latistella Porites latistellata Not present in India 300 Porites lobata Porites lobata Present in India 301 Porites lutea Porites lutea Present in India 302 Porites monticulosa Porites monticulosa Present in India 303 Porites murrayensis Porites murrayensis Present in India 304 Porites myrmidoensis Porites myrmidonensis Species spelling in incorrect, not present in India 305 Porites nigrescens Porites nigrescens Not present in India 306 Porites rus Porites rus Present in India 307 Porites solida Porites solida Present in India 308 Porites vaughani Porites vaughani Present in India 309 Pociliopora ankeli Pocillopora ankeli Genus spelling in incorrect, present in India 310 Pocillopora damicornis Pocillopora damicornis Present in India 311 Pocillopora danae Pocillopora verrucosa Present in India 312 Pocillopora eydouxi Pocillopora grandis Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in India 313 Pocillopora kelleheri Pocillopora kelleheri Not present in India 314 Pocillopora ligulata Pocillopora ligulata Present in India 315 Pocillopora meandrina Pocillopora meandrina Present in India 316 Pocillopora verrucosa Pocillopora verrucosa Repeated species, present in India 317 Seriatopora aculeata Seriatopora aculeata Not present in India 318 Seriatopora hystrix Seriatopora hystrix Present in India 319 Seriatopora stellata Seriatopora stellata Present in India 320 Seriatopora pistillata Styllophora pistillata No data available 321 Coscinaraea columna Psammocora columna Species name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in India 322 Coscinaraea monile Coscinaraea monile Present in India 323 Psammocora contigua Psammocora contigua Present in India 324 Psammocora digitata Psammocora digitata Present in India 325 Psammocora explanulata Cycloceris explanulata Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in India 326 Psammocora haimeana Psammocora haimiana Species spelling in incorrect, present in India 327 Psammocora profundacella Psammocora profundacella Present in India 328 Siderastrea savignyana Siderastrea savignyana Present in India 
83

 15 
329 Tubipora musica Tubipora musica Present in India 330 Cirrhipathes anguina Cirrhipathes anguina Present in India 331 Cirrhipathes contorta   Could not find this species name anywhere 332 Antipathes elegans Antipathes elegans Present in India 333 Sticopathes solorensis   Could not find this species name anywhere 334 Cupressopathes gracilis Cupressopathes gracilis Present in India 335 Myriopathus antrocrada Myriopathus antrocrada Present in India 336 Antipathella subpinnata Antipathella subpinnata Not present in India 337 Plumapathes pennacea Plumapathes pennacea Not present in India 338 Dichotella gemmacea Dichotella gemmacea Present in India 339 Ellisella azilia Ellisella azilia Not present in India 340 Ellisella cercidia Ellisella cercidia Not present in India 341 Ellisella eustala Ellisella eustala Not present in India 342 Ellisella marisrubri Ellisella marisrubri Not present in India 343 Ellisella nuctenea Ellisella nuctenea Not present in India 344 Juncella delicata Junceella delicata Genus spelling in incorrect, not present in India 345 Juncella eunicelloides Junceella eunicelloides Genus spelling in incorrect, not present in India 346 Juncella juncea Junceella juncea Genus spelling in incorrect, present in India 347 Viminella crassa Viminella crassa Not present in India 348 Viminella junceelloides Viminella junceelloides No data available 349 Nicella flabellata Nicella flabellata Present in India 350 Nicella laxa Nicella laxa Not present in India 351 Verrucella cerasina Verrucella cerasina Not present in India 352 Verrucella corona Verrucella corona Not present in India 353 Verrucella diadema Verrucella diadema Not present in India 354 Verrucella gubalensis Verrucella gubalensis Not present in India 355 Verrucella klunzingeri Verrucella klunzingeri Not present in India 356 Isis hippuris Isis hippuris Present in India 357 Muricella paraplectana Muricella paraplectana Not present in India 358 Muricella ramose Muricella ramosa Species spelling in incorrect, present in India 359 Acanthogorgia breviflora Acanthogorgia breviflora Not present in India 360 Acanthogorgia spinosa Acanthogorgia spinosa Not present in India 361 Anthogorgia ochracea Anthogorgia ochracea Not present in India 362 Rumphella aggregata Rumphella aggregata Not present in India 363 Rumphella torta Rumphella torta No data available 
84

 16 
364 Hicksonella princeps Hicksonella princeps Not present in India 365 Menella indica Menella indica Present in India 366 Menella kanisa Menella kanisa Not present in India 367 Menella kouare Menella kouare Not present in India 368 Menella woodin Menella woodin Not present in India 369 Bebryce sirene Bebryce sirene Not present in India 370 Bebryce studeri Bebryce studeri Not present in India 371 Echinogorgia flora Menella flora Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), present in India 372 Echinogorgia toombo Echinogorgia toombo Not present in India 373 Echinogorgia indica   Could not find this species name anywhere 374 Echinomuricea indomalaccensis Echinomuricea indomalaccensis Present in India 375 Euplexaura amerea Euplexaura amerea Not present in India 376 Euplexaura rhipidalis Euplexaura rhipidalis Not present in India 377 Trimuricea caledonica Trimuricea caledonica Not present in India 378 Villogorgia tenuis Villogorgia tenuis Present in India 
379 Acabaria cinquemiglia Melithaea cinquemiglia Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), not present in India 
380 Acabaria ouvea Melithaea ouvea Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), not present in India 381 Melithaea caledonica Melithaea caledonica Not present in India 382 Melithaea ochracea Melithaea ochracea Not present in India 
383 Mopsella rubeola Melithaea rubeola Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), not present in India 384 Wrightella braueri Melithaea braueri Genus name is unaccepted (synonymy), no data 385 Annella mollis Annella mollis Present in India 386 Annella reticulata Annella reticulata Present in India 387 Subergorgia rubra Subergorgia rubra Not present in India 388 Subergorgia suberosa Subergorgia suberosa Present in India WoRMS Editorial Board (2022). World Register of Marine Species. Available from https://www.marinespecies.org at VLIZ. Accessed 13 January 2022. https://doi.org/10.14284/170 OBIS (2022). Ocean Biodiversity Information System. Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO. www.obis.org. Accessed 13 January 2022.   
85

 17 
HOLOTHURIANS (Schedule I – Part J) 1. The WPA amendment lists 32 species of sea cucumbers of which four species are not present in India.  2. Of the 28 species, two species have incorrect scientific names and nine have typographic errors. Holothurians or Sea Cucumbers are one of the most threatened marine species groups due to extensive harvest for international trade. There are 173 species in India (Raghunathan & Venkataraman 2014). There is no rationale for including only 32 species on the schedule as in the WPA amendment 2021. While most sea cucumbers are difficult to identify on site or in a laboratory without extensive examination either morphologically or genetically, the selective list creates suitable opportunities for their harvest. Dry sea cucumbers are even more difficult to differentiate. We strongly recommend that a broad category of Sea Cucumbers or Holothurians (echinoderms of class Holothuroidea) without mentioning the species names should be listed under Schedule I – Part J. The following Table summarises the details of Holothurians (sea cucumbers) listed under Schedule I, Part J of the WPA amendment bill 2021 with the corrections and comments based on World Register of Marine Species (WoRMS database) and Ocean Biodiversity Information System (OBIS database).  
Sl No Scientific name_WPA Amendment Bill 2021 Correct name Comments 1 Actinopygaechinites Actinopyga echinites Present in India 2 Actinopygalecanora Actinopyga lecanora Present in India 3 Actinopygamauritiana Actinopyga mauritiana Present in India 4 Actinopygamiliaris Actinopyga miliaris Present in India 5 Bohadschia argus Bohadschia argus Present in India 6 Bohadschiagraeffei Pearsonothuria graeffei Not present in India 7 Bohadschiamarmorata Bohadschia marmorata Present in India 8 Holothuria coluber Holothuria (Acanthotrapeza) coluber Not present in India 9 Holothuria (Acanthotrapez) pyxis Holothuria (Acanthotrapeza) pyxis Present in India 10 Holothuria (Halodeima) atra Holothuria (Halodeima) atra Present in India 11 Holothuria (Halodeima) edulis Holothuria (Halodeima) edulis Present in India 12 Holothuria (Mertensiothuria) fuscocinerea Holothuria (Stauropora) fuscocinerea Present in India 13 Holothuria (Mertensiothuria) leucospilota Holothuria (Mertensiothuria) leucospilota Present in India 14 Holothuria (Mertensiothuria) pervicax Holothuria (Stauropora) pervicax Present in India 15 Holothuria (Metriatyla) scabra Holothuria (Metriatyla) scabra Present in India 16 Holothuria (Microthele) nobilis Holothuria (Microthele) nobilis Present in India 17 Holothuria (Semperothuria) cinerascens Holothuria (Semperothuria) cinerascens Present in India 18 Holothuria (Thymiosycia) arenicola Holothuria (Thymiosycia) arenicola Present in India 
19 Holothuria (Thymiosycia) hilla Holothuria (Mertensiothuria) hilla Scientific name incorrect, present in India 20 Holothuria (Thymiosycia) impatiens Holothuria (Thymiosycia) impatiens Present in India 21 Labidodemassemperianum Labidodemas semperianum Not present in India 
86

 18 
22 Stichopuschloronotus Stichopus chloronotus Present in India 23 Stichopushermanni Stichopus herrmanni Present in India 24 Stichopushorrens Stichopus horrens Present in India 25 Stichopus vastus Stichopus vastus Not present in India 26 Thelenota ananas Thelenota ananas Present in India 27 Pseudocolochirus violaceus Pseudocolochirus violaceus Present in India 28 Stolusbuccalis Stolus buccalis Present in India 
29 Phyllophorus (Phyllophorella) parvepides Phyllophorella spiculata Scientific name incorrect, present in India 30 Euaptagodeffroyi Euapta godeffroyi Present in India 31 Synaptamaculata Synapta maculata Present in India 32 Acaudinamolpadioides Acaudina molpadioides Present in India WoRMS Editorial Board (2022). World Register of Marine Species. Available from https://www.marinespecies.org at VLIZ. Accessed 13 January 2022. https://doi.org/10.14284/170 OBIS (2022). Ocean Biodiversity Information System. Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO. www.obis.org. Accessed 13 January 2022. Raghunathan, C. & K. Venkataraman (2014). Status Survey of Holothurians (Sea Cucumber) in the Territorial waters of Andaman and Nicobar Islands: 1–96. Published by the Director, Zoological Survey of India, Kolkata.    
87

 19 
MOLLUSCA (Schedule I – Part I) 1. The WPA amendment lists 10 species of Mollusca and all are present in India.  2. One of the species has an incorrect scientific name and four have typographic errors. The following Table summarises the details of Mollusca listed under Schedule I, Part I of the WPA amendment bill 2021 with the corrections and comments based on World Register of Marine Species (WoRMS database) and Ocean Biodiversity Information System (OBIS database).  
Sl No Scientific name_WPA Amendment Bill 2021 Correct name Comments 1 Cassis cornuta Cassis cornuta Present in India 2 Charoniatritonis Charonia tritonis Present in India 3 Conus milneedwardsi Conus milneedwardsi Present in India 4 Cypraecassisrufa Cypraecassis rufa Present in India 5 Hippopushippopus Hippopus Hippopus Scientific name incorrect, present in India 6 Nautilus pompilius Nautilus pompilius Present in India 7 Tridacna maxima Tridacna maxima Present in India 8 Tridacna squamosa Tridacna squamosa Present in India 9 Tudiclaspirillus Tudicla spirillus Present in India 10 Turbo marmoratus Turbo marmoratus Present in India WoRMS Editorial Board (2022). World Register of Marine Species. Available from https://www.marinespecies.org at VLIZ. Accessed 13 January 2022. https://doi.org/10.14284/170 OBIS (2022). Ocean Biodiversity Information System. Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO. www.obis.org. Accessed 13 January 2022.   
88

 20 
MOLLUSCA (Schedule II – Part F) 1. The WPA amendment lists 14 species of Mollusca in Schedule II of which two species are not present in India.  2. Of the 12 species, six species have incorrect scientific names and five species have typographic errors. The following Table summarises the details of Mollusca listed under Schedule II, Part F of the WPA amendment bill 2021 with the corrections and comments based on World Register of Marine Species (WoRMS database) and Ocean Biodiversity Information System (OBIS database).  
Sl No Scientific name_WPA Amendment Bill 2021 Correct name Comments 1 Cypraealimacina Staphylaea limacina Scientific name incorrect, not present in India 2 Cypraeamappa Leporicypraea mappa Scientific name incorrect, present in India 3 Cypraeatalpa Talparia talpa Scientific name incorrect, present in India 4 Pleuroploca trapezium Pleuroploca trapezium Present in India 5 Harpulinaarausiaca Harpulina arausiaca Not present in India 6 Lambis chiragra arthritica Harpago arthriticus Scientific name incorrect, present in India 7 Lambis chiragra chiragra Harpago chiragra Scientific name incorrect, present in India 8 Lambiscrocatacrocata Lambis crocata Present in India 9 Lambismillepeda Lambis millepeda Present in India 10 Lambisscorpius Lambis scorpius Present in India 11 Lambistruncatatruncata Lambis truncata truncata Present in India 12 Placuna placenta Placuna placenta Present in India 13 Strombusplicatussibbaldi Dolomena plicata Scientific name incorrect, present in India 14 Trochus niloticus Rochia nilotica Scientific name incorrect, present in India WoRMS Editorial Board (2022). World Register of Marine Species. Available from https://www.marinespecies.org at VLIZ. Accessed 13 January 2022. https://doi.org/10.14284/170 OBIS (2022). Ocean Biodiversity Information System. Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO. www.obis.org. Accessed 13 January 2022    
89

 21 
SPONGES (Schedule II – Part G) 1. The WPA amendment lists 10 species of sponges in Schedule II of which one species is not present in India.  2. Of the remaining nine, two species have scientific errors and two species have typographic errors. The following Table summarises the details of Sponges listed under Schedule II, Part G of the WPA amendment bill 2021 with the corrections and comments based on World Register of Marine Species (WoRMS database) and Ocean Biodiversity Information System (OBIS database).  
Sl No Scientific name_WPA Amendment Bill 2021 Correct name Comments 1 Clathrina coriacea Clathrina coriacea Present in India 2 Pericharaxheteroraphis Pericharax heteroraphis Present in India 3 Leucandradonani var tenuiradiata Leucandra donnani var. tenuiradiata Present in India 4 Leucandradwarkensis Leucandra dwarkaensis Present in India 
5 Leucandrawasinensis Leucandrilla wasinensis Scientific name incorrect, present in India 6 Leuconia johnstoni Leuconia johnstoni Not present in India 7 Ute syconoides Ute syconoides Present in India 
8 Grantessahastifera Sycettusa hastifera Scientific name incorrect, present in India 9 Heteropiaglomerosa Heteropia glomerosa Present in India 10 Sycon grantioides Sycon grantioides Present in India WoRMS Editorial Board (2022). World Register of Marine Species. Available from https://www.marinespecies.org at VLIZ. Accessed 13 January 2022. https://doi.org/10.14284/170 OBIS (2022). Ocean Biodiversity Information System. Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO. www.obis.org. Accessed 13 January 2022.    
90

 22 
BUTTERFLY (Schedule I – Part F) 1. The WPA amendment lists 63 species of which one species is not found in India.  2. 18 species have incorrect scientific names.  3. 35 species have typographical errors in scientific names and common names in which 25 species had errors in scientific names, 05 species had errors in common names, and 05 species had errors in both scientific and common names. 4. There is no justification for inclusion of these species as opposed to not listing the remaining 1,000 plus species and subspecies that occur in India (Tiple 2011).  The following Table summarises the details of Butterfly listed under Schedule I, Part F of the WPA amendment bill 2021 with the corrections and comments based on Indian Foundation for Butterflies and A Synoptic Catalogue of the Butterflies of India. Sl No Common name_WPA Amendment Bill 2021 Correct Common Name Scientific name_WPA Amendment Bill 2021 Correct scientific name Comments 
1 Kaiser-i-Hind   Teinopalpusimperialis Teinopalpus imperialis Typographical error in scientific name 2 Varnished Apollo Butterfly   Parnassiusacco Parnassius acco Typographical error in scientific name 3 Banded Apollo Butterfly   Parnassiusdelphius Parnassius delphius Not found in India 4 Hannyngton Apollo Butterfly   Parnassiushannyngtoni Parnassius hannyngtoni Typographical error in scientific name 5 Imperial Apollo Butterfly   Parnassius imperator     
6 Ladakh Banded Apollo Butterfly   Parnassiusstoliczkanus Parnassiuss toliczkanus Typographical error in scientific name 7 Bhutan Glory Butterfly   Bhutanitislidderdalei Bhutanitis lidderdalei Typographical error in scientific name 
8 Common ClubtailButterfly Common Clubtail Butterfly Atrophaneura coon   Typographical error in common name 
9 Black Windmill Butterfly   Atrophaneura crassipes     10 Nevill's Windmill Butterfly   Atrophaneuranevilli Byasa nevilli Genus name has changed from Atrophaneura to Byasa 11 Pemberton's Chinese Windmill Butterfly   Atrophaneuraplutioniuspembertoni Byasa plutionius pembertoni Genus name has changed from Atrophaneura to Byasa 
12 De Niceville's Windmill Butterfly de Niceville's Windmill Butterfly Atrophaneurapolla Atrophaneura polla Typographical error in common name and scientific name 13 Common Mime Butterfly   Chilasaclytiaclytia Papilio clytia clytia Genus name has changed from Chilasa to Papilio 
14 Yellow-crested Spangle Butterfly   Papilioelephenor Papilio elephenor Typographical error in scientific name 15 Malabar Banded Swallowtail Butterfly   Papilioliomedon Papilio liomedon Typographical error in scientific name 16 Shaw's Dwarf Butterfly Sikkim Dwarf Baltiashawiisikkima Baltia sikkima Common name has changed from Shaw's Dwarf to Sikkim Dwarf Typographical error in scientific name 17 Pale Jezebel Butterfly   Deliassanaca Delias sanaca Typographical error in scientific name 18 Green Banded White Butterfly   Pieris krueperidevta Pieris krueperi devta Typographical error in scientific name 
91

 23 
19 Lemon Clouded Yellow Butterfly   Coliascocandicathrasibulus Colias thrasibulus Genus name has changed to Colias. 20 Dwarf Clouded Yellow Butterfly   Coliasstoliczkanadubia Colias dubia Genus name has changed to Colias. 21 Spotted Black Crow Butterfly   Euploeacramerinicevillei Euploea crameri nicevillei Typographical error in scientific name 22 Andaman King Crow Butterfly   Euploearoepstorffi Euploea midamus roepstorffi Change in scientific name, roepstorffi is a subspecies of Euploea midamus. 23 Scarce Blue Tiger Butterfly   Tellervogautamagautamoides Tirumala gautama gautamoides Genus name has changed from Tellervo to Tirumala. 24 Scarce CatseyeButterfly Scarce Catseye Butterfly Coelitesnothis Coelites nothis Typographical error in common name and scientific name 25 Peal's PalmflyButterfly Peal's Palmfly Butterfly Elymniaspealii Elymnias peali Typographical error in common name and scientific name 26 Pointed PalmflyButterfly Pointed Palmfly Butterfly Elymniaspenanga Elymnias penaga Typographical error in common name and scientific name 27 Scarce Red Forester Butterfly   Lethe distans     28 Scarce LilacforkButterfly Scarce Lilacfork Butterfly Letha dura   Typographical error in common name 
29 Bamboo TreebrownButterfly Bamboo Treebrown Butterfly Lethe europa   Typographical error in common name 
30 Tytler'sTreebrownButterfly Tytler's Treebrown Butterfly Lethe gemina   Typographical error in common name 
31 Bhutan Treebrown Butterfly   Lethe margaritae     32 Dismal Mystic Butterfly   Lethe ocellata     33 Single Silverstripe Butterfly   Lethe ramadeva     34 Pallid Forester Butterfly   Lethe satyavati     35 Dark Wall Butterfly   Parargemaera Lasiommata menava Scientific name has changed 36 Great FiveringButterfly Great Fivering Butterfly Ypthimadohertyi Ypthima dohertyi Typographical error in common name and scientific name 37 Banded Duffer Butterfly   Discophora deo deo     38 Freak Butterfly   Calinaga buddha     
39 WhitespotFritilliary Butterfly Whitespot Fritillary Butterfly Clossianaerubescenshaberhaueri Boloria erubescens Typographical error in common name 40 Bhutan Sergeant Butterfly   Pantoporiajinajina Athyma jina jina Genus name has changed from Pantoporia to Athyma. 41 Grey Commodore Butterfly   Limenitis austenia purpurascens Bhagadatta austenia purpurascens Genus name has changed from Limenitis to Bhagadatta. 42 Grand Duke Butterfly   Euthaliaiva Euthalia iva Typographical error in scientific name 43 Naga Duke Butterfly   Euthaliakhamacurvifascia Euthalia curvifascia Species name is corrected, curvifascia is a species not a subspecies and khama is not a species hence removed 44 Tawny Emperor Butterfly   Chitoriaulupiulupi Chitoria ulupi ulupi Typographical error in scientific name 45 Branded Yeoman Butterfly   Cirrochroafasciata Algia fasciata Genus name has changed from Cirrochroa to Algia. 46 Scarce Siren Butterfly   Hestinanicevillei Hestina nicevillei Typographical error in scientific name 47 Golden Emperor Butterfly   Dilipamorgiana Dilipa morgiana Typographical error in scientific name 
92

 24 
48 Autumn Leaf Butterfly   Doleschalliabisaltideandamanensis Doleschallia bisaltide andamanensis Typographical error in scientific name 49 Tytler's Emperor Butterfly   Eulaceuramanipurensis Eulaceura manipurensis Typographical error in scientific name 50 Blue Duke Butterfly   Euthaliadurga splendens Euthalia durga splendens Typographical error in scientific name 51 Blue Baron Butterfly   Euthaliatelchinia Cynitia telchinia Genus name has changed from Euthalia to Cynitia. 52 White Emperor Butterfly   Helcyrahemina Helcyra hemina Typographical error in scientific name 53 Empress Butterfly   Sasakiafunebris Sasakia funebris Typographical error in scientific name 54 Eastern Courtier Butterfly   Sephisachandra Sephisa chandra Typographical error in scientific name 55 Scarce White Comodore Butterfly   Limenitis zulema Sumalia zulema Genus name has changed from Limenitis to Sumalia. 56 Scarce Jester Butterfly   Symbrenthiasilana Symbrenthia silana Typographical error in scientific name 57 Chestnut Rajah Butterfly   Charaxesdurnofordinicholii Charaxes durnfordi nicholii Typographical error in scientific name 58 Malayan Nawab Butterfly   Polyura moori sandakanus Polyura moori sandakana Subspecies name is incorrect 59 Blue Nawab Butterfly   Polyuraschreiberi Polyura schreiber Species name is incorrect 60 Blue Begum Butterfly   Prothoefranck regalis Prothoe franck regalis Typographical error in scientific name 61 Chinese Hairstreak Butterfly   Amblopalaavidiena Amblopala avidiena Typographical error in scientific name 62 Cachar Mandarin Blue Butterfly   Charanacepheis Charana cepheis Typographical error in scientific name 63 Blue Posy Butterfly   Myrinacyara Drupadia scaeva cyara Genus name has changed from Myrina to Drupadia. cyara is a subspecies of Drupadia scaeva.  Kunte, K., S. Sondhi & P. Roy (Chief Editors) (2022). Butterflies of India, v. 3.28. Indian Foundation for Butterflies. https://www.ifoundbutterflies.org/ Accessed 13 January 2022. Varshney, R.K. & P. Smetacek (eds.) (2015). A Synoptic Catalogue of the Butterflies of India. Butterfly Research Centre, Bhimtal and Indinov Publishing, New Delhi, ii + 261 pp., 8 pl. Accessed 13 January 2022. Tiple, A.D. (2011). Butterflies of Vidarbharegion, Maharashtra State, central India. Journal of Threatened Taxa 3(1): 1469–1477.   
93

 25 
BUTTERFLY (Schedule II – Part E) 1. The WPA amendment lists 57 species of which 10 species have errors in the scientific names.  2. One species is a vague entry and the details are not found.  3. Two species have typographical errors in scientific name. 4. There is no justification for inclusion of these species as opposed to not listing the remaining 1,000 plus species and subspecies that occur in India (Tiple 2011). The following Table summarises the details of Butterfly listed under Schedule II, Part E of the WPA amendment bill 2021 with the corrections and comments based on Indian Foundation for Butterflies and A Synoptic Catalogue of the Butterflies of India.  Sl No Common name_WPA Amendment Bill 2021 Correct Common Name Scientific name_WPA Amendment Bill 2021 Correct scientific name Comments 
1 White Dragontail Butterfly    Lamproptera curius     2 Fivebar Swordtail Butterfly    Graphium antiphates     3 Fourbar Swordtail Butterfly    Graphium agetes     4 Common banded Peacock Butterfly    Papilio crino     5 Paris Peacock Butterfly   Papilio paris     6 Blue Mormon Butterfly   Papilio polymnestor     7 Great Mormon Butterfly   Papilio memnon     8 Andaman Mormon Butterfly    Papilio mayo     9 Malabar Banded Peacock Butterfly    Papilio buddha     10 Crimson RoseButterfly Crimson Rose Butterfly Atrophaneura hector Pachliopta hector Genus name has changed from Atrophaneura to Pachliopta 11 Golden Birdwing Butterfly    Troidesaeacus Troides aeacus Typographical error in scientific name 12 Southern Birdwing Butterfly    Troidesminos Troides minos Typographical error in scientific name 13 Magpie Crow Butterfly   Euploea radamanthus     14 Malabar Tree Nymph Butterfly    Idea malabarica     15 Orange Oakleaf Butterfly    Kallima inachus     16 Blue Oakleaf Butterfly   Kallima horsfieldi     17 Danaid Eggfly Butterfly    Hypolimnas misippus     18 Leopard Lacewing Butterfly    Cethosia cyane     19 Tamil Lacewing Butterfly    Cethosia nietneri     20 Queen of Spain Fritillary Butterfly    Issoria lathonia     21 White Commodore Butterfly    Parasarpa dudu     22 Clipper Butterfly    Parthenos sylvia     23 Blue Duchess Butterfly   Euthalia dudu     
94

 26 
24 Panther Butterfly    Neurosigma siva     25 Archduke Butterfly    Lexias pardalis     26 Common Map Butterfly    Cyrestis thyodamas     27 Painted Courtesan Butterfly    Euripus consimilis     28 Camberwell Beauty Butterfly    Nymphalis antiopa     29 Ringed Argus Butterfly   Callerebiaannadaannada Callerebia annada annada   30 Fuliginous Sailer Butterfly    Lasippa ebusa ebusa   Vague entry the details are not found 31 Yellowjack Sailer Butterfly    Lasippa viraja nar     32 Variegated Sailer Butterfly    Neptis armandia     33 Chinese Yellow Sailer Butterfly    Neptis kirbariensis Neptis cydippe kirbariensis Change made as kirbariensis is a subspecies of Neptis cydippe 34 Pale Hockeystick Sailer Butterfly    Neptis manasa manasa     35 Hockeystick Sailer Butterfly    Neptis nycteus     36 Great Hockeystick Sailer Butterfly    Phaedyma aspasia     37 Red-disc Bushbrown Butterfly    Mycalesis oculus     38 Short-banded Sailer Butterfly    Phaedyma columella binghami     39 Tytler's Lascar Butterfly    Pantoporia beiti paona     40 Common Pierrot Butterfly  Andaman Common Pierrot Castalius rosimon alarbus     41 Orchid Tit Butterfly    Chliaria othona     42 Wonderfull Hairstreak Butterfly    Chrysozephyrus zulla Thermozephyrus ataxus zulla Genus name has changed from Chrysozephyrus to Thermozephyrus. Zulla is a subspecies of Thermozephyrus ataxus. 43 Watson's Hairstreak Butterfly  Howarth’s Green Hairstreak Chrysozephyrus disparatus pseudoletha     44 Paona Hairstreak Butterfly    Chrysozephyrus paona Shirozuozephyrus paona Genus name has changed from Chrysozephyrus to Shirozuozephyrus. 45 Cornelian Butterfly    Deudorix epijarbus amatius     46 Peacock Hairstreak Butterfly    Euaspa pavo     47 Hybrid Sapphire Butterfly  Golden Sapphire Heliophorus brahma Heliophorus hybrida Common name and scientific name do not match. If common name is followed scientific name is Heliophorus hybrida, if scientific name is followed then common name is Golden Sapphire. 48 Violet Onyx Butterfly   Horaga albimacula     49 Ferrar's Cerulean Butterfly    Jamides ferrari ferrari     
95

 27 
50 Tytler's Dull Oakblue Butterfly   Arhopala arata Arhopala ace arata Arata is a subspecies of Arhopala ace. 51 Rosy Oakblue Butterfly   Arhopala constanceae Arhopala selta constanceae Constanceae is a subspecies of Arhopala selta. 52 Opal Oakblue Butterfly   Nilasera opalina Arhopala opalina Genus name has changed from Nilasera to Arhopala. 53 Lister's Hairstreak Butterfly    Pamela dudgeoni     54 Dark Blue Royal Butterfly    Pratapa icetas mishmia     55 Elwes' Silverline Butterfly    Spindasis elwesi     56 Khaki Silverline Butterfly   Aphnaeus rumini Spindasis rukmini Genus name has changed from Aphnaeus to Spindasis. 57 Mackwood's Hairstreak Butterfly    Thecla mackwoodi Strymon mackwoodi Genus name has changed from Thecla to Strymon.  Kunte, K., S. Sondhi & P. Roy (Chief Editors) (2022). Butterflies of India, v. 3.28. Indian Foundation for Butterflies. https://www.ifoundbutterflies.org/ Accessed 13 January 2022. Varshney, R.K. & P. Smetacek (eds.) (2015). A Synoptic Catalogue of the Butterflies of India. Butterfly Research Centre, Bhimtal and Indinov Publishing, New Delhi, ii + 261 pp., 8 pl. Accessed 13 January 2022. Tiple, A.D. (2011). Butterflies of Vidarbharegion, Maharashtra State, central India. Journal of Threatened Taxa 3(1): 1469–1477.      
96

 28 
FISHES (Schedule I – Part E) 1. The WPA amendment lists 26 species of which only 03 are freshwater species with no rationale for their inclusion.  2. 15 species have typographic errors. 3.  Two species have wrong scientific names. 4.  One species of pipe fish is not found in Indian waters. 5.  One extinct species from India is included. 6.  There is no rationale for inclusion of pipe fishes as at least two endemic species that are in trade and not food fish are not included on the list – Microphis cancalus and Ichthyocampus carce. 7.  Only one species of the very many highly threatened marine sharks that are harvested is listed.   The following Table summarises the details of Fishes listed under Schedule I, Part E of the WPA amendment bill 2021 with the corrections and comments based on IUCN Red List and Fishbase.  Sl No Common name_WPA Amendment Bill 2021 Scientific name_WPA Amendment Bill 2021 Correct scientific name Comments 
1 Whale shark  Rhincodon typus     2 Knifetooth sawfish Anoxypristiscuspidata Anoxypristis cuspidata   3 Long nosed shark/Pondicherry shark Carcharhinus hemiodon     4 Gangetic shark Glyphis gangeticus     5 Freshwater sawfish Pristispristis Pristis pristis Not a freshwater species 6 Green sawfish Pristiszijsron Pristis zijsron   7 Giant guitarfish Rhynchobatusdjiddensis Rhynchobatus djiddensis   8 Porcupine ray  Urogymnusasperrimus Urogymnus asperrimus   9 Ganges Stingray Himantura fluviatilis   Does not occur in the Ganges. This is a marine species. 
10 Denison barb  Puntius denisonii Sahyadria denisoni 
This is one of two species of Sahyadria which look similar. No reason why this is included while the other species S. chalakudiensis is not. This species is encouraged in trade as per the MPEDA list. This species is netted along with other food fishes and is consumed by the locals.  DIfficult to enforce unless it is specifically fished for trade purposes, which is impossible to prove. 
11 Assamese Kingfish Semiplotussemiplotus Semiplotus semiplotus 
This is a food fish of the local communities who are heavily dependent on it for their sustenance.  Makes little sense to include this species as enforcement is impossible due to the fishing practices which do not distinguish between species. 
97

 29 
12 Giant grouper Epinepheluslanceolatus Epinephelus lanceolatus   
13 Manipur osteobrama Osteobramabelangeris Osteobrama belangeri This freshwater fish species is known to be extinct from India (Manipur). It is currently found only in Myanmar. 14 Pipe fish  Choeroichthyssculptus Choeroichthys sculptus   15 Pipe fish  Corythoichthys amplexus     16 Pipe fish  Corythoichthyshaematopterus Corythoichthys haematopterus   17 Pipe fish  Corythoichthys intestinalis     18 Pipe fish  Corythoichthys ocellatus   Not found in Indian waters 19 Pipe fish  Corythoichthysschultzi Corythoichthys schultzi   20 Pipe fish  Doryhamphusdactyliophorus Doryhamphus dactyliophorus   21 Pipe fish  Halicampusmacrorhynchus Halicampus macrorhynchus   22 Pipe fish  Halicampusmataafe Halicampus mataafe   23 Pipe fish  Syngnathoidesbiaculeatus Syngnathoides biaculeatus   24 Sea horse  Hippocampus histrix     25 Sea horse  Hippocampus kuda     26 Sea horse  Hippocampus trimaculatus      IUCN. 2021. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2021-3. https://www.iucnredlist.org. Accessed 13 January 2022.  Froese, R. and D. Pauly. Editors. 2021. FishBase.World Wide Web electronic publication. www.fishbase.org, version (08/2021). Accessed 13 January 2022.          
98

 30 
General comments that have remained unchanged in the principle act and the current amendment that requires attention:   22. In section 39 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:— "(4) Where any such Government property is a live animal, the State Government shall ensure that it is housed and cared for by a recognised zoo or rescue centre where it can not be released to its natural habitat.  Comment: If the animal is injured severely or terminally diseased, perhaps euthanesia should be a choice?   26. After section 42 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:— "42A. (1)Any person having a certificate of ownership in respect of any captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy, meat or ivory imported into India or an article made from such ivory, and who is not desirous of keeping it in his control, custody or possession may, after giving notice of seven working days to the Chief Wild Life Warden, surrender the same to him and any such certificate of ownership shall stand cancelled from the date of such surrender.   Comment: Does not take into account  - Elephant hair being used as finger rings  - Coral used as jewelry - Wildlife leather products being used as belts, shoes and bags   ______ 
99

 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To,  
Shri Jairam Ramesh 
Hon’ble Member of Parliament and Chairman 
Standing Committee on Environment and Forests 
 
 
17th January 2022 
 
 
Dear Sir,  
 
Sub: Inputs to the Parliamentary Committee on Environment and Forests on the proposed 
amendments to the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 
 
On behalf of Conservation Initiatives, a not-for-profit Trust dedicated to science-based 
conservation of wildlife and their habitats in Northeast India, I share with you our thoughts 
on the proposed amendments to the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. Below we list major 
concerns and suggestions for improvement in the Amendment, accompanied by specific 
suggestions in the enclosed Annexures. Our suggestions are aligned with current global 
standards of conservation science, policy, and action.  
 
1. Treatment of connectivity: Connectivity and corridors are now well-recognised as an 
essential need for wildlife conservation, securing ecosystem services and climate 
change mitigation1,2. This is especially important in the tropics and countries like India, 
where Protected Areas (PAs) are comparatively small and too insular to maintain viable 
populations of most endangered wildlife species. Researchers are accumulating 
information on corridor identification that allows for effective connectivity conservation 
in India3–5.  
 
Yet the treatment of corridors and connectivity is superficial in the Wildlife Protection 
Act and insufficiently strengthened in the draft Amendment. Corridors are not even 
defined in the Act or Amendment, offering scant legal protection for these critical 
linkages in conservation landscapes.  
 
We propose specific changes in the Wildlife Protection Act and Amendment in 
Annexure 1 that address this issue by clearly defining corridors and providing for the 
multi-pronged approach required for connectivity conservation. 
 
	
1, Mukunda Path, G. S. Road 
Suruj Nagar, Six Mile 
Guwahati – 781022, Assam, India 
Contact: +91 9401184440 
conserv.initiatives@gmail.com 
conservationinitiatives.org 
100

 2 
2. Rationalisation of Schedules. We appreciate the need to rationalise the Schedules 
under the Act. However, as things currently stand, there is no clear definition of the 
Schedules, or scope for objective or scientific categorisation of animals under the 
Schedules. For instance, the IUCN Red List categorises species based on very specific 
criteria including species distribution, population size, trends in populations, habitat 
status, and threats.  
 
Due to the lack of such criteria, there are multiple threatened species that are currently 
listed under Schedule II with lower protection accorded to them than required. We list 
these species in Annexure 2 as species that need to be recategorized from Schedule II 
to Schedule I6–10. We also include imperilled species that have not been included in the 
Schedules and need inclusion in Schedule I in Annexure 2.  
 
We posit that the above confusion arises due to the lack of scientific approach in either 
defining or populating the Schedules. We thus suggest formulating clear objectives for 
the wildlife Schedules, following globally accepted standards of the IUCN Red List of 
species6. We make specific suggestions pertaining to this in Annexure 36–11.   
 
3. Transport of live captive elephants. The Asian elephant is India’s National Heritage 
Animal and a species of global conservation concern. In recognition of the threat posed 
by wild capture of elephants for commercial and other purposes, the Elephant Task 
Force recommends a phase out of live elephant trade12. We thus urge you to delete 
point 27 of the Amendment, relating to Section 43, proposed as sub-section (4), stating 
the following:  
“This section shall not apply to the transfer or transport of any live elephant by a person 
having a certificate of ownership, where such person has obtained prior permission 
from the State Government on fulfilment of such conditions as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government."  
We also urge you to delete the associated proposed clause (gviii) in point 40 of the 
Amendment, with reference to Section 63, sub-section (1) stating the following:  
“(gviii) the conditions for transfer or transport of live elephant under sub-section (4) of 
section 43;" 
 
As pointed out by other conservationists, this clause is prone to abuse and can severely 
impact elephant populations by legitimising live trade of elephants, reviving a now-
dying illegal trade in wild-caught elephants, and thus negating years of successful 
conservation efforts on this important and charismatic species.  
 
4. Treatment of vermin. As written, any animal in Schedule II of the Act can be declared as 
vermin, without justification, for an unrestricted period of time, and with no 
specification of how vermin are treated, and no requirement for monitoring of the 
species. This is disastrous and can lead to drastic declines in wildlife populations, with 
trickle-down impacts on ecosystems. It is worthwhile to note here that even species 
that we consider as common or on the rise, can, on scientific assessment, be in 
decline13. It is also to be considered that India, at this time, does not have a successful 
population management programme that includes controlled and monitored animal 
removal or culling, as there are in some other parts of the world14. We thus recommend 
101

 3 
the changes in the Amendment to protect wild animals against precipitous and indelible 
declines that can occur while being declared as vermin (Annexure 4).  
 
We further note here that removal of animals has not been shown to be a successful 
human–wildlife conflict mitigation tool, as is evidenced by the removal of both rhesus 
and bonnet macaques for many years from urban centres, with no reduction of overall 
conflict intensities, thus calling into question the relevance of Section 62 in today’s 
context.     
 
5. Explicit inclusion of research. Conservation science, and research on wildlife and their 
habitats, are pivotal to the success of conservation programmes. This is evident and 
clearly recognised by multiple amendments to the Act. Our points above and in 
enclosed Annexures also point to the benefit of scientific information for conservation. 
Lastly, we believe that knowledge about our ecosystems and biodiversity, in itself, has 
value; appreciation of this value is what has led to the widespread and unambiguous 
support for wildlife conservation in our country.  
 
We thus recommend that the Act explicitly encourages research and the organic 
incorporation of scientific information in conservation planning, beginning with the 
Preamble of the Act. We provide specific suggestions for the same in Annexure 5.  
 
We make additional suggestions in Annexure 6. All our recommendations are supported by 
references cited in Annexure 7.   
 
We provide these inputs on the basis of our experience with wildlife conservation in 
multiple states across India; our scientific expertise as demonstrated by publications and 
editorial positions in respected international peer-reviewed journals; and our engagement 
with on-ground conservation action and policy as demonstrated by our work and positions 
in national and international policy groups. We briefly list our qualifications in Annexure 8.   
 
We sincerely hope that you and members of the Committee will find these 
recommendations to be useful. We thank you for the opportunity to contribute to 
formulating an Amendment to the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, that can effectively and 
scientifically advance our nation towards a green, sustainable, and ecologically healthy 
future where wildlife and natural habitats thrive.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Varun R. Goswami, Ph.D.  
Director & Senior Scientist 
varunr.goswami@gmail.com | vrg@conservationinitiatives.org  
102

 4 
Annexure 1: Specific suggestions for the inclusion of connectivity conservation in the 
Wildlife Protection Act (Act) and Amendment 
 
Throughout, for clarity, we indicate existing text in the Amendment or Act as blue text, and 
suggested insertions as red text.  
 
1. Inclusion in Section 2 of the Act of a definition of ‘corridor’ following Hilty et al. (2020)1 
as sub-section (10A):  
“‘corridor’ means an area that maintains or restores ecological connectivity over the 
long term.” 
 
2. Inclusion in Section 2 of the Act of a definition of ecological connectivity following Hilty 
et al. (2020)1 as sub-section (12C):  
“‘ecological connectivity’ means the movement of species and the flow of natural 
processes that sustain wildlife populations, communities, ecosystems, or ecosystem 
services.”  
 
3. Amendment to Section 5C, sub-section (2) of the Act to include the maintenance of 
connectivity within the purview of the National Board of Wildlife as clause (ba):  
“making recommendations for the declaration of corridors and formulating guidelines 
for ensuring ecological connectivity along corridors, including through the securing of 
forestland, incentivisation of wildlife-friendly practices, and regulation and restriction of 
barriers or impediments to connectivity.”  
 
4. Amendment to Section 8 of the Act to include the maintenance of connectivity within 
the purview of the State Board of Wildlife, as clause (ba):  
“formulation of policy for the maintenance of ecological connectivity via corridors, 
through the securing of forestland, incentivisation of wildlife-friendly practices, and 
regulation and restriction of barriers or impediments to connectivity.” 
 
5. Amendment of Section 18, sub-section (1) of the Act to include the following words 
after “for the purpose of protecting, propagating or developing wild life or its 
environment”, in order to enable the securing of areas that serve as corridors for 
wildlife connectivity, linkages for ecosystem health or services, or mitigating climate 
change impacts:   
“or the maintenance of ecological connectivity” 
 
6. Amendment of Section 35, sub-section (1) of the Act to include the following words 
after “for the purpose of protecting, propagating or developing wild life or its 
environment”, in order to enable the securing of areas that serve as corridors for 
wildlife connectivity, linkages for ecosystem health or services, or mitigating climate 
change impacts:   
“or the maintenance of ecological connectivity” 
 
7. Amendment of Section 36A, sub-section (1) of the Act to include the following words 
after “those areas which link one protected area with another”, for the purpose of 
103

 5 
securing areas that serve as corridors for wildlife connectivity, linkages for ecosystem 
health or services, or mitigating climate change impacts:   
“and areas that maintain ecological connectivity” 
 
8. Inclusion in Section 38O, sub-section (1), clause (g) of the Act to specifically include 
reference to corridors, by inserting the following words after “areas linking one 
protected area or tiger reserve with another protected area or tiger reserve”:  
“and corridors” 
 
9. Inclusion in Section 38V of a sub-section (3A) to specify the requirement for tiger 
connectivity conservation in Tiger Conservation Plans:  
“(3A) The Tiger Conservation Plan will also include plans for conservation of tiger 
connectivity, including staff development and deployment, and coordination across 
divisions, departments and states, so as to ensure – 
(a) Securement of corridors and maintain habitat integrity where such habitat exists or 
can be restored.  
(b) Activities that are incompatible with tiger and wildlife connectivity, such as linear 
infrastructure, mining, or destructive land uses, are either disallowed or allowed 
with adequate mitigation in tiger corridors. 
(c) Incentivisation of practices on multiple-use or non-forest lands that facilitate 
connectivity of tigers and other wildlife.  
(d) Mitigation of human–tiger conflict.“ 
 
 
 
 
 
104

 6 
Annexure 2: Modifications to the Schedules 
 
Below, we list species that are under threat, and which, as per current scientific assessment 
by subject experts6–10, deem inclusion in Schedule I. We use species assessments of the 
IUCN Red List as our justification and indicate the Red List Status of each species in 
parenthesis (NT: Near Threatened, VU: Vulnerable, EN: Endangered or CR: Critically 
Endangered). We note that this list includes some critically endangered species as well, in 
need of urgent conservation attention.   
 
Species that need to be recategorized from Schedule II to Schedule I 
 
MAMMALS 
1. Sambar Rusa unicolor (VU) 
2. Striped hyena Hyaena hyaena (NT) 
3. Nilgiri marten Martes gwatkinsii (VU) 
4. Mountain weasel Mustela altaica (NT) 
5. Assamese macaque Macaca assamensis (NT) 
6. Bonnet macaque Macaca radiata (VU) 
BIRDS 
1. Red-footed falcon Falco vespertinus (VU) 
2. Alexandrine parakeet Psittacula eupatria (NT) 
3. Grey-headed parakeet Psittacula finschii (NT) 
4. Blossom-headed parakeet Psittacula roseata (NT) 
5. Lord Derby's parakeet Psittacula derbiana (NT) 
6. Nicobar parakeet Psittacula caniceps (NT) 
7. Long-tailed parakeet Psittacula longicauda (VU) 
8. Mangrove pitta Pitta megarhyncha (NT) 
9. Andaman cuckooshrike Coracina dobsoni (NT) 
10. Andaman treepie Dendrocitta bayleii (VU) 
11. White-naped tit Machlolophus nuchalis (VU) 
12. Grey-headed bulbul Brachypodius priocephalus (NT) 
13. Yellow-throated bulbul Pycnonotus xantholaemus (VU) 
14. Nicobar bulbul Hypsipetes nicobariensis (NT) 
15. Rufous-throated wren babbler Spelaeornis caudatus (NT) 
16. Mishmi wren babbler Spelaeornis badeigularis (VU) 
17. Naga wren babbler Spelaeornis chocolatinus (VU) 
18. Tawny-breasted wren babbler Spelaeornis longicaudatus (VU) 
19. Sikkim wedge-billed babbler Stachyris humei (NT) 
20. Cachar wedge-billed babbler Stachyris roberti (NT) 
21. Snowy-throated babbler Stachyris oglei (VU) 
22. Lesser white-fronted goose Anser erythropus (VU) 
105

 7 
23. Red-breasted goose Branta ruficollis (VU) 
24. Falcated duck Mareca falcata (NT) 
25. White-headed duck Oxyura leucocephala (EN)       
26. Long-tailed duck Clangula hyemalis (VU)  
27. Ferruginous duck Aythya nyroca (NT) 
28. Andaman teal Anas albogularis (VU) 
29. Marbled teal Marmonetta angustirostris (VU) 
30. Common Pochard Aythya ferina (VU) 
31. Baer’s pochard Aythra baeri (CR) 
32. Chestnut-breasted hill patridge Arborophila mandellii (VU) 
33. White-cheeked hill partridge Arborophila atrogularis (NT) 
34. Swamp francolin Ortygornis gularis (VU) 
35. Manipur bush quail Perdicula manipurensis (EN) 
36. Horned grebe Podiceps auritus (VU) 
37. Yellow-eyed pigeon Columba eversmanni (VU)  
38. Nilgiri Wood pigeon Columba elphinstonii (VU) 
39. Pale-capped pigeon Columba punicea (VU) 
40. Andaman wood pigeon Columba palumboides (NT) 
41. European turtle dove Streptopelia turtur (VU) 
42. Andaman green pigeon Treron chloropterus (NT) 
43. Ashy-headed green pigeon Treron phayrei (NT) 
44. Nicobar imperial pigeon Drucula nicobarica (NT) 
45. Grey-sided thrush Turdus feae (VU) 
46. Nilgiri sholakili Sholicola major (EN) 
47. White-bellied sholakili Sholicola albiventris (VU) 
48. Nicobar jungle flycatcher Cyornis nicobaricus (NT) 
49. Rusty-bellied shortwing Brachypteryx hyperythra (NT) 
50. Firethroat Calliope pectardens (NT) 
51. Kashmir flycatcher Ficedula subrubra (VU) 
52. Stoliczka's bushchat Saxicola macrorhynchus (VU) 
53. Hodgson's bushchat Saxicola insignis (VU) 
54. Finn's weaver Ploceus megarhynchus (EN) 
55. Green munia Amandava formosa (VU) 
56. Nilgiri pipit Anthus nilghiriensis (VU) 
57. Yellow-breasted bunting Emberiza aureola (CR) 
58. Macqueen’s bustard Chlamydotismacqueenii (VU) 
59. Little bustard Tetrax tetrax (NT) 
60. Great thick-knee Esascus recurvirostris (NT) 
61. Beach thick-knee Esascus magnirostris (NT) 
62. Eurasian oystercatcher Haematopus ostralegus (NT) 
63. Northern lapwing Vanellus vanellus (NT) 
106

 8 
64. River lapwing Vanellus duvaucelii (NT) 
65. Sociable lapwing Vanellus gregarius (CR) 
66. Eurasian curlew Numenius arquata (NT) 
67. Bar-tailed godwit Limosa lapponica (NT) 
68. Black-tailed godwit Limosa limosa (NT) 
69. Great knot Caldris tenuirostris (ER) 
70. Red knot Caldris canutus (NT) 
71. Curlew sandpiper Caldris ferruginea (NT) 
72. Spoon-billed sandpiper Caldris pygmaea (CR) 
73. Red-necked stint Caldris ruficollis (NT) 
74. Buff-breasted sandpiper Caldris subruficollis (NT) 
75. Asian dowitcher Limnodromus semipalmatus (NT) 
76. Wood snipe Gallinago nemoricola (VU) 
77. Great snipe Gallinago media (NT) 
78. Grey-tailed tattler Tringa brevipes (NT) 
79. Black-legged kittiwake Rissa tridactyla (VU) 
80. Black-bellied tern Sterna acuticauda (EN) 
81. River tern Sterna aurantia (VU) 
82. Indian skimmer Rynchops albicollis (EN) 
83. Black-necked stork Ephippiorhynchus asiaticus (NT) 
84. Painted stork Mycteria leucocephala (NT) 
85. Greater adjutant Leptoptilos dubius (EN) 
86. Lesser adjutant Leptoptilos javanicus (VU) 
87. Oriental darter Ahinda melanogaster (NT) 
88. Spot-billed pelican Pelecanus philippensis (NT) 
89. Dalmatian pelican Pelecanus crispus (NT) 
90. Chinese egret Egretta eulophotes (VU) 
91. Black-headed ibis Threskiornis melanocephalus (NT) 
92. Nicobar scops owl Otus alius (NT) 
 
AMPHIBIANS 
1. Malabar tree toad Pedostibes tuberculosus (EN) 
2. Kemp’s tree toad Pedostibes kempi (DD)* 
 
* Note: We include a Data Deficient species here following a precautionary principle. With 
additional information regarding the conservation status of the species, it can be reclassified 
as appropriate.  
 
REPTILES 
1. Indian flap-shell turtle Lissemys punctata (VU) 
2. Red sand boa Eryx johnii (NT) 
107

 9 
3. Indian rock python Python molurus (NT) 
4. Burmese python Python bivittatus (VU) 
 
 
Species that need to be included in Schedule I 
 
MAMMALS 
1. Hume’s rat Hadromys humei (EN) 
2. Mandelli's mouse-eared Myotis Myotis sicarius (VU) 
3. Leschenault’s rousette Rousettus leschenaultii (NT) 
4. Andaman spiny shrew Crocidura hispida (VU) 
5. Burrowing vole Hyperacrius fertilis (NT) 
6. Malabar spiny tree mouse Platacanthomys lasiurus (VU) 
7. Royle's mountain vole Alticola roylei (NT) 
8. Dusky-striped squirrel Funambulus sublineatus (VU) 
9. Tail-less leaf-nosed bat Coelops frithii (NT) 
10. Durga Das's leaf-nosed bat Hipposideros durgadasi (VU) 
11. Mishmi giant flying squirrel Petaurista mishmiensis (NT) 
12. Red goral Naemorhedus baileyi (VU) 
13. Asian highland shrew Suncus montanus (VU) 
14. Great evening bat Ia io (NT) 
15. Painted woolly bat Kerivoula picta (NT) 
16. Nilgiri long-tailed tree mouse Vandeleuria nilagirica (EN) 
17. Himalayan musk deer Moschus leucogaster (EN) 
18. Hipposideros nicobarulae (EN) 
19. Andaman white-toothed shrew Crocidura andamanensis (CR) 
20. Jenkin's shrew Crocidura jenkinsi (CR) 
21. Nicobar shrew Crocidura nicobarica (CR) 
22. Namdapha flying squirrel Biswamoyopterus biswasi (CR) 
23. Large rock-rat Cremnomys elvira (CR) 
24. Kolar leaf-nosed bat Hipposideros hypophyllus (CR) 
25. Arunachal macaque Macaca munzala (EN) 
26. Kashmir musk deer Moschus cupreus (EN) 
27. Black musk deer Moschus fuscus (EN) 
28. Kashmir gray langur Semnopithecus ajax (EN) 
29. Nicobar treeshrew Tupaia nicobarica (EN) 
30. Kelaart's long-clawed shrew Feroculus feroculus (EN) 
31. Day's shrew Suncus dayi (EN) 
32. Kondana rat Millardia kondana (EN) 
33. Bonhote’s mouse Mus famulus (EN) 
34. Ranjini’s field fat Rattus ranjiniae (EN) 
108

 10 
35. Miller’s Nicobar rat Rattus burrus (EN) 
36. Nicobar flying fox Pteropus faunulus (EN) 
37. Andaman horseshoe Bat Rhinolophus cognatus (EN) 
38. Andaman rat Rattus stoicus (VU) 
39. Zelebor’s Nicobar rat Rattus palmarum (VU) 
40. Central Kashmir vole Alticola montosa (VU) 
41. Tarai gray langur Semnopithecus hector (NT) 
42. Red serow Capricornis rubidus (VU) 
 
BIRDS 
1. Brown hornbill Anorrhinus austeni (NT)* 
2. Malabar grey hornbill Ocyceros griseus (VU) 
3. Malabar pied hornbill Anthracoceros coronatus (NT) 
4. Blyth’s kingfisher Alcedo Hercules (NT) 
5. Brown-winged kingfisher Pelargopsis amauroptera (NT) 
6. Yellow-rumped honeyguide Indicator xanthonotus (NT) 
7. Great slaty woodpecker Mulleripicus pulverulentus (VU)   
8. Andaman woodpecker Dryocopus hodgei (VU) 
9. Grey-crowned prinia Prinia cinereocapilla (VU) 
10. Long-billed bush warbler Locustella major (NT) 
11. Broad-tailed grassbird Schoenicola platyurus (VU)  
12. Bristled grassbird Schoenicola striatus (VU) 
13. Tytler’s leaf warbler Phylloscopus tytleri (NT) 
14. Jerdon’s babbler Chrysomma altirostre (VU) 
15. Black-breasted parrotbill Paradoxornis flavirostris (VU) 
16. Indian grassbird Graminicola bengalensis (NT) 
17. Marsh babbler Pellorneum palustre (VU) 
18. Rufous-vented grass babbler Laticilla burnesii (NT) 
19. Swamp grass babbler Laticilla cinerascens (EN) 
20. Banasura laughingthrush Montecincla jerdoni (EN) 
21. Nilgiri laughingthrush Montecincla cachinnans (EN) 
22. Palani laughingthrush Montecincla fairbanki (NT) 
23. Ashambu laughingthrush Montecincla meridionalis (VU) 
24. Slender-billed babbler Argya longirostris (VU) 
25. Chestnut-backed laughingthrush Pterorhinus nuchalis (NT) 
26. Yunnan nuthatch Sitta yunnanensis (NT) 
27. Beautiful nuthatch Sitta formosa (VU) 
28. Lesser flamingo Phoeniconaias minor (NT) 
29. Dark-rumped swift Apus acuticauda (VU) 
30. Rustic bunting Emberiza rustica (VU) 
109

 11 
 
* Note: the species of brown hornbill found in India is Anorrhinus austeni and not 
Anorrhinus tickelli (Tickell's brown hornbill).  
 
AMPHBIANS 
1. Konkan tiger toad Xanthophryne tigerina (CR)  
2. Ghats wart frog Minervarya murthii (CR) 
3. Kottigehar dancing frog Micrixalus kottigeharensis (CR)  
4. Dattatreya night frog Nyctibatrachus dattatreyaensis (CR) 
5. Gundia frog Indirana gundia (CR) 
6. Kerala Indian frog Walkerana phrynoderma (CR) 
7. Sacred grove bushfrog Philautus sanctisilvaticus (CR) 
8. Amboli bush frog Pseudophilautus amboli (CR) 
9. Chalazode bush frog Raorchestes chalazodes (CR) 
10. Green eyed bushfrog Raorchestes chlorosomma (CR) 
11. Griet bush frog Raorchestes griet (CR) 
12. Kaikatti bush frog Raorchestes kaikatti (CR) 
13. Mark's bush frog Raorchestes marki (CR) 
14. Munnar bush frog Raorchestes munnarensis (CR) 
15. Large Ponmudi bush frog Raorchestes ponmudi (CR) 
16. Resplendent bush frog Raorchestes resplendens (CR) 
17. Shillong bush frog Raorchestes shillongensis (CR) 
18. Sushil's bushfrog Raorchestes sushili (CR) 
19. Anaimalai flying frog Rhacophorus pseudomalabaricus (CR) 
20. Khasi Hill rock toad Bufoides meghalayanus (EN) 
21. Beddome's toad Duttaphrynus beddomii (EN) 
22. Malabar torrent toad Ghatophryne ornata (EN) 
23. Koyna toad Xanthophryne koynayensis (EN) 
24. Nicobar frog Minervarya nicobariensis (EN) 
25. Nilgiri frog Minervarya nilagirica (EN) 
26. Rakhine litter frog Leptobrachium rakhinensis (EN) 
27. Gadgil's torrent frog Micrixalus gadgili (EN) 
28. Black microhylid frog Melanobatrachus indicus (EN) 
29. Sholiga narrow-mouthed frog Microhyla sholigari (EN) 
30. Indian dot frog Uperodon mormoratus (EN) 
31. Purple frog Nasikabatrachus sahyadrensis (EN) 
32. Alicia's night frog Nyctibatrachus aliciae (EN) 
33. Beddome’s night frog Nyctibatrachus beddomii (EN) 
34. Giant wrinkled frog Nyctibatrachus karnatakaensis (EN) 
35. Small wrinkled frog Nyctibatrachus minor (EN) 
110

 12 
36. Coorg night frog Nyctibatrachus sanctipalustris (EN) 
37. Kalakad wrinkled frog Nyctibatrachus vasanthi (EN) 
38. Günther's leaping frog Indirana brachytarsus (EN) 
39. Spotted leaping frog Sallywalkerana diplosticta (EN) 
40. Boulenger's Indian frog Sallywalkerana leptodactyla (EN) 
41. Green tree frog Ghatixalus variabilis (EN) 
42. Nicobarese tree frog Polypedates insularis (EN) 
43. Dark-eared bush frog Pseudophilautus wynaadensis (EN) 
44. Seshachar's bush frog Raorchestes charius (EN) 
45. Kalpatta yellow bush frog Raorchestes nerostagona (EN) 
46. Cross-backed bush frog Raorchestes signatus (EN) 
47. Spotted bush frog Raorchestes tinniens (EN) 
48. Travancore bush frog Raorchestes travancoricus (EN) 
49. Kalakkad tree frog Rhacophorus calcadensis (EN) 
50. Small tree frog Rhacophorus lateralis (EN) 
51. Southern hill toad Duttaphrynus microtympanum (VU) 
52. Kerala stream toad Ghatophryne rubigina (VU) 
53. Small paa frog Nanorana minica (VU) 
54. Rotung oriental frog Ingerana borealis (VU) 
55. Naked dancing frog Micrixalus nudis (VU) 
56. Nilgiri dancing frog Micrixalus phyllophilus (VU) 
57. Malabar tropical frog Micrixalus saxicola (VU) 
58. Malabar ramanella Uperodon triangularis (VU) 
59. Deccan night frog Nyctibatrachus deccanensis (VU) 
60. Bombay night frog Nyctibatrachus humayuni (VU) 
61. Malabar night frog Nyctibatrachus major (VU) 
62. Boulenger's golden-backed frog Indosylvirana aurantiaca (VU) 
63. Indian flying frog Pterorana khare (VU) 
64. Matherana leaping frog Indirana leithii (VU) 
65. Garo Hills bubble-nest frog Philautus garo (VU) 
66. Bob Inger's bush frog Raorchestes bobingeri (VU) 
67. Bombay bush frog Raorchestes bombayensis (VU) 
68. Confusing green bush frog Raorchestes chromasynchysi (VU) 
69. Koadaikanal bush frog Raorchestes dubois (VU) 
70. Southern bubble-nest frog Raorchestes glandulosus (VU) 
71. Ponmudi bush frog Raorchestes graminirupes (VU) 
72. Assam Indonesian treefrog Theloderma moloch (VU) 
73. Indian toad Duttaphrynus parietalis (NT) 
74. Annandale's paa frog Nanorana annandalii (NT) 
75. Dusky dancing frog Micrixalus fuscus (NT) 
76. Jerdon's balloon frog Uperodon montanus (NT) 
111

 13 
77. Dahaoping sucker frog Amolops viridimaculatus (NT) 
78. Bicoloured frog Clinotarsus curtipes (NT) 
79. Beddome's bush frog Raorchestes beddomii (NT) 
 
REPTILES 
1. Anaikatti gecko Cnemaspis anaikattiensis (CR) 
2. Jeypore ground gecko Cyrtodactylus jeyporensis (EN) 
3. Madras spotted skink Barkudia insularis (CR) 
4. Assam roofed turtle Pangshura sylhetensis (CR) 
5. Indian narrow-headed softshell turtle Chitra indica (EN) 
6. Goan day gecko Cnemaspis goaensis (EN) 
7. Wynad day gecko Cnemaspis wynadensis (EN) 
8. Poona skink Eurylepis poonaensis (EN) 
9. Boulenger's dasia Dasia subcaerulea (EN) 
10. Inger's mabuya Eutropis clivicola (EN) 
11. Perrotet's vine snake Ahaetulla perroteti (EN) 
12. Travancore earth snake Rhinophis travancoricus (EN) 
13. Asian leaf turtle Cyclemys dentata (NT) 
14. Brown roofed turtle Pangshura smithii (NT) 
15. Gund day gecko Cnemaspis heteropholis (NT) 
16. Ponmudi day gecko Cnemaspis nairi (NT) 
17. Ornate day gecko Cnemaspis ornata (NT) 
18. Sispara day gecko Cnemaspis sisparensis (NT) 
19. Sikkimese bent-toed gecko Cyrtodactylus gubernatoris (DD) 
20. Anamalai hill gecko Hemidactylus anamallensis (NT) 
21. Sharma's mabuya Eutropis nagarjunensis (NT) 
22. Günther's vine snake Ahaetulla dispar (NT) 
23. Bicatenate uropeltis Uropeltis bicatenata (NT) 
24. Smith's earth snake Uropeltis grandis (NT) 
25. Large-scaled pit viper Trimeresurus macrolepis (NT) 
26. Loggerhead turtle Caretta caretta (VU) 
27. Southeast Asian box turtle Cuora amboinensis (EN) 
28. Indian eyed turtle Morenia petersi (EN) 
29. Nilgiri dwarf gecko Cnemaspis indica (VU) 
30. Das's day gecko Cnemaspis indraneildasii (VU) 
31. Jerdon’s day gecko Cnemaspis jerdonii (VU) 
32. Vellore day gecko Cnemaspis otai (VU) 
33. White-striped viper gecko Hemidactylus albofasciatus (VU) 
34. Gujarat gecko Hemidactylus gujaratensis (VU) 
35. Satara gecko Hemidactylus sataraensis (CR) 
112

 14 
36. Side-spotted ground skink Kaestlea laterimaculata (VU) 
37. Ashwamedh writhing skink Eutropis ashwamedhi (EN) 
38. Short-tailed kukri snake Oligodon brevicauda (VU) 
39. Walnut kukri snake Oligodon juglandifer (VU) 
40. Andaman krait Bungarus andamanensis (NT) 
41. Two-lined black earth snake Melanophidium bilineatum (VU) 
42. Phipson's earth snake Uropeltis phipsonii (VU) 
 
 
 
 
113

 15 
Annexure 3: Suggestions for rationalisation of the Schedules 
 
We recommend the following for rationalisation and scientific treatment of the Schedules.  
 
1. Provide a clear definition of the Schedules in Section 2 of the Wildlife Protection Act. 
For instance, Schedule I includes species that are severely threatened and in need of 
conservation protection and attention. Schedule III include plants that are in need of 
conservation protection and attention.  
 
2. Provide for clear criteria and objectives to be outlined for each Schedule, along the lines 
of the IUCN Red List of Species, which may be subject to review under a regular basis.   
 
3. We recommend including a list of endangered species of particular conservation 
concern, for which a species conservation plan––such as those developed for the tiger, 
elephant and great Indian bustard––is a necessity and concerted conservation efforts 
are mandated. This is along the lines of the Endangered Species Act of the USA and has 
been immensely successful for a selection of species.  
 
4. In Section 61, include the following proviso to ensure scientific rationalisation and 
categorisation of wildlife:  
“Provided that such a change is based on a scientific assessment report prepared in 
collaboration with experts or professionals having qualifications and experience in the 
field of wildlife ecology and conservation.” 
 
5. We also bring to your attention the IUCN Red List of Ecosystems11, which identifies and 
protects ecosystems that are of particular concern and under threat. We recommend 
identifying threatened ecosystems in India, to keep our conservation law and policy 
aligned with current global standards. The floodplain ecosystem of Kaziranga National 
Park, or mangrove ecosystems, for instance, may be identified as threatened 
ecosystems in India.    
 
To do so, we suggest including a definition of ‘threatened ecosystems’ in Section 2, 
which include “a habitat that is has unique biodiversity, hydrology or geology, or 
sustains a unique ecological process, function or service, and which is imperilled due to 
its restricted or shrinking distribution, or threats to its ecological integrity.”   
 
We suggest treating these ecosystems in a manner similar to endangered species of 
particular conservation concern (point 3 above), requiring specific plans and action for 
preservation.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
114

 16 
Annexure 4: Suggestions for the treatment of vermin in the Act 
 
1. As it stands, multiple species of conservation concern are included in Schedule II. Thus, 
without modification of Schedule II, we strongly recommend deletion of point 38(a) in 
the Amendment whereby Schedule II is removed from Section 62. We recommend 
retaining the following as Section 62:  
“The Central Government may, by notification, declare any wild animal other than 
those specified in Schedule I and Schedule II to be vermin for any area and for such 
period as may be specified therein.” 
 
2. We also recommend placing a restriction on the time period for which animals can be 
declared vermin, to ensure review of the conservation status of the wildlife population. 
We thus recommend the following inclusion in Section 62 of the principal Act after “to 
be vermin for any area and for such period as may be specified therein”: 
“so long as that period does not exceed a period of six months.”  
  
3. For scientific management of wildlife and objective assessment of species as vermin, we 
recommend including the following proviso after Section 62:  
“Provided that such a declaration is based on a scientific assessment report drafted by 
officials and experts or professionals having qualifications and experience in the field of 
wildlife ecology and conservation.” 
 
4. We recommend monitoring of the vermin population to ensure that uncontrolled 
hunting of the species does not lead to precipitous declines in their numbers, via the 
following inclusions as Section 62, sub-sections (1) and (2):  
“(1) The Chief Wildlife Warden, or Chief Wildlife Wardens, of the state or states where 
the animal is declared as vermin, shall monitor the population of wild animals for the 
period that they are declared as vermin in collaboration with experts or professionals 
having scientific qualifications and experience in the field of wildlife ecology and 
conservation.   
(2) Such a declaration may be reversed at any point in time, if authorities observe 
damage to the habitat or drastic declines in the wild animals population during such 
time as it is deemed to be vermin.” 
 
5. Finally, we recommend that declaration of a wild animal as vermin is accompanied by a 
population management plan, which is put into action and closely monitored by the 
Forest Department. We thus recommend the following inclusion as section 62, 
subsection (3):  
“(3) The Chief Wildlife Warden of the state, or Chief Wildlife Wardens of the states, 
where the animal is declared as vermin, shall formulate and act as per a Vermin 
Population Management and Monitoring Program which includes a plan for controlled 
population management and stringent monitoring of the vermin species in 
collaboration with experts or professionals having scientific qualifications and 
experience in the field of wildlife ecology and conservation.”   
115

 17 
Annexure 5: Suggestions for the inclusion of research in the Act 
 
Research is integral to conservation, and accrual of knowledge on our natural health has 
value in and of itself. Thus, we suggest the following changes in the Act.  
 
1. Amendment of point 2 of the Amendment, and the Preamble of the Act, to include: 
“research, conservation, protection and management of wild life” in place of 
“protection of wild animals, birds and plants”.  
 
2. Inclusion of the following words in section 5B, sub-section (2) of the Act to ensure 
representation of external experts in the Standing Committee of the National Board of 
Wildlife:  
“including at least two members referred to in clauses (e) and (f) of section 5, sub-
section (1).” 
 
3. Inclusion of the following proviso to Section 5B of the Act, to provide for members of 
the National Board of Wildlife to comment on acts and actions of the Standing 
Committee:  
“Provided that members of the National Board of Wildlife referred to in Section 5, sub-
section (1), will have access to the workings, meetings, recommendations and actions of 
the Standing Committee, and can officially provide their comments, recommendations 
and dissent notes on the same.”  
 
4. Amendment of point 6 of the Amendment and proposed Section 6A, sub-section (2) of 
the act to include the following phrase which will ensure representation of external 
experts on the Standing Committee of the State Board of Wildlife:  
“including at least two members referred to in clauses (d) and (e) of section 6, sub-
section (1).” 
 
5. Inclusion of a clause in Section 12 for clarity on the collection of non-invasive samples 
for scientific research, which can contribute substantially to our understanding of the 
viability of wildlife populations:  
“(e) collection of non-invasive samples, such as faeces, for the purpose of scientific 
research.” 
 
6. Inclusion of clear protocols in Section 12, sub-section (1), to streamline and bring 
transparency to the issuance of permits for scientific research on Schedule I species 
using certain methods such as telemetry or genetic sample collection. Currently, 
methods like radio-telemetry—widely used for valuable conservation-relevant data 
worldwide15,16—are staggeringly under-utilised, simply due to the difficulty in getting 
permits17. These data will be especially valuable for species of conservation concern, 
likely to be included under Schedule I. Thus, we suggest the inclusion of the following:  
“(1) The Central Government shall appoint, and announce appointment of, an officer 
not below the rank of Inspector General of Forests, to review and process proposals for 
permission to conduct scientific research including methods such as trapping, snaring, 
or handling animals under Schedule I, for example, for the purpose of radio-telemetry 
or obtaining genetic or tissue samples.  
116

 18 
(2) The officer may grant a permit in writing to qualified persons which shall entitle the 
holder of such a permit to undertake activities specified in section 12, sub-section (1).  
(3) The Central Government shall process and respond to permit requests within a 
period not exceeding one hundred and twenty days. Issuance of permits will be 
accompanied by a set of terms and conditions under which the scientific research shall 
be undertaken. Rejection of the permit shall be accompanied with specific reasons in 
writing. 
(4) The Chief Wild Life Warden may issue permits in writing for the collection of non-
invasive samples, such as faeces, of species listed in Schedule I for the purpose of 
scientific research. The Chief Wild Life Warden shall process such permit requests 
within a period not exceeding sixty days.“ 
 
7. Inclusion of clear protocols in Section 28 as sub-section (3), to streamline and bring 
transparency to the issuance of permits for scientific research in sanctuaries, based on 
multiple reports of the difficulties in obtaining such permits, leading to discouragement 
of high-quality ecological research and conservation science in our country18,19:    
“(3) The Central Government may prescribe conditions subject to which permits for 
scientific research may be permitted, and the time frame in which proposals for 
scientific research shall be disposed of, which shall in no case exceed sixty days.” 
 
8. Inclusion of the following phrase in Section 36D, sub-section (2) of the Act to allow 
representation of independent experts in the Community Reserve Management 
Committee. This is critical as independent experts can serve as liaisons and hold 
substantial credibility with community leaders, thus encouraging communities to 
declare their forests as Reserves:  
“and representatives of non-governmental organisations working in the field of wild life 
conservation.” 
 
9. Inclusion of the following proviso in Section 61 of the Act to bring scientific justification, 
objectivity and transparency to the categorisation of species into Schedules:  
“Provided that such a change is based on a scientific assessment report prepared in 
collaboration with experts or professionals having qualifications and experience in 
conservation of wild life.” 
 
10. As mentioned in points 3 and 4 of Annexure 4 above, we recommend the following 
inclusions of a proviso and sub-sections (1) and (2) in Section 62 to allow for scientific 
management of species declared as vermin. We urge the committee to consider this as 
the current process of declaration of species as vermin is highly unscientific and 
uncontrolled, has led to indiscriminate hunting, and is likely to have negative impacts 
on biodiversity and ecosystems, that, since the species in question are not monitored, 
are yet to be detected:  
“Provided that such a declaration is based on a scientific assessment report drafted by 
officials and experts or professionals having qualifications and experience in the field of 
wildlife ecology and conservation. 
(1) The Chief Wildlife Warden shall monitor the population of wild animals for the 
period that they  are declared as vermin.   
117

 19 
(2) Such a declaration may be reversed at any point in time during this specified period, 
if the authorities observe damage to the habitat or drastic declines in the wild animals 
population during such time as it is deemed to be vermin.” 
118

 20 
Annexure 6: Additional suggestions for modification of the Amendment or Act  
 
1. Deletion of the phrase “and development” in section 5C, sub-section (1) of the Act, 
such that it reads:  
“(1) It shall be the duty of the National Board to promote the conservation of wild life 
and forests by such measures as it thinks fit.“ 
 
2. Inclusion of the following phrase in section 5C, sub-section (2), clause (c) to ensure that 
ecologically damaging activities are not undertaken in important conservation areas:  
“and making recommendations for the restriction of such activities that may be 
damaging to wildlife and the environment.” 
 
 
 
 
 
119

 21 
Annexure 7: References 
 
1 Hilty, J. et al. 2020. Guidelines for conserving connectivity through ecological networks and 
corridors. Technical Policy Report of the IUCN Connectivity Conservation Specialist Group. 
IUCN, Gland Switzerland. https://portals.iucn.org/library/node/49061  
 
2 CCSG News. 2021. Ecological connectivity in global conservation policy. 26 July 2021. 
https://conservationcorridor.org/ccsg/ccsg-news/2021/07/ecological-connectivity-in-global-
conservation-policy-2/ 
 
3 Vasudev, D. et al. 2021. Identifying important connectivity areas for the wide-ranging Asian 
elephant across conservation landscapes of Northeast India. Diversity and Distributions 27, 
2510–2526. DOI: 10.1111/ddi.13419 
 
4 Jayadevan, A. et al. 2020. Navigating paved paradise: Evaluating landscape permeability to 
movement for large mammals in two conservation priority landscapes in India. Biological 
Conservation 247, 108613. DOI: 10.1016/j.biocon.2020.108613 
 
5 Rodrigues, R. G. et al. 2021. Dog in the matrix: Envisioning countrywide connectivity 
conservation for an endangered carnivore. Journal of Applied Ecology 59, 223–237. DOI: 
10.1111/1365-2664.14048 
6 IUCN. 2021. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2021-3. 
https://www.iucnredlist.org 
 
7 Bayani, A. 2022. Indian Mammals Listed In The IUCN Red List. In Ramachandran, V., A. 
Bayani, R. Chakravarty, P. Roy, and K. Kunte (editors). Mammals of India, v. 1.13. Editors. 
 
8 S. M. Billerman, B. K. Keeney, P. G. Rodewald, and T. S. Schulenberg (Editors) (2020). Birds 
of the World. Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology, Ithaca, NY, USA. 
https://birdsoftheworld.org/bow/home 
 
9 Jangid, A.K. and A. Kamdar. 2022. Indian Reptiles In The IUCN Red List. In Kamdar, A., A, 
Jangid, P. Roy, and K. Kunte (eds.). Reptiles of India, v. 1.26. Indian Foundation for 
Butterflies. 
 
10 Bayani, A. 2022. Indian Amphibians In The IUCN Red List. In Gosavi, N., A. Bayani, P. Roy, 
and K. Kunte (eds.). Amphibians of India, v. 1.05. Indian Foundation for Butterflies. 
 
11 IUCN Red List of Ecosystems. https://www.iucn.org/resources/conservation-tools/iucn-
red-list-ecosystems   
 
12 Rangarajan, M. et al. 2010. Gajah: Securing the future for elephants in India. The Report of 
the Elephant Task Force, Ministry of Environment and Forests. New Delhi, India.  
 
120

 22 
13 Erinjery, J. J. et al. 2017. Losing its ground: A case study of fast declining populations of a 
‘least-concern’ species, the bonnet macaque (Macaca radiata). PLoS ONE 12, e0182140. 
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0182140 
 
14 Nichols, J. D. et al. 1995. Managing North American waterfowl in the face of uncertainty! 
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 26, 177–199.  
 
15 Hooten, M. B. et al. 2017. Animal Movement: statistical models for telemetry data. CRC 
Press, Boca Raton, USA.  
 
16 Bastille-Rousseau, G. et al. 2018. Optimizing the positioning of wildlife crossing structures 
using GPS telemetry. Journal of Applied Ecology 55, 2055–2063. DOI: 10.1111/1365-
2664.13117 
 
17 Habib, B. et al. 2014. Three decades of wildlife radio telemetry in India: a review. Animal 
Biotelemetry 2, 4.  
 
18 Bagla, P. 2006. Indian wildlife researchers show their fangs over permit hassles. Science 
314, 907. DOI: 10.1126/science.314.5801.907a 
 
19 Madhusudan, M. D. et al. 2006. Science in the wilderness: the predicament of scientific 
research in India’s wildlife reserves. Current Science 91, 1015–1019.  
121

 23 
Annexure 8: Selected Qualifications of contributors to this note 
 
Profile of the Organisation 
 
Conservation Initiatives (Email | Website | Twitter | Instagram | YouTube) is a Northeast 
India–based NGO dedicated to science-based wildlife conservation, rural livelihoods and 
human wellbeing, and sustaining positive human–nature relationships in the region. We 
have two flagship programs. In our first program, we have been working towards elephant 
conservation in the Kaziranga landscape for 8 years, and our past work in tea estates has 
benefited >5,000 beneficiaries. Our second flagship program is focussed on gibbons and 
community-managed forests, where we have engaged with >40 villages to assess forest 
cover and wildlife presence, engage for greater conservation support and facilitate 
community-based forest conservation and sustainable nature-friendly livelihoods. We have 
established local credibility, demonstrated scientific expertise, and representation of local 
community leaders in our team. Our work aligns with post-2020 Convention on Biological 
Diversity targets, multiple Sustainable Development Goals (including SDG 13 & 15), India’s 
Nationally Determined Contributions towards mitigating climate change, as well as 
resilience, forest and biodiversity conservation, and sustainable living.  
 
Selected Scientific Publications of Contributing Researchers 
 
Rodrigues, R. G., Srivathsa, A., & Vasudev, D. (2021) Dog in the matrix: Envisioning 
countrywide connectivity conservation for an endangered carnivore. Journal of Applied 
Ecology, Early View. DOI | In the news  
Vasudev, D., Goswami, V. R., Srinivas, N., Syiem, B. L. N., & Sarma. A. (2021) Identifying 
important connectivity areas for the wide-ranging Asian elephant across conservation 
landscapes of Northeast India. Diversity and Distributions, Early View. DOI | In the news  
Goswami, V. R., Vasudev, D., Joshi, B., Hait, P., & Sharma, P. (2021) Coupled effects of 
climatic forcing and the human footprint on wildlife movement and space use in a 
dynamic floodplain landscape. Science of the Total Environment, 758, 144000. DOI | In 
the news 
Vasudev, D., Goswami, V. R., & Oli, M. K. (2021) Detecting dispersal: A spatial dynamic 
occupancy model to reliably quantify connectivity across heterogenous conservation 
landscapes. Biological Conservation, 253, 108874. DOI | In the news 
Seidler, R., Primack, R.B., Goswami, V.R., ... Wilson, J.W., & Wrangham, R. (2021) 
Confronting ethical challenges in long-term research programs in the tropics. Biological 
Conservation, 255, 108933. DOI 
Corlett, R.T., Primack, R.B., ... Goswami, V.R., ... Johns, D. & Roth, R. (2020) Impacts of the 
coronavirus pandemic on biodiversity conservation. Editorial. Biological Conservation, 
246, 108571. DOI   
Vasudev, D., Goswami, V.R., Hait, P., Sharma, P., Joshi, B., Karpate, Y., & Prasad, P.K.  (2020) 
Conservation opportunities and challenges emerge from assessing nuanced stakeholder 
attitudes towards the Asian elephant in tea estates of Assam, Northeast India. Global 
Ecology and Conservation, 22, e00936. DOI  
122

 24 
Joshi, B., Syiem, B. L. N., Kuotsu, R., Menon, A., Gogoi, J., Goswami, V. R. & Vasudev, D. 
(2019) Records of the Marbled Cat Pardofelis marmorata and the Asiatic Golden Cat 
Catopuma temminckii (Mammalia: Carnivora: Felidae) from the community forests 
surrounding the Dzükou Valley in Nagaland, India. Journal of Threatened Taxa, 11, 
14363–14367. In the news  
Goswami, V. R., Yadava, M. K., Vasudev, D., Prasad, P. K., Sharma, P. & Jathanna, D. (2019) 
Towards a reliable assessment of Asian elephant population parameters: the application 
of photographic spatial capture– recapture sampling in a priority floodplain ecosystem. 
Scientific Reports, 9, 8758. DOI 
Syiem, B. L. N., Goswami, V. R. & Vasudev, D. (2018) “In a tree by the brook, there’s a 
songbird who sings”: Woodlands in an agricultural matrix maintain functionality of a 
wintering bird community. PLoS ONE 13, e0201657. DOI | In the news 
Vasudev, D., Nichols, J. D., Ramakrishnan, U., Ramesh, K. & Srinivas V. (2018) Assessing 
landscape connectivity for tigers: concepts and practice. In: Methods for Monitoring 
Tiger and Prey Populations (K. U. Karanth and J. D. Nichols, eds). Springer, India.  
Goswami, V.R. & Vasudev, D. (2017) Triage of conservation needs: the juxtaposition of 
conflict mitigation and connectivity considerations in heterogeneous, human-dominated 
landscapes. Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 4, 144. DOI.  
Ripple, W., Chapron, G. ... Goswami, V.R. ... Young, H. & Zhang, L. (2017) Conserving the 
world's megafauna and biodiversity: the fierce urgency of now. BioScience 67, 197–200. 
DOI  
Ripple, W., Chapron, G. … Goswami, V.R. … Young, H. & Zhang, L. (2016) Saving the world’s 
terrestrial megafauna. BioScience, 66, 807–812. DOI 
Vasudev, D. & Fletcher, R. J. (2015) Incorporating movement behavior into conservation 
prioritization in fragmented landscapes: an example of western hoolock gibbons in Garo 
Hills, India. Biological Conservation, 181, 124-132. DOI 
Goswami, V.R., Medhi, K., Nichols, J.D. & Oli, M.K. (2015) Mechanistic understanding of 
human–wildlife conflict through a novel application of dynamic occupancy models. 
Conservation Biology, 29, 1100–1110.  DOI 
Vasudev, D., Fletcher, R. J., Goswami, V.R. & Krishnadas, M. (2015) From dispersal 
constraints to landscape connectivity: lessons from species distribution modeling. 
Ecography, 38, 001–012. DOI 
Goswami, V.R., Sridhara, S., Medhi, K., Williams, A.C., Chellam, R., Nichols, J.D. & Oli, M.K. 
(2014) Community-managed forests and wildlife-friendly agriculture play a subsidiary 
but not substitutive role to protected areas for the endangered Asian elephant. 
Biological Conservation, 177, 74–81. DOI 
Goswami, V.R., Vasudev, D. & Oli, M.K. (2014) The importance of conflict-induced mortality 
in designing multiple-use reserves for wide-ranging species of conservation concern. 
Biological Conservation, 176, 191–198.  
Goswami, V.R., Vasudev, D., Karnad, D., Krishna, Y.C., Krishnadas, M., Pariwakam, M., Nair, 
T., Andheria, A., Sridhara, S. & Siddiqui, I. (2013) Conflict of human–wildlife coexistence. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 110, 
E108. DOI 
123

 25 
Selected Professional Affiliations 
 
Teaching and/or Mentoring positions (Guest, Adjunct, Courtesy or Visiting Faculty, or 
Academic Partner Supervisor) at the following institutions: 
University of Florida, Gainesville, USA 
Deakin University, Melbourne, Australia 
Ashoka University, Sonepat, India 
National Centre for Biological Sciences, Bengaluru, India 
 
Editorial positions at Biological Conservation, PLoS ONE, and Conservation Biology 
 
Members of the following policy groups  
Govt. of Assam–Elephant Task Force 
IUCN–Asian Elephant Specialist Group 
IUCN–Connectivity Conservation Specialist Group 
IUCN–Section on Small Apes 
Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation–Council Member & Chair, 
Conservation Committee 
 
124

Wildlife Conservation Society –
India 
CIN: U74999KA2011NPL058034 
Registered Office: 
551, 7th Main Road 
Rajiv Gandhi Nagar, 2nd Phase 
Kodigehalli, Bengaluru – 560 097 
Karnataka, INDIA    
Tel: +91 80 29737455Fax:+91 80 29737455 
Email:info@wcsindia.org 
Website: https://india.wcs.org/ 
Date: 19.01.2021  
To: 
Shri. Jairam Ramesh 
Chairman 
Rajya Sabha Standing Committee on Science & Technology 
Parliament House Annexe  
New Delhi 110 001  
Subject: Preliminary comments on the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
(Bill No 159 of 2021 as introduced in the Rajya Sabha) 
Dear JairamJi,  
Trust this letter finds you well. I am happy to let you know that I have been selected to lead 
WCS India as the Director and I thank you for your mentorship over the years which has 
been very valuable to me. Today I am writing on behalf of Wildlife Conservation Society-
India (WCS-India). Our organization works towards the conservation of wildlife and wild 
places through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature.  
This letter is in response to the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 tabled before 
the Rajya Sabha recently. We thank you for your interest in the same. Please find attached a 
list of our preliminary comments and recommendations on the Draft Amendments. We urge 
that more time be given for experts to send detailed responses and also open it to public 
consultation. We would be happy to create a platform to bring all the NGO’s on board if 
required. 
We hope that the above-mentioned concerns and recommendations will be taken into account 
during the Standing Committee’s deliberations.  
Thanking you and with best wishes 
 
Vidya
125

Wildlife Conservation Society- India 
1 
 
Preliminary comments on the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 
2021 (Bill No 159 of 2021 as introduced in the Rajya Sabha) to amend 
the Wild Life (Protection) Act of 1972 
 
These are Wildlife Conservation Society -,QGLD¶V :&6-India) preliminary comments and 
recommendations on the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 (hereafter referred to as the 
Draft Amendments) tabled before the Rajya Sabha recently to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act 
1972 (hereafter referred to as the WLPA). 
 
At the outset, the work that has gone into the Draft Amendments should be appreciated as it has 
resulted in addressing several concerns of the members of the conservation community in India. The 
following aspects are especially of note: 
 
1. ,QFUHDVLQJ WKH DPELW RI WKH OHJLVODWLRQ E\ XVLQJ WKH WHUP ³:LOGOLIH´ ZKLFK LQFOXGHV DQ\
animal, aquatic or land vegetation which forms part of any habitat.  
2. Including provisions for addressing the problem of invasive species 
3. Authorizing WCCB to take the cognizance of the offence and filing of Complaint before the 
Court.  
4. Dropping of permanent listing of species as vermin  
5. Increasing the penalties for all offences 
6. Inclusion of species listed under  CITES 
7. Simplifying the categorisation of species under the Schedules.  
8. Directing CCF to manage wildlife sanctuaries and preparing management plans in  
consultation with Gram Sabhas in accordance with Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional 
Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006  
9. Not allowing the renewal of arms within ten kilometers of a sanctuary except un der the 
intimation to the Chief Wildlife Warden 
10. Allowing State governments to use Central government land to form conservation reserves  
11. Allowing the amendment of any entries in the Schedule via notification under section 61 
 
Having stated the above, we would like to submit that the WLPA is an iconic and important 
piece of legislation in India for wildlife conservation till date. Hence we feel that there are 
aspects of the Draft Amendments that need careful consideration. We have highlighted some of 
these below. We urge that more time be given for experts to send detailed responses and also 
open it to public consultation.  
GENERAL COMMENTS  
1. Removal of group level listing in the Schedules: Listing individual species instead of 
groups (i.e., all Holothurians, all Signathidians, Testudinidae, Tryonychidae, Hornbills etc.) 
is a major deviation from the current Act and will need further consideration. This can give 
rise to taxonomic ambiguity when identifying species and filing WLORs in many cases. This 
is especially true when parts and products are being traded. Additionally, many species from 
126

Wildlife Conservation Society- India 
2 
 
these groups have not been included in the current schedules (See Annexure 1). Also, new 
species are still getting described -- this is especially true for invertebrates, coral, sponges 
DQGDPSKLELDQVDQGWKHVHQHZO\UHSRUWHGZRQ¶WJHWGXHSURWHFWLRQDVSHUOHJLVODWLRQ 
 
2. Names of species in the Schedules: Misspelt and incorrect naming of species can lead to 
confusion and uncertainty during legal proceedings. We urge that species names (common 
and scientific) be standardized as much as possible. This can be done by using the IUCN Red 
List when possible. (Some examples of this are listed in Annexure 2)  
 
3. Criteria for inclusion in Schedule: We urge that a criteria for including species in Schedule 
EH ZHOO GHILQHG 6SHFLHV WKDW KDYH EHHQ OLVWHG DV µ&ULWLFDOO\ (QGDQJHUHG¶ DQG µ(QGDQJHUHG¶
under the IUCN Red List should be included in Schedule I and Schedule II (plants) in the 
absence of other systems for evaluating.  
 
4. Application of provisions of Act in respect of species listed in Schedule I or II and 
Schedule IV: We recommend that species from Schedule I and II are not included in 
Schedule IV as well, especially since Chapter VB legitimizes trade and breeding of these 
species, while Schedule I and II species do not have this exemption. Listing any native 
species in Schedule IV will lead to confusion especially since group level listing has been 
removed.   
 
5. &ULWLTXHRQWKHGHILQLWLRQRIµ]RR¶It will be useful to include the definition of ex-situ so 
DVWREULQJLQIDFLOLWLHVVXFKDVDTXDULXPVERWDQLFDOJDUGHQDQGJHQHEDQNVZLWKLQD]RR¶V
ambit.  
 
,QFOXVLRQ RI µFLUFXV¶ ZLWKLQ WKH GHILQLWLRQ RI µ]RR¶ FDQ KDYH D YHU\ GHOHWHULRXV HIIHFW RQ
conservation and is in fact an antithesis to conservation given the stress that animals are put 
WKURXJK LQ FLUFXVHV ,QFOXVLRQ RI µFLUFXV¶ ZLOO DOVR EH LQ GLUHFW FRQWUDGLFWLRQ WR WKH
JRYHUQPHQW¶VPRYHWRZDUGVEDQQLQJXVHRIDQLPDOVLQFLUFXVHVRI,QGLDDVZDVHvidenced by 
a draft notification on November 28, 2018, banning the use of all animals in circuses across 
the country. 
 
6. Decoupling research activities from the definition of hunting: Currently permission for 
research is provided as an exemption to prohibition on hunting in Section 9 and permits for 
the same are provided under Section 12. This view causes research work involving wild 
animals to be seen as hunting which is an offence with penal consequences.  
 
Research activities for the purpose of wildlife conservation should be seen in a different light 
and not be clubbed with hunting as that creates a barrier for researchers who are out to help 
with the cause of conservation. Research itself has several nuances and it would be better if 
new sections are created within the legislation to regulate the same with adequate safeguards. 
This would encourage more young researchers and conservation enthusiasts to enter the 
conservation arena. 
 
7. Breeding of Indian native species included within Schedule IV of Draft Amendments 
raise concerns: Sections 49M, 49N and 49O of Draft Amendments legitimize breeding of 
127

Wildlife Conservation Society- India 
3 
 
CITES species for commercial purposes. This has hitherto not been the case with wildlife 
conservation in India and such activities must be approached with great cau tion and 
sufficient baselining to understand the ecological and ethical impacts of such breeding. 
 
SPECIFIC COMMENTS 
 
1. Amendment of the preamble: We urge that this be substituted by - ³$Q$FWWRSURYLGHIRU
the conservation, protection and research-driven management of wildlife and habitats «´
It is important to include habitat within the scope of this Act. It is also important that the 
management be based on sound research.  
 
2. ,PSOLFDWLRQ RI VHFWLRQ ¶V 3URKLELWLRQ RI +XQWLQJ RQ 6FKHGXOH ,9 VSHFLHVGiven that 
certain vulnerable native species have also been added to Schedule IV of Draft Amendments, 
the prohibition of hunting for only Schedule I and II of Draft Amendments, leaves everything 
else open to risk of hunting.   
 
3. Grant of permit to enter or reside in a sanctuary should include some more conditions 
to facilitate research and wildlife management: Currently it is the Chief Wildlife Warden 
that grants this permit. A separate clause should be added here to stipulate that such permits 
will be granted in a timely manner and in case permissions are denied, it should be done so 
after giving adequate reasons. The applicant should also be afforded an opportunity to be 
heard before rejecting them downright. 
 
Although the Environment Ministry has issued  Guidelines for Scientific Research in the 
Wildlife Protected Areas this has not been reflected in the main Act through enabling 
provisions. This need to be incorporated as ecological research is often time bound by season 
and delay in receiving permits might cause hurdles for researchers. 
 
4. Invasive and Schedule IV species as Vermin:  Under this sub-section, vermin has been 
defined as a wild animal notified under Section 62. 7KHWHUPµZLOGDQLPDO¶KDVEHHQGHILQHG
under Section 2(36) as any animal which has been specified under Schedules I and II. 
However, this does not include invasive alien species or species mentioned under Schedule 
IV of the Draft Amendments, which may acquire the nature of vermin.  
 
8VLQJWKHWHUPµZLOGOLIH¶LQVWHDGRIµZLOGDQLPDO¶LVPRUHDSSURSULDWHLQWKLVFRQWH[W6LQFH
µZLOGOLIH¶XQGHUVHFWLRQ) includes µDQ\DQLPDO¶DTXDWLFRUODQGYHJHWDWLRQZKLFKIRUPV
part of any habitat.  
 
5. Procedure to declare vermin to be clarified: The designation of species as Vermin under 
Section 62 should happen with explicit stipulation of giving reasons, basing it on scientific 
evidence by involvement of an advisory or supervisory body. Also there should be provision 
RISHULRGLFWUDFNLQJRIWKHIDWHRIDQLPDO¶VSRSXODWLRQDVDUHVXOWRIQRWLILFDWLRQ&RQVLGHULQJ
the requirements of such processes we recommend that this section should be re-amended. 
 
128

Wildlife Conservation Society- India 
4 
 
6. Need for an advisory or supervisory body to regulate invasive alien species: The 
identification and then designation of species as invasive alien species should also happen on 
the basis of scientific evidence of their impacts through a supervisory or advisory body.  
 
We hope that the above-mentioned concerns and recommendations will be considered. 
 
ANNEXURE 1 
Examples of Indian species not included in Schedules I & II 
 
Common Names Scientific Name IUCN Status Previously included 
in the Schedules  
Indian Narrow-
headed Softshell 
Turtle 
Chitra indica Endangered  Previously covered as 
a family 
(Tryonychidae) in 
Schedule IV 
Indian Eyed Turtle Morenia petersi Endangered Previously not 
included in 
WLPA,1972 
Assam Leaf Turtle Cyclemys gemeli Near Threatened Previously not 
included in 
WLPA,1972 
Assam Roofed Turtle Pangshura 
sylhetensis 
Critically Endangered Previously not 
included in 
WLPA,1972.  
Indian Roofed Turtle Pangshura tecta Vulnerable Previously not 
included in WLPA, 
1972. Common name 
of Tent turtle was 
erroneously kept with 
the old scientific 
name of Roofed 
turtle. 
Brown Roofed Turtle Pangshura smithii Near Threatened Previously not 
included in WLPA, 
1972 
South-east Asian Box 
Turtle 
Cuora amboinensis Endangered Previously not 
included in WLPA, 
1972 
129

Wildlife Conservation Society- India 
5 
 
Indian Black Turtle Melanochelys trijuga Least Concern Previously not 
included in WLPA, 
1972 
Impressed Tortoise Manouria impressa Endangered Previously covered as 
a family 
(Testudinidae) in 
Schedule IV 
Malabar Pied-
Hornbill 
Anthracoceros 
coronatus 
Near Threatened  Previously covered as 
a family (4-C. 
Hornibills) in 
Schedule I  
Malabar Grey 
Hornbill 
Ocyceros griseus Vulnerable  Previously covered as 
a family (4-C. 
Hornibills) in 
Schedule I  
 
ANNEXURE 2 
Examples of species names that have been changed over the years, have been misspelt or mistyped 
in the Draft Act.  
 
Common Name 
(WLPA) 
Scientific Name 
(WLPA) 
Common Name 
(IUCN/CITES) 
 Scientific Name 
(IUCN/CITES) 
Comments 
Indian Tent 
Turtle 
Kachuga tecta 
tecta 
Indian Tent 
Turtle 
Pangshura 
tentoria 
Update 
taxonomy 
NA Trochus 
niloticus 
NA Rochia nilotica Update 
taxonomy 
NA Cypraea talpa NA Talparia talpa  Update 
 taxonomy 
Indian Soft-
shelled Turtle 
Lissemys 
punctata 
punctata 
Indian Flap-
shelled Turtle 
Lissemys 
punctata 
Draft act 
misspelt the 
species name as 
punctate, also 
common name 
needs to be 
updated as per 
IUCN name. 
130

Wildlife Conservation Society- India 
6 
 
NA Lambis chiragra NA Harpago 
chiragra 
Update 
taxonomy 
NA Lambis chiagra 
arthritica 
NA Harpago 
arthriticus   
Update 
taxonomy 
NA Lambis scorpius NA Lambis 
indomaris 
Update 
taxonomy 
NA Cypraea talpa NA Talparia talpa   Update 
taxonomy 
NA Cypraea mappa NA Leporicypraea 
mappa   
Update 
taxonomy 
NA Cypraea 
limacina 
NA Staphylaea 
limacine   
Update 
taxonomy 
 
 
 
 
131

WK-DQXDU\
7R
7KH&KDLUPDQDQG0HPEHUV
6WDQGLQJ&RPPLWWHHRQ6FLHQFH7HFKQRORJ\(QYLURQPHQW)RUHVWV	&OLPDWH&KDQJH
5DM\D6DEKD6HFUHWDULDW3DUOLDPHQW+RXVH$QQH[H
1HZ'HOKL
'HDU6LU0DGDP
,DPVXEPLWWLQJEHORZRQEHKDOIRIP\FROOHDJXHVDQGFRDXWKRUVRXUFRPPHQWVDQG
VXJJHVWLRQVRQWKH:LOG/LIH3URWHFWLRQ$FW$PHQGPHQW%LOOEHLQJFXUUHQWO\
UHYLHZHGE\WKH6WDQGLQJ&RPPLWWHHRQ6FLHQFH7HFKQRORJ\(QYLURQPHQW)RUHVWV	
&OLPDWH&KDQJH
2XUVXEPLVVLRQGHOLEHUDWHO\WDNHVDEURDGHUDQGVRPHZKDWDVSLUDWLRQDOYLHZRI
LVVXHVDWWKHYLWDOLQWHUVHFWLRQRIVFLHQFHDQGZLOGOLIHFRQVHUYDWLRQ:HRĳHUWKLV
SHUVSHFWLYHZKLOHDFNQRZOHGJLQJWKDWPDQ\LQVWLWXWLRQVDQGLQGLYLGXDOVLQYROYHGLQ
ZLOGOLIHUHVHDUFKDQGFRQVHUYDWLRQIURPDFURVV,QGLDKDYHDOUHDG\RĳHUHGGHWDLOHG
DQDO\VHVDQGVSHFLıFVXJJHVWLRQVRQWKHGUDIW:/3$$PHQGPHQW%LOO
7KLV\HDUPDUNVWKHWKDQQLYHUVDU\RIWKH:LOG/LIH3URWHFWLRQ$FW)LIW\\HDUVDJR
ZHFHUWDLQO\ODFNHGFDSDFLWLHVLQVFLHQFHEDVHGFRQVHUYDWLRQ%XWRYHUWKHODVW
GHFDGHVZHKDYHLQYHVWHGYDVWıQDQFLDOLQIUDVWUXFWXUDODQGKXPDQUHVRXUFHVWREXLOG
DFRPPLWWHGZRUOGFODVVVFLHQWLıFFDSDFLW\WRDGYDQFHRXUFRQVHUYDWLRQDPELWLRQV
$QG\HWWKH:/3$QHLWKHUDFNQRZOHGJHVQRUHQJDJHVWKHVHVFLHQWLıFFDSDFLWLHVWR
PHHWRXUFRQVHUYDWLRQFKDOOHQJHV:HEHOLHYHWKDWWKH:/3$$PHQGPHQW%LOOSURYLGHV
WKHULJKWRSSRUWXQLW\IRUDMRLQWSDUOLDPHQWDU\FRPPLWWHHŠRQHFRQFHUQHGZLWKERWK
VFLHQFHDQGWKHHQYLURQPHQWŠWRVHULRXVO\FRQVLGHUDQGLPDJLQHKRZVFLHQFHFDQEH
PDGHDVWURQJHUDOO\LQ,QGLDŖVFRPPLWPHQWWRZLOGOLIHFRQVHUYDWLRQ
3OHDVHIHHOIUHHWRFRQWDFWXVLI\RXQHHGHODERUDWLRQRUFODULıFDWLRQRQDQ\RIWKHSRLQWV
ZHKDYHPDGHLQRXUDWWDFKHGQRWH
6LQFHUHO\\RXUV
0'0DGKXVXGDQ3K'
PGPDGKX#JPDLOFRPPGPDGKX#QFEVUHVLQ

132

:LOG/LIH3URWHFWLRQ$FW$PHQGPHQW%LOO
6XJJHVWLRQVWR6WUHQJWKHQWKH6FLHQWLILF%DVLVRI:LOGOLIH&RQVHUYDWLRQLQ,QGLD
'U0'0DGKXVXGDQ'U$UMXQ6ULYDWKVD3URI8PD5DPDNULVKQDQ'U-D\DVKUHH
5DWQDP3URI0DKHVK6DQNDUDQ	'U+DUL6ULGKDU
7,)51DWLRQDO&HQWUHIRU%LRORJLFDO6FLHQFHV8QLYHUVLW\RI$JULFXOWXUDO6FLHQFHV&DPSXV*.9.
%DQJDORUH
287/,1(
%DFNJURXQG	&RQWH[W
:/3$ŖV6SHFLHVFHQWULF,PSXOVH
%ULQJLQJ6FLHQFHLQWR6FKHGXOHVDQG6SHFLHV/LVWLQJ
,VVXHVDQG&RQFHUQV
6XJJHVWLRQVDQG5HFRPPHQGDWLRQV
:/3$ŖV+DELWDWFHQWULF,PSXOVH
%ULQJLQJ6FLHQFHLQWR+DELWDW3URWHFWLRQ
,VVXHVDQG&RQFHUQV
6XJJHVWLRQVDQG5HFRPPHQGDWLRQV
2Q6FLHQFHLQWKH:/3$
,VVXHVDQG&RQFHUQV
6XJJHVWLRQVDQG5HFRPPHQGDWLRQV
 %DFNJURXQG	&RQWH[W
 )LIW\\HDUVDJRZKHQ,QGLDSDVVHGWKH:LOG/LIH3URWHFWLRQ$FWKHQFHIRUWK
:/3$LWOHGWKHZRUOGLQLWVYLVLRQDQGDSSURDFKWRZLOGOLIHSURWHFWLRQ7KH$FW
EURXJKWWZRNH\LPSXOVHVWKDWUHPDLQIRXQGDWLRQDOWRWKHZD\ZHLPDJLQHDQG
LPSOHPHQWZLOGOLIHFRQVHUYDWLRQ7KHıUVWZDVDVSHFLHVFHQWULFLPSXOVHZKHUHWKH
IRFXVZDVRQSURWHFWLQJHQGDQJHUHGDQGWKUHDWHQHGVSHFLHVDQGWKHVHFRQGZDVD
KDELWDWFHQWULFLPSXOVHWKDWVWULYHGWRSURWHFWWKHODQGVDQGZDWHUVRQZKLFK
YDULRXVVSHFLHVGHSHQGHGIRUVXUYLYDO
 8QGHULWVVSHFLHVFHQWULFLPSXOVHOLVWLQJVSHFLHVLQ:/3$6FKHGXOHVZDV
DNH\H[HUFLVH6SHFLHVZHUHOLVWHGXQGHUıYH6FKHGXOHVEDVHGRQ
DFFXPXODWHGH[SHULHQFHDQGDYDLODEOHNQRZOHGJHDWWKHWLPH,GHQWLI\LQJ
7KHWHUPVSHFLHVLQWKLVQRWHLVXVHGWRUHIHUQRWRQO\WRVSHFLHVEXWDOVRWRKLJKHUWD[RQJURXSV
:LWKLQSXWVIURP'U$SDUDMLWD'DWWD'U756KDQNDU5DPDQ	'U6XKHO4XDGHU1DWXUH&RQVHUYDWLRQ
)RXQGDWLRQ

133

KXQWLQJDQGWUDGHDVNH\WKUHDWVVSHFLHVZHUHFRQIHUUHGYDULRXVGHJUHHV
RISURWHFWLRQVDVZHOODVSHQDOWLHVLPSRVHGIRUYLRODWLQJWKHSURWHFWLRQV
 8QGHUWKHKDELWDWFHQWULFLPSXOVHWKH:/3$SURYLGHGIRUQRWLI\LQJ
3URWHFWHG$UHDV3$VŠLQLWLDOO\FRPSULVLQJRQO\:LOGOLIH6DQFWXDULHVDQG
1DWLRQDO3DUNVEXWVXEVHTXHQWO\LQFOXGLQJ&RQVHUYDWLRQ5HVHUYHV
&RPPXQLW\5HVHUYHVDQGPRVWUHFHQWO\7LJHU5HVHUYHV0DQ\IDPHG
KXQWLQJDUHDVXQGHUYDULRXVHUVWZKLOHSULQFLSDOLWLHVUHVHUYHGIRUHVWVRU
RWKHUFDWHJRULHVRIODQGVVXSSRUWLQJZLOGOLIHSRSXODWLRQVZHUHEURXJKW
XQGHUWKHQHZUHJLPHRIOHJDOSURWHFWLRQWRZLOGOLIHKDELWDWV
 2YHUWKHGHFDGHVZHKDYHDGGHGQHZHUFKDOOHQJHVDVJOREDOGULYHUVQDWLRQDO
IRUFHVDQGORFDOVRFLRSROLWLFDOSULRULWLHVKDYHDOWHUHGRXUVRFLHW\ŖVFRPSOH[
UHODWLRQVKLSVZLWKQDWXUH$WWKHVDPHWLPHQHZHURSSRUWXQLWLHVDQGSRVVLELOLWLHV
KDYHHPHUJHGDVZHOO7KHUHLVDORWPRUHZHNQRZDERXWRXUVSHFLHVDQG
HFRV\VWHPVWKHWKUHDWVWKH\IDFHDQGWKHNLQGRISURWHFWLRQVWKH\QHHG:HKDYH
DOVREXLOWVFLHQWLıFDQGLQVWLWXWLRQDOFDSDFLWLHVWRDGGUHVVWKHVHFKDOOHQJHVWKDWZH
GLGQRWSRVVHVV\HDUVDJR
 $VZHFRQVLGHUDQDPHQGPHQWWRWKH:/3$LQLWVLQWHQWRIZLOGOLIH
FRQVHUYDWLRQUHPDLQVMXVWDVUHOHYDQWDQGLPSRUWDQW$WWKHVDPHWLPHWKHWK
DQQLYHUVDU\DOVRDĳRUGVXVWKHRSSRUWXQLW\WRUHYLHZWKH:/3$ŖVDSSURDFKHVDQG
DFWLRQVRYHUWKHODVWıYHGHFDGHVDQGDVVHVVWKHGRPDLQVZKHUHFRQWLQXLW\ŠRU
FKDQJHŠPLJKWEHWWHUVHUYHWKHLQWHQWRIWKH:/3$
 :/3$·V6SHFLHVFHQWULF,PSXOVH
%ULQJLQJ6FLHQFHLQWR6FKHGXOHVDQG6SHFLHV/LVWLQJ
,VVXHVDQG&RQFHUQV
 $VSHUWKHSURSRVHGDPHQGPHQWVWR6HFWLRQRIWKH:/3$WKHQXPEHURI
6FKHGXOHVKDYHEHHQUHGXFHGDQGWKHIDXQDOVSHFLHVLQFOXGHGXQGHUYDULRXV
6FKHGXOHVDVSHUWKHSULQFLSDO$FWKDYHEHHQSODFHGHLWKHUXQGHU6FKHGXOH,RU
6FKHGXOH,,:KLOHWKHDWWHPSWWRUDWLRQDOLVHDQGVWUHDPOLQHWKH6FKHGXOHVLV
FHUWDLQO\DZHOFRPHPRYHWKHUHLVVFRSHIRUDPDMRURYHUKDXORIWKHŕ6FKHGXOHŖ
V\VWHPLWVHOIWREURDGHQWKHDPELWRIWKH$FWLQFOXGLQJEXWQRWOLPLWHGWR
GHıQLWLRQVSURWRFROVIRUOLVWLQJGHOLVWLQJSURYLVLRQVIRUUHVHDUFKFRQVHUYDWLRQ
DQGSURKLELWLRQVSHQDOWLHVIRUYLRODWLRQVRIWKH$FW*LYHQWKDWWKHVSLULWRIWKH
SULQFLSDO$FWLVWRPDQDJHSURWHFWDQGFRQVHUYHZLOGOLIHLWVSURYLVLRQVQHHGWREH
PRUHSURDFWLYHDQGHQDEOLQJUDWKHUWKDQPHUHO\UHVWULFWLYHDQGSURKLELWRU\
 $VLWVWDQGVWKH6FKHGXOHEDVHGV\VWHPWRFDWHJRULVHVSHFLHVLVDOHJDF\SURFHGXUH
URRWHGLQDOORZDQFHVDQGRUUHVWULFWLRQVIRUKXQWLQJRIZLOGOLIHDQGSRVVHVVLRQRI
ZLOGDQLPDOVRUWKHLUSDUWVZKLFKZDVUHOHYDQWLQGXULQJWKHSURPXOJDWLRQRI
7KLVVXEPLVVLRQDGGUHVVHV3DUD3DUDVDE	GRIWKH6WDWHPHQWRI2EMHFWVDQG5HDVRQVS

134

WKHSULQFLSDO$FW$GGLWLRQVDQGGHOHWLRQVRIVSHFLHVIURPYDULRXV6FKHGXOHVDQG
FKDQJLQJVSHFLHVŖ6FKHGXOHVKDVKLWKHUWREHHQDQRSDTXHSURFHVVZLWKOLWWOHRUQR
VFLHQWLıFUDWLRQDOH
 )RUWKH$FWWRUHDOLVHLWVIXOOSRWHQWLDOLQHĳHFWLYHO\SURWHFWLQJFRQVHUYLQJDQG
UHYLYLQJZLOGOLIHSRSXODWLRQVQRZDQGLQWRWKHIXWXUHWKHEDVLVIRUVXFK
FDWHJRULVDWLRQQHHGVWRHYROYHLQWRDQVFLHQFHEDVHGOLVWLQJSURFHVVWKDWDGHTXDWHO\
UHĲHFWVWKHFRQVHUYDWLRQVWDWXVRIVSHFLHVLQWKHZLOGDQGSUHVFULEHLQWHUYHQWLRQV
IRUFRQVHUYDWLRQUHVHDUFKPRQLWRULQJPDQDJHPHQWHWFRUSHQDOWLHVIRU
YLRODWLRQVKXQWLQJSRVVHVVLRQWUDGHHWF)XUWKHUPRUHWKHUHLVJURZLQJVFLHQWLıF
VXSSRUWIRUWKHYDOXHRIFRQVHUYDWLRQDFWLRQVWKDWDUHHYLGHQFHEDVHGFROODERUDWLYH
VRFLDOO\LQFOXVLYHDQGKROLVWLFLQWKHLUSXUVXLW$PHQGPHQWVWKDWLQFRUSRUDWHWKHVH
SULQFLSOHVDQGSURYLGHPHFKDQLVPVIRUIXUWKHUUHıQHPHQWZLOOHQVXUHWKDWWKH$FW
UHDOLVHVLWVIXOOSRWHQWLDO
6XJJHVWLRQVDQG5HFRPPHQGDWLRQV
 $QHZVHWRI6FKHGXOHVQHHGWREHGHıQHGZLWKDFOHDULQWHQWIROORZLQJD
VWDQGDUGLVHGSURWRFROWKHSDUDPHWHUVRIZKLFKQHHGWRFRQVLGHUVSHFLHVHFRORJ\
WKHLUGLVWULEXWLRQH[WHQWSRSXODWLRQVL]HVZKHUHDYDLODEOHDQGWKHQDWXUHDQG
LQWHQVLW\RIWKHLUWKUHDWVXVLQJWKHODWHVWDYDLODEOHVFLHQWLıFLQIRUPDWLRQ7KHVH
SURWRFROVVKRXOGIROORZLQWHUQDWLRQDOVWDQGDUGVLQOLQHZLWKWKHFRQVHUYDWLRQ
VWDWXVDVVHVVPHQWDQGOLVWLQJSURFHGXUHVRIWKH,8&15HG/LVWRUVLPLODUVWDQGDUGV
DGRSWHGE\DUDQJHRIFRXQWULHVIURPDFURVVWKHZRUOGHJWKH86$ŖV(QGDQJHUHG
6SHFLHV$FWRU$XVWUDOLDŖV(QYLURQPHQW3URWHFWLRQDQG%LRGLYHUVLW\
&RQVHUYDWLRQ$FW
 7KHGHWDLOHGSURWRFROIRUGHıQLQJWKHQHZ6FKHGXOHVDQGGHWHUPLQLQJWKHVSHFLHV
WREHLQFOXGHGWKHUHLQQHHGVWREHXQGHUWDNHQWKURXJKDFRQVXOWDWLYHSURFHVVE\D
FRPSHWHQWPXOWLLQVWLWXWLRQDOFRPPLWWHHFRQVLVWLQJRIWD[RQRPLVWVHFRORJLVWV
FRQVHUYDWLRQVFLHQWLVWVJRYHUQPHQWDODQGQRQJRYHUQPHQWDOUHVHDUFK
RUJDQLVDWLRQVFRQVHUYDWLRQDGYRFDF\JURXSVDQGıHOGPDQDJHUVZLWKH[SHULHQFH
LQZLOGOLIHUHVHDUFKDQGFRQVHUYDWLRQFRQFHUQHGFLWL]HQQDWXUDOLVWVDVZHOODV
UHSUHVHQWDWLYHVIURPFLYLOVRFLHW\,QVWLWXWLRQDOPRGHOVDQGOLVWLQJSURWRFROVWR
FRQVLGHUZRXOGLQFOXGHWKRVHXVHGE\$XVWUDOLDŖV7KUHDWHQHG6SHFLHV&RPPLVVLRQ
WKH8.ŖV-RLQW1DWXUH&RQVHUYDWLRQ&RPPLWWHHDQGWKH86(QGDQJHUHG6SHFLHV
$FW
 7KHLQGLYLGXDO6FKHGXOHVQHHGWRRXWOLQHQRWMXVWSURWHFWLRQVDQGSHQDOWLHVIRU
YLRODWLRQVRIWKHSULQFLSDO$FWEXWDOVRWKHSURDFWLYHPHDVXUHVIRUUHVHDUFK
PRQLWRULQJPDQDJHPHQWDQGFRQVHUYDWLRQRIWKHOLVWHGVSHFLHVDQGWKHLUKDELWDWV
7KH$FWPXVWDOVRPDNHSURYLVLRQVIRUHQFRXUDJLQJVWDWHOHYHOUHJLRQDODQG
QDWLRQDOOHYHOFRQVHUYDWLRQDQGPDQDJHPHQWSODQVIRULPSOHPHQWLQJVSHFLHV
UHFRYHU\SURJUDPVWKURXJKPXOWLDJHQF\FROODERUDWLRQVIRUUHVHDUFKPRQLWRULQJ
DQGLQWHUYHQWLRQV
 7KH6FKHGXOHVQHHGWREHG\QDPLFDQGWKHVSHFLHVVKRXOGEHOLVWHGRUGHOLVWHGRQD
SHULRGLFEDVLV7KHDIRUHPHQWLRQHGFRPPLWWHHZLOODOVRRXWOLQHWKH

135

SURFHGXUHIRUSURSRVLQJVSHFLHVWREHLQFOXGHGLQWKH6FKHGXOHVRUWKHXSOLVWLQJ
DQGGRZQOLVWLQJRIVSHFLHVEDVHGRQFKDQJHVWRLWVFRQVHUYDWLRQVWDWXVLQWKHZLOG
 7KH6FKHGXOHVDQGWKHLUUHVSHFWLYHŕSDUWVŖPXVWDOVRVHHNWREURDGO\RXWOLQHWKH
SURDFWLYHPHDVXUHVWREHWDNHQIRUFRQVHUYLQJWKHOLVWHGVSHFLHVHVSHFLDOO\ZKHQ
WKH\RFFXURXWVLGHWKHMXULVGLFWLRQRIWKH)RUHVW'HSDUWPHQWV1DWLRQDO3DUNV
6DQFWXDULHV7LJHU5HVHUYHV6XFKPHDVXUHVDOVRQHHGWRLQFOXGHSURWRFROVIRU
PDQDJHPHQWRIFRQĲLFWSURQHVSHFLHVWKDWFDQFDXVHGDPDJHWRSHRSOHŖVOLYHV
OLYHOLKRRGVDQGSURSHUW\7RWKDWHQGZHVWURQJO\DVVHUWWKDWQRVSHFLHVOLVWHGLQ
WKH6FKHGXOHVRURWKHUZLVHVKRXOGEHQRWLıHGDVŕYHUPLQŖZLWKLQWKH$FW6WDQGDUG
RSHUDWLQJSURFHGXUHVIRUWKHPDQDJHPHQWRIFRQĲLFWSURQHVSHFLHVVKRXOGEH
RXWOLQHGVXFKWKDWWKH\DUHWLPHDQGORFDWLRQVSHFLıFDQGLPSOHPHQWHGZLWKD
FOHDULQWHQWRIUHVROYLQJFRQĲLFWVLWXDWLRQV
 7KH6FKHGXOHV\VWHPPXVWDOVRLQFOXGHSURYLVLRQVIRUDFFRPPRGDWLQJVSHFLHV
ZKRVHWD[RQRPLHVDUHDPELJXRXVRUVSHFLHVWKDWDUH\HWWREHGLVFRYHUHG7KHVH
PD\EHLQFOXGHGXQGHUDVHSDUDWH6FKHGXOHVLPLODUWRWKHŕ'DWD'HıFLHQWŖFDWHJRU\
RIWKH,8&15HG/LVWZKHUHWKH$FWPXVWHQFRXUDJHDQGHQDEOHUHVHDUFKRQVXFK
VSHFLHVWRJHQHUDWHEDVHOLQHGDWDVRWKDWWKH\PD\EHOLVWHGRQWKHEDVLVRI
HYLGHQFHWRRWKHU6FKHGXOHVLQWKHIXWXUH
 6HFWLRQ$RIWKHSURSRVHGDPHQGPHQWVLQFOXGHGLUHFWLYHVWRUHJXODWHRU
SURKLELWWKHLPSRUWWUDGHSRVVHVVLRQRUSUROLIHUDWLRQRIŗLQYDVLYHDOLHQVSHFLHVŘ:H
VXJJHVWWKDWVXFKVSHFLHVRQFHLGHQWLıHGPD\EHSODFHGXQGHUDGHVLJQDWHG
6FKHGXOH)RUVSHFLHVLQFOXGHGWKHUHLQWKH$FWZLOORXWOLQHWKHSURWRFROVIRU
VWXG\LQJPDSSLQJH[SHULPHQWDOPDQLSXODWLRQIRUWKHFRQWURODQGHUDGLFDWLRQ
WKURXJKUHVHDUFKDQGFROODERUDWLYHHĳRUWVEHWZHHQVFLHQWLVWVPDQDJHUVDQGZKHUH
DSSOLFDEOHWKHORFDOFRPPXQLWLHVRURWKHULPSDFWHGSDUWLHV
 )LQDOO\IHUDOVSHFLHVŠHVSHFLDOO\IUHHUDQJLQJGRPHVWLFVSHFLHVVXFKDVGRJVDQG
FDWVŠKDYHRYHUWKHODVWFRXSOHRIGHFDGHVEHFRPHDQH[WUHPHO\VHULRXVWKUHDWWR
ZLOGOLIHDFURVV,QGLD5DQJLQJIURPNLOOLQJRIZLOGOLIHWRK\EULGLVDWLRQZLWK
HQGDQJHUHGVSHFLHVVFRUHVRIVFLHQWLıFVWXGLHVDVZHOODVWKHJRYHUQPHQWŖVUHFHQW
UHSRUWRQWLJHUVSRLQWWRWKHLUVKDUSO\LQFUHDVLQJLPSDFWRQ,QGLDŖVZLOGOLIH$V
DQLPDOVFRYHUHGXQGHUWKH3UHYHQWLRQRI&UXHOW\WR$QLPDOV$FWWKH
PDQDJHPHQWRIIHUDODQLPDOVKDVEHHQRYHUORRNHGDQGWKHUHIRUHQHHGVOHJLVODWLYH
KHIWXQGHUWKH:/3$0HDVXUHVWRDGGUHVVWKHLUWKUHDWPXVWEHGUDZQ
FRQVXOWDWLYHO\DQGVFLHQWLıFDOO\LQFOXGLQJWKHKXPDQHFRQWURORIIHUDODQLPDOVLQ
ZLOGOLIHFRQVHUYDWLRQFRQWH[WV

136

 :/3$·V+DELWDWFHQWULF,PSXOVH
%ULQJLQJ6FLHQFHLQWR+DELWDW3URWHFWLRQ
,VVXHVDQG&RQFHUQV
 7KH:/3$SURYLGHVIRUDUDQJHRISURWHFWHGDUHD3$FDWHJRULHVIURPLQYLRODWH
1DWLRQDO3DUNVWRLQFOXVLYH&RPPXQLW\5HVHUYHV+RZHYHULWGRHVQRWVSHFLI\WKH
WHQHWVRUFULWHULDXQGHUZKLFKVXFK3$VDUHFUHDWHG,QWKHVDQH[FHOOHQW
IRUZDUGORRNLQJLQLWLDWLYHRIWKH:LOGOLIH,QVWLWXWHRI,QGLDGHYHORSHGD
ELRJHRJUDSKLF]RQDWLRQIRU,QGLDVXJJHVWLQJWKDWWKLV]RQDWLRQEHPDGHWKHEDVLV
IRUSODQQLQJD3$QHWZRUNZLWKWKHLGHDWKDWWKHFRXQWU\ŖVGLYHUVHHFRV\VWHPV
VKRXOGEHDGHTXDWHO\UHSUHVHQWHGZLWKLQRXU3$QHWZRUN7KLVVFLHQFHEDVHG
DSSURDFKWR3$SODQQLQJVHHPVWRKDYHEHHQDEDQGRQHGWKHUHDIWHU
7RLOOXVWUDWHZK\WKLVLVDYHU\VLJQLıFDQWSUREOHPEURDGO\,QGLDKDVHTXDO
H[WHQWVRIWZRNH\WHUUHVWULDOKDELWDWVIRUHVWVDQGQRQIRUHVW2SHQ1DWXUDO
(FRV\VWHPV21(V<HWIRUHVWVGRPLQDWHRYHURIRXU3$QHWZRUNZKHUHDVD
PHUHRI21(VDUHSURWHFWHGZLWKLQ,QGLDŖV3$V$VDUHVXOW21(VWKDWDUH
DEVROXWHO\FULWLFDOWRWKHVXUYLYDORIVHYHUDOWKUHDWHQHGRUFULWLFDOO\HQGDQJHUHG
VSHFLHVJUHDW,QGLDQEXVWDUGOHVVHUĲRULFDQ,QGLDQZROIHWFDUHRSHQWRDOO
PDQQHURIWKUHDWV'HVSLWHWKHDSSDUHQWO\KLJKOHYHOVRISURWHFWLRQEHLQJDFFRUGHG
WRWKHVHVSHFLHVWKURXJKWKH6FKHGXOHVLQWKHDEVHQFHRIDGHTXDWHSURWHFWLRQWR
WKHLUKDELWDWVZLWKLQWKH3$V\VWHPSRSXODWLRQVRIWKHVHVSHFLHVDUHLQVWHDG\DQG
VWHHSGHFOLQHV
 ,QGLDŖVZLOGOLIHFRQVHUYDWLRQDSSURDFKKDVZRUNHGUHDVRQDEO\ZHOOZKHQLWV
VSHFLHVFHQWULFDQGKDELWDWFHQWULFDSSURDFKHVKDYHDOLJQHGLHZKHQ
OHJDOO\SURWHFWHGVSHFLHVKDYHRFFXUUHGZLWKLQOHJDOO\SURWHFWHGKDELWDWV+RZHYHU
PDQ\SURWHFWHGVSHFLHVRIZLOGOLIHŠLQFOXGLQJODUJHDQGSRWHQWLDOO\GDQJHURXV
DQLPDOVOLNHHOHSKDQWVDQGOHRSDUGVŠRFFXUZLGHO\LQKXPDQGRPLQDWHG
ODQGVFDSHVDVZHOODVLQSURWHFWHGKDELWDWV:HQHHGDPRUHSURDFWLYHDQG
DGDSWLYHDSSURDFKWRZLOGOLIHPDQDJHPHQWLQWKHVHVLWXDWLRQVWKDWFDQUDSLGO\DQG
SUDJPDWLFDOO\UHFRQFLOHDVFLHQWLıFXQGHUVWDQGLQJRIVSHFLHVHFRORJ\DQG
FRQVHUYDWLRQQHHGVZKLOHDOVRDGGUHVVLQJFRQFHUQVRIKXPDQVDIHW\DQG
ZHOOEHLQJ
 /HJDOSURWHFWLRQRIKDELWDWZLWKRXWVFLHQWLıFXQGHUVWDQGLQJRIHFRORJ\FDQEH
VHULRXVO\FRXQWHUSURGXFWLYHWRFRQVHUYDWLRQ5HVHDUFKKDVVKRZQKRZWKH
ZHOOLQWHQWLRQHGEXWLJQRUDQW\HDUURXQGFXUWDLOPHQWRIJUD]LQJDVSDUWRIWKH
ŕSURWHFWLRQŖPHDVXUHVIRUJUDVVODQGKDELWDWVRIWKHFULWLFDOO\HQGDQJHUHGJUHDW
,QGLDQEXVWDUGOHGWRDQLQFUHDVHLQJUDVVKHLJKWWROHYHOVWKDWPDGHWKHKDELWDWV
XQVXLWDEOHIRUWKHELUGV6LPLODUO\IHQFLQJRIJUDVVODQGVLQ6DUGDUSXU:/6DQG
ŕSURWHFWLRQŖRIJUDVVODQGVDJDLQVWJUD]LQJDQGıUHOHGWRDQHVWDEOLVKPHQWRIZRRG\
VSHFLHVLQWKHJUDVVODQGKDELWDWVRIWKHFULWLFDOO\HQGDQJHUHGOHVVHUĲRULFDQIRUFLQJ
5RGJHUV:$	3DQZDU+63ODQQLQJDZLOGOLIHSURWHFWHGDUHDQHWZRUNLQ,QGLD)$25RPH
	:LOGOLIH,QVWLWXWHRI,QGLD'HKUDGXQ

137

WKHELUGVWRVHHNUHIXJHLQQHDUE\VR\EHDQıHOGVUDWKHUWKDQXVHXQVXLWDEOH
KDELWDWVZLWKLQWKH3$
6XJJHVWLRQVDQG5HFRPPHQGDWLRQV
 7KH:/3$DVZHOODVWKH1DWLRQDO:LOGOLIH3ROLF\DQG$FWLRQ3ODQPXVWDUWLFXODWHD
FOHDUDVSLUDWLRQWRPDNHWKHFRXQWU\ŖV3$QHWZRUNDGHTXDWHO\UHSUHVHQWDWLYHRILWV
ELRJHRJUDSKLF]RQHV7RDOLJQWKLVDVSLUDWLRQWRRQJURXQGHĳRUWVZHVXJJHVWWKDW
WKH:/3$DUWLFXODWHWKHQHHGIRUDVFLHQWLıFDOO\VRXQGEDVLVIRUJD]HWWLQJQHZHU
3$VZLWKWKHXOWLPDWHDLPRIPDNLQJ,QGLDŖV3$QHWZRUNUHSUHVHQWDWLYHRIWKH
FRXQWU\ŖVGLYHUVHKDELWDWVDQGELRFOLPDWLF]RQHV:HFDXWLRQWKDWHQODUJLQJ3$
FRYHUDJHLQDFURZGHGFRXQWU\FDQEHDFKDOOHQJHDQGZHVWURQJO\VXJJHVWWKH
LQYROYHPHQWDQGSDUWLFLSDWLRQQRWRQO\RIORFDOFRPPXQLWLHVDQGWKHLUHOHFWHG
UHSUHVHQWDWLYHVEXWRIDUDQJHRIH[SHUWVLQFOXGLQJHFRORJLVWVVRFLRORJLVWV
DQWKURSRORJLVWVDQGFRQVHUYDWLRQSUDFWLWLRQHUVLQ3$H[SDQVLRQVDQG
UHFRQıJXUDWLRQV:HDOVRHPSKDVLVHWKHQHHGWRHPEUDFHWKHPRUHLQFOXVLYH3$
PRGHOVLQWKH:/3$VXFKDV&RQVHUYDWLRQ5HVHUYHVDQG&RPPXQLW\5HVHUYHVWKDW
JLYHDELJJHUVWDNHDQGJUHDWHUFRQWUROWRORFDOFRPPXQLWLHVLQ3$PDQDJHPHQW
 0DQ\ODUJHZLGHUDQJLQJVSHFLHVPRYHDQGGLVSHUVHWKURXJKKXPDQXVHDUHDV
DQGDFURVVSROLWLFDOERXQGDULHVWKHVHDUHLPSRUWDQWFRQVLGHUDWLRQVLIZHDUHWR
UHWDLQFRQQHFWLYLW\EHWZHHQZLOGOLIHSRSXODWLRQV$GPLQLVWUDWLYHDQGMXULVGLFWLRQDO
ERXQGDULHVUHTXLUHPDQDJHPHQWWREHERWKSURDFWLYHDQGQLPEOHLIZHDUHWR
SURWHFWVXFKVSHFLHVDVZHOODVWKHFRPPXQLWLHVWKH\DUHLQFRQĲLFWZLWK7R
LOOXVWUDWHWKH.DUQDWDND(OHSKDQW7DVN)RUFHVHWXSE\WKH.DUQDWDND+LJK&RXUW
VXJJHVWHGLQWKHLUUHSRUWDODUJHURSHUDWLRQDO]RQDWLRQUDWKHUWKDQDOHJDO
RQHŠDVFRQVHUYDWLRQSULRULW\]RQHVKXPDQSULRULW\]RQHVDQGFRH[LVWHQFH
]RQHVŠEDVHGRQVSHFLHVQHHGVKXPDQFRQFHUQVDQGKDELWDWVWDWXV7KH:/3$
VKRXOGPDQGDWHWKHXVHRIVXFKG\QDPLFPDQDJHPHQW]RQHVFDUULHGRXWDV
FRQVXOWDWLYHDQGFROODERUDWLYHHĳRUWVLQYROYLQJORFDOFRPPXQLWLHVıHOGPDQDJHUV
DQGFRQVHUYDWLRQVFLHQWLVWV
 ,QRUGHUWRHQVXUHWKDWZHOOLQWHQWLRQHGEXWHFRORJLFDOO\ĲDZHGPDQDJHPHQWDQG
FRQVHUYDWLRQDFWLRQVGRQRWXQGHUPLQHWKHFRQVHUYDWLRQRIHQGDQJHUHGVSHFLHVWKH
:/3$PXVWUHTXLUHPDQDJHPHQWSODQVIRU3$VDVZHOODVVSHFLHVWREHRSHQWR
SHHUUHYLHZ:HVXJJHVWDSXEOLFO\DFFHVVLEOHSRUWDORQZKLFKWKHVHDUHSXEOLVKHG
SULRUWRLPSOHPHQWDWLRQIRUVFLHQWLıFSHHUUHYLHZE\HFRORJLVWVUHVHDUFK
RUJDQLVDWLRQVDQGRWKHUVWDNHKROGHUV)XUWKHUWKH:/3$PXVWDOVRPDQGDWH
LQGHSHQGHQWDQGSHULRGLFHFRORJLFDODXGLWVRIWKHDFWLRQVDQGRXWFRPHVOLQNHGWR
3$PDQDJHPHQWSODQV

138

 2Q6FLHQFHLQWKH:/3$
,VVXHVDQG&RQFHUQV
 5HJUHWWDEO\WKH:/3$DVZHOODVWKHSURSRVHGDPHQGPHQWVQHLWKHUVHHQRU
DUWLFXODWHDQ\UROHIRUVFLHQFHDQGVFLHQWLıFUHVHDUFKLQDFKLHYLQJWKH$FWŖVVWDWHG
LQWHQWRISURWHFWLQJPDQDJLQJRUFRQVHUYLQJ,QGLDŖVZLOGOLIH&RQVHTXHQWO\WKH
:/3$KDVJHQHUDOO\YLHZHGVFLHQWLıFUHVHDUFKLQHFRORJ\FRQVHUYDWLRQELRORJ\
DQGVHYHUDORWKHUDOOLHGGLVFLSOLQHVDVHQWLUHO\LUUHOHYDQWWRZLOGOLIHFRQVHUYDWLRQRU
ZRUVHWUHDWHGWKHPDVXQGHVLUDEOHKXPDQDFWLYLW\LQWKHVDPHYHLQDVKXQWLQJ
SRDFKLQJRUKDUYHVWGHVHUYLQJRIVWULFWSROLFLQJ
 ,WKDVEHFRPHSRVVLEOHWRWKZDUWVFLHQWLıFUHVHDUFKWKURXJKUHODWLYHO\DUELWUDU\
GHFLVLRQVRQUHVHDUFKSHUPLWVEDVHGRQDFRQVHUYDWLYHUHDGLQJDQG
LPSOHPHQWDWLRQRIWKHH[LVWLQJSURKLELWRU\SURYLVLRQVRIWKH:/3$7KH$FWIDLOVWR
FOHDUO\GHOLQHDWHWKHDFWLYLWLHVWKDWPXVWEHUHVWULFWHGZLWKWKRVHWKDWPXVWEH
HQDEOHGLQRUGHUWREHWWHUPHHWLWVRZQVWDWHGDLPV$VDUHVXOWLWKDVEHFRPH
SRVVLEOHWRXQUHDVRQDEO\UHVWULFWDGHVLUDEOHDQGHYHQHVVHQWLDOHQGHDYRXUVXFKDV
VFLHQWLıFUHVHDUFKŠQRWRQO\IXQGDPHQWDOUHVHDUFKGULYHQE\VFLHQWLıFFXULRVLW\
EXWDOVRDSSOLHGUHVHDUFKGULYHQE\FRQVHUYDWLRQFRQFHUQVŠRQZLOGVSHFLHVDQG
ZLOGKDELWDWVLQ,QGLD7KLVKDVVHULRXVLPSOLFDWLRQVIRUORQJWHUPH[SHULPHQWDO
DQGLQYDVLYHVDPSOLQJEDVHGVWXGLHVQHHGHGLQFXWWLQJHGJHLQWHUGLVFLSOLQDU\
UHVHDUFKFULWLFDOWRKXPDQDQGSODQHWDU\KHDOWKDQGZHOOEHLQJ
 7KHYLVLRQIRUFRQVHUYDWLRQRIZLOGKDELWDWVDQGHFRV\VWHPVPXVWLQYROYHGLDORJXH
DQGFROOHFWLYHDFWLRQE\VFLHQWLVWVPDQDJHUVDQGORFDOVWDNHKROGHUV8QIRUWXQDWHO\
GHVSLWHWKHGHPRFUDWLFSROLWLFDOLGHRORJ\LQ,QGLDLWLVSHUKDSVWKHRQO\FRXQWU\
ZKHUHVFLHQFHLVVRJODULQJO\DEVHQWIURPWKHSODQQLQJWKHLPSOHPHQWDWLRQDQGWKH
DVVHVVPHQWRIKRZZLOGVSHFLHVDQGKDELWDWVDUHSURWHFWHGFRQVHUYHGDQG
PDQDJHG7KLVVLWXDWLRQKDVKDGWZRNH\FRQVHTXHQFHV
0HDVXUHVDQGDFWLRQVIRUZLOGOLIHFRQVHUYDWLRQDUHQRWUHTXLUHGWREHEXLOW
RQWKHEDVLVRIVFLHQWLıFGDWDRUHYLGHQFHQRUDUHVXFKGDWDFRQVLGHUHG
HYHQZKHUHDYDLODEOHZKHQVZHHSLQJDFWLRQVVXFKDVWKHUHFRQıJXUDWLRQ
RIHQWLUHVFKHGXOHVRIWKH:/3$VHH6HFWLRQDERYHDUHEHLQJ
XQGHUWDNHQ
(QWLUHıHOGVRIVFLHQFHWKDWDUHFULWLFDOO\SLYRWHGRQDQXQKLQGHUHGDFFHVV
WRQDWXUHŖVODERUDWRULHVDQGPDWHULDOVKDYHEHHQKREEOHGDQGKHOGEDFN
 7KHPRWLYDWLRQRIFRQVHUYDWLRQVFLHQFHLVWRXQGHUVWDQGPRQLWRUDQGDVVHVVQRW
RQO\WKUHDWVWRZLOGOLIHEXWDOVRWKHHĳHFWLYHQHVVRIPHDVXUHVWDNHQWRDGGUHVV
WKHVHWKUHDWV,QWKLVUHVSHFWVFLHQFHSHUIRUPVERWKDGLDJQRVWLFDQGDQDXGLWLQJ
IXQFWLRQLQWHUURJDWLQJDQGHYDOXDWLQJFKRLFHVEHLQJPDGHE\DJHQFLHVPDQGDWHG
WRLPSOHPHQWWKH:/3$6FLHQWLıFUHVHDUFKFDQWKHQKHOSLOOXVWUDWHVXFFHVVVWRULHV
TXDQWLWDWLYHO\ZLWKHYLGHQFHRIZLOGOLIHUHFRYHU\EXWDOVRRIWHQXQFRYHU
PDQDJHPHQWDFWLRQVWKDWGHVSLWHWKHEHVWLQWHQWLRQVGRQRWUHVXOWLQWKHEHVW
RXWFRPHVIRUZLOGOLIHDQGZLOGODQGV6XFKUHVXOWVVKRXOGDOVREHHPEUDFHGLQ

139

FROOHFWLYHO\SODQQLQJIXWXUHPDQDJHPHQWDQGLWVPRQLWRULQJ7UDQVSDUHQF\
OHDUQLQJDQGFROODERUDWLRQEHWZHHQPDQDJHUVDQGUHVHDUFKHUVZLOOHQDEOHHĳHFWLYH
FRQVHUYDWLRQDQGDGHTXDWHPRQLWRULQJ
6XJJHVWLRQVDQG5HFRPPHQGDWLRQV
 7KHSUHDPEOHWRWKH:/3$PXVWEHHGLWHGWRSODFHDQHPSKDVLVRQVFLHQFHDVD
FDUGLQDOSULQFLSOHXQGHUO\LQJ,QGLDŖVDSSURDFKWRZLOGOLIHFRQVHUYDWLRQ,QWKH
SULQFLSDO$FWIRUWKHZRUGVSURWHFWLRQRIZLOGDQLPDOVELUGVDQGSODQWVWKH
ZRUGVFRQVHUYDWLRQSURWHFWLRQVWXG\DQGPDQDJHPHQWRIZLOGOLIHDQGWKHLU
KDELWDWVRQHVWDEOLVKHGDQGHPHUJLQJVFLHQWLıFSULQFLSOHVVKRXOGEHVXEVWLWXWHG
 %DVHGRQDVHWRIJXLGHOLQHVLVVXHGE\WKH0R()&&LQVHYHUDOVWDWHOHYHO
SDQHOVDUHHVWDEOLVKHGWRVFUHHQDQGSHUPLWVFLHQWLıFUHVHDUFKZLWKLQSURWHFWHG
DUHDVDQGRQSURWHFWHGVSHFLHV7KH)RUHVW'HSDUWPHQWVDVWKHGHVLJQDWHG
FXVWRGLDQVRIRXUZLOGOLIHDQGWKHLUKDELWDWVKDYHDVWURQJVD\LQWKHVFUHHQLQJRI
SURSRVDOVIRUVFLHQWLıFUHVHDUFKDQGLQJUDQWLQJWKHPSHUPLVVLRQVZLWKWKHLQWHQW
WRHQFRXUDJHHYHQIXQGDPHQWDOVFLHQFH+RZHYHULWLVLPSRUWDQWWRHQVXUHWKDW
VXFKSDQHOVDOVRLQFOXGHDVWURQJUHSUHVHQWDWLRQRIVFLHQWLVWVDVZHOO7KHWDVNDQG
WUDLQLQJRIRXUIRUHVWPDQDJHUVLVYHU\VSHFLıFDOO\IRFXVVHGRQDGPLQLVWUDWLRQDQG
QRWRQVFLHQFHDQGUHVHDUFK6RHYHQLIWKH)RUHVW'HSDUWPHQWVOHDGWKHSURFHVVLW
LVHVVHQWLDOWKDWWKHSDUWLFLSDQWVLQWKLVSURFHVVRIUHYLHZDQGJUDQWRISHUPLVVLRQV
IRUVFLHQFHLQFOXGHSHRSOHWUDLQHGLQHFRORJ\FRQVHUYDWLRQDQGRWKHUUHODWHGıHOGV
ZLWKGHPRQVWUDEOHDFDGHPLFFUHGHQWLDOVDQGDJUDVSRIWKHQXDQFHVRIVFLHQWLıF
UHVHDUFKLWVPRWLYDWLRQVLWVPHWKRGVLWVVFRSHDQGLWVOLPLWDWLRQV
 7KHVFLHQWLıFSURFHVVPXVWEHIRXQGDWLRQDOWRWKH:/3$:HVXJJHVWLQFOXGLQJD
VHFWLRQLQWKH:/3$WKDWOD\VGRZQDSURFHVVE\ZKLFKVFLHQWLıFUHVHDUFKVKDOOEH
HQFRXUDJHGHQDEOHGDQGLPSOHPHQWHG)ROORZLQJWKLVZHVXJJHVWDOLYHSXEOLF
SRUWDOXQGHUWKH0R()&&WKDWEHFRPHVWKHFHQWUDOFOHDULQJKRXVHIRUDOOVFLHQWLıF
UHVHDUFKRQZLOGOLIHVSHFLHVRUZLWKLQZLOGOLIHKDELWDWVLQWKHFRXQWU\MXVWDVWKH
ZHEVLWH3$5,9(6+KHOSVVWUHDPOLQHSURSRVDOVVHHNLQJGLYHUVLRQRIIRUHVWVDQG
ZLOGOLIHKDELWDWVLQDPDQQHUWKDWLVWLPHERXQGHĴFLHQWSXEOLFDQGWUDQVSDUHQW
6LPLODUO\XVHUVPXVWEHDEOHWRıOOIRUPVDQGXSORDGSURSRVDOVRQWKLVSRUWDO
OLNHZLVHUHYLHZHUVDQGFRPPLWWHHPHPEHUVRQVWDWHOHYHOSDQHOVPXVWEHDEOHWR
VHHNFODULıFDWLRQVDQGSURYLGHFRPPHQWVDQGXOWLPDWHO\SODFHRQUHFRUGWKHLU
UHDVRQVIRUWKHLUDFFHSWDQFHRUUHMHFWLRQRIDSURSRVDO$Q\PHPEHURIWKHFLYLO
VRFLHW\VKRXOGEHDEOHWRUHDGWKHSURMHFWWLWOHVEHLQJFRQVLGHUHGNQRZZKRLWV
UHYLHZHUVDUHWKHGHFLVLRQPDGHLQSURJUHVVJUDQWHGUHMHFWHGDQGWKH
MXVWLıFDWLRQV6LPLODUO\WKLVSRUWDOFRXOGDOVRVHUYHDVDUHSRVLWRU\WRGRFXPHQWWKH
VFLHQWLıFRXWSXWVDQGIXOıOWKHUHSRUWLQJREOLJDWLRQVRIUHVHDUFKHUV
KWWSVZZZIRUHVWVWQJRYLQDSSZHEURRWLPJGRFXPHQWOHJLVODWLRQVB*/SHUP5HVB3$VSGI
KWWSVPRHIJRYLQZSFRQWHQWXSORDGVJXLGHOLQHVBVFLHQWLıFSGI

140

Speciﬁc provisions in the WLPA to enable
science1and facilitate research
Why is it reasonable and right to seek changes in the WLPA to strengthen its scientiﬁc
bases and facilitate scientiﬁc research?
The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, (1972), states:
“There is therefore, an urgent need for introducinga comprehensive legislation,
which would provide for the protection of wild animals and birds andfor all
matters connected therewith or ancillary and incidental thereto.” (emphasis
added).
Part 1
====
Change to Preamble of WLPA
Current version (WLPA, 1972):“protection of wildanimals, birds and plants”
Proposed change in Clause 2 of WLPA Amendment Bill, 2021: “conservation, protection
and management of wild life”
Our suggestion:“conservation, protection, researchand management of wild life,
enabled by science”
Justiﬁcation:
On our fast changing planet, it is critical that the conservation, protection and
management of wild life be based on the best available scientiﬁc evidence and
knowledge. Science provides the foundation for informed, adaptive and dynamic
responses to conservation challenges, and enables the periodic assessment of the
impact of conservation and management strategies. Furthermore, fundamental
scientiﬁc understanding of wild life and natural ecosystems has value in and of itself.
The prominent and enabling role of science in securing the future of India’s wild life
and their habitats needs to be acknowledged and valued by placing this key process
in the preamble of the Act. Further, aSupreme Courtjudgementof 2013 has also
directed the Government of India to adopt science-based methods to periodically
1In the context of this note, ‘science’ is used in a broad sense, to denote not only the traditional
‘natural sciences’, but also allied and adjacent disciplines in the social sciences and humanities.
1
141

assess the conservation status of all wild species in India and to implement recovery
programmes for endangered species.
Part 2
====
New Chapter on Science in the WLPA
Aim: To acknowledge the importance of science to theWLPA, and to enable the
continued generation of scientiﬁc knowledge on wild life and ecosystems, and
facilitate its application to conservation and management.
Rationale / Justiﬁcation: In the 50 years that haveelapsed since the WLPA (1972)
was enacted, ecology and conservation science have grown into full-ﬂedged
scientiﬁc and academic disciplines that support and enable nature conservation on
the ground. Mirroring this global trend, the Government of India has consistently
invested in building scientiﬁc capacity to understand and conserve wild life. These
measures to strengthen scientiﬁc capacity include, among others, the creation of the
Centre for Ecological Sciences at the Indian Institute of Science, the Wildlife Institute
of India, the Salim Ali Centre for Ornithology and Natural History, the recruitment
of dozens of scientists, as well as the scientiﬁc training of hundreds of graduate
students, and in-service wildlife managers.
Yet, India’s only legislation for wild life conservation, the WLPA, doesnotarticulate
the critical role of ecology and conservation science, even in the context of achieving
its goal of wild life conservation. Science can—and should—play a vital role in the
understanding of wild life and enabling its conservation as envisioned in the WLPA.
The paragraphs below lay out a framework within the WLPA, consisting of a chapter
on science, as well as enabling structures, and an outline of their mandate and
processes.
Chapter XX
STRENGTHENING SCIENCE FOR WILDLIFE CONSERVATION
1) Deﬁnitions:
a) “National Scientiﬁc Advisory Committee” or NSAC means the Scientiﬁc
Advisory Committee constituted under Section XX(2).
b) “State Scientiﬁc Advisory Committee” or SSAC  means the Scientiﬁc
Advisory Committee constituted under Section XX(4) in each state.
2
142

2) Constitution of the National Scientiﬁc Advisory Committee:The Central
Government shall constitute a body to be known as the National Scientiﬁc
Advisory Committee, which will function under the purview of the National
Board for Wild Life (5A), and comprise:
a) Principal Scientiﬁc Adviser to the Government of India – Chair,
b) Three members from among Botanical Survey of India, Centre for Ecological
Sciences, Salim Ali Centre for Ornithology and Natural History, Wildlife
Institute of India and Zoological Survey of India on a rotational basis,
c) One representative of the Department of Science and Technology,
d) One representative of the Department of Biotechnology,
e) No fewer than ﬁve scientists, from governmental and non-governmental
institutions and universities, possessing a track record of research and
peer-reviewed publications in disciplines in or allied to wild life ecology,
conservation or its human dimensions,
f) Member Secretary, National Tiger Conservation Authority,
g) Director of Wild Life Preservation - Member Secretary.
3) General Mandates/Functions of the National Scientiﬁc Advisory Committee:
a) The NSAC will determine and operationalise the scientiﬁc criteria and
protocols for the inclusion, removal, up-listing or down-listing of species in
various Schedules of the WLPA. The NSAC shall also periodically solicit
proposals from SSACs, scientiﬁc institutions and researchers for species to be
considered for inclusion, removal, up-listing or down-listing, and make
necessary recommendations to the Central Government.
b) The NSAC will provide scientiﬁc advice and support to the Central
Government in the creation and implementation of recovery plans for
conservation-dependent species, as well as management plans for
human–wildlife coexistence, and assess and help improve their eﬀectiveness.
c) The NSAC will help in the interpretation and incorporation of relevant
scientiﬁc concepts (e.g., connectivity, coexistence, human–wildlife conﬂict,
sustainability, invasive species, feral species, and population and habitat
viability) into the policy and practice of wild life conservation and
management, both within and outside the boundaries of Protected Areas.
d) The NSAC shall provide any other scientiﬁc advice or assistance as and
when sought by NBWL or its Standing Committee. The NSAC shall also
advise individual SSACs, as and when required.
e) The NSAC may bring before the NBWL, or its Standing Committee, any
concerns pertaining to scientiﬁc research relevant to the Act, for necessary
attention and action.
4) Constitution of State Scientiﬁc Advisory Committee: Each State Government
shall constitute a body to be known as the State Scientiﬁc Advisory Committee,
3
143

which will function under the purview of the State Board for Wild Life (6A), and
comprise:
a) Chief Wildlife Warden of State – Chair,
b) No fewer than three scientists, from governmental and non-governmental
institutions and universities, whose work is focused within the state, with a
track record of research and peer-reviewed publications in disciplines closely
allied to wild life ecology, conservation or its human dimensions,
c) An oﬃcer with relevant experience to be appointed by the State Government
will serve as the Member Secretary.
5) General Mandates/Functions of the State Scientiﬁc Advisory Committee:
a) The SSAC shall provide scientiﬁc advice and support to the respective State
Forest Department(s) on aspects including, but not limited to management
planning, human–wildlife conﬂict and coexistence, management zoning, and
ecological monitoring, both within and outside Protected Areas.
b) The SSAC, in consultation with the SBWL, shall develop proposals for
inclusion, up-listing or down-listing of species in the Schedules of the
WLPA.
c) The SSAC will provide scientiﬁc advice and support to the State
Government in the creation and implementation of State-level recovery
plans for conservation-dependent species and assess and help improve their
eﬀectiveness.
d) The SSAC shall draw from best scientiﬁc practices to advise the State Forest
Department on strengthening the coverage, connectivity and
representativeness of the Protected Area network within the State.
e) The SSAC shall advise on design, implementation and evaluation of
evidence-based ecological restoration projects in the State.
f) The SSAC may bring before the SBWL any concerns pertaining to scientiﬁc
research relevant to the Act, for necessary attention and action.
6) Procedure to be followed by NSAC and SSACs (SACs):
a) The Scientiﬁc Advisory Committees (SACs) shall regulate their own
procedure, including quorum.
b) The SACs shall meet at least once every six months.
c) The SACs may constitute sub-committees or study groups, as may be
necessary, from time to time.
d) The term of oﬃce of the members of the SACs, other than those who are
members ex-oﬃcio, shall be three years. No non-oﬃcial member shall have
consecutive terms on an SAC.
e) No member of a State SAC may serve on more than one State SAC at a time.
A member may, however, if chosen, serve in the National SAC in addition to
a State SAC.
4
144

Part 3
====
Changes to speciﬁc sections of the WLPA to strengthen the scientiﬁc basis of
WLPA
Aim: To strengthen the scientiﬁc basis of conservation and management in the
WLPA, and to encourage and enable broad-based and long-term scientiﬁc research
on wild life, ecology and conservation.
Below, we provide speciﬁc suggestions in the form of insertions or edits to diﬀerent
sections of the WLPA, with accompanying justiﬁcation to reinforce the need and
utility of science for conservation and enable scientiﬁc research.
1. Section 2, Sub-Section (16)
We suggest the following insertion as clause (d):
“(d) except where (a), (b) and (c) above are carriedout for the speciﬁc purpose
of scientiﬁc research by qualiﬁed scientists holding a permit as per Section 12,
or by recognised animal rescuers explicitly permitted in writing by the
CWLW.
Justiﬁcation: It is important to recognise, as separateand distinct from hunting,
scientiﬁc methods such as trapping and capturing of live animals, as well as
lethal sampling, for thebona ﬁdepurpose of scientiﬁcresearch. These methods
have wide use for research and conservation and have been extensively used
across the world, but are staggeringly under-utilised in India due to the lack of
recognition of such methods as diﬀerent from hunting, and the consequent
diﬃculty in obtaining permits for the same.
2. Section 5A, Sub-Section (1)
We suggest inclusion of a new clause (fa) as follows:
“(fa) at least two non-oﬃcial members of the NationalScientiﬁc Advisory
Committee”
Justiﬁcation:To structurally link the proposed NationalScientiﬁc Advisory
Committee to the National Board for Wild Life.
3. Section 5B, Sub-Section (2)
We suggest inclusion of the following words after “The Standing Committee
shall consist of the Vice-Chairperson, the Member-Secretary, and not more than
ten members to be nominated by the Vice-Chairperson from amongst the
members of the National Board”:
5
145

“including at least two members referred to in clause (fa) of section 5,
sub-section (1).”
Justiﬁcation:To link the proposed National ScientiﬁcAdvisory Committee to the
Standing Committee of the National Board for Wild Life.
4. Section 5C, Sub-Section (2)
We suggest insertion of the following:
“(f) consulting the National Scientiﬁc Advisory Committeeand leveraging its
scientiﬁc capacities and mandate, while undertaking functions ‘a’ to ‘e’ under
this subsection”
Justiﬁcation: This would help link the NSAC to theNBWL, speciﬁcally to
strengthen the scientiﬁc foundations to the broad mandate of the NBWL.
5. Section 6, Sub-Section (1)
We suggest inclusion of a new clause (ea) as follows:
“(ea) at least two non-oﬃcial members of the State Scientiﬁc Advisory
Committee”
Justiﬁcation:To link the proposed State ScientiﬁcAdvisory Committee to the
State Board for Wild Life.
6. Section 8
We suggest inclusion of the following words (in bold)  “Duties of State Board for
Wild Life.- It shall be the duty of the State Board for Wild Life to advise the State
Government”:
“,seeking inputs from the State Scientiﬁc AdvisoryCommittee as needed”
Justiﬁcation: This would help link the SSAC to theSBWL, speciﬁcally to
strengthen the scientiﬁc foundations to the broad mandate of the SBWL.
7. Section 12
We suggest the following insertions as sub-sections (1) and (2):
“(1) The Director, Wild Life Preservation, may grantpermits, in writing, to
conduct scientiﬁc research involving methods mentioned in Section 2(16) on
species listed under Schedule I. The Central Government shall process and
respond to permit requests within a period not exceeding ninety days.
Issuance of permits will be accompanied by a set of terms and conditions
under which the scientiﬁc research shall be undertaken. Rejection of the
permit shall be accompanied with speciﬁc reasons in writing.
(2) The Chief Wild Life Warden shall grant permits, in writing, to conduct
scientiﬁc research involving methods mentioned in Section 2(16) on wild
animals, except for those included under Schedule I, within a time period
6
146

which shall in no case exceed sixty days. Rejection of the permit shall be
accompanied with speciﬁc reasons in writing after giving an opportunity for
the applicant to be heard or to submit a revised proposal.
Justiﬁcation: To facilitate, streamline and bringtransparency to the issuance of
permits for scientiﬁc research involving methods such as trapping and capturing
of animals which have had wide use for research and conservation across the
world, but are currently under-utilised in India due to diﬃculty in obtaining
permits for the same.
8. Section 17B
We suggest the following insertion as sub-section (1):
“(1) The Chief Wild Life Warden shall process permit requests described
under Section 17B within a period not exceeding sixty days.”
Justiﬁcation:To facilitate, streamline and bringtransparency to the issuance of
permits for scientiﬁc research on plant species.
9. Section 28
We suggest the inclusion of the following sub-sections (3) and (4):
(3) The Chief Wild Life Warden shall grant permits for scientiﬁc research in
writing, within a time period which shall in no case exceed sixty days.
Reasons for the denial of permit shall be conveyed in writing after giving an
opportunity for the applicant to be heard or to submit a revised proposal.
(4) The Chief Wild Life Warden shall issue permits in writing for the
collection of non-invasive samples, such as faeces or tissue samples from
carcasses of wild life, including species listed in Schedule I for the purpose of
scientiﬁc research. The Chief Wild Life Warden shall process such permit
requests within a period not exceeding sixty days.
Justiﬁcation:To enable scientiﬁc research, andstreamline and bring transparency
to the issuance of permits for scientiﬁc research.
10.Section 61
We suggest including the following proviso:
“Provided that such a change is based on the recommendation of the National
Scientiﬁc Advisory Committee.”
Justiﬁcation:To bring scientiﬁc justiﬁcation, objectivity and transparency to the
categorisation of species into Schedules, and to allow science-based listing and
delisting of species.
11. Section 62
We suggest replacing Section 62 as follows:
“62. Declaration of certain wild animals to be ‘managed species’.”
7
147

The Central Government may, based on the recommendation and
conditionalities of the NSAC, by notiﬁcation, declare any wild animal other
than those speciﬁed in Schedule I and Schedule II to be a ‘managed species’
for a given area and for a given period.
Justiﬁcation:To allow for scientiﬁc declarationand population management of
species declared as a ‘managed species’. The current process of declaration of
species as ‘vermin’ is highly unscientiﬁc and uncontrolled, has led to
indiscriminate killing, and is likely to have negative impacts on biodiversity and
ecosystems, but the same remains unknown since populations of the species in
question are not monitored. Thus, we suggest that the term ‘vermin’ be replaced
with ‘managed species’ more accurately reﬂecting the nature and motivation
behind this section.
Part 4
====
Recommendations to facilitate scientific research and
streamline the grant of research permits under WLPA
The central issue:Science is integral to conservationbecause it generates the
knowledge to understand complex ecological processes and lays the foundation for
policy, practice and adaptive management. Yet, much scientiﬁc pursuit in India is
hindered by the permit process being arbitrary, opaque, and hamstrung by
bureaucratic procedure. Scientiﬁc and academic research of all forms must be
encouraged and the spirit of the permit process should be facilitative and enabling.
We submit here speciﬁc recommendations to help operationalise the suggested
changes to sections in the WLPA relevant to scientiﬁc research. In particular, we
focus on how the process of granting research permits can be made more
transparent, systematic, timebound, eﬃcient and unbiased.
Action points to streamline the research permit process:
1. Create a public online portal under the MoEFCC that tracks permits being
sought for scientiﬁc research under the WLPA. Besides tracking the date of
proposal submission, receipt by the State Forest Department and/or
Government of India, progress and timelines of review, the portal should also
provide State-wise details of the members of the review committee (if any).
On this portal, users must be able to ﬁll forms, upload proposal summaries
and track progress, and eventually also submit their ﬁnal research reports. In
8
148

processing applications, the relevant authority will record its reasons for
acceptance or rejection of a proposal that it has reviewed. This portal will also
serve as a repository of all scientiﬁc research carried out in India’s protected
areas and on wild species.
2. For permits applied at the level of States and Union Territories, the Chief Wild
Life Warden of the concerned State or Union Territory shall grant permits for
the research within a time period of no more than 60 days. For permits
applied to the Government of India, the concerned oﬃcer shall grant permits
for the research within a time period of no more than 90 days
Exceptions to the timelines for Government of India permission for animal capture
and handling:permit applications will be evaluatedon a fast track basis in
cases of conservation urgency, human welfare and public health which will
require decisions to be taken within seven (7) days.
3. If there are ethical and legal concerns regarding a project, the concerns must
be communicated to the applicant in writing and the applicant should be
given the opportunity to respond and, if necessary, revise and resubmit the
proposal (via the above portal, see Point 1).
4. Projects reviewed and funded by other departments/ministries of the
Government of India will be granted permits as is, as these have already been
subject to an oﬃcial review process, unless justiﬁable legal concerns can be
demonstrated and provided in writing.
5. The overarching objective of scientiﬁc research is to advance scientiﬁc
knowledge. Researchers will be free to determine the scientiﬁc considerations
of their research (including research question, study site, study design, sample
size, sampling methodology, the timing, manner and choice of publication),
while the State-level Research Advisory Board (if operational) or CWLW may
review permit applications for their compliance with the WLPA, and
established ethical standards.
6. The proceedings of the Research Advisory Board meetings (or equivalent) to
evaluate proposals shall be recorded and made available to the public, via the
portal mentioned in Para 1.
7. Any scientist, including researchers aﬃliated to research or academic
institutions, non-governmental organisations or independent researchers, and
students aﬃliated to an educational institution or non-governmental
organisation can apply for research permits.
9
149

8. The reasons for denying a permit will be given in writing and placed on the
portal for the applicant to access and respond, if necessary.
9. To ensure that research is facilitated, rather than impeded, approved scientiﬁc
research projects should be exempt from any fees, including entry fees, permit
fees, research fees, and security deposits. Where researchers are allowed the
use of government accommodation, they will be charged oﬃcial rates.
10. Incentives need to be created and implemented at the level of protected areas,
as well as at the level of managing oﬃcials, to recognise their encouragement
and support to scientiﬁc research. The current system of Management
Eﬀectiveness Evaluation, coordinated by the Wildlife Institute of India could
provide a mechanism for periodic evaluation of the extent to which PAs are
encouraging, enabling and applying scientiﬁc research.
11. In all bodies formed under the Act, the Government shall ensure appropriate
gender and regional representation, and ensure inclusivity and diversity.
10
150

 
 
 
President:     
Randhir Sahgal 
 
Bombay Natural History Society 
Hornbill House, Dr. Salim Ali Chowk, Shaheed Bhagat Singh Road, Mumbai – 400 001, India. 
Tel: (91-22) 2282 1811 
Email: Office: info@bnhs.org Director: director@bnhs.org Website: www.bnhs.org 
BNHS comments on the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill 2021 
Comments on t he Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill 2021 are given below. For the 
purposes of this document the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill 2021 is referred to as 
WLPA 2021.  
Bombay Natural History Society (BNHS) is India’s oldest nature conservation organization 
and we work in several states on nature conservation and research. 
Summary of comments:  
1. In their present form, the Schedules of the WLPA 2021 need change on two counts: a) 
not all species are included and b) critically endangered species with ve ry few 
numbers left should be moved to Schedule 1. 
2. There are several mistakes in the names of species as well as scientific names of 
species  
3. The inclusion of Invasive Alien Species in the Act is welcome but the definition is 
incomplete and should be changed  
4. State Wildlife Boards should be retained as per the WLPA 1972.  
5. Declaration of vermin is excessive  
6. Ownership and transport of captive elephants should not be encouraged  
  
151

 
 
 
President:     
Randhir Sahgal 
 
Bombay Natural History Society 
Hornbill House, Dr. Salim Ali Chowk, Shaheed Bhagat Singh Road, Mumbai – 400 001, India. 
Tel: (91-22) 2282 1811 
Email: Office: info@bnhs.org Director: director@bnhs.org Website: www.bnhs.org 
Detailed comments:  
I. Schedules of the WLPA:  
The purpose of the Schedules of the Act is to prohibit hunting of wild animals, and give 
instructions on what conditions a Scheduled animal can be declared vermin.  In the 2021 
version, there is ‘rationalisation’ of Schedules —these have been reduced to Sche dules I and 
II as opposed to Schedule I- IV in the Principal Act. 
The WLPA 1972 defines hunting as follows:  
“hunting”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes, — 5 [(a) killing 
or poisoning of any wild animal or captive animal and  every attempt to do so; (b) capturing, 
coursing, snaring, trapping, driving or baiting any wild or captive animal and every attempt to 
do so;] (c) injuring or destroying or taking any part of the body of any such animal or, in the 
case of wild birds or re ptiles, damaging the eggs of such birds or reptiles, or disturbing the 
eggs or nests of such birds or reptiles. 
On Prohibition of hunting of Scheduled animals the WLPA 1972 says: 
9. Prohibition of hunting.—No person shall hunt any wild animal specified in Schedules I, II, 
III and IV except as provided under section 11 and section 12 
The WLPA 1972 has the following clauses for declaration of vermin: 
11 a. the Chief Wild Life Warden may, if he is satisfied that any wild animal specified in 
Schedule I has beco me dangerous to human life or is so disabled or diseased  as to be 
beyond recovery, by Order in writing and stating the reasons therefore, permit any person to 
hunt such animal or cause such animal to be hunted; 
11 (b) the Chief Wild Life Warden or the auth orised officer may, if he is satisfied that any 
wild animal specified in Schedule II, Schedule III, or Schedule IV, has become dangerous to 
human life or to property  (including standing crops on any land) or is so disabled or 
diseased as to be beyond recov ery, by order in writing and stating the reasons therefor, 
152

 
 
 
President:     
Randhir Sahgal 
 
Bombay Natural History Society 
Hornbill House, Dr. Salim Ali Chowk, Shaheed Bhagat Singh Road, Mumbai – 400 001, India. 
Tel: (91-22) 2282 1811 
Email: Office: info@bnhs.org Director: director@bnhs.org Website: www.bnhs.org 
permit any person to hunt 2 [such animal or group of animals in a specified area or cause 
such animal or group of animals in that specified area to be hunted 
BNHS Comment: Thus, the main difference between the Schedule I and the other Schedules 
is in how the animal may be declared vermin (to be eliminated, hunted or removed). An 
animal that is not in Schedule I may be declared vermin if it causes damage to human 
property. It is also understood that Schedule I is the highest form of protection under the 
Wildlife Protection Act.  
The following aspects must be considered regarding the new Schedules under WLPA 2021: 
1. Several birds that are critically endangered as per the IUCN Red List are very found 
in very few numbers in the wild. It is thus follows that they should get highest 
protection under the WLPA as they need absolute protection from hunting, killing, 
poisoning, disturbing of eggs or nesting and related threats.  
 
2. Several critically endangered birds are not in Schedule I of the WLPA 2021. These 
include:  
a. Baer’s Pochard [placed in Schedule II of the WLPA 2021] 
b. Sociable Lapwing [placed in Schedule II of the WLPA 2021] 
c. Yellow-breasted Bunting [placed in Schedule II of the WLPA 2021] 
d. Spoon-billed sandpiper [placed in Schedule II of the WLPA 2021] 
 
3. Further, some critically endangered birds (as per the IUCN Red list) found in India 
are not mentioned at all in the WLPA 2021. These include the following:  
a. Masked finfoot  
b. Barau’s petrel 
c. Swamp grass babbler 
d. Banasura Chilappan 
e. Nilgiri Chilappan 
153

 
 
 
President:     
Randhir Sahgal 
 
Bombay Natural History Society 
Hornbill House, Dr. Salim Ali Chowk, Shaheed Bhagat Singh Road, Mumbai – 400 001, India. 
Tel: (91-22) 2282 1811 
Email: Office: info@bnhs.org Director: director@bnhs.org Website: www.bnhs.org 
f. Dark-rumped swift  
g. Grey-crowned prinia  
BNHS thus recommends that the Schedules of the WLPA 2021 be opened up for wide 
consultation with wildlife and plant biologists and experts in order to ensure that the 
Schedules are applied or rationalised appropriately and that all Indian wild animals are 
included.  
 
II. Spellings and names of species in the Schedules 
BNHS has detected several spelling mistakes in the names of species in the Schedules and/or 
in their scientific names. 
Some examples are below: 
Clouded leopard Neofelisnebulosa – the correct scientific name is Neofelis nebulosa 
Asiatic Golden Cat Catopumatemminckii – the correct sc ientific name is Catopuma 
temminckii 
Blood pheasant Ithaginiscruentus- the correct scientific name is Ithaginis cruentus 
Rusty Spotted Cat Prionailurusrubiginosus - the correct scientific name is Prionailurus 
rubiginosus 
Fishing Cat Prionailurusviverrinus - the correct scientific name is Prionailurus viverrinus 
Hume's Pheasant Syrmaticushumiae - the correct scientific name is Syrmaticus humiae 
Brown Noddy Anousstolidus - the correct scientific name is Anous stolidus 
Lesser Noddy Anoustenuirostris - the correct scientific name is Anous tenuirostris 
Black Noddy Anousminutus - the correct scientific name is Anous tenuirostris 
154

 
 
 
President:     
Randhir Sahgal 
 
Bombay Natural History Society 
Hornbill House, Dr. Salim Ali Chowk, Shaheed Bhagat Singh Road, Mumbai – 400 001, India. 
Tel: (91-22) 2282 1811 
Email: Office: info@bnhs.org Director: director@bnhs.org Website: www.bnhs.org 
The BNHS recommends a wide consultation be done with experts to make sure that all taxa 
are included and all taxa are correctly spelled . BNHS also recommends that the spelling of 
wildlife in the Act be corrected from ‘wild life’. 
  
III. Invasive Alien Species 
Invasive Alien species are a huge threat to native wildlife. They predate on wildlife, take over 
habitat or outcompete them. The WLPA 2021 has a welcome addition of controlling Invasive 
Alien species and introduces new sections 62a and 62b to deal with Invasive Alien species  
WLPA 2021 defines invasive alien species as follows:  
'(16A) "invasive alien species" means a species of animal or plant which is not native 
to India and whose introducti on or spread may threaten or adversely impact wild life 
or its habitat;'; 
BNHS Comment: This is not a full or accurate description. Several wild animals native to 
India (such as the Common Crow) may be invasives in other parts of India (such as in 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands).   
The Convention on Biological Diversity defines invasive alien species as follows: 
Invasive alien species are plants, animals, pathogens and other organisms that are 
non-native to an ecosystem,  and which may cause economic or environ mental harm 
or adversely affect human health. In particular, they impact adversely upon 
biodiversity, including decline or elimination of native species - through competition, 
predation, or transmission of pathogens - and the disruption of local ecosystems  and 
ecosystem functions. 
Further, domestic animals like dogs and cats also behave like invasive alien species. 
BNHS thus recommends the following definition of invasive alien species 
"invasive alien species" means a species of animal or plant which is not native to 
an ecosystem  and whose introduction or spread may threaten or adversely 
impact wild life or its habitat , also including domestic predators like dogs and 
cats as appropriate;'; 
155

 
 
 
President:     
Randhir Sahgal 
 
Bombay Natural History Society 
Hornbill House, Dr. Salim Ali Chowk, Shaheed Bhagat Singh Road, Mumbai – 400 001, India. 
Tel: (91-22) 2282 1811 
Email: Office: info@bnhs.org Director: director@bnhs.org Website: www.bnhs.org 
Within the same context, BNHS suggests removing Rock pigeons from the schedules of 
the Act as it behaves like an invasive species. 
 
IV. State Board for wildlife 
WLPA 2021 has the following addition of Clause 6: 
“This clause seeks to insert a new section 6A allowing the State Board for Wild Life to 
constitute a Standing Committee to exercise such powers and perform such duties as may 
be delegated to it by the Board. It provides for the membership of such Standing 
Committee to be the Vice-Chairperson, the Memb er-Secretary, and not more than 
ten members, to be nominated by the Vice -Chairperson, from amongst the members of 
the Board. It further provides for such Standing Committee to constitute committees, sub -
committees or study groups as may be necessary” 
In 4 (e) the WLPA 2021 says: 
(e) insert a provision to allow the State Boards for Wild Life to constitute Standing 
Committees, etc.; 
BNHS Comment: BNHS is of the opinion that decisions should be taken by the entire 
state board for wildlife and not just minimum number of members of the standing 
committee. The above wording suggests that the standing committee may function with 
just vice-chairperson and the Member secretary.  
 
IV declaration of Vermin  
In the principal Act, clause 62 says: 
Declaration of certain w ild animals to be vermin. —5 [The Central Government] may, by 
notification, declare any wild animal other than those specified in Schedule I and Part 
156

 
 
 
President:     
Randhir Sahgal 
 
Bombay Natural History Society 
Hornbill House, Dr. Salim Ali Chowk, Shaheed Bhagat Singh Road, Mumbai – 400 001, India. 
Tel: (91-22) 2282 1811 
Email: Office: info@bnhs.org Director: director@bnhs.org Website: www.bnhs.org 
II of Schedule II to be vermin for any area and for such period as may be specified 
therein and so long as such notification is in force, such wild animal shall be deemed to 
have been included in Schedule V. 
WLPA 2021 proposes changing this clause with the following explanation: 
Clause 38.—"This clause seeks to amend section 62 of the Principal Act which relate s to 
declaration of certain wild animals to be vermin. The section empowers the Central 
Government to declare certain wild animals to be vermin for any area and for such period 
as may be specified by way of notification. The clause seeks to omit the refere nces to 
Part II of Schedule II and Schedule V from the section . This is a consequential 
amendment in view of rationalisation of the Schedules to the principal Act.” 
BNHS Comment:  The changes suggested by WLPA 2021 therefore suggest that 
Schedule II animals may be declared vermin. As explained in point I of this submission, 
several threatened animals are part of Schedule II. It is incumbent on the government to 
only declare vermin in rare cases. The principal purpose of the WLPA has to be protect 
wildlife. C lause 38 is excessive and should be removed. Further, the declaration of 
vermin should be a scientific decision based on baseline studies of wildlife populations, 
abundance and distribution.  
V. Possession of Elephants: 
Regarding keeping wild animals and transfer of animals, WLPA 1972 says: 
“43. Regulation of transfer of animal, etc. —(1) No person having in his possession 
captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy in respect of which he has a 
certificate of ownership shall transfer by way of sale or offer for sale or by any other 
mode of consideration of commercial nature, such animal or article or trophy or uncured 
trophy. (2) Where a person transfers or transports from the State in which he resides to 
another State or acquires by transfer fr om outside the State, any such animal, animal 
article, trophy or uncured trophy in respect of which he has a certificate of ownership, he 
157

 
 
 
President:     
Randhir Sahgal 
 
Bombay Natural History Society 
Hornbill House, Dr. Salim Ali Chowk, Shaheed Bhagat Singh Road, Mumbai – 400 001, India. 
Tel: (91-22) 2282 1811 
Email: Office: info@bnhs.org Director: director@bnhs.org Website: www.bnhs.org 
shall, within thirty days of the transfer or transport, report the transfer or transport to the 
Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer within whose jurisdiction the transfer or 
transport is effected. (3) Nothing in this section shall apply— (a) to tail feather of peacock 
and the animal article or trophies made therefrom; (b) to transfer of captive animals 
between recognised zoos subject to the provisions of section 38 -I, and transfer amongst 
zoos and public museums.” 
WLPA 2021 suggests  a change to this by inserting an exception for transfer of live 
elephants. It says: 
“In section 43 of the principal Act, after su b-section (3), the following sub -section shall 
be inserted, namely:— "(4) This section shall not apply to the transfer or transport of 
any live elephant by a person having a certificate of ownership , where such person 
has obtained prior permission from the State Government on fulfilment of such conditions 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.". 
BNHS Comment: 
Prima facie this exception seems to encourage the ownership of live el ephants. It is to be 
noted that elephants are wild animals (protected u nder Schedule I of the WLPA) . Under 
the principal act, WLPA 1972, elephants can only be owned when inherited. The change 
to WLPA 2021 seems to encourage possession of wild elephants and this clause must be 
reconsidered.  
 
For further information please contact:  
Dr Bivash Pandav, Director, BNHS 
Email: director@bnhs.org  
 
158

WWF India Suggestions on the Wildlife (Protection) Act Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
 
Additions under Section 36 
 
In the interests of wildlife conservation in a broader context, and given that much 
wildlife in India occurs outside of forma lly protected areas like National Parks and 
Wildlife Sanctuaries, we propose that Section 36 needs to be expanded to recognise 
and promote conservation of areas which might not be declared as formal Protected 
Areas. We are suggesting the addition of  three sub-sections which can promote 
conservation by other stakeholders especi ally tribal and local communities. This 
approach will help provide formal recognit ion to ecologically important areas and 
also enable protection of these areas from detrimental land use change.   
 
It is also critical to recognise that these areas will need to have separate management 
mechanisms, which are community led and that the provisions described in Section 
27 to 33 do not apply to these areas.  
 
36 E:  Provide special recognition for wildlife corridors: Wildlife corridors help in 
facilitating wildlife movement, maintaining genetic diversity, reducing human-
wildlife conflict, and in the long term, supporting the migration of wild animals due 
to climate change induced circumstances. To ensure connectivity and integrity of 
ecosystems and species, it is crucial th at wildlife corridors are given a special 
recognition by creating a new subsection  under Section 36. Wildlife corridors have 
a mosaic of land use which varies from agriculture fields, tea gardens to forests and 
therefore the designation and management  of these corridors should include a 
stakeholder-based approach. 
 
36 F:  Recognise and support conservation areas that are currently not formally 
recognised:  Globally and in India, studies have shown that tribal and local 
communities have been protecting wildlife and their habitats since time immemorial. 
These area are commonly defined as Sacred Groves, Community Biodiversity Areas 
and Community Conservation Areas by  local communities and have their own 
management systems. Such areas play a cr itical role in supporting wildlife and 
biodiversity and need to be recognised to enhance these localised but crucial efforts. 
Similarly, urban natural areas all across In dia play a critical role in conservation 
but are slowly getting encroached upon due to inadequate formal recognition as 
wildlife areas. The Act should also give formal recognition to such areas. 
 
36 G:  Establish separate mechanisms to manage Marine Conservation Areas:  India’s 
7,000 km coastline and island groups contain highly ecologically diverse and fragile 
coastal and marine areas which need to be protected as a special category. The 
management of marine conser vation areas needs to be specialised as it is very 
159

different from managing terrestrial PAs.  Marine species are dynamic and highly 
mobile and often marine reserves are able to support sustainable use of resources. 
Therefore management and protection regim es that take into account and involve 
coastal communities and that the fisherfolk, need to be developed. 
 
 
Ambiguity in Section 43 relating to Elephant Trade: 
 
The amendment proposes a new subsection (4 ) under Section 43: “(4) This section 
shall not apply to the transfer or transport of any live elephant by a person having 
a certificate of ownership where person has obtained prior permission from the state 
government on fulfillment of such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government”. 
 
The amendment removes the prohibition on commercial trade of live elephants, even 
though it can be carried out only for el ephants for which there is an ownership 
certificate and after due permission from State Government and under conditions 
prescribed by the Central Government. This exception in the suggested amendment 
on Section 43 is likely to open a new window for legal commercial trade of captive 
live elephants. From a conservation perspective, the main reason to minimize trade 
in elephants is to reduce incentivization of  the capture of elep hants from the wild. 
Therefore, we suggest withdrawal of the subsection. 
 
 
Declaration of species as ‘Vermin’:  
 
The proposed amendment has reduced the list of wild animals appended to the Act 
from IV schedules to II schedules. In doing so, the Bill now proposes that any wild 
animal not listed in Schedule I can be d eclared as ‘vermin’. This means that all 
animals listed in Schedule II can be decl ared as ‘vermin’, thus removing legal 
protection to all those species listed in Sc hedule II, especially given the lack of any 
scientific ‘criteria’ for declaring a species as vermin.  
 
We suggest a robust process should be put in place where a scientific study by a 
recognized organization is made mandatory before any proposal to declare a species 
as ‘vermin’ is considered by the Central/State Government. A similar study should 
follow the impact of the intervention once it is executed, so that the data can enable 
future decisions.  
 
We also suggest replacement of the deroga tory terminology of ‘ vermin’ for wildlife 
species that might be a localized problem, often due to man-made factors. 
Rationalisation of Provisions of the Act :  The following sections need to be 
reviewed and rationalised  
160

 
a. Schedule I species need to be fully protected- and since species listed in Appendix 
1 of Schedule IV and Schedule I are common, there should be a new subsection 
which clarifies that provisions to manage and protect Schedule I will override any 
other provision which applies to Appendix of Schedule IV. 
b. Provisions of sections like 49F(4) and similar sections like 49 I and N related to 
trade, breeding in captivity should not apply to any species listed in Schedule I 
and II of the amended bill. 
c. Proposed addition of Section 18 A  along with Section 27 and 28 needs to be 
verified i n section 35 of the Principal Act, since Section 18A also mentions 
application of Section 27 to 33 A and this is repetitive.  
d. The list of Schedule I and II needs to be re-checked since the proposed amendment 
specifies only scientific and common na mes, hence many may be outside the 
purview of the Act. For example, the list  of birds may not be complete as birds 
like Red Junglefowl are not mentioned. In addition, only 3 species of sea horses 
are mentioned but India has 7 species. Sim ilarly, in the existing Schedule I, all 
sea cucumbers were listed but in the proposed Schedule I only specific ones have 
been listed.  A detailed comparison needs to be done. 
 
 
 
Powers of the State Board for Wildlife 
 
The Bill proposes to amend Section 6 which will allow the State Boards of Wildlife 
(SBWL) to establish a Standing Committee for exercising powers and duties as the 
board deems fit. This is of concern as it could lead to a majority of decisions being 
taken by the Standing Committee rather than the members of the SBWL. Hence it 
is important that the State Boards of Wildlife meet in totality and do not establish a 
smaller group like a Standing Committee, which could act in lieu of the full authority 
of the SBWL. We recommend that this amendment is not undertaken. 
 
 
161

 1 
         
27thJanuary 2021 
 
To,  
 
All Honourable Members & The Secretariat 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
Parliament House Annexe 
 New Delhi 110 001  
 
 
Dear Members of the Committee, 
 
SUBJECT: WRRC submissions to the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Forests, Wildlife and Climate Change 
 
We are writing to you from the Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation 
Centre (WRRC), a sister concern of CUPA, Bangalore. We are 
concerned with clause 27 of the proposed Wildlife Protection 
Amendment Bill that purports to  exclude “live elephants” from the 
ban,in section 43 of WPA ,of commercial trade in wild animals. Our 
submissions are as follows:  
 
1. The Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 (WPA) is a legislation enacted 
to protect wild animals in their natural environments. This 
includes elephants which are both a national heritage and a 
Schedule I animal.  
 
2. The provisions of self-declaration followed by the issuance of an 
ownership certificate to private owners of captive elephants 
(under sections 40 and 42 of WP A), and further prohibition of 
sale of private elephants (section 43 of WPA) were designed to 
bring the “unregulated” market of captive elephant trade pre -
1972 within a regulatory framework of the law. It was never 
meant to facilitate further ownership and trade in elephants.  
 
162

 2 
3. However, over the decades the law has been mis -utilised to 
perpetuate illegal trade in captive elephants. The Wildlife Stock 
Rules, 2003, revised the cut -off date to regularize illegal 
ownership in captive elephants from 1972 to 2003 by granting 
amnesty to all (legal and illegal) ownership of captive elephants 
pre-2003. However, just like 1972, the 2003 regulatory amnesty 
provision remains disregarded, and ownership and illegal trade 
of captive elephant continues.  
 
4. Widespread capture, trade and transport o f elephants – contrary 
to the intention of WP A - has become the norm, leading to the 
current approximate 2500 captive elephants in India of which 
1800 are privately owned. We have produced summaries of news 
reports from 2019, 2020, 2021 that confirm that il legal trade and 
transfer of captive elephants is still active across states: 
a. Joymala is one of 320 Assamese elephants sent under an 
“ambiguous lease system to Tamil Nadu.” These Elephants are 
then “sold in the guise of a lease, whose term is usually not 
mentioned.”1 Joymala was leased only for six months in 2008 and 
one Girin Moran of Kakopathar in Tinuskia district in Assam is 
her „legal‟ owner, yet despite this she has remained illegally in 
Tamil Nadu for over 13 years.”2(November 2019) 
b. On 21st February 2021 , a video from an elephant rejuvenation 
camp in Mettupalyam showed Joymala being merciless beaten by 
her mahout and kavadi, 3 raising calls for the elephant to be sent 
back to Assam.4 
c. In June 2019, Sri Jagannathji temple in Gandhinagar requisitioned 
four elephants from Assam. All four were juveniles, and their 
transport order was suspended by the High Court of Assam due to 
high summer temperatures. However, by December at least two of 
the elephants  were sent to Gujarat, both of whom were 
microchipped and issued ownership certificates dated to June 
                                                      
1“320 elephants „leased‟ by Assam have not returned” https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/320- elephants-leased-by-assam-have-
not-returned/article28313686.ece 
2“Assam‟s Joymala begging in Tamil Nadu temple” https://nenow.in/north-east-news/assam/assams-joymala-begging-in-tamil-nadu-
temple.html (7th November 2019) 
3“Tamil Nadu: Mahout, kavadi booked for thrashing jumbo at rejuvenation camp”  
https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/tamil-nadu/2021/feb/21/tamil-nadu-mahout-kavadi-booked-for-thrashing-jumbo-at-rejuvenation-
camp-2267053.html (22nd February 2021) 
4 “Srivilliputhur temple elephant abuse: Assam government asks Tamil Nadu to send jumbo back”  
https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/tamil-nadu/2021/feb/27/srivilliputhur-temple-elephant-abuse-assam-government-asks-tamil-nadu-
to-send-jumbo-back-2269760.html (27th February 2021) 
163

 3 
2019.5  A statement by the global “Free Elephant Network” on the 
transfer reads: “The elephants -- Rupsing, Joymati, Babulal and 
Rani – are suspected to h ave been illegally taken from the wild. 
For three of the elephants, there is no record of them being 
captive born until December 30, 2018. One male juvenile has a 
bullet injury on his left foreleg, suggesting violent capture.”  
d. After a gap of four years 9 -12 captive elephants were seen in the 
infamous Sonepur Mela in Bihar in November 2019, allegedly for 
the purpose of trade, an activity that the Bihar administration 
appears to be encouraging.6 
e. In October 2020, a video went viral of an elephant trader calle d 
Shaji claiming that he had traded over 200 captive elephants to 
private owners in the past few years. Fifteen elephants were seized 
in a subsequent raid in Kollam that  were illegally held by Shaji 
and his men. Shaji was recently, in Feb 2021, arrested in  
Mumbai.7 
5. The illegal trade  in elephant  continues primarily because 
pursuant to a 2003 amendment, under section 40 2A/2B of WPA, 
the elephant is the ONLY wild animal that is still allowed to be 
privately owned. While this anomaly needs to be corrected on a n 
urgent basis, the  Section 43 ban of commercial trade in all wild 
animals is a protective bulwark to hold live elephant smugglers 
in check.  
 
6. We are concerned that th e illegal, unconstitutional , captive 
elephant ownership exception is now be ing extended to their 
trade, i f clause 27 is passed. This will detrimental to our 
commitment of elephant protection and conservation. Both 
ownership and trade in elephants must remain strictly prohibited 
under WPA.  
 
7. Many studies acknowledge that captivity is inherentl y cruel to 
elephants. The seminal Gajah Report on elephants in India, 
                                                      
5“Assam to send 4 elephants to Gujarat despite doubt about “captive birth”https://nenow.in/north-east-news/assam/assam-to-send-4-
elephants-to-gujarat-despite-doubt-about-captive-birth.html (20th November 2019) 
6“Elephant trade may resume in Sonepur fair” https://nenow.in/north-east-news/assam/elephant-trade-may-resume-in-sonepur-
fair.html (11th November 2019) 
7 Viral Video on illegal elephant trading https://www.thenewsminute.com/article/viral-video-illegal-elephant-trading-kerala-sheds-light-
alleged-mafia-links-136337 (28th October 2020) 
164

 4 
published in 2010 by the Ministry of Environment and Forest, 
recognised that elephants are complex, sentient beings and that 
their captivity in private hands, must be phased out.  
 
8. The guidelines for welfare of captive elephants are often 
disregarded and, when followed, they fail to mitigate the inherent 
cruelty embedded in inappropriate and intensive captivity. It is 
now time to shift the narrative from managing welfare of 
elephants within captivity , to eradicating private ownership of 
elephants altogether.  
 
9. From a detail analysis done by WRRC, three elephant deaths due 
to abuse and mis -treatment per month  are happening in Kerala 
alone. In addition, there is loss of precious human lives by 
bizarre killings, elephants running amok in parades and 
processions. It is also feared that Tuberculosis has spread in 
approximately 33% of captive elephants in South India. 
 
10. When capture of elephants from the wild is illegal, how can 
their captivity – defined as “imprisonment” in the dictionary – be 
permissible? All elephants essentially come from the wild . This 
is the truth behind privately owned captive elephants , who are 
poached and illegally trapped from the wild. I n rare cases they 
may have been born in Govt. owned and run forest 
camps,wherein elephants were captured from the wild to mitigate 
human-elephant conflict with humans. The sale of elephant 
calves from fores t camps has been discontinued in all states, in 
view of the miserable conditions they are subject to in private 
hands. 
 
11. We recognise that there exists a sentiment in the country to 
legalise elephant trade, essentially to meet the demand for 
elephants by religious institutions. Ironically, legalising by some 
is seen as way to regularise the already existing illegal trade in 
elephants. However, we would like to caution the committee 
against this. Any attempt to legalise trade, even under the false 
165

 5 
pretext of regularising an illegal activity is both regressive and 
will open the floodgates of wild elephant capture.  
 
12. The purpose of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 (WPA) 
read with Article 48A of the Constitution (inserted by the 42nd 
Amendment in 1977) creates a duty on the state to „protect‟ and 
„safeguard the forest and wildlife of the country‟. It is our 
contention that at the very minimum „protection‟ and 
„safeguarding‟ entails that no wild life shall be taken out of the 
wild, unless deemed absolutely necessary. 
 
13. Wildlife protection must only be guided by a non -negotiable 
commitment to ensure that wild animals prosper, remain and 
flourish in the wild as free animals. The entire clause 27 should 
be removed as an aberration of the WPA.  
 
14. There have been some remarkable judicial decisions where High 
Courts have stepped in to end the cruel commercial use of 
captive elephants and to direct they be rehabilitated  in natural 
environments: 
a. Karnataka Hi gh Court in the case of CUPA vs. State of 
Karnataka & Ors. (W.P. No. 7276/2005)  has held in Para 15, 
“What is of paramount in a case like this in the best interests of 
the animal and certainly not its owner or any other party.” , 
thereby giving importance to the welfare of Elephant Girija 
Prasad over the interest of the temple trust, who was the 
custodian of the animal. 
b.  In Dr. Manilal Valliyate (PETA) v. State of Maharashtra and 
others [Bombay High Court 2014] Elephant Sunder, a captive 
elephant held by a temple in Kolhapur district in Maharashtra, 
who was subjected to many years of cruel treatment by the 
mahout, was directed to be set free and relocated to a sanctuary. 
The Court acknowledged that elephants are highly cognitiv e and 
intelligent animals.  
c. Perhaps the best formulation of our belief that elephants are wild 
and must be left alone in the wild was echoed by the High Court 
of Chhattisgarh in Nitin Singhvi, (2017) where Court recognised 
166

 6 
“that [ elephants] have …rights... A salutary principle … to 
uphold the rights of the animals to say “Leave us alone”.  
d. In a recent landmark Delhi High decision dated court 20th 
January 2020 in Saddam v Union of India , the court rejected a 
habeas claim by a Mahout to repossess a captive elephant 
Laxmi, by recognising the inherent connection the elephant has 
to its natural habitat. The Court stated: “Keeping in view the … 
its natural characteristics,this Court is of the opinion that Jungle 
is the natural habitat of an elephant … Even if the Mahout is 
able to establish ownership, it would not be a ground to treat the 
elephant as his “slave” and move elephant -Laxmi to an 
uncomfortable environment against her rights and interests. 
Consequently, the interest of elephant -Laxmi is best served in a 
forest rather than in a congested city with a Mahout.” 
e. The High Court  of Bombayin Goa in the case of People For 
Animals (2020) has banned the commercial use of ten captive 
elephants in Goa used for joy rides. These elephants have now 
been seized by the for est department, but due to lack of an 
elephant rescue and care facility , they still remain with the 
owners.  
f. In February 2021, in a case filed by an animal activist 
highlighting the cruel treatment meted to captive elephants in 
Srirangam Temple, the Chennai High Court has strictly advised 
that the forest department cannot evade their primary 
responsibility for the welfare of elephants even when they are 
privately owned. They have further asked the government to 
frame policies to end future private ownership of elephants.  
 
We are afraid that the current amendment will go against and render 
redundant and trite, some two decades of  enlightened jurisprudence  
on elephant protection.  
 
Conclusion and Recommendations: 
 
15. All animals have a right to live a life of dignity that must entail 
freedom from captivity and the right to live in their natural 
habitat. Captivity of wild animals is a relic of the past, and today 
167

 7 
it singularly af fects elephants, which is unjust and unfa ir. 
Elephants should also be accorded the same measure of 
protection from ownership and captivity that other wild animals 
enjoy. We cannot allow our National Heritage Animal with the 
highest protection in law to be chained and abused for the 
pleasure and s entiments of human kind. Keeping elephants 
captive is not only against the WPA, it is also unconstitutional 
and arbitrary to treat the elephant differently from all other 
Schedule I, wild animals. We do not have any captive lions or 
tigers being owned and traded, then why elephants? 
 
16.  We would like to make the following suggestions to the 
committee as stakeholders working on the ground on the welfare 
and rescue of captive elephants:  
a. We request the hon‟ble esteemed members of this committee to 
take a princi pled stand against all ownership and trade in wild 
animals. 
b. We also request the Hon‟ble C ommittee to propose the 
abolishing of the captive versus wild animal distinction as 
unsustainable in law, and that all Schedule animals in the 
Wildlife Protection Act,  must only b e treated as wild, even if 
they are in human control/possession or custody.  
c. The Hon‟ble Committee must recommend the deletion of clause 
27, as it purports to undo five decades of work on elephant 
protection and is also patently unconstitutiona l.  All gift deeds, 
dana patras, exchange, transfer, power of attorneys to potential 
custodians for transfer of custody of elephants in captivity must 
be rejected as a cover to bypass the restriction under section 43, 
and must be treated as a quasi -commercial sale. To date, we see 
that Forest Departments actively encourage such transfers, taking 
advantage of the ambiguous legal provisions. 
d. The Hon‟ble Committee must also advise the Government 
propose a further amendment to the law to also delete “the 
live elephant” exception in Section 4 0 2A/2B that allows 
ownership of elephants.  
e. We applaud the insertion of section 42A for voluntary surrender 
of any captive animal, and the forest department must ensure that 
168

 8 
surrendered animals are homed in elephant rescue centres. 
Incapacity to take care  of a captive elephant cannot initiate 
further commercial transactions in the form of sales. Government 
owned Elephant Rescue/Care C enters should be  the norm and 
provisions firmly in place for elephant owners to hand over 
without trying to profit by selling or trading the animal. . 
f. Finally, we request the C ommittee to propose legislation for 
State Forest D epartments to set up Elephant Rescue and 
Rehabilitation Centres across captive elephant locations to 
rehome abused, sick and old elephants in captivity or those found 
in illegal possession. 
 
Thank you. 
169

 
1                                                                                                                                    
 
 
WILD ORISSA 
(An organization for conservation of nature and wildlife) 
Registered Office:         BJ-29, BJB Nagar, Bhubaneswar 
                                                        Orissa. India. 751014 
Regn. No. 20479/29 of 1998-99 
wildorissa@hotmail.com                       www.wildorissa.org 
Ref.No. WO/HQRS/WLPA2021/2022                                                                   Date 21.01.2022  
 
To 
 Hon'ble Chairman 
 Standing Committee on 
 Science, Technology, Environment and Forests  
 Parliament of India 
 New Delhi 
sub:- submission of suggestions pertaining to The Wildlife (Protection) 
Amendment Bill 2021, reg.. 
 
Sir, 
 At the outset ‘ Wild Orissa ’ would like t o place it’s appreciation to the 
Standing Committee in affording an opportunity for placing on record 
suggestions in the matter of The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill 2021. 
We are grateful for the same. 
 We have carefully gone through the provisions c ontained in the said 
amendment bill and wish to state that, the Bill proposes certain far reaching 
changes and also envisages ushering in provisions to manage and conserve of 
wildlife. We are happy that the Bill proposes to:  
 amend the preamble to the Act s o as to include the aspects of 
"conservation" and "management" of wild life which are covered by the 
Act 
 rationalise and amend the Schedules to the Act for the purposes of 
clarity 
 insert a new Chapter VB in the Act for proper implementation of the 
provisions of the Convention in India 
 insert provisions to enable control of Invasive Alien Species  
 insert a provision to allow the State Boards for Wild Life to constitute 
Standing Committees, etc. 
 make amendments for better management of protected areas  
 insert a n explanation so as to provide that certain permitted activities 
such as, grazing or movement of livestock, bona fide use of drinking and 
170

 
2                                                                                                                                    
 
household water by local communities, etc., shall be considered as non -
prohibitive under section 29 of the Act 
 insert provisions for better care of seized live animals and disposal of 
seized wild life parts and products 
 insert a provision to allow for transfer or transport of live elephants by 
person having ownership certificates in accordance with conditions 
prescribed by the Central Government 
 insert a provision to enable the Central Government to call for 
information and issue directions for proper implementation of the Act  
 Authorizing Wildlife Crime Control Bureau, Customs and Coast Guard  to 
take the cognizance of the offence and filing of Complaint before the 
Court 
 Dropping of permanent listing of species as vermin  
 Increasing the penalties for all offences 
 Inclusion of species listed under  CITES 
 Simplifying the categorisation of species under the Schedules   
 Not allow ing the renewal of arms within ten kilometers of a sanctuary 
except under the intimation to the Chief Wildlife Warden  
 Allowing State governments to use Central government land to form 
conservation reserves  
 
In this regard, ‘ Wild Orissa ’ would like to sugg est the following for 
consideration by the Hon’ble Members of the Standing Committee on 
Environment, Forests & Climate Change. 
  
The proposed amendment in the existing provisions of Wildlife Protection Act, 
authorizing an officer of Customs and an officer of Coast Guard to be the 
Proper Officers for Section 50 Power of Entry, Search, Arrest and Detention 
under the Chapter VI Prevention and Detection of Offences, is a most welcome 
initiative.  This is important because the Customs Department and Coast Guard 
wing of the Government have been instrumental in detecting a number of 
wildlife related cases and over a period of many years have gained in expertise 
and skills in handling wildlife matters. The natural course of action now 
available is to insert appropri ate amendments in the Section , 2, 54 and 55 of 
the Wildlife Protection Act as existing.  Further since the Customs Department 
plays a crucial role in wildlife crime enforcement, the Central Board of Indirect 
Taxes and Customs needs to be represented in the National Board for Wildlife. 
Further the amendment proposes to lower the amount to be imposed as 
Compounding fee under provisions of Section 54 of the existing Act, by 
proposing to lower the present amount from Rs. 25,000.00 to Rs. 5,000.00. 
This does not appear to be appropriate and infact as a measure to further 
171

 
3                                                                                                                                    
 
disincentivise indulgence in hunting a much higher amount than what exists 
today need to be laid down.  
 
Accordingly:  
1) Chapter I (Preliminary) Section 2- amendments proposed 
In Section 2 of the pr incipal Act, after sub -section (7A), to insert new sub -
sections: 
 sub-section 7B - “Assistant Commandant of Coast Guard” means the 
Assistant Commandant of Coast Guard appointed under the provisions of 
the Coast Guard Act 
 sub-section 7C- “Customs Officer” mea ns the Customs Officer appointed 
under of the provisions of the Customs Act 1962  
In Section 2 of the principal Act, after sub -section (10), to insert new sub -
sections: 
 sub-section 10A- “Commissioner of Customs’ means the Commissioner of 
Customs appointed under the provisions of the Customs Act 1962  
2) Chapter II (Authorities to be appointed or constituted under the Act) - 
Section 5A- amendments proposed 
In section 5A of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 1), after clause ( l), the 
following clause shall be inserted: 
"(ll) Chairman Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs"  
3) Chapter VI (Prevention and Detection of Offences) - Section 50 - 
amendments proposed 
 sub-section (3A), after the words “ or an Assistant Conservator of 
Forests”, to insert the words “or a Superi ntendent of Customs or an 
Assistant Commandant of Coast Guard” 
 sub-section (8): after the words “ any officer not below the rank of an 
Assistant Director of Wild Life Preservation”, to insert the words “or a 
Superintendent of Customs or an Assistant Command ant of Coast Guard” 
4) Chapter VI (Prevention and Detection of Offences) - Section 54 - 
amendments proposed 
 after the words “or any other officer not below the rank of Assistant 
Director of Wild Life Preservation”, to add “or any officer not below the 
rank of S uperintendent of Customs or any officer not below the rank of 
Assistant Commandment of Coast Guard” 
 sub-section (4) instead of words “twenty five thousands” the words “one 
lakh” to be inserted 
5) Chapter VI (Prevention and Detection of Offences) - Section 55 - 
amendments proposed 
 after clause (ac) to insert new clauses (ad) and (ae):  
o “(ad) Commissioner of Customs” 
172

 
4                                                                                                                                    
 
o “(ae) Inspector General of Coast Guard” 
 
In the matter of Schedules drawn up in the proposed amendments, in 
order to replace Schedules as present in t he existing statute, the following are 
suggested: 
6) Removal of group listing in Schedules 
Listing individual species instead of groups ( Avadavat, Babblers, Bitterns, 
Buntings, Cranes, Duck, Egrets, etc. in Schedule IV as existing ) is a major 
deviation should be reconsidered . This can give rise to taxonomic ambiguity 
when identifying species and considering specific status . Illicit trade in parts 
and products could also become an issue . Additionally, many species from  
these groups have not been included in the  proposed Schedules. Emergence of 
new species is a possibility especially in the case of invertebrates, coral, 
sponges, reptiles, aves and amphibians, and these newly reported would not 
get due protection as per the new legislation . It is important that al l bird 
species recorded in India needs to be listed in the Schedules.  
7) Appropriate nomenclature for species 
Misspelt and incorrect naming of species can lead to confusion and uncertainty  
especially during legal proceedings. There is a need standardize names of 
species, scientific and common, globally accepted databases like maintained by 
IUCN, need to be carried out. 
8) Need to include all IUCN Red List species in category of Critically 
Endangered, Endangered, Threatened and Near Threatened  and 
Endemic species 
There is a priority need to include all IUCN Red List species in category of 
Critically Endangered, Endangered, Threatened and Near Threatened , as 
applicable for India, and Endemic species to India in the proposed Schedule-I.  
 
 We shall be grateful for consideration of our suggestions as above. 
  
 ‘Wild Orissa ’ will be grateful if provided with an opportunity to place 
these suggestions before the Hon’ble Members of the Standing Committee on 
Environment, Forests & Climate Change, at date scheduled.  
 
 Thanking you 
                                                                                                       Yours faithfully, 
 
                                                                                                   
  
                                                                                               [Shibaji Charan Nayak] 
                                                                                                          Secretary 
                                                                                                     +919437090969 
173

Comments on the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
Compiled by: Centre for Policy Design, ATREE and the Biodiversity Collaborative 
 
With contributions from Ravi Chellam, Abi Tamim Vanak, Iravatee Majgaonkar, Karishma 
Shelar, Anuja Malhotra, Siddappa Setty, R. Ganesan, Kadambari Deshpande, Rasika T.S, 
Suryanarayanan, Divya Srinivasan, Aneesh C. R,  and other faculty, students, and resea rchers at 
ATREE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology                                   
and the Environment (ATREE) 
The Biodiversity Collaborative 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
174

 
1 
 
10th January, 2022 
 
To, 
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and 
Climate Change, 
New Delhi 
 
Subject: Submission of comments on Bill. no. 159 of 2021 i.e. the Wild Life (Protection) 
Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
Dear Madam/Sir, 
 
This year, 2022 is  a landmark year for Indian conservation as it marks 50 Years of the 
implementation of the Wild Life Protection Act (1972). The Amendment Bill currently with the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee is crucial and timely.  At the Ashoka Trust for Research in 
Ecology and the Environment (ATREE) and the Biodiversity Collaborative, we strongly believe 
that there is scope  to re-imagine conservation in India to be backed by empirical evidence and 
scientific research, supported with good governance, while continuously involving, empowering, 
and protecting local communities. 
 
ATREE is a global non-profit organisation which generates interdisciplinary knowledge to inform 
policy and practice towards conservation and sustainability. For over two decades, we have worked 
on addressing socio -environmental challenges extending from the grassroots to global policy 
levels. Some of the areas we have worked on include biodiversity science and conservation,  land 
and water resources, forests and governance, ecosy stem services and human well -being, and 
climate change mitigation. We also recognise that scaling transformative solutions for complex 
socio-environmental systems  requires rigorous interdisciplinary knowledge to inform innovative 
policy instruments and improved governance at multiple levels.  
 
The Biodiversity Collaborative is a group of institutions and individuals who are committed to 
furthering biodiversity science and advocating its use in the crafting of development, environment 
and conservation policies, plans and programmes. The Biodiversity Collaborative is involved in 
implementing high quality research and action projects to generate interdisciplinary information 
to enhance our knowledge base, establish proof of concept, and further human well-being.  
 
Through our learning on the ground as well as our research in the policy space, we  offer our inputs 
and insights in our areas of expertise. In order to make wildlife protection legislation stronger and 
more effective, we hereby submit our comments on  the proposed amendments to the Wild Life 
Protection Act along with some overarching suggestions.  
175

 
2 
 
Our comments are organised as follows: 
 
1. Scope of the Act 
2. The preamble 
3. Classification of species under different Schedules 
4. Participatory management and bottom-up approach 
5. Authority and criteria to declare vermin 
6. References to The Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition 
of Forests Rights) Act, 2006 (FRA) 
7. Permitting subsistence fishing in and around Protected Areas 
8. Missing taxa 
9. Invasive species 
10. Chapter IIIA-17 on protection of specified plants 
11. Devising a OneHealth approach 
12. Decentralizing research; need for a review 
 
 
1. Scope of the Act 
In this era of climate  change emergency, marked by the ongoing effects and learnings of the 
pandemic, and increasing recognition of the importance of OneHealth 1, we believe that the Act 
should go beyond protection of species through administratively defined Protected Areas 
boundaries. This legislation’s approach should not decouple cultural, human, and social systems 
from wildlife conservation. The Act must recognise and include “real life” conservation reflecting 
India’s rich history and heritage of wildlife conservation. It s hould also explicitly recognise the 
connection between geology, geography, climate, socio -cultural practices and biodiversity when 
planning conservation interventions.  Furthermore, long -term ecological and evolutionary 
processes that have created this ric h biodiversity in India also need to be acknowledged, and 
conserved. The Act needs to recognise and acknowledge that wildlife is not restricted to protected 
areas and that there are constant interactions involving wildlife, domestic animals, human 
populations and the environment which can best be addressed only by adopting the OneHealth 
framework. The Act needs to encourage and enable long -term ecological and conservation 
research in all ecosystems across India including marine and freshwater ecosystems. Fi nally, we 
also recommend adequate inclusion of the implications of the climate change emergency for 
wildlife conservation, and for the Act to recognise and direct actions related to adaptation and 
mitigation for conserving wildlife.   
 
2. The Preamble 
                                                
1 A detailed note on OneHealth has been given on page 7 
176

 
3 
[Page 1, point 2 in the Amendment bill]  
In the amendment of the preamble, the phrase “protection of wild animals, birds and plants” has 
been substituted with the words “conservation, protection and management of wildlife”. However, 
neither the principal Act nor the Amendment has adequately highl ighted the importance of 
scientific research and ecological knowledge to implement conservation, management,  and 
protection. In these times of denial of science and misinformation, it is more crucial than ever that 
conservation efforts need to be backed by data, empirical evidence and credible science.  
 
We urge the inclusion of the term ‘science/scientific research/empirical evidence, indigenous 
knowledge and practices’ in the preamble, which informs and sets the tone for the legislation. 
Further, we suggest the addition of the words ‘and the natural habitats, ecological processes and 
socio-ecological systems that wildlife depends on’ after the word “wildlife” in order to make this 
Act more inclusive of entire systems and not just individual animal and plant species. 
 
We feel it is important for the Act to clearly state its goal as ensuring the persistence of wildlife 
populations including all native species of wild plants and animals, maintaining the integrity of 
ecosystem processes and enhancing the connectivity across landscapes to ensure gene flow.  
  
3. Classification of species under different Schedules 
[Page 124, Clause 42 under Notes on Clauses in the Amendment bill]  
In the Amendment, the justification given for cutting down the number of Schedules is that there 
are only two levels of protection and that this will avoid confusion amongst the public. We call for 
a better alignment of the Schedules with the IUCN Red List, and an adoption of a similar 
categorisation. Furthermore, we recommend that there can be both a National Red List, as well as 
a State Red List. This is because states should be free to classify animals found within their 
boundaries based on their conservation status, so long as the species is not down-listed as per the 
National List or the IUCN Red list.  
The classification of animal and plant species must be based on a rigorous scientific procedure 
which is informed by scientific literature, subject experts, and indigenous knowledge. This has 
also been directed by the judgement of the Supreme Court of India dated 15th April 2013, I.A. No. 
100 in WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 337 OF 1995, Centre for Environment Law, WWF-I Versus 
Union of India & Others with IA No.3452 in WP(C) No.202 of 1995, the Lion Translocation 
judgement. In this order, the Government of India (GoI) and Ministry of Environment, Forests, 
and Climate Change (MoEFCC) were directed to do the following every three years [Refer to page 
66 of the above order]: 
A. Identify all endangered species of flora and fauna to study their needs a nd survey their 
environments and habitats to establish current level of security and nature of threats. 
B. Conduct periodic reviews of flora and fauna species status, and correlate the same with the 
IUCN Red Data List. 
 
177

 
4 
We strongly recommend that the process of listing and delisting species be streamlined with the 
use of appropriate criteria which are frequently reviewed and updated and made transparent for 
the general public to engage with. Moreover, we recommend an online portal hosted by the 
MoEFCC for the general public to share their knowledge and opinions on the status of all species 
and discovery of new species. Along  with global assessments like the IUCN Red List, science -
based, credible and objective listing of wildlife species can be achieved. 
 
Given the above, we urge the government to facilitate a scientific review of the conservation status 
of species once every 3 years where inputs from scientific organizations, indigenous communities, 
subject experts and the general public are taken into considerat ion to establish a socially and 
culturally relevant data-based assessment framework. 
 
Additionally, while the explanation clauses specify differences in level of protection to Schedule 
I and II species, it is not clear what the corresponding penalties or “ levels of offence” are. This is 
relevant to revised penalties based on “compounding” of offences and repeated offences. It would 
be important to develop graded penalties for offences of different nature – e.g. intended versus 
unintended impacts. This applies to cases of accidental deaths of species in any Schedule (due to 
bycatch in fishing nets or road kills of animals), or to cases where collateral damage due to 
inadvertent intervention elsewhere may lead to death (e.g. either death due to the effects of mining 
outside a protected area, high intensity pesticide use, sewage or plastic pollution from a distant 
upriver source, or any other distant activities likely to have large -scale impacts not traceable 
always to the origin). It will help to clarify, in th e amended sections 51 and 54, of what Schedule 
species correspond with what level of penalties and for what offences. 
 
Similarly, under Sections 11 and 32, it would be worth including a clause related to a mechanism 
to deal with “accidental death or injury” of species in Schedule I and II, where it may be reasonably 
assumed that the intent was not to cause harm to wildlife. There can be many cases where this 
becomes important to consider, e.g. bycatch of species due to accidental entanglement in fishing 
nets, road or railway kills of animals, or potential injuries resulting from animal behaviour in 
response to tourist vehicles, filmmaking/photography and, other bona  fide livelihood -based 
activities. 
 
At present, the WLPA assumes hunting to be any action that can cause injury or death of an animal. 
But there is room for dealing with the above exceptions in a more reasonable way, with 
differentiated and graduated penalties or sanctions. This is of particular importance when the 
person involved in the accidental mortality or injury may be from underprivileged sections of 
Indian society, whose residence and dependence on natural habitats results in them sharing space 
with wildlife. 
 
4. Participatory management and bottom-up approach 
178

 
5 
Under Section 33(B) of the Principa l Act, the State Government is mandated to constitute an 
Advisory Committee for each Wildlife Sanctuary consisting of the Chief Wildlife Warden or 
nominee, a member of the State Legislature, 3 representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions, 2 
representatives of NGOs, and other experts from the field of wildlife conservation. This committee 
is mandated to advise on measures to be taken for better conservation and management of the 
respective Sanctuary, including participation of the people living in and around the Sanctuary.  
 
It is unfortunate that till date not a single Advisory Committee has been established so far. 
 
Further, the amendment of Section 33(B) of the Principal Act calls for “due consultation with the 
Gram Sabha concerned”  in forming management plans for sanctuaries. We recommend the 
following- 
A. The legal provision for the establishment of Advisory Committees must be retained in the 
amended Act and should be backed by adequate capacity building for implementation of 
the provisions of the Act. The proposed consultation with the Gram Sabhas should be done 
through the Advisory Committees. We r ecommend that the process is people -centric in a 
way that local communities and the Advisory Committees are involved throughout the 
process - from planning to implementation.  
 
5. Authority and criteria to declare vermin 
[Page 124, Clause 42 under Notes on Clauses in the Amendment bill] 
The Principal Act and the proposed amendments both use the term ‘vermin’ to describe species 
which can be hun ted under certain conditions (earlier Schedule V included such species and, in 
the amendment, such species can now “simply be notified”). The proposed amendment is unclear 
as to what are the criteria for declaring species as ‘vermin’ and this poses a risk i n terms of open 
and highly subjective interpretation. It is also not clear whether it is the discretion of the Union 
Government to make such declarations because in many cases, the State Governments are more 
equipped to identify animals and populations of animals which can or cannot be culled depending 
on the local conditions. We recognize that culling/removal of certain animals like wild pigs, rodent 
species and certain plant species which cause risk to life and property is a part of adaptive 
management an d necessary in some contexts for livelihood security and human well -being. 
However, there should be a transparent and accountable process which is backed by ecological 
and social evidence to be able to identify such species and establish that the timeline and the region 
for which such declarations made are valid. There should also be an adequate monitoring 
mechanism to ensure that the conflict situation is addressed properly without any excessive 
negative impacts on wildlife while at the same time ensuring that the local communities get 
relieved of their problems and there are no negative cultural consequences in systems where people 
and wildlife have coexisted through adaptive practices. Lastly, it is also troubling that the idea of 
“vermin”, which has had a colonial legacy, is still being sustained.  
 
179

 
6 
6. References to The Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition 
of Forests Rights) Act, 2006 (FRA) 
Clause 13 which seeks to amend Section 33 of the principal Act, Clause 15 which seeks to amend 
Section 35 of the principal Act and Clause 17 which seeks to amend Section 38 of the principal 
Act, must give effect to and should not be in violation of the provisions of the Scheduled Tribes 
and other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Fo rests Rights) Act, 2006 (FRA), 
henceforth referred to as FRA (2006). 
 
Clause 13 which seeks to amend Section 33 of the principal Act, should give effect to Sec 2 of the 
FRA (2006) which provides for determination and notification of ‘Critical Wildlife Habi tats’ 
within National Parks and Sanctuaries. 
 
Under the FRA, Gram Sabha and village level institutions are empowered to make decisions 
regarding the protection of wildlife, forest and biodiversity; protection of ecologically sensitive 
areas; and regulation of access to community forest resources and s top any activity which 
adversely affects the wild animals, forest and biodiversity. Therefore, Gram Sabhas should be 
made strong allies in wildlife governance via the FRA and WLPA but these links need to be 
outlined clearly in the Act.  
 
Similarly, there i s scope to integrate Biodiversity Management Committees (BMCs) in the 
governance of biological resources by integrating with the Biological Diversity Act (2002). 
Further, there is potential to integrate the People's Biodiversity Registers (PBRs) that are mandated 
to be prepared by BMCs to document comprehensive information on availability and knowledge 
of local biological resources. 
 
7. Permitting subsistence fishing in and around Protected Areas 
Under sections 29 and 33 in the Amendment bill, there is a need to include low-intensity, small-
scale subsistence fishing in rivers, wetlands, and reservoirs that may be permitted with suitable 
restrictions on the scale and intensity of different fishing practices (for eg. allowing certain types 
of artisanal gears, sma ll nets or traps to only catch non -commercial fish species without any 
externalities for threatened wildlife). Small-scale capture fisheries still remain an important source 
of livelihood for millions of rural poor across India. Fish are a cheap and rich s ource of protein 
and thus a critical element of rural nutrition and subsistence. In many protected areas, fishing is 
considered illegal and there are blanket bans, due to which many local communities are negatively 
impacted. 
 
Allowances for subsistence fishing may need to be considered on similar lines as livestock grazing, 
or use of drinking water by local communities, or collection of minor produce such as fruits, 
fodder, honey or lac that involve both animal and plant products. Such permissions to subsistence 
fishing may be granted by amending the explanation for Section 29. 
180

 
7 
At the same time, any fishing activity that is found to be in contravention of other laws to ban 
hunting, or involving the use of weapons or any injury-causing devices, or explosives, poisons, or 
electricity, should continue to be banned. Fishing is peculiar because it is the only form of hunting 
which is legally and socially acceptable. This “special status” of fishing needs to be considered in 
an amendment of Section 11, to distingui sh some forms of fishing from other banned forms of 
hunting. This is also particularly important given the recent developments in the implementation 
of the FRA (2006), recognizing the bundles of rights of forest dwellers and other dependent 
communities, as well as the recent draft National Fisheries Policy 2020. 
 
8. Missing taxa 
The current Schedules are not comprehensive and have many missing animal and plant species, 
especially of non-charismatic groups like plants, reptiles, amphibians, invertebrates and freshwater 
fish. Even in the case of mammals, despite significant advancement in the knowledge about many 
relatively lesser known groups such as rodents or bats (including fruit bats and insectivorous bats), 
most species or genera of these groups do not find a single mention in the amended Schedules.   
 
A comprehensive scientific exercise needs to be undertaken to examine the Schedules as suggested 
previously. The proposed amendments to the Act also do not take into consideration that new 
species continue to be described, and taxonomic re -evaluation of existing species is an ongoing 
process.  
 
9. Invasive species 
The amendment to Section 62 of the principal Act recognizes the threat to ecosystems from 
invasive alien species (IAS) and also provides for the establishment of a Scientific Authority (as 
per CITES) to advise on matters related to trade of such species. This is a welcome change and is 
greatly appreciated. However, we urge the MoEFCC to also include regional invasive species 
(some of which may be native to the country) which might not necessarily be part of international 
trade. For example, crows, mynas and  spotted deer are invasive species in the Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands, and should be eradicated to protect the fragile ecology of these island systems. 
These also need to be reviewed using scientific literature and local indigenous knowledge on a 
timely basis to avoid mismanagement of ecosystems outside and inside protected areas. 
 
10. Chapter IIIA-17 on protection of specified plants 
In the principal Act, the guidelines under Chapter IIIA -17 specifying rules for protection of 
specified plants will have an impact on the conservation of these rare plants through ex -situ 
conservation measures like in Botanical Gardens and their use for indigenous health practices. This 
is because there are no specified guidelines as to how institutions and communities can engage in 
growing, conserving and utilising these plants and their products. If these guidelines are not 
specified, it runs the risk of erasure of indigenous practices and may go against the National 
Biodiversity Authority’s vision of empowering Biodiversity Management Committees to manage 
181

 
8 
local biodiversity resources. While this chapter recognizes exempting Scheduled Tribe members 
from collection of some plant resources, it restricts this within district boundaries where the person 
resides. Dependence on plant resources by indigenous communities is not determined by political 
boundaries and this will not only create confusion but also chal lenge livelihood improvement 
programs by the Department of Biotechnology and MoEFCC. Additionally, placing vague 
restrictions on ‘declaration of stock’ and ‘purchase of specified plants’ will enable adulteration in 
herbal plant product manufacturing. . Additionally, only 18 species of plants, which are arbitrarily 
decided, are referred to as ‘specified plants’ under Schedule III. Following this, Chapter IIIA -17 
does not mention the nature of penalties for the extraction and use of these plants. It also does not 
state rules and regulations of whether commercial Ayurveda and Naturopathy institutes can openly 
harvest other plants and its derivatives. Moreover, it vaguely states that specified plants and their 
derivatives which are within  protected areas are government property. There is no recognition of 
plant populations outside protected areas. Lastly, the dearth of human resources with expertise in 
identifying specified plant products and derivatives (say, in customs procedures), to advise the 
CCF will be yet another impediment in implementing the Chapter IIIA-17.  
 
11. Devising a OneHealth approach 
The current amendment comes during the COVID-19 pandemic, and therefore must recognise the 
importance of a OneHealth approach. OneHealth is a collaborative, multisect oral, and 
transdisciplinary approach—working at the local, regional, national, and global levels —with the 
goal of achieving optimal health outcomes recognizing the interconnection between people, 
animals, plants, and their shared environment. The amendment should proactively address wildlife 
health, which is an important and growing, yet often overlooked and neglected, component of the 
conservation of wild species and their habitats. Therefore, enabling research on wildlife health 
should be an important consideration. We suggest that research on wildlife and ecosystem health, 
and any research on wildlife that is crucial from a public health perspective should be exempt from 
state and central government permission, and that the relevant local authority, of the rank of Range 
Forest Officer and above, be authorised to issue an emergency permit for capture, handling, and 
sampling of wildlife from authorised/verified/certified research bodies (either government or non-
government), provided that the results of such  sampling be made available to the relevant 
authorities within a specified time period.  
 
12. Decentralizing research; need for a review 
Marking 50 years of this legislation, the proposed December 2021 amendment is a good 
opportunity to review the effectivenes s of the Act, to note the best practices and success stories, 
and learn from failures and unintended consequences. With this view, we would like to highlight 
that wildlife conservation research requires decentralization; and that management of protected 
areas that exclude  the research of non-governmental organizations needs to be reviewed, and freer, 
easy access needs to be enabled.  
182

 
9 
A. We urge the MoEFCC to make wildlife research more accessible for institutions and 
consequently make the Wild Life Protection  Act more enabling, which encourages wider 
participation in wildlife research and conservation.  
B. Currently there is a skewed focus on restrictions rather than guidance on a desirable future 
course of action in the Act. For instance, scheduling of species m ust be complemented by 
a time-bound roadmap to ameliorate threats to protect the endangered species and “de -
threaten” them with adequate monitoring, reporting, and evaluation.  
C. Obtaining permission to conduct research on species and ecosystems has become v ery 
difficult. The process is often arbitrary and is not time bound. The scientific merit of the 
proposals are not recognised and valued. This hinders independent scientific inquiry and 
advancement of ecological research in the country. On these lines, we suggest that after 
section 12 of the principal Act, the following section may be inserted, namely: 
a. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Chief Wildlife Warden, or 
their designated authority, shall on an application and on the recommendation 
of the state or central research advisory committee, grant a permit, by an order 
in writing to any person, to conduct scientific research, including the non-lethal 
capture of animals mentioned in the Schedules. Further the Chief Wildlife 
Warden shall permit  the lethal sampling of species where scientifically 
justified, especially if it is of wildlife health and public health concern.  
b. Without prejudice to any law currently in force, the Chief Wildlife Warden shall 
ensure that all permits for scientific research have been processed and granted 
subject to such conditions and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
c. The Central Government may prescribe the following, namely:— 
i. the priority thematic areas for conduct of scientific research; 
ii. the person(s)/institution(s) who shall be eligible for the grant of 
permits; 
iii. the time frame in which proposals for scientific research permits shall 
be processed, which shall in no case exceed one hundred twenty days; 
iv. the conditions subject to which permits for scientific research may be 
granted. 
 
D. The Act should recognise that science is an essential activity required for conservation, and 
not something to be “permitted”. Furthermore, being repositories of the natural heritage of 
the country, areas that are governed by the Act should be open to both basic and applied 
research, and decisions to permit research should not be left only to the decisions of the 
Forest Department research advisory committees. We recommend that both Central and 
State Research Advisory Committees should be set -up with expertise for reviewing basic 
and applied research proposals for scientific validity. This is along the lines of similar 
institutions in other countries (e.g. Scientific Services of the South African National Parks). 
The process needs to be transparent, streamlined, time -bound and welcoming to research 
183

 
10 
so that there is a vibrant on the ground partnership and collaboration involving researchers, 
local communities, conservationists and wildlife managers. This will result in the 
production of high quality ecological knowledge, more sustainable conservation action, 
and has the potential to create models for the rest of the world to emulate. 
 
We sincerely hope that the honourable members of the Standing Committee will find our 
comments useful and present them to the  Government of India. ATREE and the Biodiversity 
Collaborative will be pleased to engage further to address questions as needed. 
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
Sincerely, 
Centre for Policy Design, ATREE and the Biodiversity Collaborative 
 
184

Submission to
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change
Parliament of India
COMMENTS ON
THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2021
185

COMMENTS ON  
THE WILDLIFE 
(PROTECTION) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2021  
Submission to the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change, Parliament of India  
 
 
 
Deb a dityo Sinha  
Deepa Padmar  
 
 
January  202 2  
 
 
 
Cover Image: Habitat of Sambar Deer, Melghat Tiger Reserve in Maharashtra  ( photograph : Debadityo Sinha )  
186

 
 
This is an independent, non - commissioned piece of 
work by the Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy, an 
independent think - tank doing legal research to help 
make better laws and improve governance for public 
good.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
About the Authors  
 
Debadityo Sinha is a Senior Resident Fellow  and Lead, Climate & Ecosystems  at Vidhi. Deepa 
Padmar is a  Research Fellow at Vidhi - Karnataka .   
 T
he authors would like to thank Mr Alok Prasanna Kumar (Co-Founder, Vidhi), Mr Ananda 
Banerjee (Advisor to Climate & Ecosystems team at Vidhi), Mr Vijay Dhasmana (Eco-restoration 
Practitioner), and Ms Mridhu Tandon (Research Fellow,  Climate & Ecosystems at Vidhi) for 
sharing their inputs.
 
Correspondence  
 
For any clarifications/ queries in relation to this submission ,  please contact:  
 
Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy  
A - 232, Ratanlal Sahdev Marg,  
Defence Colony, New Delhi - 110024  
 
011 - 431 02767/43831699  
debadityo.sinha@vidhilegalpolicy.in  
187

Table of Contents  
 
Executive Summary and  Introduction  ……….…………………………………………………………………………………………… …… . 1  
 
A. Suggestion s  on General Amendments  
1. Amendment to Section 28  ………… …………………………………………………………………………………………………….  3  
2. Amendment to  Section 2 9 ………… ……………………………………………………………………………………… ……………  3  
3. Regulation of Invasive Species Must Include ‘ Invasive Native Species’  ……………… ……………  3  
4. Declaring of a  S pecies as Vermin  ………………………………………………………………………………………… . ………  5  
5. Clarity on Transfer and Interstate Transport of Live Elephants  ………………………………………… .. 8  
B. Suggestions on the Amendments Related to CITES  
1.  Compliance with CITES Definitions  ………… ……………………………………………………………………………… . … ... 9  
2. Clarification of Import in The Context of Transit or Trans - Shipment  ………… ………… ……… …. . 10  
3. Function & Responsibilities of Management & Scientific Authorities  ………… ……………… …..  10  
4. Export Permits Must Incorporate IATA Standards for Transportation  ………… ………………….  11  
5. Reasoning for Exemptions Under Section 49 M (1) Must Be Given in Writing  ………… .. … .  11  
C. Additional Suggestions  
1. Protection of Wildlife Habitats Beyond Protected Areas  ………… ……………………………………… .. … .  12  
2. Establish  A Central Wildlife Authority  ………… ………………… ………… ………………… ……… . … …… … ……… …..  13  
D. Bibliography  ………… ………………… ………… ………………… ………… ………………… ………… ………………… ………… ………………… ….  14  
 
 
188

1  
Executive Summary and 
Introduction  
 
The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill 2021 (Bill No. 159/  2021) proposes to update and add 
several provisions to the existing Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972 (“ WPA ”) and streamline the same 
with other related laws and international commitments. A major addition is Chapter VB on 
regulating international trade in wildlife and the establishment of Management and Scientific 
Authorities to give effect to India’s commitment towards the Convention on Int ernational Trade in 
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (“ CITES ”).  
We appreciate the i nclusion of ‘alien invasive species’ and regulating the same under the new 
S e ction 62A(l), the giving up of ownership of captive animal or any trophy under Sectio n 42A (1), 
mandating consultation of the Gram Sabha in Protected Areas  (“ PA ”)  falling under Scheduled 
Areas or areas recognised under Forest Rights Act , 2006  as positive developments . Expansion of 
the definition of ‘person’ and inclusion of ex - situ conservation facilities under ‘zoos’ brings more 
clarity and expands the purview of the Act. We also appreciate the amendment of the t itle  of 38Y 
from ‘Tiger and other Endangered Species’ t o using the word ‘Wildlife’.  
Although the Bill appears to have been drafted with good intention s , our analysis indicates that 
several provisions can be improved to bring clarity , strengthen conservation  efforts  and effectively 
implement the WPA. We also t hink that there are a number of neglected aspects of wildlife 
management which may be addressed through this Bill. Our suggestions are broadly categorised 
as follows:  
 
A.  General amendments not related to CITES;  
B.  Amendments related to CITES in Chapter VB ;  
C.  New Suggestions (not covered by the Act or Bill) .  
 
In the first section, we have provided comments on clarifications necessary in certain ambiguous 
provisions  and definitions . We have also discussed the need for regulation of 'invasive native 
species' alon g with 'invasive alien species' to manage native species with known invasive 
characteristics. Additionally, w e have recommended the establish ment of  an Advisory Committee 
on Invasive Species. Our principles submissions include use  of  the term ‘problem anim al’ as 
opposed to ‘vermin’, specification of criteria and responsibilities in the process of declaration of  any 
species as ‘ problem animal ’ , and the introduction of an enabling provision to include feral 
population of domestic/tamed animals within the purv iew of this provision. Such feral animals, 
especially dogs ,  pose a threat to both ungulates (which they hunt) and to carnivores, since they 
carry infectious diseases like rabies, parvovirus, and distemper .  This is  particularly important as 
studies indicate  that that 60% of Emerging Infectious Diseases —  such as HIV, Ebola, SARS, Covid -
19 —  affecting humans, are zoonotic in origin and approximately 72% of these originate in wildlife .  
 
In the second section, we have provided detailed analysis and comments on the newly inserted 
c hapter on the implementation of CITES. Our major submissions propose improving definitions, 
and streamlining provisions in line with  the  CITES Model Law and international best practices. We 
have recommended increasing  the functions and responsibilities of the Management and 
Scientific Authorities constituted under this chapter.  
189

2     Comments on The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021  
 
In the last section, we have discussed the need to bring att ention towards protection of wildlife 
habitats and corridors outside the PA  network. We have recommended insertion of a new section 
to declare wildlife habitats  and corridors  outside PAs to be declared as ‘Deemed Wildlife Reserve’. 
We also recommend  the  es tablishment of  a Central Wildlife Authority with powers  similar to the  
National Tiger Conservation Authority ,  but with a wider jurisdiction over all wildlife habitats 
irrespective of their ownership and PA  status.  
 
190

3  
A. Suggestion s  on General 
Amendments  
 
1.  A mendment to Section 28  
 
The present Act allows the Chief Wildlife Warden (“ CWLW ”) to permit photography, research, 
tourism etc .  inside a sanctuary. This amendment proposes to insert provisions for permitting ‘ film -
making without making any change in the habitat or causing any adverse impact to the habitat 
or wildlife ’.  
 
It is submitted that ‘change in habitat’ and ‘adverse impact’  should be further explained to indicate 
the activities which may be considered to have adverse impact . The Bill must incorporate an 
inclusive definition clause on th is term. The definition may include removal of canopy, damage to 
soil, using of high beam lights, loud noise etc.  
2.  Amendment t o Section 29  
 
The proposed amendment seeks to exempt activities from the requirement of permission of 
National Board of Wildlife (“ NBWL ”) for certain circumstances ,  by inserting an explanation as 
follows:  
 
Explanation. — F or the purposes of this section, ‘grazing or movement of  livestock permitted 
under clause (d) of section 33, or hunting of wild animals under a permit granted under section 11 
or hunting without violating the conditions of a permit granted under section 1 2, or the exercise 
of any rights permitted to continue under clause (c) of sub - section (2) of section 24, or the bona 
fide use of drinking and household water by local communities, shall not be deemed to be an act 
prohibited under this section.  
 
This expla nation is a good addition and clarifies Section 29 -  particularly,  the provision o n  bona  fide 
use of drinking and household water by local communities. However, it is suggested that the  list 
of activities which can be  considered as household water use  must be prescribed,  to prevent 
misuse of the provision  for large scale agriculture and livestock rearing.  
 
Further, the portion of clause (d) of section 33, that hunting of wild animals under a permit granted 
under section 11 or hunting without violating the conditions of a permit granted under section 12 ’, 
must be rephrased as ‘ hunting of wild animals permitted under section 11 and 12 ’  as there is 
already a separate section for penalties under Section 51 of the WPA.  
 
3.  Regulation o f Invasive Speci es Must Include ‘ Invasive Native 
Species’  
 
The Bill proposes to insert a definition of invasive alien species as follows:  
 
191

4     Comments on The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021  
“I nvasive alien species" means a species of animal or plant which is not native to India and whose 
introduction or spread may threaten or adversely impact wildlife or its habitat. ’  
 
The Bill also proposes a new section to regulate the spread of invasive species in India as follows:  
 
"62A. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, regulate or prohibit the  import, trade, 
pos session or proliferation of invasive alien species which pose a threat  to the wildlife  or 
habitat in India.  
 
(2) The Central Government may authorise the Director or any other officer to  seize and 
dispose of, including through destruction, the species referred to in the  notification issued 
under sub - section (1).  
 
While introducing a provision to regulate invasive alien species in India is a valuable step, the Act 
must include a definition of ‘ invasive native species ’  to restrict the spread of In dian species with 
known invasive properties within their range and beyond.  
 
In some cases, State governments have used species that are non - native to the ecosystem  as part 
of afforestation programs ,  which have immense ecological impact, altered soil proper ty, and 
adversely affected local flora and fauna. These  species are not legally classified as alien invasive and 
therefore used extensively in afforestation and restoration programs leading to a cascade of 
ecological disaster.  For instance, Chir Pine ( Pin us roxburghii ) which is native to Himalayas is now 
considered locally invasive in some areas due to the negative impact on biodiversity and alteration 
to soil properties.
1 2 3
 In some cases, species like Katsagoon ( Haplophragma adenophyllum ) which 
are native to Eastern India, have become invasive in other states due to their utilization in 
afforestation campaigns , owing to their resilience and quick growth potential. 
4
 
 
Similarly,  an animal which is considered important or protected in one ecosystem ma y become 
invasive in another ecosystem within India. For eg. The population of House Sparrows ( passer 
domesticus ), which is native to the Indian subcontinent, appears to be decreasing
5
; it is classified 
as an invasive alien species by the National Biodive rsity Authority (“ NBA ”) in islands of India.
6
  Indian 
bullfrog, Spotted Deer, Indian Hog Deer, Indian Barking Deer, Asian Elephant are all native to India 
and protected under Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972 (“ WPA ”) but are also designated as invasive 
alien  species for island ecosystems in India by the NBA.
7
  
 
Following are our suggestion to regulate the issue of invasive species in India:  
 
i) The invasive species definition should include two categories of alien invasive species -
Invasive alien species ; an d Invasive native species  
 
ii) An Advisory committee on Invasive Species may be constituted under the chairmanship 
of Director - NBA along with representatives from Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change (“ MoEFCC ”), Ministry of Agriculture and re presentation of State Wildlife 
Division -  on rotational basis -  to advise the Central Government on identification and 
regulation of invasive species in India.  
 
iii) A new Schedule may be added to the WPA listing names of plants, animals and any 
microorganisms considered as  invasive species. The Schedule may initially list 170 species of 
plants and animals identified as invasive species by the NBA.
8
 
 
iv) The Stat e Governments must have the power to notify any species as ‘invasive’ within any 
forest division or administrative units in the state.  
192

5  
 
 
 
Katsagon ( Haplophragma adenophyllum ) plantation in Chandra Prabha  Wildlife Sanctuary . Uttar Pradesh . 
While the tree is known to survive harsh conditions, over the years it replaces native vegetation and 
replaces a scrub land ecosystem to a wooded ecosystem, eventually leading change in faunal diversity . 
( Photo: Debadityo Sinha, Chandraprabh a  Wildlife Division, Varanasi, March 202 1)  
 
4.  Declaring a  Species as Vermin  
 
In the present Act, the Central Government can declare any wild animal not listed in Schedule I 
and part II of the Schedule II as vermin under Section 62. The proposed amendment has reduced 
the list of wild animals appended to the Act from four schedules to two schedules. In doing so, the 
Bill now proposes that any wild animal not listed in Schedule I can be declared as vermin , which  
means  that all animals listed in Schedule II can be  declared as vermin. The list includes 41 
mammals, 864 birds, 12 reptiles, 5 amphibians, 58 insects, 14 molluscs, 10 sponges which may be 
declared as vermin by the Central Government.  
 
While most of the animals which can be declared vermin in the present Act and the proposed Bill 
may not have significant differences in composition of species covered -  the Central Government 
must deliberate the justification for declaring a long list of wild animals which may be declared as 
vermin, as such. Declaration of an y wild animal as vermin must be undertaken with utmost caution 
and scientific rigour.  
 
The purpose of declaration of any animal as vermin has been to control the population of an animal 
which is beyond management. Such an exercise must be undertaken with utmost caution and 
respecting the constitutional duty (Article 48A) of the government to protect forests and wildlife. 
While some states allow killing of animals outside Reserve Forests and Protected Areas
9
, some 
states have imposed supervision of the For est Department while culling the animals notified 
under Schedule V.
10
 With no procedure established in the statute, the States have been prescribing 
their own protocols in exercising their power to cull animals declared as vermin.  
193

6     Comments on The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021  
 
For clarity on procedur e and ensuring precautions, the Act must prescribe the criteria and process 
of declaration of an animal as vermin in a time bound manner, outline responsibilities at different 
levels and ensure transparency of the entire process. Following are our suggesti on for the 
provisions related to declaration of vermin:  
 
i) Substitute The Term ‘Vermin’ With ‘Problem Animals/ Species’ and Define Criteria  
 
‘ V ermin’ is a derogatory term being used for species in a law that  is meant for protection and 
conservation of wildlife. W e strongly suggest that the term be replaced with a scientifically 
acceptable word which does not stigmatise the animal but indicates a decision taken for 
management of the ecosystem. One alternative may  be to use the term ‘problem animal/species’ 
instead of vermin.  
 
We also suggest that problem animals must be defined under the Act and specific criteria under 
which any animal can be notified as a problem animal  must be provided . We also suggest that the 
notification declaring any species as problem animal under Section 62 must be prescribed to be 
for one month which can be extended subject to review of the situation.  
 
ii) Declaration o f Problem Animals Must Be Limited to A Rang e and Include Recommendation 
of Chief Wildlife Warden  
 
Many of the species which may be declared as problem animals include ungulates such as Spotted 
Deer or Sambar which are  major prey for tigers. While this  species may become a problem species 
in a lands cape where it has no natural predators left, the same species may be key to survival  of 
eco - system  in another landscape within the same state. With one - third of tigers now residing 
outside protected areas, conservation of such prey populations becomes very  important. Also, 
many wild animals, especially deers and wild boars, are major hunting targets for meat. In which 
case, declaration of any species as problem animals may become a target for hunters and lead to 
extermination of the species as opposed to po pulation control.  
 
We strongly suggest that the Act should  clarify that identification  of problem animals must be 
undertaken at district or forest division level only. The final decision for declaration of any species 
as problem animal m ay  be taken only after recommendation of the CWLW  and final approval of 
the Central Government . Proper record of the population of the species must be maintained and 
justification backed by an expert review must be provided before declaration of any species as 
problem animal.  
 
To prevent complete extermination of the species, and its misuse to satisfy the hunting urge of 
people, the killing of problem animals must be undertaken under the supervision of the Divisional 
Forest Officer (“ DFO ”) of the concerned a reas involved and such deaths must be officially recorded 
by the Divisional Forest Officer. A weekly status report must be submitted by the concerned DFO 
to the CWLW. For better implementation of this provision, the concerned DFO must be designated 
as Noda l Officer, to monitor effective implementation during the period when a species is under 
declaration as a problem animal.  
 
iv) Central And State Government to Publish Information Related to  Declaration Of Problem 
Animals And The Status Report On Its Websit e  
 
It is suggested that the Central Government must maintain a database of the notifications it 
publishes under Section 62 on the website of MoEFCC under a separate section with clear 
194

7  
indication of the expiry of the notification and details of the district /forest division where it is 
applicable. The same shall also be displayed on websites for the concerned State.  
 
v) Feral Population of Domestic/ Tamed Animals Should b e Included  
 
In many wildlife habitats including Protected Areas (“ PA ”), the feral popula tion of dogs and 
livestock  compete directly with the wild animals. In certain areas, the feral dog populations have 
become a threat to wildlife by killing animals and replacing top carnivores. According to a study, 
feral dogs in India reportedly attacked 8 0 species, of which 31 were IUCN Red list threatened 
species, including four Critically Endangered species.
11
 The study also mentions that in 45% of the 
cases the dogs killed the animals and 48% of the incidents were reported in and around wildlife 
protected areas.  The report Status of Tigers: Co - Predators and Prey in India (2018)
12
  by National 
Tiger Conservati on Authority (“ NTCA ”) stated:  
 
“Feral dogs were detected in most tiger reserves…. Dogs are a threat to both ungulates 
(which they hunt) and to carnivores, since they carry infectious diseases like rabies, 
parvovirus, and distemper.”  
 
Similarly, the feral p opulation of livestock within a wildlife sanctuary pose a serious threat to native 
herbivores by directly competing for resources, causing damage due to soil compaction,  and 
wiping out palatable grasses due to overgrazing.  
 
 
Feral dogs attacking a Spotted Deer. Managing feral dogs is one of the major  challenges  to wards  wildlife  
conservation  in India. Without any legislation to manage dog populations in wildlife habitats , forest 
managers find it difficult to check such incidents. (Photo: Vikas Patil/BBC)  
 
Studies indicate that 60% of Emerging Infectious Diseases —  such as HIV, Ebola, SARS, Co vid - 19 —  
affecting humans, are zoonotic in origin and approximately 72% of these originate in wildlife.
13
 
 
W e strongly suggest that the proposed amendment must include a clause on declaring feral 
animals (including dogs and livestock) in and around wildlif e habitat as a problem animal.  
P ermissions to control the population of feral animals should have an overriding effect on any 
other laws ( e.g.,  Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960).  
195

8     Comments on The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021  
 
5.  Clarity on Transfer and Interstate Transport of Live 
Elephants ( Amendment to Section 43)  
 
Section 43 (1) prohibits commercial transfer of captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured 
trophy by the person holding ownership certificate. Section 43 (2) mandates reporting of inter -
state transport of animal, animal art icle, trophy,  or uncured trophy by holder of the ownership 
certificate to CWLW/ authorised officer. The newly inserted Section 43 (4) states that:  
 
"This section shall not apply to the transfer or transport of any live elephant by a person 
having a certificate of ownership, where such person has obtained prior permission from 
the State Government on fulfilment of such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.”  
 
The section is unclear as to the meaning of ‘ prior permission of State Go vernment ’ and which State 
government such permission must be obtained from -  whether from the originating state or the 
state to which transfer/ transport has occurred. It must be clarified that intimation of transfer/ 
interstate transport of Elephants must be made to the respective CWLWs/ authorised officials.  
 
It is necessary in the interest of elephant protection, that any transfer or inter - state transport be 
notified to the CWLW or authorised official of the jurisdiction where the Elephant has been 
trans ferred or transported from and the jurisdiction to which the Elephant has been transferred or 
transported to. Such a record must be maintained by the respective CWLWs or authorised officials.  
196

9  
B. Suggestions on the 
Amendments Related to 
Regulation of Inter national 
Trade/ CITES compliance  
The Bill proposes to insert a new Chapter VB titled ‘ Regulation of  International Trade in  
Endangered Species of  Wild Fauna and  Flora as  p er Convention o n International Trade i n 
Endangered Species o f Wild Fauna a nd Flora ’. F ollowing are detailed comments and suggestions 
on this chapter.  
 
1.  Compliance with CITES Definitions  
 
Several  terms used in the amendment require definitions to be brought in line with Convention 
on International Trade in  Endangered Species of  Wild Fauna and  Flora (“ CITES ”) requirements:  
 
i) As per the amendment, Section 49D(a) defines ‘ artificially propagated ’  t o ‘ mean plants which 
have been grown under controlled conditions from plant materials grown under similar 
conditions .  
 
The term ‘ similar conditions ’ is ambiguous. Therefore, it is advisable that artificially propagated be 
defined as to ‘ plants grown under controlled conditions from seeds, cuttings, divisions, callus 
tissues or other plant tissues, spores or other propagules that either are exempt from the control 
of the Convention or have been derived from cultivated parental stock’ to comply with the Model  
CITES Law .
14
  
 
ii) The term  ‘ captivity' ’  must  be replaced with the more comprehensive term ‘controlled 
environment’  or incorporate the definition as proposed under the CITES Model Law. For the 
purposes of the amendment, captivity may be defined as   
 
‘Environment that is manipulated for the purpose of producing animals of a particular species, 
that has boundaries design ed to prevent animals, eggs or gametes of the species from entering 
or leaving the controlled environment, and the general characteristics of which may include but 
are not limited to artificial housing; waste removal; health care; protection from predators ; and 
artificially supplied food.’
15
 
 
iii) The Bill mentions ‘ derivatives ’  on several occasions, including under Section 49 D (n), to define 
the term ‘ specimen ’. However, the Bill does not define derivatives.  
 
The Model CITES Law, defines “derivatives” in  relation to an animal, plant or other organism, to 
mean any part, tissue or extract, of an animal, plant or other organism, whether fresh, preserved 
or processed, and includes any chemical compound derived from such part, tissue or extract.
16
 
 
This definition may be adopted under the amendment.  
 
197

10     Comments on The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021  
2.  Clarification o f Import in The Context of Transit or Trans -
Shipment  
 
The terms ‘ transit ’  and ‘ trans - shipment ’  have not been defined in the Bill. It is pertinent to note 
that CITES applies to import but not transit/ trans - shipment. Therefore, clarity on the difference 
between the two is necessary. Currently, import may be understood to mean the release of 
specimen s after  Customs clearance. However, import may also mean any introduction into the 
national territory, whatever the Customs procedure under which the specimens have been placed, 
including their introduction into Customs free zones, free ports,  or bonded wa rehouses or for 
temporary storage.
17
 This ambiguity must be resolved.  
 
Resolution of Conference of the Parties No. 4.10 under CITES contains a definition of transit and 
trans - shipment which makes it clear that it "refers to specimens that remain in Customs control 
and are in the process of shipment to a named consignee when a ny interruption in the 
movement arises only from the arrangements necessitated by this form of traffic .”
18
 This 
definition may be adopted under the Bill.  Thus, the introduction of specimens under any Customs 
procedure other than transit and trans - shipment  should be considered as an import under CITES. 
19
 
 
However, Conference of the Parties No. 7.4, recommends that " Parties may inspect, to the extent 
possible under their national legislation, specimens in transit or being transhipped, to verify 
the presence  of a valid CITES permit or certificate as required under the Convention or to 
obtain satisfactory proof of its existence " and " adopt legislation allowing them to seize and 
confiscate transit shipments without valid permit or certificate or proof of the ex istence .”
20
 This 
is in furtherance of CITES implementation and to introduce checks on illegal transits or trans -
shipments. Additionally, provision to this effect may be adopted either in the Bill or rules that may 
be framed thereof . “  
 
 
3.  F unction & Responsibilities of Management & Scientific 
Authorities  
 
Management & Scientific Authorities have been constituted under Section 49E & 49F of the Bill. 
The legislative establishment of these authorities is appreciable and necessary.  
 
The functions and resp onsibilities of Management authorities are mentioned under Section 49E 
(2) & (3). The functions are issuance of permits and certificates for trade of scheduled specimens. It 
is advisable that basic functions of the Management Authority must be outlined in the 
Amendment. Specifically, it must include the following:  
 
▪  The power of Management Authorities to advise Central Government on CITES 
implementation  
▪  The mandate of Management authority to conduct training & awareness programs on 
CITES for relevant officia ls & organisations,  
▪  The Power of the Authority to communicate with the Secretariat and other countries on 
scientific, administrative, enforcement and other issues related to implementation of the 
Convention  
 
198

11  
These are functions as prescribed under the Mod el CITES Law, as well as provisions embedded in 
legislations of countries such as South Africa
21
.  
 
Additionally, the Scientific Authority designated under Section 49F must have the additional 
function of advising the Management Authority on the choice of a rescue centre or other place for 
the disposal of confiscated specimens.  
 
4.  Export Permits Must Incorporate IATA Standards for 
Transportation  
 
Incorporation of Live Animals Regulations of the International Air Transport Association (“ IATA ”) 
has been recommended under the Model CITES Law. Conference of the Parties No. 7.13 
recommends that IATA Live Animals Regulations are deemed to meet the CITES Guidelines in 
respect of air transport.  
 
IATA is the worldwide standard for transporting live animals by commercial airlines. Whether 
it is a pet, an animal transported for zoological or agricultural purposes or for any other reason, 
the objective of the Live Animal Regulation is to ensure that all animals are transported safely 
and humanely by air
22
. In a Directive of 1991 on the transport of live animals, the European 
Community requires that CITES specimens are transported in conformity with the latest CITES 
Guidelines or IATA Regulations, while United  States has laid down its own detailed "Standa rds for 
the Humane and Healthful Transport of Wild Mammals and Birds to the United States" with which 
the exporters of wildlife to the United States must comply.
23
  
 
In the absence of any specific live animal air transport regulation in India, incorporatio n of the 
IATA is advisable.  
 
5 .  Reasoning for Exemptions Under Section 49  M  (1) Must Be 
Given in  Writing  
 
As per the proposed Section 49M (1) the Central government is empowered to exempt one or more 
specimens of any animal species included in Schedule IV from the requirement to report 
possession of such specimens to the Management Authority. To ensure transpa rency, it is 
advisable that the Act mandate that every exemption under the section be accompanied by a 
written statement on reason/ rationale for exemption and a mandatory public consultation must 
be held.   
199

12     Comments on The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021  
C. Additional Suggestions  
 
1. Protection of Wild life Habitats Beyond Protected Areas  
 
The WPA in its present form adopts an approach of declaring areas  as P a s , which include d  Wildlife 
Sanctuar ies , National Parks  and  Conservation/Community Reserves for protection of wildlife. As of 
March 2021, India has managed to add 981 PAs which account for approximately 5% of its 
geographical area under PA, spread over 104 National Parks, 566 Wildlife Sanctuaries, 97 
Conservation Reserves and 214 Community Reserves.
24
 Most of these PAs are administrative 
boundaries created out of convenience, and may not have any conservation benefit as they do not 
necessarily overlap with the ecological boundaries of wildlife.  
 
Majority of the wi ldlife use areas outside PAs for access to food, water, and survival. With 22% of 
India’s geographical land under forest cover
25
 and just 5% of the land under the PA network, a large 
tract of wildlife habitats in India still falls  under Reserve/Protected F orests and private lands which 
are regulated under Indian Forest Act 1927 (“ IFA ”) and other state legislations. They act as 
important wildlife refuge and connectors with the more strongly guarded, but scattered, network 
of PAs across the country. A signifi cant population of big carnivores such as Striped Hyena, Dhole, 
Sloth Bear, Grey Wolf, Golden Jackal are found in areas outside the PAs and use the same for 
breeding as well as for other survival needs.
26 27
 As per the latest Tiger Census, nearly one - third of 
the tigers live outside protected areas in India.
28
 However, despite being home to rich biodiversity 
and protected wildlife, such forests are never given legal protection as that of a PA.
29 30
 
 
The connec tivity among PAs and habitats in such state managed forests and private lands are 
increasingly being obstructed due to various land use, land cover changes and are also one of the 
most human - dominated wildlife areas, prone to heightened human - wildlife conf lict and 
poaching. These habitats remain neglected under India’s wildlife law. There is growing consensus 
on the importance of protecting wildlife corridors and habitats outside PAs scientifically as well as 
legally.
31 32
  
 
The WPA provides limit ed protecti on to forests outside PAs. These wildlife habitats are neither 
properly managed nor protected. It is also worth mentioning that the State Forest Divisions 
outside PAs lack the support, capacity, and knowledge to manage wildlife. Except for the NTCA, 
which protects tiger reserves, it is unusual for agencies under the WPA to intervene in wildlife 
habitat protection in such areas. This is in contrast with PAs, which are specifically designated 
under the WPA. Any developmental or industrial activity involving t he use of PAs require prior 
recommendation of the NBWL, but this is not required outside PAs and their designated buffer/ 
eco sensitive zones.
33
 
 
Further, it is difficult to protect those wildlife habitats outside PAs that  are not part of any State 
regulated forests such as habitats which constitute grassland ecosystems, floodplains of rivers, 
wetlands which are habitat and nesting sites of important species, river channels and other 
migration routes.  
 
The proposed amendme nt must include a section to mandate the Central and State government 
to protect and conserve areas outside PAs which are known and recognized as wildlife habitats. 
The Bill also misses an opportunity to recognize and protect wildlife corridors and importa nt 
migratory routes and flyways
34
.  
200

13  
 
Thus, we suggest that a separate section 36 E on ‘ Deemed Wildlife Reserve ’ should be inserted 
for areas protected as Forests (IFA and other State Forest regulations) which has recorded wildlife 
presence or recognized as  wildlife corridors. Such Deemed Wildlife Reserve may be continued to 
be managed under the Working Plans of the respective State Forest Divisions; however, provisions 
of S ection 29 must apply to them.  
 
2. Establish  A Central Wildlife Authority  
 
Statutory b odies like the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (“ WCCB ”) cannot exercise independent 
authority to curb poaching and are reliant instead on state forest officers. Other bodies like the 
NBA and State Biodiversity Boards under the Biodiversity Act, 2002, and the National and State 
Boards of Wildlife are advisory in nature and lack teeth to take measures to protect wildlife. Areas 
outside PAs are one of the most threatened habitats in terms of both human - wildlife conflict and 
poaching due to reduced restriction s and monitoring. Even the areas falling under the PA network 
suffer from lack of adequate training and knowledge of forest staff to manage wildlife.
35
  
 
The working plans of all forest divisions (including non - wildlife division) in India should 
compulsori ly include wildlife conservation plans, efficient monitoring mechanisms and measures 
for mitigating human - wildlife conflicts. C omprehensive management of this kind  requires an 
expert body that can assume primary responsibility for the protection of wildlif e habitats and  
advise governments on all matters related to wildlife management and human - wildlife 
interaction. The Vidhi’s Briefing Book 2020 titled ‘ Towards A Post - Covid India: 25 governance 
challenges and legal reforms ’
36
 suggested creation of an indepe ndent Wildlife Authority to 
address some of these limitations. The proposed reforms are as follows:  
 
I.  Establish a ‘ National Wildlife Protection Authority ’ (“ NWPA ”) under the WPA, with powers 
like  the NTCA, but with wider jurisdiction for the protection of all scheduled wildlife species 
and their habitats, irrespective of the ownership of land. The NWPA should have at least 10 
regional headquarters representing each biogeographic zone assisted by t he Regional 
Offices of the MoEFCC.  
 
II.  Bring all wildlife - related departments and agencies (including the NTCA, the NBWL and 
the WCCB) under the authority of the NWPA.  
 
III.  Confer powers on the NWPA to approve working plans and other management activities 
propos ed by forest divisions. The NWPA must ensure their compatibility with regional 
wildlife requirements, prevent ecologically unsustainable land use, frame guidelines, 
facilitate research, organise the training of frontline staff in the management of human -
wi ldlife interaction and facilitate community - driven conservation efforts.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
201

14     Comments on The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021  
 
D. Bibliography  
 
 
1.  Nautiyal, Ankush, ‘Is Chir Pine Displacing Banj  Oak in the Central 
Himalaya? Socioeconomic Implications for Local People and the 
Conservation of Oak Forest Biodiversity’ 2015 
<http://scholarworks.uark.edu/etd/1330>  
2.  Arvind Bijalwan, ‘If we really want to save the Himalayan oak, we 
should not chop them f or developmental activities’, 30 April 2018 
<https://www.downtoearth.org.in/news/energy/for - the - sake - of -
oaks - 60316>  
3.  J.S Singh, Y.S Rawat & O.P Chaturvedi, ‘Replacement of oak forest 
with pine in the Himalaya affects the nitrogen cycle’, Nature, 1984 
<https ://doi.org/10.1038/311054a0>.  
4.  Debadityo Sinha & Rakesh Chaudhary, ‘Wildlife Inventory and 
Proposal for Sloth bear Conservation Reserve in Marihan - Sukrit -
Chunar  Landscape of Mirzapur Forest Division, Uttar Pradesh’, 2019 
<https://vindhyabachao.org/embeds/Mirzapur_Wildlife_Final_Web
_July2019.pdf>  
5.  BirdLife International (2022) Species factsheet: Passer domesticus. 
Downloaded from http://www.birdlife.org on 15/01/2 022  
6.  Compiled by S. Sandilyan, National Biodiversity Authority, ‘Invasive 
ALien Species of India’ 2018 
<http://nbaindia.org/uploaded/pdf/Iaslist.pdf>  
7.  ibid  
8.  n6  
9.  Rajeshwari Ganesan, ‘Wild boar declared vermin in Uttrakhand’, 10 
Feb 2016 <https://www.downtoearth .org.in/news/wildlife -
biodiversity/wild - boar - declared - vermin - in - uttrakhand - 52774>  
10.  Wildlife Wing, HP Forest Department, ‘A protocol/guidelines with 
reference to declaration of monkeys as vermin in 92 Tehsils/ Sub -
Tehsils in Himachal pradesh including in MC Shimla’ 
<https://hpforest.nic.in/files/Protocol_Wildlife.pdf>  
11.  Clifford Warwick, Catrina Steedman, Regulating pets using an 
objective positive list approach, Journal of Veterinary Behavior, 
2021 
<https://zslpublications.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1 111/a
cv.12389>  
12.  Y.V Jhala, Q. Qureshi, and A.K.Nayak,  National Tiger Conservation 
Authority & Wildlife Institute of India, ‘Status of Tigers, Co -
predators and Prey in India’, 2018 <https://moef.gov.in/wp -
content/uploads/2020/07/Tiger - Status - Report - 2018_For -
Web_compressed_compressed.pdf>  
13.  K. Jones, N. Patel, M. Levy, et al. ‘Global trends in emerging 
infectious diseases’, Nature, 2008 
<https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06536>  
14.  Cites Secretariat, Model Law on International Trade in Wild Flora 
and Fauna, 2021 
<htt ps://cites.org/sites/default/files/projects/NLP/E - Model_law -
revised_Oct.2021.FINAL.DRAFT.pdf>  
15.  ibid  
16.  n14  
17.  Cyrille de Klemm, ‘Guidelines for Legislation to Implement CITES’ 
IUCN Environmental Policy and Law Paper No. 26, 1993 
<https://portals.iucn.org/library/ efiles/documents/EPLP - 026.pdf  
18.  Conf. 9.7 (Rev. CoP15) <https://cites.org/eng/res/09/09 -
07R15.php>  
19.  ibid  
20.  Conf. 9.7 (Rev. CoP15) <https://cites.org/eng/res/09/09 -
07R15.php>  
21.  CITES Regulation, 2010 
<http://www.saflii.org/za/legis/consol_reg/coitiesowfafr2010832. p
df>  
22.  IATA, ‘Live Animals’ 
<https://www.iata.org/en/programs/cargo/live - animals/>  
23.  n17  
24.  National Wildlife Database Cell <https://wii.gov.in/nwdc_aboutus>  
25.  Santiago Saura, Örjan Bodin, Marie - Josée Fortin, ‘Stepping stones 
are crucial for species' long‐distance  dispersal and range expansion 
through habitat networks’, Journal of Applied Ecology 2013 
<https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365 -
2664.12179>  
26.  Melursus ursinus Sloth Bear, The IUCN Red list of threatened 
Species, IUCN 
<https://www.iuc n.org/sites/dev/files/import/downloads/sloth_be
ar.pdf>  
27.  n12  
28.  n12  
29.  Nabaraun Guha, Mongabay India, 'Neglect shrouds Behali Reserve 
Forest’s biodiversity along Assam - Arunachal border', 23 July 2021 
<https://india.mongabay.com/2021/07/neglect - shrouds - behali -
reser ve - forests - biodiversity - along - assam - arunachal - border/>  
30.  Mayank Aggarwal, Mongabay India, 'Declare UP's Mirzapur forests 
as a conservation reserve,says study', 2019 
<https://india.mongabay.com/2019/08/declare - ups - mirzapur -
forests - as - a - conservation - reserve - sa ys - study/>  
31.  Goa Foundation v. Union of India, (2011) 15 SCC 791  
32.  Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change, Forest Survey 
of India, 2019 <https://fsi.nic.in/isfr19/vol1/executive -
summary.pdf>  
33.  MOEFCC, F. No. 6 - 6/2020 WL Part (1), Procedure for consideration 
of developmental projects located within 10 km of National 
Park/Wildlife Sanctuary by Standing Committee of the National 
Board for Wildlife seeking environmental clearance under the 
provisions of the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
Noti fication, 2006 
<http://environmentclearance.nic.in/writereaddata/OMs - 2004 -
2021/233_OM_16_07_2020.pdf>  
34.  Indian is signatory of CMS: The Convention urges parties to protect 
migratory species and take individual or cooperate in adopting 
necessary steps to cons erve such species and their habitat  
35.  Minutes of the 24th Meeting of the Standing Committee of National 
Board for Wildlife, 13 December 2011 <https://moef.gov.in/wp -
content/uploads/2018/03/mom - 24 - 13.12.11.pdf>  
36.  Vidhi Centre for Legal policy, Towards a Post - Co vid India: 25 
Governance Challenges and Legal Reforms, 2020 
<https://vidhilegalpolicy.in/research/towards - a - post - covid - india -
25 - governance - challenges - and - legal - reforms/>  
202

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About the Authors  
 
 
 
 
 
A - 232, Ratanlal Sahdev Marg,  
Defence  Colony,  New Delhi - 110024  
011 - 43102767/43831699  
 
www.vidhilegalpolicy.in  
203

The Wildlife(Protection)AmendmentBill, 2021
Recommendations
to Strengthen 
Submitted to
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment, Forests, and Climate Change,
Parliament of India
204

Wildlife Trust of India                                                    Recommendations to Strengthen The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
 
  1 
 
Table of Contents 
 
1. Chapter I of the Principal Act _______________________________________________ 3 
Addition / changes in Definition ___________________________________________________ 3 
2. Chapter II of the Principal Act _______________________________________________ 5 
Constitution of Standing Committee of SBWL ________________________________________ 5 
3. Chapter III of the Principal Act ______________________________________________ 6 
Ex-gratia support for wildlife-caused damage ________________________________________ 6 
4. Chapter IV of the Principal Act ______________________________________________ 6 
Legal mandate to institutions constituted for participatory forest management ____________ 6 
Grant of permit for research ______________________________________________________ 7 
Banning use of injurious substances in sanctuaries and its eco-sensitive zone ______________ 8 
Management Plans of sanctuary and national parks ___________________________________ 8 
Management of Community Reserve ______________________________________________ 11 
5. Chapter V of the Principal Act ______________________________________________ 11 
Ownership transfer of elephants __________________________________________________ 11 
6. Chapter VI of the Principal Act _____________________________________________ 12 
Powers to CITES authorities and other enforcement agencies __________________________ 12 
7. Chapter VII of the Principal Act _____________________________________________ 13 
Declaration of certain wild animals as Vermin _______________________________________ 13 
8. Wildlife conservation outside Protected Areas ________________________________ 13 
i. Legal recognition to elephant corridors __________________________________________ 14 
ii. Inclusive management of wildlife corridors and habitats by engaging other landowners ___ 14 
iii. Stopping migration of elephants should be an offence ______________________________ 15 
9. Schedules of wild animals _________________________________________________ 15 
 
 
 
 
205

Wildlife Trust of India                                                    Recommendations to Strengthen The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
 
  2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The act's preamble has been revised, offering more comprehensive 
legal support for wildlife conservation in India, which is a great step 
forward. As a result, the amendment has added and substituted 
provisions under several sections. The amendment broadens the scope 
of the act by including a mechanism for implementation of the 
provisions under Convention on International Trade in Endangered 
Species (CITES), a key international wildlife commitment for India.  
However, there are some significant gaps, particularly in the 
conservation of animal habitats and connectivities, as well as other 
inadequacies that should be addressed in order for it to be more 
effective. Wildlife Trust of India’s comments and suggestions are in this 
document. 
  
206

Wildlife Trust of India                                                    Recommendations to Strengthen The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
 
  3 
 
1. Chapter I of the Principal Act  
Addition / changes in Definition 
i. Electrocution has emerged as a popular method of hunting wild 
animals in both aquatic and terrestrial environments. Thus , it should 
be included to the Act under section 2(16) (b).  
ii. There is currently no distinct definition for physically or chemically 
capturing any wild animal for the purposes of research, conservation 
translocations, disease investigation and treatment, or human -wild 
animal conflict mitigation. And any attempt to do  so is usually 
classified as 'hunting.' It is proposed that such acts be given a distinct 
definition.  
Some suggestions include the following: Restraint, Immobilization, and 
Capture      
iii. Section 2 (16 A) of the amendment defines a 'invasive alien species' as 
"a species of animal or plant which is not native to India and whose 
introduction or spread may threaten or adversely impact wild life or its 
habitat." The definition is not correct scientifically. 
India is a signatory to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), 
which defines Invasive Alien Species as "plants, animals, pathogens, 
and other organisms that are non -native to an ecosystem,  and which 
may cause  economic or environmental harm or  adversely affect 
human health. In particular, they impact a dversely upon biodiversity, 
including decline or elimination of native species - through 
competition, predation, or transmission of pathogens - and the 
disruption of local ecosystems and ecosystem functions”. It is evident 
that the species must be alien to an ecosystem, not a country.  
Thus, the amendment's definition of Invasive Alien Species is wrong 
and should be rectified. 
207

Wildlife Trust of India                                                    Recommendations to Strengthen The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
 
  4 
 
iv. In addition to the above changes, additional terms should be added to 
Section 2 of the Act, as participatory forest management is be coming 
increasingly important in the conservation of species and their habitat, 
with legal backing of the Forest Rights Act (2006) and government 
policy statements.  
As a result, some terms require legal support and consideration under 
the Wildlife (Protec tion) Act. We propose to include the following in 
Section 2:  
2 ( 10) ( A) - Community Forest Resources - as defined in t he Forest 
Rights Act, 2006 
2 (10) (B) - Critical Wildlife Habitat - as defined in the Forest Rights Act 
and includes critical habitats of Protected Areas and adjoining 
forest areas. 
2 ( 23) (A)-Participatory Forest Management as implemented in 
Protected Areas, with communities serving as Eco Development 
Committees (EDCs) an d the Forest Development Agency (FDA) acting 
as the nodal agency. 
 
v. Ecologically fragile areas adjoining National Parks and Sanctuaries are 
critical for sustaining their biodiversity and habitat integrity. They also 
function as shock absorbers against human  activities. Environment 
(Protection) Act,1986 designates such areas as Eco -Sensitive Zones 
(ESZ), critical for wildlife and habitat conservation both inside and 
outside protected areas. So, it is essential to include t his term in 
Section 2 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act; 
2(12) (a) - Eco-Sensitive Zones  (ESZ)- Area declared as ecologically 
sensitive as per Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and mandated by 
Supreme Court. 
 
vi. Linear infrastructure pose threats on wildlife and their habitat and is 
being referred in various legal contexts . Central government a lready 
has guidelines for linear infrastructure intrusion in natural areas . It is 
suggested that this is defined under Section 2 of the Wildlife 
(Protection) act as below; 
208

Wildlife Trust of India                                                    Recommendations to Strengthen The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
 
  5 
 
2 (18) (a)- Linear Infrastructure – Roads, rail, canals, penstocks, power 
lines, fences, and other man -made intrusions into natural ecosystems 
that are linear in structure. 
2. Chapter II of the Principal Act 
Constitution of Standing Committee of SBWL 
The addition of Section 6A to the Act would allow states to form a Standing 
Committee of the State Board for Wildlife (SBWL), which would be chaired by 
the State Board's Vice-Chair (the Minister-in-Charge of Forest and Wildlife), who 
could nominate up to ten members from among the State Board's members. 
This is similar to the provisions of a Standing Committee of the National Board 
for Wildlife provision (NBWL). It is anticipated that the Standing Committee will 
primarily focus on wildlife clearance issues,  with minimal attention paid to 
framing policies and advising the state governments on ways and means of 
supporting wildlife conservation.  
This amendment has two important ramifications in our opinion: 
a. Due to other commitments of the Chief Minister, it is quite possible that 
he or she will not attend SBWL meetings (as has been observed in 
NBWL), weakening the SBWL's policy decision function and speeding up 
wildlife clearances. 
b. The amendment merely specifies the maximum number of Standing 
Committee members and makes no mention of the minimum number 
of Standing Committee members. This might lead to a Standing 
Committee with only one member other than the Vice-Chair, rendering 
the organisation ineffective because other members will only be on 
paper. 
In l ight of this, we suggest that the SBWL's Standing Committee include all 
nominated SBWL members from non-governmental organisations, as well as the 
notable conservationists, ecologists, and environmentalists. 
209

Wildlife Trust of India                                                    Recommendations to Strengthen The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
 
  6 
 
3. Chapter III of the Principal Act 
Ex-gratia support for wildlife-caused damage 
Wild animal damage to human property and lives has emerged as the most 
pressing concern in wildlife management. Providing relief to those affected by 
such incidents on private or community land is one of the first initiat ives that 
the state government should take to increase people's tolerance for wild 
animals. In such cases, the state governments have systems to provide support. 
We propose the following clause to give it legal standing.   
11(4) The state shall provide ex-gratia support for wildlife damages to human 
lives and properties on private or community land. 
4. Chapter IV of the Principal Act 
Legal mandate to institutions constituted for participatory forest 
management  
The current policies mandate participatory forest management and constitute 
public institutions that do not get legal back up under Wildlife (Protection) Act, 
and these institutions function without a legal mandate. Such institutional and 
participatory mec hanisms like  Gram Sabha, Forest Rights Committee, 
Community Forest Resource, Management Plan  have legal backing under the 
FRA. Furthermore, the Forest Development Agency, created for joint forest 
management, should be assigned to carry out operations in sa nctuaries 
comparable to those carried out by the Tiger Conservation Foundation in tiger 
reserves (Section 38X). We suggest following insertions in Section 27; 
27(2) f- Institutions like Forest Development Agency (FDA) and Eco-Development 
Committees (EDC) i nvolved in Participatory Forest Management shall assist in 
the sustainable management and conservation of the Sanctuary while deriving 
means of livelihood from the resources of the sanctuary.  
27(2) g- Forest Development Agencies should have the following objectives  
i. promote ecotourism with involvement of EDCs and provide support to 
safeguard the Sanctuary 
210

Wildlife Trust of India                                                    Recommendations to Strengthen The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
 
  7 
 
ii. solicit financial, social, legal and other support for sustainable 
management and conservation of Sanctuary 
iii. mobilise financial resources of the Sanctuary by charging a fee approved 
by government from resorts/hotels and other agencies that depend on the 
resources of the sanctuary. 
iv. to support nature education, research and training needs of sanctuary 
Grant of permit for research 
i.  Section 28 of the Act empowers the Chief Wildlife Warden to grant permits to 
enter and reside in a sanctuary for various purposes, including scientific 
research. It is also a well-known fact that good research is a vital component 
of wildlife management. Academic and applied research is often conducted 
by independent educational, scientific, and conservation groups facing 
challenges obtaining research permits. Approval from the Central 
Government is necessary for research involving the handling  of Schedule I 
species. There is no transparent procedure for reviewing the merits of 
research proposals and timely granting of permits. Research grants are time-
bound, and most ecological research is season -specific; therefore, delays in 
granting permissi on imperil the project. Hence, emphasis should be on 
making the process of permission less cumbersome.  
The proposed amendment in the Schedules are more complex and technical, 
the Chief Wildlife Warden may require expert advice to take an informed 
decision. Moreover, overlap with Forest Rights Act would require support of 
social scientists too. We recommended including a separate sub -section 
(under Section 28) 'Granting research permits' outlining specific 
procedures for assessing the merit of the applicati on. Following insertion is 
suggested:  
28(3) - Chief Wildlife Warden shall, with approval of state government, 
nominate three experts/professionals in the field of wildlife research and 
social sciences for advising him in matters related to permission for scientific 
research. In Community Forest Resource areas this shall be done after 
consultation with the Gram Sabha. 
Provided that when permit is granted – 
211

Wildlife Trust of India                                                    Recommendations to Strengthen The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
 
  8 
 
(a) in respect of any wild animal specified in Schedule I, the Central 
government shall be intimated. 
(b) in respect of all wild animals, with previous permission of state 
government 
ii. Commercial films are very damaging, as was proven repeatedly in different 
areas. In many cases, courts have put stiff penalties on film crews. 
Amendment in Section 28 (b) has added film making under Photography. We 
want to make it more consonance with wildlife conservation by suggesting 
the following changes in the amendment 
28(b) Photography and wildlife film making without making any change in the 
habitat or causing any a dverse impact to the habitat or wildlife. Commercial 
films shall be allowed only in tourism zones. 
(suggested insertion in the amendment are underlined) 
Banning use of injurious substances in sanctuaries and its eco-sensitive zone 
Given the increasing number of incidents of wildlife casualty due to 
electrocution outside the sanctuary limits, it is cr itical to ban the use of this  
detrimental practice within the eco-sensitive zone of protected areas.  
Hence, the scope of Section 32 should be broadened by applying its provisions 
beyond the sanctuary boundary – extending its scope up to the eco -sensitive 
zone, and classifying the use of live electric wires to prevent crop raiding and 
electrofishing in water bodies as a 'injurious substance.' 
Management Plans of sanctuary and national parks 
Section 33 has been revised to emphasise the drafting of management plans for 
sanctuaries in accordance with central government guidelines and in 
cooperation with the Gram Sabha in areas where the Forest Rights Act (2006) 
applies. 
The amendment, however, ignores the quality aspects of the Management 
Plans, which serves as a foundational document for the systematic development 
212

Wildlife Trust of India                                                    Recommendations to Strengthen The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
 
  9 
 
and management of protected areas. The utility of management plans is limited 
if they are not ecologically and scientifically sound. The National Wildlife Action 
Plan (2017-31) of India highlights the concern and recommends streamlining the 
process of reviewing the plans, as well as providing statutory backing to the 
Management Plans of Protected Areas (PAs), similar to the Tiger Conservation 
Plan.  
These aspects should be adequately addressed in the amendments. 
Furthermore, the Chief Wildlife Warden has the authority to approve the 
Management Plans of PAs. In many instances, he or she is unlikely to be a wildlife 
expert because the posting is seniority - based instead of knowledge and 
experience in wildlife management. The state should constitute a management 
plan approval committee, with the requisite expertise, under the chairmanship 
of the Chief Wildlife Warden. 
The Forest Rights Act mandates that Community Forest Resource (CFR) 
management plans should be prepared by Gram Sabha. One Protected Area can 
have several Gram Sabha with Community Forest Resource plans of their own. 
Hence PA management plans should incorporate all these CFR plans. 
In accordance with such we propose to make following amendment in Section 
33: 
a. Change in the amended section (underlines parts are suggested changes) 
"in accordance with such management plans for the sanctuary approved 
by an expert committee with Chief Wildlife Warden as the Chairperson as 
per the guidelines issued by the Central Government and in case the 
sanctuary also falls under the Scheduled Areas or areas where the 
Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of 
Forest Rights) Act, 2006 is applicable, to incorporate the CFR management 
plans prepared as per Sec 5 of FRA and Rule 4 (f) after due consultation 
with Gram Sabha concerned. 
b. Approval of Management Plans necessitate expertise from different fields 
as well as general acceptance from local communities. Hence, the 
proposed amendment is; 
213

Wildlife Trust of India                                                    Recommendations to Strengthen The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
 
  10 
 
Section 33(e) - Apart from C hief Wildlife Warden, the management plan 
approval committee shall consist of two experts in the fields of wildlife 
conservation, one social scientist, officer of the concerned tribal 
department, two nominated presidents of EDCs (at least one woman) and 
the wildlife warden/ in-charge of the sanctuary. 
c. There are many instances of wild animals getting killed and injured 
because of abject irresponsibility of concerned agencies. Moreover, FRA 
also mandates for creation of linear infrastructure. In all these cases a 
viable as well as judicious decision has t o be taken. Thus, we suggest 
following amendment; 
Section 33 (f) - All linear infrastructure should be considered on a case by 
case basis by the Committee before including them in the Management 
Plan. It shall be incumbent upon the agency operating the lin ear 
infrastructure like roads, railways and electric lines to put in place 
mitigation measures for avoiding wildlife deaths and injury. 
d. Core or Critical Tiger (CTR) Habitat has been defined in the Wildlife 
(Protection) Act in  the case of Tiger Reserves. Ho wever, while Critical 
Wildlife Habitat (CWH) is defined in the Forest Rights Act, it has yet to be 
included in the Wildlife (Protection) Act. Due to this, no CWH has been 
notified, as opposed to CTR, already been declared for all Tiger Reserves. 
For this reason, Sanctuary would include core or critical wildlife habitat as 
defined under Section 2 (b) of the Forest Rights Act, identified by an expert 
committee as per MOEF guidelines, and a buffer that is peripheral to the 
core. 
Other essential points related to management plans of protected areas are given 
below, which should be considered for inclusion in the amendment 
appropriately. 
 It is also critical to ensure that protected areas are managed following the 
plans that have been adequately reviewed and approved, as mentioned 
previously. Currently, the prescriptions outlined in management plans 
214

Wildlife Trust of India                                                    Recommendations to Strengthen The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
 
  11 
 
mandatorily do not serve as a basis for t he Annual Plan of Operation 
(APO).  
 It is proposed that the amendment includes an explicit reference to 
protected areas is managed according to management plan prescriptions 
and the adaptive APOs derived essentially from the approved 
management plan.  
 The protected area management plan must incorporate village -level 
micro-plans, for mitigating the effects of protected area management on 
local communities' livelihoods as a result of user rights restrictions, locals' 
vulnerability to human-wildlife conflict, reducing community dependence 
on the protected area resources, and overall ecological development 
outside protected areas. 
Management of Community Reserve 
Section 36 D (4) of the act states that the Community Reserve Management shall 
elect a Chairman who shall be the Honorary Wildlife Warden on the Community 
Reserve. It is understood that unless the land owner has a decisive say in the 
management of Community Reserve, it would be difficult to convince the 
person/agency owning the land to get the area declared as Community Reserve, 
hence we suggest following amendment in the section. 
36D (4) - The owner of the land shall be the Honorary Wildlife Warden of the 
Community Reserve. 
5. Chapter V of the Principal Act 
Ownership transfer of elephants 
The Elephant Task Force, constituted by the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests, Government of India, recommended in its 2010 rep ort that agencies, 
institutions or individuals should phase out the acquisition of elephants already 
in captivity or wild -caught for entertainment, commercial, or other purposes. 
The task force also recommended amending the law to prohibit the sale, 
transfer, power of attorney, lease, gift, and donation of elephants . 
215

Wildlife Trust of India                                                    Recommendations to Strengthen The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
 
  12 
 
Establishment of lifetime care centres was also recommended to care for the 
abandoned, confiscated, or captured  elephants as a step to phase out the 
practice. 
However, the proposed change to Section 43, i.e. the addition of sub-section 4, 
implies that the general prohibition on the transfer of animals by any means in 
this section will not apply to 'live elephants,' resulting in the start of commercial 
trade in elephants. The amendment contradicts the Government of India's 
Elephant Task Force recommendation. 
The broader issue of elephant welfare in captivity will likewise go unresolved.  
Thus, we suggest that this amendment should not be made.  
6. Chapter VI of the Principal Act 
Powers to CITES authorities and other enforcement agencies  
Chapter V  B has been added to the amendment to regulate the trade of 
endangered species in accordance with CITES, and powers have been delegated 
to the 'Management Authority' and 'Scientific Authority' to carry out their 
function under the convention. 
Sections 50 to 58 of Chapter VI, on the other hand, grant no power to the se 
CITES authorities (or any authorised officer). Section 50 does not give them the 
power to enter, search, arrest, or detain anyone.  
Thus, in addition to the Forest and Police Officers, the CITES authorities and other 
enforcement agencies such as Customs officials and the Coast Guard should be 
given power under Section 50. 
216

Wildlife Trust of India                                                    Recommendations to Strengthen The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
 
  13 
 
7. Chapter VII of the Principal Act 
Declaration of certain wild animals as Vermin  
The Principle Act's Schedule V - listing 'Vermin' species - has been removed, 
keeping only Section 62, which allows the Central Government to designate any 
species not included in the amended Schedule I of the Act as a 'Vermin.' 
In the recent past, the central government designated many species as Vermin 
in few states, including the Nilgai, Wild Pig, an d Rhesus Macaques. These 
notifications were used by the states to 'kill' the animals arbitrarily, without first 
assessing the population status, prescribing specific methods to get rid of the 
problem, or evaluating the overall impact of the killings on the  ecosystem. 
According to the Principle Act, animals designated as 'Vermin' may be hunted, 
which does not always necessitate the animal to be killed according to the Act's 
definition. 
We are confident that no species should be categorised as 'Vermin' without first 
assessing its number, the level of harm caused to people, and the attempts 
made by the state or UT administration to resolve the problem prior to 
communicating the intent to the Central Government.  
We suggest that the amendment in the Act  should define a criteria and 
procedure for the Central Government to make scientifically rigorous and 
evidence-based decisions on this matter. 
8. Wildlife conservation outside Protected Areas 
The key to wildlife conservation is habitat improvement and protec tion. These 
aspects are limited to the management of habitats in four categories of 
Protected Areas (National Park, Sanctuary, Conservation Reserve, and 
Community Reserve) and Tiger Reserves. 
The National Wildlife Action Plan (2017 -31) of India recommends securing 
wildlife corridors and implementing a landscape approach to wildlife 
management. However, the proposed amendment makes no mention of 
granting legal status to habitat connectivities / corridors that are critical for the 
217

Wildlife Trust of India                                                    Recommendations to Strengthen The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
 
  14 
 
conservation of long-ranging species like elephant. The integrity of these wildlife 
corridors is critical for the long-term survival and genetic health of such species. 
It is vital to use a landscape-level approach to protect habitats that allow animals 
to travel from one habitat to another. Because the effects of climate change may 
cause species range shifts, protecting these connectivities and vast landscapes 
is critical. 
In the light of these facts, specific recommendations are as below; 
i. Legal recognition to elephant corridors 
A separate chapter on ‘Corridor and Landscape Conservation’ should be added 
in the Wildlife (Protection) Act. It should include assigning legal safeguard to 
corridors by notifying them under Wildlife (Protection) Act. 
Wildlife Trust of India of India has ide ntified 101 elephant corridors across the 
country. Corridor identification and ground validation should be a continuous 
process. It is suggested that the ecologically and objectively identified elephant 
corridors be notified under the Wildlife (Protection) Act. 
ii. Inclusive management of wildlife corridors and habitats by engaging other 
landowners 
Owners of lands in identified corridors and key wildlife habitats (such as forests, 
grasslands, wetlands, open natural habitat, plantations etc.) outside the 
jurisdiction of a Protected Area (such as territorial forests, government 
departments, tribal councils in Sixth Schedule areas, public and private sector 
institutions, tea gardens, plantation companies, linear infrastructure 
development agencies, and so on) should be mandated to manage the land in 
accordance with a corridor / habitat conservation plan prepared in consultation 
with the state forest and wildlife department and experts. The plan should 
primarily address the target species' ecological requirements. 
218

Wildlife Trust of India                                                    Recommendations to Strengthen The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
 
  15 
 
iii. Stopping migration of elephants should be an offence  
To control human -elephant conflict and to prevent elephants from coming to 
one’s range / region / state, government agencies and private parties across the 
country often construct various types of long-distance physical barriers, 
including solar power fences. Such barriers can obstruct elephants' migratory 
routes, causing changes in their ecology and behaviour. 
We suggest that installing such long -distance barriers w ithin forests, natural 
ecosystems, and across established migratory corridors be considered an offence 
under the Act. It should not, however, be applied to barriers erected by local 
residents to protect themselves and their property. 
9. Schedules of wild animals  
There is no clarity on how the Schedules, particularly Schedules I to III, have been 
assigned to the species on the list. It does not even match the most accepted 
criteria of the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. The country's knowledge of 
the status of most species and threats to their habitat is restricted to a few taxa. 
Assessing the species' national status before classifying them in specific 
schedules would be helpful.  
We suggest that the schedules should be revised after conducti ng National Red 
Listing of species based on the criteria developed by IUCN. 
There are instances where there are errors in the common and scientific names 
of wild animals on the schedules. Further, genetic and other methods keep on 
updating the taxonomy and changing the nomenclature of flora and fauna. It is 
not feasible to rapidly amend names on the schedules  as per the change in 
nomenclature. Mismatches in updated nomenclature and scientific names of 
scheduled species in the legal documents result in a court of law's unfavourable 
observations. 
Thus, names on the schedules should be correct. It is also necessary to make a 
specific mention regarding the automatic adoption of the revised scientific name 
under the Act's Schedule. 
219

Wildlife Trust of India is a wildlife conservation charity
organization, dedicated to preserve and protect the natural world
and its wild habitats. Our team has been fully committed to India’s
wildlife for the last 20+ years.
 
F-13, Sector 8
National Capital Region (NCR)
Noida 201301
Phone: 120-4143900 
e-mail: info@wti.org.in
 
220

We are writing to express our comments on the recently proposed amendments to the Wild Life 
Protection Act, 2021. 
World Animal Protection appreciates the uplisting of the Star Tortoise in Schedule I of the 
amended Wild Life Protection Act. 
World Animal Protection has conducted research for greater legal protection to the Star Tortoise 
on several fora, including CITES :  
https://www.worldanimalprotection.org/blogs/investigating-illegal-trade-indian-star-tortoises 
 World Animal Protection is however concerned about certain other aspects of the proposed 
amendments to the Wildlife Protection Act as expressed in this article in Times of India, including 
the continued exemption to transactions in captive live elephants  : 
 https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/experts-flag-loopholes-in-proposed-amendment-in-
wildlife-protection-act-saying-it-will-allow-commercial-trade-in-live-
elephants/articleshow/88816712.cms 
 World Animal Protection has been campaigning for the end of the allowance given to 
transactions in live captive elephants in the Wildlife Protection Act under Section 40, as conveyed 
to you earlier : 
 https://www.worldanimalprotection.org.in/protect-elephants 
 We hope that as the Chairman of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science, 
Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, you will take note of our observations 
whilst reviewing the current Wildlife Protection Act. 
Many thanks. 
With best regards. 
                                                  Yours sincerely, 
                                                 Shubhobroto Ghosh 
With best regards and kind wishes, 
Shubhobroto Ghosh 
Wildlife Projects Manager - India 
World Animal Protection 
 
221

In continuation of our submission on the proposed Wild Life Protection Act 
amendments, we would like to make an additional point for your consideration  
“Whilst recognising the importance of including CITES legislation in the 
amended version of the Wildlife Protection Act, World Animal Protection would 
like to state that the allowance and provision for keeping CITES listed animals 
in captivity or dealing in them or their products should not be an inducement 
provided by the current amendment. Therefore, for any individual or group that 
wants to deal or keep CITES listed wild animals, the jurisdiction should always 
involve jurisprudence to consider each application on a case by case basis 
rather than an ad hoc basis. CITES permits for keeping and dealing in animals 
should only be provided to those who can demonstrate genuine bona fide 
reasons for doing so.” 
We look forward to this process being carried out in the Parliament and would 
like to consult with you on the process when the time is appropriate. Many 
thanks. 
  
With best regards and kind wishes, 
Shubhobroto Ghosh 
Wildlife Projects Manager - India 
World Animal Protection 
 
222

JUSTICE FOR ANIMALS, INDIA* 
 
 
*Working to advance animal rights in India through research, litigation and policy support. 
Email: alokcraar2021@gmail.com; Contact: +91 -9619292036; Founder: Alok Hisarwala 
Gupta 
 
1 
     [By Email] 
To           26th January, 2022  
All Honourable Members & The Secretariat, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment and 
Forests and Climate Change, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 110 001  
 
Dear Members of the Committee, 
 
SUBJECT: WRRC submissions to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Forest, Wildlife and Climate Change 
I am an animal rights lawyer representing “Justice for Animals” based in Bombay 
and Goa. I research and write on animal rights, specifically on the rights and 
welfare of captive elephants.  
 
I am writing with great concern over clause 27 of the proposed Wi ldlife 
Protection Amendment Bill that purports to exclude “live elephants” from the 
ban, in section 43 of WPA, of commercial trade in wild animals.  
My pointwise submission is as follows:  
 
1. The Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 (WPA) is a legislation enacted t o protect 
wild animals in their natural environments. This includes elephants which are 
both a national heritage and a Schedule I animal.  
 
2. The provisions of self -declaration followed by the issuance of an ownership 
certificate to private owners of captive  elephants (under sections 40 and 42 
of WPA), and further prohibition of sale of private elephants (section 43 of 
WPA) were designed to bring the “unregulated” market of captive elephant 
trade pre-1972 within a regulatory framework of the law. It was never meant 
to facilitate further ownership and trade in elephants.  
 
3. However, over the decades the law has been mis -utilised to perpetuate 
illegal trade in captive elephants. The Wildlife Stock Rules, 2003, revised the 
cut-off date to regularize illegal ownership in captive elephants from 1972 to 
2003 by granting amnesty to all (legal and illegal) ownership of captive 
elephants pre-2003. However, just like 1972, the 2003 regulatory amnesty 
223

JUSTICE FOR ANIMALS, INDIA* 
 
 
*Working to advance animal rights in India through research, litigation and policy support. 
Email: alokcraar2021@gmail.com; Contact: +91 -9619292036; Founder: Alok Hisarwala 
Gupta 
 
2 
provision remains disregarded, and ownership and illegal trade of captiv e 
elephant continues.  
 
4. Widespread capture, trade and transport of elephants – contrary to the 
intention of WPA - has become the norm, leading to the current approximate 
2500 captive elephants in India of which 1800 are privately owned.  
 
5. The illegal trade in elephant continues primarily because pursuant to a 2003 
amendment, under section 40 2A/2B of WPA, the elephant is the ONLY wild 
animal that is still allowed to be privately owned. While this anomaly needs 
to be corrected on an urgent basis, the  section 43 ban of commercial tr ade 
in all wild animals is a protective bulwark to hold live elephant smugglers in 
check.  
 
6. I am concerned that the illegal, unconstitutional, captive elephant ownership 
exception is now being extended to their trade. This will detrimental to our 
commitment of elephant protection and conservation. All elephants 
essentially come from the wild, this is the truth behind privately owned 
captive elephants. Both ownership and trade in elephants must remain 
strictly prohibited under WPA.  
 
7. The purpose of the India n Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 (WPA) read with 
Article 48A of the Constitution (inserted by the 42nd Amendment in 1977) 
creates a duty on the state to ‘protect’ and ‘safeguard the forest and wildlife 
of the country’. It is our contention that at the very minimum ‘protection’ 
and ‘safeguarding’ entails that no wildlife shall be taken out of the wild.  
 
8. Wildlife protection must only be guided by a non-negotiable commitment to 
ensure that wild animals prosper, remain and flourish in the wild as free 
animals. At the very least, the word "transfer" from clause 27 should be 
deleted, if not the entire clause itself. 
 
9. There have been some remarkable judicial decisions where High Courts have 
stepped in to end the cruel commercial use of captive elephants and to direct 
they be rehabilitated in natural environments: 
224

JUSTICE FOR ANIMALS, INDIA* 
 
 
*Working to advance animal rights in India through research, litigation and policy support. 
Email: alokcraar2021@gmail.com; Contact: +91 -9619292036; Founder: Alok Hisarwala 
Gupta 
 
3 
a. Karnataka High Court in the case of CUPA vs. State of Karnataka & Ors. 
(W.P. No. 7276/2005) has held in Para 15, “What is of paramount in a case 
like this in the best interests of the animal and certain ly not its owner or 
any other party.”, thereby giving importance to the welfare of Elephant 
Girija Prasad over the interest of the temple trust, who was the custodian 
of the animal. 
b.  In Dr. Manilal Valliyate (PETA) v. State of Maharashtra and others 
[Bombay High Court 2014] Sunder, a captive elephant held by a temple in 
Kolhapur district in Maharashtra, who was subjected to many years of 
cruel treatment by the mahout, was directed to be set free and relocated 
to a sanctuary. The Court acknowledged that elep hants are highly 
cognitive and intelligent animals.  
c. Perhaps the best formulation of our belief that elephants are wild and 
must be left alone in the wild was echoed by the High Court of 
Chhattisgarth in Nitin Singhvi , (2017) where Court recognised “that 
[elephants] have..rights... A salutary principle.. to uphold the rights of the 
animals to say “Leave us Alone”.  
d. In a recent landmark Delhi High decision dated court 20th January 2020 in 
Saddam v Union of India , the court rejected a habeas claim by a Mahout 
to repossess a captive elephant Lakshmi, by recognising the inherent 
connection the elephant has to its natural habitat. The Court stated: 
“Keeping in view the … its natural characteristics, ..this Court is o f the 
opinion that Jungle is the natural habitat of an elephant … Even if the 
Mahout is able to establish ownership, it would not be a ground to treat 
the elephant as his “slave” and move elephant-Laxmi to an uncomfortable 
environment against her rights and interests. Consequently, the interest of 
elephant-Laxmi is best served in a forest rather than in a congested city 
with a Mahout.” 
e. The High Court of Bombay in Goa in the case of People For Animals (2020) 
has banned the commercial use of ten captive eleph ants in Goa used for 
joy rides. These elephants have now been seized by the forest department, 
but due to lack of an elephant care facility they still remain with the 
owners.  
f. In February 2021, in a case filed by an animal activist highlighting the cruel 
treatment meted to captive elephants in Srirangam Temple, the Chennai 
High Court has strictly advised that the forest department cannot evade 
their primary responsibility for the welfare of elephants even when they 
225

JUSTICE FOR ANIMALS, INDIA* 
 
 
*Working to advance animal rights in India through research, litigation and policy support. 
Email: alokcraar2021@gmail.com; Contact: +91 -9619292036; Founder: Alok Hisarwala 
Gupta 
 
4 
are privately owned. They have further ask ed the government to frame 
policies to end future private ownership of elephants.  
 
We are afraid the current amendment will go against over two decades of 
jurisprudence on elephant protection.  
Conclusion and Recommendations: 
10. All animals have a right to live a life of dignity that must entail freedom from 
captivity and the right to live in their natural habitat. Captivity of wild animals 
is a relic of the past, and today it singularly effect elephants. We cannot allow 
our National Heritage Animal with the highest protection in law to be chained 
and abused for will of human kind. Keeping elephants captive is not only 
against the WPA, it is also unconstitutional and arbitrary to treat the elephant 
differently from all other Schedule I, wild animals. We do no t have any 
captive lions or tigers being owned and traded, then why elephants? 
 
11.  We would like to make the following suggestions to the committee as 
stakeholders working on the ground on the welfare and rescue of captive 
elephants:  
a. The Hon’ble Committee m ust recommend the deletion of clause 27, as it 
purports to undo five decades of work on elephant protection and is also 
patently unconstitutional.   
b. The Hon’ble Committee must also advise the Government propose a 
further amendment to the law to also delete “the live elephant” exception 
in Section 40 2A/2B that allows ownership of elephants.  
 
Thank you. 
 
Warm Regards, 
 
Alok Hisarwala Gupta, LLB, LLM (Columbia) 
Founder, Justice for Animals, India. 
 
CC: Shri. Ramesh Pandey, IFS, Director, Project Elephant, 
       Dr. K M Selvan, Dy. Director, Project Elephant,  
226

CONSERVATION ACTION TRUST 
5, Sahakar Bhavan, 1st Floor, LBS Road, Narayan Nagar, Ghatkopar (W),  
Mumbai – 400086 
Work: 022 – 25122422/23 
 
 
31st  January 2022 
 
The Hon’ble Chairman and Hon’ble Members, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science, Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, 
Room No. 4, A Block, 
Parliament House Annexe Extension 
New Delhi 
 
 
Dear Sirs, 
 
Comments and suggestions on the proposed amendments to the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972 
 
1. We would suggest that the following changes need to be made in the Act – 
 
a) The Standing Committee should be appointed by the National Board, or the State Board, as the case may be, and should not be 
nominated by the Vice Chairperson. 
b) The following proviso should be inserted as S. 6 A (4) - Provided that all reports, recommendations and/or decisions taken by these 
committees, sub-committees or study groups should be placed before the State Board for its approval. 
c) We would suggest that the Chapter on CITES should be removed from the WLPA and enacted as a separate Act. We are suggesting 
this because whilst the WLPA is a restrictive/prohibitory Act, the CITES chapter enables the trade and breeding of exotic wildlife. 
Incorporating this Chapter in the WLPA will cause unnecessary confusion and contradictions. 
d) In either case, there is a need to add a separate clause to the Act saying that the provisions of the CITES chapter would not apply to 
any species of wildlife that is found naturally in India. There are species e.g. Tiger, Leopard and Asiatic Lion which are specified in Sch 
I and in Sch IV App I. This has the potential for exploitation by vested interests, notwithstanding S 49 R.  
e) Ambergris (so called whale vomit) should be specifically excluded from the provisions of the WLPA, since it is a waste product, 
discharged naturally by some individual whales and is not commercially harvested. For fisher folk who find this floating in the sea, or 
on the beach, this is a bonanza, and the fisher folk should not be prosecuted for these finds. 
f) We have suggested that the Management Plans of Protected Areas be prepared based on the Guidelines issued by the MoEFCC, 
should go through a process of public consultation, and then be approved by the MoEFCC. In case of any measures required for 
habitat “improvement”, the Management Plan should clearly specify which scientific studies have been carried out to justify the 
need for such “improvement”. These Management Plans should also be in compliance with S 29 or 35(6) of the WLPA as the case 
may be. 
g) The Management Plans should also include the areas adjacent to the PAs that have been notified as ESAs/ESZs.  
h) There should be a ban on the use of mechanical earth moving equipment within PAs such as bull dozers and JCBs except in the event 
of natural disasters. This is intended to discourage civil works within PAs that now seem to be proliferating because of CAMPA funds 
being made liberally available to the Forest Departments.  
i) In the case of offences under the WLPA, any police officer of the rank of Officer in charge of a Police Station and above should be 
empowered to investigate offences and file a Police Report (chargesheet). This would require amendment of S. 50 (8) and 55 (b)of 
the WLPA. 
j) A Non obstantive clause may please be added to the WLPA. 
 
2. Please find below some additional changes that we are suggesting to specific provisions of the Act. The left hand column contains the 
provisions of the proposed Bill, and the right hand column contains our suggestions for your kind consideration. 
 
 
Draft of Bill Comments/Suggestions for your consideration 
THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2021 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2021. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In the preamble of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), for the words "protection of wild animals, birds and plants", the words 
"conservation, protection and management of wild life" shall be substituted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please add "and its habitats" after "conservation, 
protection and management of wild life" 
 
 
227

Short title and 
commencement. 
Amendment of 
preamble. 
53 of 1972. 
Bill No. 159 of 2021 
5 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
2 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in clause (5), for the words and figures "Schedule I, Schedule II, Schedule III 
or Schedule IV", the words and figures "Schedule I or Schedule II" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (15), after the words "wild animal", the words "or specified plant" 
shall be inserted; 
(c) after clause (16), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
'(16A) "invasive alien species" means a species of animal or plant which is 
not native to India and whose introduction or spread may threaten or adversely 
impact wild life or its habitat;'; 
(d) in clause (18A), for the words and figures "Schedules I to V", the words and 
figures "Schedules I, II and IV" shall be substituted; 
(e) in clause (19), for the words and figures "Schedules I to V and VI", the words 
and figures "Schedules I, II and III" shall be substituted; 
(f) for clause (24), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
'(24) "person" shall include any firm or company or any authority or 
association or body of individuals whether incorporated or not;'; 
(g) after clause (26), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
'(26A) "Schedule" means a Schedule appended to this Act;'; 
(h) in clause (27), for the word and figures "Schedule VI", the word and figures 
"Schedule III" shall be substituted; 
(i) for clause (34), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
'(34) "vermin" means any wild animal notified under section 62;'; 
(j) in clause (36), for the words and figures "Schedules I to IV", the words and 
figures "Schedule I or Schedule II" shall be substituted; 
(k) for clause (39), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
'(39) "zoo" means an establishment whether stationary or mobile, where 
captive animals are kept for exhibiting to the public or ex-situ conservation and 
includes a circus and off-exhibit facilities such as rescue centres and conservation 
breeding centres, but does not include an establishment of a licensed dealer in 
captive animals.'. 
4. In section 5A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for clause (d), the following 
clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
"(d) Member, NITI Aayog in-charge of Environment, Forest and Climate Change;". 
5. In section 5B of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words "in proper 
discharge of functions assigned to it", the words "on such terms and conditions as may 
be 
prescribed for proper discharge of functions assigned to it under the Act'' shall be 
substituted. 
6. After section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
"6A. (1) The Board may constitute a Standing Committee for the purpose of 
exercising such powers and performing such duties as may be delegated to it by the 
Board. 
(2) The Standing Committee shall consist of the Vice-Chairperson, the 
Member-Secretary, and not more than ten members, to be nominated by the 
Vice-Chairperson, from amongst the members of the Board. 
(3) The Board or its Standing Committee referred to in sub-section (1) may, 
constitute committees, sub-committees or study groups, as may be necessary, from 
time-to-time, for proper discharge of the functions assigned to it.". 
7. In section 9 of the principal Act, for the words and figures "Schedules I, II, III and 
IV", the words and figures "Schedules I and II" shall be substituted. 
8. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (b), the words and 
figures ", Schedule III, or Schedule IV," shall be omitted. 
9. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (b), for the words and 
figures "Land Acquisition Act, 1894", the words and figures "Right to Fair Compensation 
and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013" shall 
be 
substituted. 
10. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),— 
(a) in clause (a), for the words and figures "Land Acquisition Act, 1894", the 
words and figures "Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013" shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please delete the word “alien”.  
Also, please replace the word “and” after “not 
native to India” with “or”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
k) The Standing Committee should be 
appointed by the National Board and should 
not be nominated by the Vice Chairperson. 
l) The following proviso should be inserted as S. 
6 A (4) - Provided that all reports, 
recommendations and/or decisions taken by 
these committees, sub-committees or study 
groups should be placed before the State 
Board for its approval. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
228

(b) in clauses (b) and (c), for the word and figure "section 9", the word and 
figures "section 21" shall be substituted; 
(c) in clause (d), for the words and figures "section 18" and "Part III", the words 
and figures "section 64" and "Chapter VIII" shall respectively be substituted; 
(d) in clause (e), for the words "the Court", the words "the Authority" shall be 
substituted; 
(e) after clause (f), the following Explaination shall be inserted, namely:— 
'Explanation.—The expression "Authority" referred to in clause (e), shall 
mean the Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Authority established 
under section 51 of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.'. 
11. In section 28 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (b), after the word 
"photography", the words "and film-making without making any change in the habitat 
or 
causing any adverse impact to the habitat or wild life" shall be inserted. 
12. In section 29 of the principal Act,— 
(a) for the word "Board", the words "National Board" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
"Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, grazing or movement of 
livestock permitted under clause (d) of section 33, or hunting of wild animals 
under a permit granted under section 11 or hunting without violating the 
conditions of a permit granted under section 12, or the exercise of any rights 
permitted to continue under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 24, or the 
bona fide use of drinking and household water by local communities, shall not 
be deemed to be an act prohibited under this section.". 
13. In section 33 of the principal Act,— 
(a) after the words "manage and maintain all sanctuaries", the words, brackets 
and figures "in accordance with such management plans for the sanctuary approved 
by him as per the guidelines issued by the Central Government and in case the 
sanctuary also falls under the Scheduled Areas or areas where the Scheduled Tribes and 
Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 is applicable, 
in accordance with the management plan for such sanctuary prepared after due 
consultation with the Gram Sabha concerned" shall be inserted; 
(b) in clause (a), in the proviso, for the words "commercial tourist lodges", the 
words "tourist lodges, including Government lodges, for commercial purposes" shall 
be substituted. 
14. In section 34 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(4) No renewal of any licence under the Arms Act, 1959, shall be granted to any 
person residing within ten kilometres of a sanctuary except under the intimation to the 
Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer.". 
15. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (8), for the words and figures 
"sections 27 and 28", the words, figures and letter "sections 18A, 27 and 28" shall be 
substituted. 
16. In section 36D of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
(a) for the words "five representatives", the words "not less than five 
representatives" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(2A) Where a community reserve is declared on private land under 
sub-section (1) of section 36C, the community reserve management committee 
shall consist of the owner of the land, a representative of the State Forests or 
Wild Life Department under whose jurisdiction the community reserve is located 
and also the representative of the Panchayat concerned or the tribal community, 
as the case may be.". 
17. In section 38 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in the marginal heading, after the words "National Parks", the words "or 
conservation reserves" shall be inserted; 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(2A) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the conditions 
specified in sub-section (1) of section 36A are fulfilled in relation to any area 
referred to in sub-section (1), declare such area, by notification, to be a 
conservation reserve and the provisions of sections 36A and 36B shall apply in 
relation to such conservation reserve as they apply in relation to a conservation 
reserve declared by the State Government."; 
(c) in sub-section (3),— 
(i) after the words "or National Park", the words "or conservation reserve" 
shall be inserted; 
(ii) for the words, brackets and figures "sub-sections (1) and (2)", the 
words, brackets, figures and letter "sub-sections (1), (2) and (2A)" shall be 
substituted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please add the word “documentary” before “film-
making”. No commercial filming should be 
allowed. Please also add the words "or 
disturbance" after the words “any adverse impact” 
 
 
 
 
The rights for the bona fide use of drinking and 
household water should form part of the 
management plan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Management Plans should be prepared as per 
the Guidelines issued by the Central Government 
after due public consultation and should be 
approved by both the State and National Wildlife 
Boards. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We would suggest that the word “intimation” 
should be replaced with “concurrence”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
229

18. In section 38L of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (o), for the words 
"Inspector General of Forests or an officer of the equivalent rank", the words "an 
officer not 
below the rank of Inspector General of Forests" shall be substituted. 
19. After section 38X of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“38XA.The provisions contained in this Chapter shall be in addition to, and not 
in derogation of, the provisions relating to sanctuaries and National Parks (whether 
included and declared, or are in the process of being so declared) included in a tiger 
reserve under this Act.”. 
20. In Chapter IVC of the principal Act, in the heading, for the words "TIGER AND 
OTHER ENDANGERED SPECIES", the words "WILD LIFE" shall be substituted. 
21. In section 38Y of the principal Act,— 
(a) in the marginal heading, for the words "Tiger and other Endangered Species", 
the words "Wild Life" shall be substituted; 
(b) in the opening portion, the words "Tiger and other Endangered Species 
Crime Control Bureau to be known as the" shall be omitted; 
(c) in clause (e), for the words "Central Excise", the words "Central Goods and 
Services Tax" shall be substituted. 
22. In section 39 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(4) Where any such Government property is a live animal, the State Government 
shall ensure that it is housed and cared for by a recognised zoo or rescue centre where 
it can not be released to its natural habitat. 
 
 
(5) Any such animal article, trophy or uncured trophy or meat derived from any 
wild animal, as referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) may be disposed of by the State 
Government or the Central Government, as the case may be, in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government: 
Provided that such disposal shall not include any commercial sale or auction 
and no certificate of ownership shall be issued for such disposal.". 
23. In section 40 of the principal Act, the words and figures "or Part II of Schedule II" 
wherever they occur shall be omitted. 
24. In section 40A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words and figures "or 
Part II of Schedule II" shall be omitted. 
25. In section 41 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (b), the words and 
figures "and Part II of Schedule II" shall be omitted. 
26. After section 42 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
"42A. (1)Any person having a certificate of ownership in respect of any captive 
animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy, meat or ivory imported into India or 
an 
article made from such ivory, and who is not desirous of keeping it in his control, 
custody or possession may, after giving notice of seven working days to the Chief 
Wild Life Warden, surrender the same to him and any such certificate of ownership 
shall stand cancelled from the date of such surrender. 
(2) No compensation shall be payable to any person for surrender of 
any such animal, article, trophy, meat or ivory to the Chief Wild Life Warden under 
sub-section (1). 
(3) Any such animal, article, trophy, meat or ivory surrendered under this section 
shall become the property of the State Government and the provisions of section 39 
shall apply.". 
27. In section 43 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(4) This section shall not apply to the transfer or transport of any live elephant 
by a person having a certificate of ownership, where such person has obtained prior 
permission from the State Government on fulfilment of such conditions as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.". 
28. In section 48 of the principal Act, in clause (b), in sub-clause (ii), the words and 
figures "or Part II of Schedule II" shall be omitted. 
29. In section 49A of the principal Act, the words and figures "or Part II of Schedule II" 
at both the places where they occur, shall be omitted. 
30. After Chapter VA of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
'CHAPTER VB 
REGULATION OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE IN ENDANGERED SPECIES OF 
WILD FAUNA AND FLORA AS PER CONVENTION ON INTERNATIONAL 
TRADE IN ENDANGERED SPECIES OF WILD FAUNA AND FLORA 
49D. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) "artificially propagated" means plants which have been grown 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Conservation Reserves” should also be added 
after “sanctuaries and National Parks” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It should be clarified that such live animals should 
be housed only in public zoos, and not in private 
zoos. Also, the word “where” should be replaced 
with the word “when”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please add the following words at the end of the 
proposed S. 43(4) - 
Provided that this is done for the welfare of the 
elephant and does not involve any commercial 
transaction. 
 
 
 
 
We would strongly suggest that this Chapter not 
be added to the WLPA. CITES should be regulated 
with a standalone Act. 
 
 
 
 
230

under controlled conditions from plant materials grown under similar 
conditions; 
(b) "bred in captivity" means produced from parents in captivity; 
(c) "Convention" means the Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora signed at Washington D.C., 
in the United States of America on the 3rd of March, 1973, and amended at 
Bonn on the 22nd of June, 1979, its appendices, decisions, resolutions 
and notifications made thereunder and its amendments, to the extent 
binding on India; 
(d) "export" means export from India to any other country of a 
specimen; 
(e) "import" means import into India from any other country of a 
specimen; 
(f) "introduction from the sea" means transportation into India of 
specimens of any species which were taken from the marine environment 
not under the jurisdiction of India or any other country; 
(g) "Management Authority" means the Management Authority 
designated under section 49E; 
(h) "plant" means any member, alive or dead, of the plants listed in 
Schedule IV including seeds, roots and other parts thereof; 
 
 
(i) "readily recognisable part or derivative" includes any specimen 
which appears from an accompanying document, the packaging or a mark 
or label, or from any other circumstances, to be a part or derivative of an 
animal or plant of a species listed in Schedule IV; 
(j) "re-export" means export of any specimen that has previously 
been imported; 
(k) "Scientific Authority" means a Scientific Authority designated 
under section 49F; 
(l) "scheduled specimen" means any specimen of a species listed in 
Appendices I, II or III of the Convention and incorporated as such in 
Schedule IV; 
(m) "species" means any species, sub-species, or geographically 
separate population thereof; 
(n) "specimen" means— 
(i) any animal or plant, whether alive or dead; 
(ii) in the case of an animal,— 
(A) for species included in Appendices I and II of 
Schedule IV, any readily recognisable part or derivative thereof; 
(B) for species included in Appendix III of Schedule IV, 
any readily recognisable part or derivative thereof specified 
in Appendix III of Schedule IV in relation to the species; and 
(iii) in the case of a plant,— 
(A) for species included in Appendix I of Schedule IV, 
any readily recognisable part or derivative thereof; 
(B) for species included in Appendices II and III of 
Schedule IV, any readily recognisable part or derivative thereof 
specified in Appendices II and III of Schedule IV in relation to 
the species; 
(o) "trade" means export, re-export, import and introduction from 
the sea. 
49E. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, designate an officer 
not below the rank of an Additional Director General of Forests as the 
Management Authority for discharging the functions and exercising the powers 
under this Act. 
(2) The Management Authority shall be responsible for issuance of permits 
and certificates for trade of scheduled specimens in accordance with the 
Convention, submission of reports, and shall perform such other functions as 
may be necessary to implement the provisions of the Convention. 
(3) The Management Authority shall prepare and submit annual and 
biennial reports to the Central Government. 
(4) The Central Government may appoint such officers and employees as 
may be necessary to assist the Management Authority in discharging its 
functions or exercising its powers under this Chapter, on such terms and 
conditions of service including salaries and allowances as may be prescribed. 
(5) The Management Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central 
Government, delegate its functions or powers, to such officers not below the 
rank of the Assistant Inspector General of Forests, as it may consider necessary 
for the purposes of this Chapter. 
49F. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, designate one or 
 
 
 
“parents” should be replaced by “parent”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The words “or any other country” may please be 
deleted. 
 
 
 
For the purposes of this definition, “fungi” may 
please be added, even though technically they are 
not “plants”. Alternatively, they could be added as 
a separate category in a separate clause. 
 
 
 
 
Please add the word “legally” before “imported”. 
 
 
 
We suggest that there should be a mechanism put 
into place to address changes in the CITES 
Appendices in case there are any modifications. 
 
 
 
Please add “or fungi” in clause (i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please add the word “breeding” after “import” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
231

more institutes engaged in research on species as Scientific Authority for the 
purposes of this Chapter, for fulfilling the functions under the Convention. 
(2) The designated Scientific Authority shall advise the Management 
Authority in such matters as may be referred to it by the Management Authority. 
(3) The Scientific Authority shall monitor the export permits granted for 
specimens of species listed in Appendix II of Schedule IV and the actual export 
of such specimens. 
(4) Whenever a Scientific Authority is of the opinion that the export of 
specimens of such species requires to be limited in order to maintain that species 
throughout its range at a level consistent with its role in the ecosystems in 
which it occurs and well above the level at which that species might become 
eligible for inclusion in Appendix I of the Convention, it shall advise the 
Management Authority to take such appropriate measures to limit the grant of 
export permits for specimens of that species as the Scientific Authority may 
deem necessary for said purpose. 
49G. The Management Authority and the Scientific Authorities, shall, while 
performing their duties and exercising powers under this Chapter, be subject to 
such general or special directions, as the Central Government may, from time to 
time, give. 
49H. (1) No person shall engage in trade of scheduled specimens except 
as provided for under this Chapter. 
(2) The Central Government shall prescribe the conditions and procedures 
by which the exemptions contained in Article VII of the Convention may be 
availed. 
(3) Every person engaging in trade of a scheduled specimen shall report 
the details of the scheduled specimen and the transaction to the Management 
Authority or the officer authorised by it in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(4) Every person engaging in trade of a scheduled specimen, shall present 
it for clearance to the Management Authority or the officer authorised by it or a 
customs officer only at the ports of exit and entry as may be specified by the 
Central Government. 
49-I. (1) The export of any specimen of species included in Appendices I 
or II of Schedule IV shall require the prior grant and presentation of an export 
permit. 
(2) The export of any specimen of species included in Appendix III of 
Schedule IV shall require the prior grant and presentation of an export permit if 
the species has been listed in Appendix III of the Convention by India or a 
certificate of origin in other cases. 
(3) An export permit shall not be granted unless— 
(a) the Management Authority is satisfied that the specimen 
concerned has not been obtained in contravention of any law for the time 
being in force relating to protection of fauna and flora; 
(b) the Management Authority is satisfied that any living specimen 
will be so prepared and shipped as to minimise the risk of injury, damage to 
health or cruel treatment; 
(c) in the case of a specimen of a species listed in Appendices I or II 
of Schedule IV, the Scientific Authority has advised that the export will not 
be detrimental to the survival of that species; and 
(d) in the case of specimens of species listed in Appendix I of 
Schedule IV, an import permit has been granted by the competent authority 
of the country of destination. 
49J. (1) The import of any specimen of a species included in Appendix I of 
Schedule IV shall require the prior grant and presentation of an import permit 
and either an export permit or a re-export certificate from the country of export. 
(2) An import permit for a specimen of a species listed in Appendix I of 
Schedule IV shall not be granted unless— 
(a) the Management Authority is satisfied that the specimen 
concerned will not be used for primarily commercial purposes; 
(b) the Scientific Authority has advised that the import will be for 
purposes which are not detrimental to the survival of the species; and 
(c) the Scientific Authority is satisfied that the proposed recipient of 
a living specimen is suitably equipped to house and care for it. 
 
(3) The import of any specimen of a species included in Appendix II of 
Schedule IV shall require the prior presentation of either an export permit or a 
re-export certificate issued by the country of export. 
(4) The import of any specimen of a species included in Appendix III of 
Schedule IV shall require the prior presentation of— 
(a) a certificate of origin; or 
(b) in the case where the import is from a country which has included 
the species in Appendix III of the Convention, an export permit; or 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We would suggest that clause (4) can be deleted 
since CITES covers exotic species not found in 
India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please add the words “or breeding” after “trade”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Since we are not breeding exotic species for 
reintroduction in India, this clause could also be 
deleted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The word “primarily” may please be deleted. 
 
 
 
We would suggest that if the import is being 
carried out by a trader, this condition needs to be 
imposed on the subsequent buyers as well. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
232

(c) a re-export certificate granted by the country of re-export. 
49K. (1) The re-export of any specimen of species included in 
Appendices I or II of Schedule IV shall require the prior grant and presentation 
of a re-export certificate. 
(2) A re-export certificate shall not be granted unless— 
(a) the Management Authority is satisfied that any specimen to be 
re-exported was imported in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter 
and of the Convention; 
(b) the Management Authority is satisfied that any living specimen 
will be so prepared and shipped as to minimise the risk of injury, damage to 
health or cruel treatment; and 
(c) in the case of any living specimen of species listed in Appendix I 
of Schedule IV, the Management Authority is satisfied that an import 
permit has been granted. 
49L. (1) The introduction from the sea of a specimen of a species included 
in Appendices I or II of Schedule IV shall require the prior grant and presentation 
of a certificate of introduction from the sea. 
(2) A certificate of introduction from the sea shall not be granted unless— 
(a) the Scientific Authority has advised that the introduction of any 
specimen will not be detrimental to the survival of the species; 
(b) in the case of a specimen of a species listed in Appendix I of 
Schedule IV, the Management Authority is satisfied that it is not to be 
used for primarily commercial purposes and that the proposed recipient of 
any living specimen is suitably equipped to house and care for it; and 
(c) in the case of a living specimen of a species listed in Appendix II 
of Schedule IV, the Management Authority is satisfied that it will be so 
handled as to minimise the risk of injury, damage to health or cruel treatment. 
49M. (1) Every person possessing a living specimen of an animal species 
listed in Schedule IV shall report the details of such specimen or specimens in 
his possession to the Management Authority or the authorised officer: 
Provided that the Central Government may exempt one or more specimens 
of any animal species included in Schedule IV from such declaration for such 
quantity and for such period as it may deem fit. 
(2) The Management Authority or the authorised officer may, on being 
satisfied that a person was in possession of a living specimen of an animal 
species listed in Schedule IV which had not been obtained in contravention of 
any law relating to protection of fauna and flora, issue a registration certificate 
allowing the owner to retain such specimen. 
(3) Any person who transfers possession, by any means whatsoever, of 
any living specimen of an animal species listed in Schedule IV shall report the 
details to the Management Authority or the authorised officer. 
(4) The Management Authority or the authorised officer shall register all 
transfers of living specimens of animal species listed in Schedule IV and issue 
the transferee with a registration certificate. 
(5) Any person in possession of any living specimen of an animal species 
listed in Schedule IV which bears any offspring shall report the birth of such 
offspring to the Management Authority or the authorised officer. 
(6) The Management Authority or the authorised officer shall on receipt 
of the report under sub-section (5) register any offspring born to any living 
specimen of an animal species listed in Schedule IV and issue the owner with a 
registration certificate. 
(7) Any person in possession of any living specimen of an animal species 
listed in Schedule IV which dies shall report such death to the Management 
Authority or the authorised officer. 
(8) No person shall possess, transfer or breed any living specimen of any 
animal species listed in Schedule IV except in conformity with this section and 
the rules made by the Central Government in this behalf. 
(9) The form, manner and period for reporting possession, transfers, and 
births, deaths, and registration of the same under this section shall be as 
prescribed by the Central Government. 
49N. (1) Every person who is engaged in breeding in captivity or artificially 
propagating any scheduled specimen listed in Appendix I of Schedule IV 
shall make, within a period of ninety days of the commencement of the Wild Life 
(Protection) Amendment Act, 2021, an application for registration to the Chief 
Wild Life Warden. 
(2) The form and manner of the application to be made to the Chief Wild 
Life Warden under sub-section (1), the fee payable, the form of certificate of 
registration, the procedure to be followed in granting or cancelling the certificate 
of registration shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
49-O. (1) On receipt of application under sub-section (1) of section 49N, 
the Chief Wild Life Warden shall, if— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We would suggest that this clause be deleted since 
the opportunity for declaration was given last 
year. In any case, the time limit for reporting 
cannot be open ended. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We would suggest that prior permission should be 
obtained before the transfer is effected. 
 
 
 
 
We would suggest that births be reported within a 
period of 15 days. 
 
 
 
 
 
We would suggest that deaths be reported within 
a period of 15 days. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
233

(a) the application is in the prescribed form; 
(b) the resolutions of the Convention relating to breeding in captivity 
or artificial propagation of species listed in Appendix I of Schedule IV are 
satisfied; and 
(c) the provisions of the Act and rules made thereunder have been 
duly complied with, 
record an entry of the statement in a register and grant the applicant a certificate 
of registration. 
(2) The Chief Wild Life Warden shall, if the provisions or resolutions of 
the Convention or this Act and any rules made hereunder have not been complied 
with, or if a false particular is furnished, refuse or cancel the registration as the 
case may be after providing the applicant with an opportunity of being heard. 
(3) The certificate of registration under sub-section (1) shall be issued for 
a period of two years and may be renewed after two years on payment of such 
fee as may be prescribed. 
(4) Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the Chief Wild Life Warden or 
cancellation of registration under sub-section (2) may prefer an appeal to the 
State Government within a period of sixty days in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
49P. No person shall alter, deface, erase or remove a mark of identification 
affixed upon the scheduled specimen or its package. 
49Q. (1) Every species or scheduled specimen, in respect of which any 
offence against this Act or rules made thereunder has been committed, shall 
become the property of the Central Government and the provisions of 
section 39 shall, without prejudice to the Customs Act, 1962, apply, mutatis 
mutandis, in relation to species and scheduled specimens as they apply in 
relation to wild animals, captive animals and animal articles. 
(2) Where a living specimen of a species listed in Schedule IV has been 
seized under this Act or the Customs Act, 1962 or any other law for the time 
being in force as a result of import into India in contravention of this Act, the 
Management Authority shall, after consultation with the country of export, return 
the specimen to that country at the expense of that country, or ensure that it is 
housed and cared for by a recognised zoo or rescue centre in case it cannot be 
returned to the country of export. 
(3) The Management Authority may for such purposes consult the 
Scientific Authority as it deems appropriate. 
49R. Where the same species is listed in Schedule I or II and Schedule IV, 
then, the provisions of this Act applicable to such species listed in Schedule I or 
II and the rules made thereunder shall apply.'. 
31. In section 50 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),— 
(i) after the words "the Director or any other officer authorised by him in this 
behalf ", the words "or the Management Authority or any officer authorised by the 
Management Authority" shall be inserted; 
(ii) after the words "a sub-inspector", the words "or any customs officer not 
below the rank of an inspector or any officer of the coast guard not below the rank of 
an Assistant Commandant" shall be inserted; 
(iii) in clauses (a) and (c), after the words "derivative thereof ", the words "or 
scheduled specimen" shall be inserted. 
32. In section 51 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (1),— 
(i) for the words "twenty-five thousand rupees", the words "one lakh 
rupees" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in the first proviso,— 
(A) the words and figures "or Part II of Schedule II" shall be omitted; 
(B) after the words "boundaries of a sanctuary or National Park", 
the words and figures "or where the offence relates to a specimen of a 
species listed on Appendix I of Schedule IV" shall be inserted; 
(C) for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "twenty-five 
thousand rupees" shall be substituted; 
(iii) in the second proviso, for the words "twenty-five thousand rupees", 
the words "one lakh rupees" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (1A), for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "twentyfive 
thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 
33. In section 51A of the principal Act, the words and figures "or Part II of Schedule II" 
shall be omitted. 
34. In the section 54 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the words "twenty-five 
thousand rupees", the words "five lakh rupees" shall be substituted. 
35. In section 55 of the principal Act, after clause (ac), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
"(ad) the Management Authority or any officer, including an officer of theWild 
Life Crime Control Bureau, authorised in this behalf by the Central Government; or". 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
234

36. In section 57 of the principal Act, after the words "derivate thereof" at both the 
places where they occur, the words "or Scheduled specimen" shall be inserted. 
37. In section 61 of the principal Act, for the word "add", the words "amend any 
Schedule or add" shall be substituted. 
38. In section 62 of the principal Act,— 
(a) the words and figures "and Part II of Schedule II" shall be omitted; 
(b) the words and figure "and so long as such notification is in force, such wild 
animals shall be deemed to have been included in Schedule V" shall be omitted. 
39. After section 62 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, 
Namely:— 
"62A. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, regulate or prohibit the 
import, trade, possession or proliferation of invasive alien species which pose a threat 
to the wild life or habitat in India. 
(2) The Central Government may authorise the Director or any other officer to 
seize and dispose of, including through destruction, the species referred to in the 
notification issued under sub-section (1). 
62B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the Central Government 
may call for any information or report from a State Government or any such other 
agency or body or issue any direction to a State Government or any such other agency 
or body for effective implementation of the provisions of the Act for the protection, 
conservation and management of wild life in the country.". 
40. In section 63 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),— 
(a) after clause (ai), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(aii) terms and conditions of the committee, sub-committees or study 
groups under sub-section (3) of section 5B;"; 
(b) after clause (gvi), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(gvii) the manner of disposal of Government property under 
sub-section (5) of section 39; 
(gviii) the conditions for transfer or transport of live alaphant under 
sub-section (4) of section 43;"; 
(c) after clause (j), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(ji) the terms and conditions of service including salaries and allowances 
for appointment of the officers and employees of the Management Authority 
under sub-section (4) of section 49E; 
(jii) the conditions and procedures subject to which any exemption 
provided for in Article VII of the Convention may be availed under 
sub-section (2) of section 49H; 
(jiii) the reporting of details of scheduled specimens and the transaction 
as per sub-section (3) of section 49H; 
(jiv) the matters provided for in sub-sections (8) and (9) of section 49M; 
(jv) the form and manner of the application, the fee payable, the form of 
certificate of registration, and the procedure to be followed in granting or 
cancelling a certificate of registration as per sub-section (2) of section 49N; 
(jvi) the fee payable for renewal of certificates of registration as per 
sub-section (3), and manner of making appeal under sub-section (4), of 
section 49-O; 
(jvii) any other matter for proper implementation of the Convention as may 
be required under Chapter VB;". 
41. For Schedules I, II, III, IV, V and VI to the principal Act, the following Schedules 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The word “alien” may please be deleted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The schedules need to be finalized after a series of 
consultations with domain experts. 
Sandalwood and Red Sanders need to be added as 
Schedule I species. 
There are numerous orchids that also need to be 
added to the list of protected plants. 
The earlier system of including entire families may 
need to be replicated for some insects as well. 
 
  
 
Please do let us know if any further information or clarifications are required. 
 
Yours faithfully, 
 
 
 
 
Debi Goenka 
Executive Trustee 
235

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
236

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
237

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
238

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
239

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
240

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
241

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
242

Turtle Survival Alliance - India 
 Committed to conserving India’s freshwater ecosystems 
F.F., D 1/ 317, Sector F, Jankipuram, Lucknow, 
Uttar Pradesh, India -226021 
 
Tele-Fax: +91-522-4001167  | tsa.indiaprog@gmail.com 
www.indianturtles.in | www.turtlesurvival.org 
 
 
Letter No.: TSAFI/PSC/22-950                                                                     Date: 02.02.2022 
 
To, 
Mr. Rakesh Anand 
Additional Director, 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
New Delhi 
 
 
Subject: Regarding revisions and amendments made to the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 vide THE WILD 
LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2021 (Bill No 159 of 2021) 
 
Sir, 
 
I am writing this on behalf of Turtle Survival Alliance (India) Program in the context of the recent revisions and 
amendments proposed in the Lok Sabha under THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2021. 
An exhaustive revision and consideration of various species of Tortoises and Freshwater Turtles of India was 
long overdue in the Wild Life (Pr otection) Act, 1972. We appreciate the amendments proposed in the act that 
would strengthen law and enforcement structures so as to grant these animals the highest level of protection in 
the country. 
 
With 29 species of tortoises and freshwater turtles, India is among the premier turtle diversity hotspots. Globally, 
India ranks sixth in terms of species diversity, while third among all Asian countries. Turtle Survival Alliance 
India (TSA-India) Program initiated in 2014, today, positively impacts 15 of the 29 species. Working in close 
collaboration with the State Forest Departments and National Institutions, we conduct actions on the ground 
towards species conservation and protected area management, enhance community livelihood benefits, strengthen 
law enforcement, curb illegal trade, and accelerate learning on relevant issues on the illegal turtle trade in the 
country. Three National Freshwater Turtle and Tortoise Strategic Conservation Planning & Red-list Assessment 
Meeting conducted by TSA India in 2005, 2 010 and 2017 with support and endorsement of Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, and Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation (in the past), help recognize the five ‘Turtle Priority Areas’ in the country, with timely revisions of 
the species in IUCN Red List as per the status and conservation priority. 
 
TSA India program has always voiced in favor of listing the threatened Tortoises and Freshwater Turtles of India 
under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, CITES, IUCN Red List etc but with the backing of current knowledge 
and need assessment so as to well inform the species protection based on the regional as well as a global, science 
and conservation priorities.  We are approaching you in this context and would be grateful if you can consider the 
following views which are framed as per the existing state of knowledge, conservation importance and the 
scientific research feasibility for the species. 
 
1.    On the revised Schedules- 
 
-Indian Flapshell Turtle ( Lissemys punctata) may be maintained in Schedule I – The species has drastically 
surfaced in illegal trade seizures, destined for food/flesh markets. The species was up -listed to Vulnerable in 
IUCN Red List, as it is estimated to have undergone a reduction of more than 30% over three generations owing 
to extensive local harvesting and continual wetland loss. It was earlier listed in Schedule I, allowing for the stricter 
conviction of the offenders. 
 
-Indian Roofed Turtle ( Pangshura tecta) may be maintained in Schedule I (it is listed as Indian Tent Turtle/ 
Kachuga tecta* under Schedule II, * see Sr. No. 3 for species name anomalies) – Due to their decorative coloration  
243

and relatively small size, the species is among the commonly sought-after species for the pet trade. It is a heavily 
exploited species, especially as a pet and as dried plastron for the Chinese Traditional Chinese Medicine markets. 
 
-Loggerhead Turtle (Caretta caretta) may be maintained in Schedule I – The species is threatened due to direct 
utilization of turtles or eggs for human use (i.e., consumption, commercial products) as well as fisheries bycatch: 
incidental capture of turtles in fishing gear targeting other species. 
 
-Indian Tent Turtle (Pangshura tentoria) may be listed in Schedule II (it is listed as Indian Tent Turtle/ Kachuga 
tecta* under Schedule II, * see Sr. No. 3 for species name anomalies) – Likewise, Indian Roofed Turtle, the 
species also surfaces considerably in the pet trade though less than sister species P. tecta, and P. sylhetensis. 
 
-Crowned River Turtle ( Hardella thurjii) may be moved to Schedule II – The species currently has a stable 
population across its distribution range in the Ganga -Brahmaputra basin of northern India. The species further 
has rare occurrences in the trade seizures. 
 
-Asian Giant Tortoise ( Manouria emys ) may be moved to Schedule II – Though the species is rare and 
reportedly occurs across its distributional range in Northeastern India, exact range is yet to be established, 
requiring further studies. Also, it rarely occurs in pet or flesh trade. 
 
-Keeled Box Turtle ( Cuora mouhotii) may be listed under Schedule II – Though a decent population of the 
species exists in Northeast India, very limited information is available with preliminary studies suggesting that it 
might have a sub-species, warranting further investigation. The species has rare occurrences in the trade seizures. 
 
-Assam L eaf turtle ( Cyclemys gemeli) may be added to Schedule II (it is mentioned as 'Cyclemys spp.' in 
Schedule IV in the appendix) – Though the species has been reported from different Northeastern states, decline 
in available habitat over three generations is suspected to have caused a 20% reduction in population. 
 
2.    On the species not listed in any Schedule- 
 
-Indian Narrow Headed Softshell Turtle (Chitra indica) is recommended for listing in Schedule I – The species 
has recently emerged as one of the most sought after species in illegal turtle trade for meat and their calipee (in 
Chinese traditional medicine). Continued decline in area, extent and/or quality of habitat is leading to population 
decline. 
 
- Assam roofed turtle (Pangshura sylhetensis) is recommended for listing in Schedule I – The species is locally 
rare to very rare in its distribution range, restricted to the Brahmaputra basin. The population has been decimated 
due to widespread local subsistence consumption and demand for the high-end pet trade. 
 
-Malayan box turtle (Cuora amboinensis) is recommended for listing in Schedule II – Though rare, a substantial 
population occurs in several protected areas in northeast India, however very limited information is available with 
preliminary studies suggesting that it might have a sub -species, warranting further investigation.  The species is 
threatened with illegal trade for consumption and traditional Chinese medicine and occasion al consumption for 
subsistence throughout its range. 
 
-Impressed tortoise ( Manouria impressa ) is recommended for listing in Schedule II – The species was 
discovered from Arunachal Pradesh in 2019. With sparse information currently available on its distribu tion, the 
species is rare, but faces threats of subsistence hunting, alongside habitat loss from agriculture and logging. 
 
-Indian Eyed Turtle ( Morenia petersi) is recommended for listing in Schedule II – The species has suffered 
widespread declines, essentially disappearing from half of its former range. Substantial numbers continue to be 
collected for local consumption and export to East Asian food markets. The recent appearance of the species in 
trade seizures is worrisome. 
 
 
 
244

3.    On the anomalies in the species names- 
 
-Indian Roofed Turtle ( Pangshura tecta ) and Indian Tent Turtle ( Pangshura tentoria ) are two 
different species. They are currently mentioned as the Indian Tent Turtle/ Kachuga tecta  under the 
Schedule II, (*see Sr. No. 1 for recommended Sch edules). Both species are heavily exploited for the pet 
trade, thus need protection. 
 
-The scientific name of Indian Flapshell  Turtle may be rectified as Lissemys punctata  (in place of 
Lissemys punctate) 
 
-Genus and species name must be separated with a space. 
 
4.    On the export of scheduled and non-scheduled species under VB- 
 
As per 49-I. (1) The export of any specimen of species included in Appendices I or II of Schedule IV shall 
require the prior grant and presentation of an export permit. 
 
The Current Appendix I contain several tortoise and freshwater turtle species that are threatened with 
extinction, like CITES, 49-I can be more clarified that it prohibits international trade in specimens of these 
species except when the purpose of the exp ort is not commercial for instance for conservation breeding 
and research (as in Article III, CITES). 
 
49-N. (1) Every person who is engaged in breeding in captivity or artificially propagating any scheduled 
specimen listed in Appendix I of Schedule IV sha ll make, within a period of ninety days of the 
commencement of the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2021, an application for registration to the 
Chief WildLife Warden. 
 
For non-scheduled species as Morenia petersi, Melanochelys trijuga and Cyclemys gemeli etc, 49N may 
be exploited for commercial breeding ventures and trade. A sub -clause similar to above may be included 
to allow only conservation breeding and research, and prohibit breeding for commercial purposes. 
 
 
5.    Other recommendations- 
 
In 49-N or 49-O, it may be included that ‘‘all captive breeding facilities (conservation and commercial) 
for any species of wildlife must have documentation of legal acquisition of the founder stock, and maintain 
records of births, deaths and transfers (releases,  exchanges, sales) of all captive -born offspring. Where 
possible, parent and offspring specimens should be uniquely marked (microchipping, scute notching, 
photo-identification, ringing, tagging, etc.) whenever possible without compromising animal welfare’’. 
 
In 49-I, 3 (c), it is strongly recommended to include the words ‘in the wild’, so that the sentence reads “…. 
the Scientific Authority has advised that the export will not be detrimental to the survival of that species 
in the wild;” [otherwise there may  be a situation where a species is allowed to go extinct in the wild as 
long as plenty of animals survive in captivity, like it happened for Cuora trifasciata or, even Giant Pandas 
in China] 
 
49M (5) & (6) and 49N (1) are not quite consistent: registration requirement applies to Appendix I, II and 
III species, but the 90 day limit and fee schedule only apply to Appendix I specimens. 
 
49M only pertains to live specimens; death of concerned specimens must be reported, but there seems to 
be no specific instruction what to do with the carcass, and the option to give away a dead specimen. This 
may be resolved by including such clauses in the act that are not discussed or proposed for amendment 
here. 
 
245

There may be a structured mechanism to periodically review and upd ate the list of species included in 
Schedules I and II – both for inclusion of species recently found to warrant legal protection, and to update 
taxonomic-nomenclatural changes. Also, whether the changes to Schedule IV would presumably occur 
‘automatically’ after each CITES CoP – such a mechanism can be specified. 
 
 
We do hope that you will reflect upon these issues, and consider this as our formal request to invite expert 
opinions and deliberations before going ahead with the proposed WILD LIFE (PROTECTI ON) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2021. These suggestions, if included, would elevate the consideration of tortoises 
and freshwater turtles, both regionally and globally as sentient beings. 
 
 
Thanking You 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
(Dr. Shailendra Singh) 
Director, Turtle Survival Alliance – India 
Regional Vice-chair, IUCN/SSC/Tortoise and Turtle Specialist Group 
 
 
 
 
246

 
 
 
PROPOSED AMMENDMENTS  
THE WILDLIFE PROTECTION ACT, 1972 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRUE CONSERVATION ALLIANCE FOUNDATION 
FEBRUARY 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
247

 
 
CONTENTS 
NO. TOPIC PAGE NO. 
 Summary 1 
 Introduction 2 
 Wildlife Management Principles  3 
 WPA Amendments & Comments  4 
 Additional Recommendations 12 
 Wildlife Protection Act 14 
 Aims & Objectives of the WPA: A Criticism 21 
 Annexure 1: Background & History of the WPA 23 
 Annexure 2: Animal Rights Vs Animal Welfare  25 
 Annexure 3: Renaming the WPA 28 
 Annexure 4: Wildlife Management as per WCS Protocols  29 
 Annexure 5: Sustainable Use of Wild Resources  31 
 Revenue Generation & Benefits of Regulated Hunting  35 
 Annexure 6: The Megafauna Index  37 
 Annexure 7: Crop Protection & the WPA 38 
 Annexure 8: Invasive Alien Species  40 
 Annexure 9: Sanatan Dharma & Sustainable Use  42 
 The Case of Sustainable Use in the Mahabharat 43 
 Annexure 10: Regulated Hunting & Sustainable Use: The Global Context 43 
 Wildlife Management Definitions 45 
 Annexure 11: Hunting Models & Revenue Systems  46 
 The Success of Regulated Hunting in Pakistan: A Case Study  50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
248

1 
 
SUMMARY 
This report outlines lacunae in the Wildlife Protection Act, India and aims to - 
• Check constitutionality of aims & objects of WPA,1972 that affect proposed amendments. 
 
• Outline relevance of aims and objects of WPA 1972 with regard to World Conservation 
Strategy protocols (1980) upon which India has agreed to model its wildlife laws upon. 
 
• Define foundational principles for the Act as per WCS protocols and best possible outcome 
keeping constitutionality, legality and global precedents in mind. 
 
• Define “Wildlife Management” as per global precedent and its branches, “Conservation 
Management” & “Preservation Management” to set foundations for all ensuing policy. 
 
• Provide s ustainable management solutions for Human -wildlife conflict including 
integrated management solutions (IPM)  and Community Nature Based Resource 
Management (CNBRM) solutions  that result in livelihood dev elopment for rural 
communities while achieving IUCN/World Conservation Strategy (WCS) Objectives.  
 
• Ensure farmers are given the rights to protect their crops, lives and livelihood. 
 
• Sustain & nurture abilities of rural communities to participate in the economy through 
wise & sustainable use of natural resources to contribute to the alleviation of poverty 
 
• Conserve the country’s biological diversity by allowing sustainable use and ownership of 
bio diversity by both public and private sectors.  
 
• Restore and increase wildlife habitat by incentivizing communities to protect wildlife and 
their habitats, thus increasing community participation in conservation. 
 
• Provide strategies for t he resurrection of tradition and culture  inhibited by policy  and 
sustain animist, Sanatan dharmic and indigenous traditions across India. 
 
• Fulfil India’s international obligations to treaties, declarations and protocols to which India 
is a signatory to,  including the UN declaration of Human rights,  UNESCO and IUCN  
declarations, regarding conservation objectives and sustainable use of biodiversity. 
 
• Ensure that various forms of ‘ecotourism’ benefits farming and indigenous communities 
directly – with significant revenues staying at the community level via policy. 
 
• Increase tourism at both national and international levels within India. 
 
• Enable a significant rise in the GDP of the country. 
 
 
249

2 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The Wildlife Protection Act (WPA) 1972 was enacted and passed by Indira Gandhi prior to the 
42nd Amendment of India’s Constitution, enacted during the Emergency when the opposition 
was jailed and the supreme courts powers were reduced. The WPA effectively banned hunting 
in most regards and took away the traditional rights of Indians 38 million tribals at the time 
(today over a 100 million people), to sustainably use their natural resources as they had been 
doing so since time immemorial. Simultaneously it prohibited farmers from effectiv ely 
protecting their crops or citizens from sustainably using wild resources as is practised in most 
countries. While the ban ‘sounded’ good to people removed from ground realities, it led to 
massive amounts of forest being converted to agricultural lands with immense losses of 
biodiversity, the attack on culture and traditions of India’s indigenous peoples  as well as 
inhibiting the right of farmers to protect their livelihoods guaranteed under Article 21. 
 
The Wildlife Protection Act was a precursor to the  Indian Emergency and the model was 
inspired by early North American efforts to create the ‘ideal’ wilderness, evocative of paradise 
and sans human habitation. While the Americans allowed regulated hunting, fishing and other 
sustainable usages of public an d private  lands and ensured the right of their farmers to 
protect their livelihoods, the Indian state took over all wild resources, preventing them from 
being owned or used sustainably by citizens in most regards, and the forest department was 
tasked with enforcing the blanket ban on hunting and state takeover of natural resources. In 
India wildlife ‘conservation’ as it is called, is the sole domain of the State , often alienating 
local communities who have historic ally been linked to the wildlife through mythological, 
spiritual, consumptive and economic connections.  
 
The Act extinguished the customary rights as well as historical relationships of local 
communities with the natural environment, creating conflict bet ween communities, wildlife 
and the state . In comparison to nearly all Western, European  and African conservation 
models, India’s ‘Fortress’ WPA essentially bureaucratized crop protection while converting 
the former hunting reserves of Maharajas to Protected Areas, banning hunting in most 
regards, effectively taking away resource usage rights from all indigenous people  and 
removed via policy the potential of sustainable use of any wild life or wild lands from the 
citizens of India, whose resources they actually are. 
 
Worldwide, there is no ban on regulated sustainable use of wild resources , an effective 
wildlife management tool and revenue generator. Nor is there a man-animal conflict problem 
or threats to wildlife in those countries, since wildlife populations are monitored and 
managed. Indian wildlife is routinely portrayed as threatened and exploited, in the absence 
of any reliable knowledge or data on the subject. Except for tigers, we have not taken a census 
of any wildlife species outside protected areas that cover only about 5% of the country. There 
exist no reliable figures for any species of terrestrial wildlife, despite immense funding 
received by concerned government organs.  
 
Wildlife is prolific and needs to be managed in landscapes that include agriculture, human 
settlements and natural habitats. These landscapes cover up to 95 percent of the country  
(excluding protected areas)  and could be a source of immense and sustainable wealth in 
various forms, if allowed via policy, as followed by all first world nations and most of the rest. 
250

3 
 
WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT PRINCIPLES: THE INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT 
 
The provisions of the World Conservation Strategy – 1980 (WCS), revised 1991 and renamed: 
Caring for the Earth, A Strategy for Sustainable Living  form a protocol, declared to be the 
official Mission Statement, and is reflected the principal policy, of the International Union for 
the Conservation of Natur e and Natural Resources (IUCN). In 1980, the WCS was hailed by 
world society as being the blueprint for the symbiotic survival of man and nature on earth.   
 
India became a State Member of IUCN in 1969, through the Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change (MoEFCC) and obligated itself to model India’s National Conservation 
Strategies (NCSs) on the WCS template; and to write its provisions into their national 
laws. The WCS proposed and promoted, inter alia, an integrated approach to developmen t 
and sustainable natural resource management. The three principles objectives of what the 
WCS describes as living resource conservation (sic) are:  
 
1. To preserve genetic diversity (the range of genetic material found in the world’s 
organisms), on which depend the functioning of many of the above processes and life-
support systems, the breeding programs necessary for the protection and 
improvement of cultivated plants, domesticated animals and microorganisms, as well 
as much scientific and medical advancement, technical innovation, and the security of 
the many industries that use living resources; 
 
2. To maintain essential ecological processes and life support systems (such as soil 
regeneration and protection, the recycling of nutrients, and the cleansing of waters), 
on which human survival and development depend; and 
 
3. To ensure the sustainable utilization of species and ecosystems (notably fish and other 
wildlife, forests and grazing lands), which support millions of rural communities as well 
as major industries.  
 
The Wildlife Protection Act of India is a central Statute that protects wildlife wherever wildlife 
may be found. The Act was written in 1972, eight years prior to when India became a signatory 
to the World Conservation Strategy – 1980 (WCS). After the promulgation of the WCS, all 
those responsible sovereign states who were members of the IUCN at that time, including 
India, obligated themselves to model their National Conservation Strategies (NCSs) on the 
WCS template; and to write its provisions into their national laws.  These protocols of the WCS 
have not been incorporated into the WPA as yet, especially the third protocol for sustainable 
use. The WPA itself is arguably problematic on many fronts including at a constitutional level 
where it can be contended that Article 21 is routinely violated especially when it comes to 
farmers rights and indigenous livelihoods & traditions. 
 
251

4 
 
WPA AMENDMENTS / COMMENTS 
 
• Short Title and Commencement 
 1(1) This Act may be called the Wild Resources (Management) Amendment Act, 2021. 
The use of the word ‘protection’ is not commensurate with global understanding of what 
‘conservation’ is per se. “Protection” is only one aspect of Wildlife Management as per 
the world conservation strategy protocols. Both “Conservation” and “Protection” are the 
two aspects of Wildlife Management. Conservation allows for sustainable use of natural 
resources whereas protection is only applied to those species that need protection so that 
their numbers can rise to a level where the species can be conserved and thus benefit 
both humanity and biodiversity. 
Refer: Annexure 3, Annexure 4 
• Amendment of Preamble 
The use of the expression “conservation” in the preamble is a good thing though 
unnecessary if Wildlife Management is used. The word ‘Conservation’ is used globally and 
clearly defined as per World Conservation Strategy Protocols and also includes sustainable 
use of wild resources including fish, plants, and wildlife -  as per the 3rd WCS protocol. 
The Act should shift its title / objective from “protection” of wildlife to “MANAGEMENT” 
Of wildlife  and wild resources  which encompasses both PROTECTION and 
CONSERVATION, allowing revenues and rural livelihoods to be created in various ways, as 
per global precedents, WCS protocols and evidence-based science. 
Refer: Annexure 3, Annexure 4 
• Amendment of Section 2: Section 2 gives a list of the definitions of expressions used 
in the Act. Many are welcome changes. 
The following need addressal -  
(c) after clause (16), the following clause shall be inserted, namely — '(16A) "invasive 
alien species" means a species of animal or plant which is not native to India and 
whose introduction or spread may threaten or adversely impact wildlife or its 
habitat;' 
Invasive Alien Species (IAS) definition should follow the IUCN definition of what an IAS is  as 
India is a signatory to the WCS protocols . The definition is currently incorrect.  The Correct 
definition is “An Invasive alien species is a species introduced outside its natural past or 
present distribution; if this species becomes problematic to either wildlife, wildlife habitat or 
human life and resources, it is termed an invasive alien species (IAS)”.  
In other words: An invasive species is an organism that causes ecological or economic harm 
in a new environment where it is not native. – Source: US Dept. of Commerce) 
252

5 
 
IAS are the most common threat to amphibians, reptiles, and mammals on the IUCN Red List; 
they may lead to changes in the structure and composition of ecosystems detrimentally 
affecting ecosystem services, the economy and wellbeing. Given the numerous ecosystems in 
India especially island ecosystems, invasive species native to some parts of India may invade 
other parts. For example: 1. Spotted deer in the Andaman Islands are invasive alien species 
which destroy endemic flora and fauna  though endemic to other areas . 2. Unowned /free 
ranging domestic dogs and cats in any wildlife areas are also Invasive Alien Species as per 
international definition 3. Rhesus monkeys ranges are increasing negatively affecting farmer’s 
incomes and bonnet monkey populations. 5. Common Blue rock pigeons are also invasive 
alien species causing huge damage to both urban structures, monuments, and agriculture. All 
these species follow the IUCN definitions of an “Invasive Alien Species” 
Suggested Amendment: All designated Invasive Alien species may be harvested, killed and 
utilized in designated contexts by any citizen, government authority or agency. Where their 
removal or hunting can be monetized, it should encouraged. For example: 1. Hunting of 
spotted deer in the Andaman islands 2. Export and trade of rhesus monkeys for bio -pharma 
research. 3. Hunting of pigeons in fields when they raid crops or allowance of people to 
capture/kill blue rock pigeons in cities. 
Refer: Annexure 7 
The definition of “hunting” (sub-rule 16) must also be amended given its relevance to other 
amendments. 
India is perhaps the only country on earth where farmers are prevented and inhibited from 
protecting their crops, livelihoods, and property as per the stipulations of the Wildlife 
Protection Act 1972 that has put in place procedures for crop pest management that are 
illogical, unsustainable, and practically impossible or near impossible for a farmer to use to 
protect his livelihood. India's official farmer population is up to about 150 million people who 
work against tremendous odds to achieve their harvests. Up to 70 percent (and in some cases 
more) of the harvest can be lost to vertebrate pests including birds, mammals and roden ts 
and vast losses go unreported, at great cost to both the GNP and India’s farmers.  
 
Under the Wildlife Protection Act (WPA) in India, it is illegal for a farmer to even chase a wild 
boar, nilgai or monkey off his land, let alone shoot it, even if it is destroying his crops and 
livelihood or posing a threat to his life and livestock. The current definition implies that driving 
(chasing) wild animals out of somebody’s home or fields amounts to illegal hunting {clause 
(b)} and cannot be done legally without the permission of an authorized officer. Likewise, on 
paper, farmers are prevented from protecting their crops using lethal methods from various 
birds and monkeys that cause immense losses to both farmers and to food security of the 
nation even though the se species are not endangered in any way and are present in 
exponentially greater numbers in croplands compared to wild habitat’s simply because 
farmers resources form the bulk of their diet and predators are absent/inadequate in number.  
 
India is among the first countries in the world to have passed legislation granting Farmers' 
Rights in the form of the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Act, 2001. However, 
paradoxically while the Act protects the genetic potential and strains of crops grown by Indian 
253

6 
 
farmers it does not include the right for farmers to protect their plant resources on the ground 
from attack by crop pests. So, while intellectual property is protected, actual property is not 
allowed to be protected from many crop pests using lethal, sustainable, or consumptive 
means even if regulated as the hunting definition does not allow for regulation of hunting.  
 
Likewise, the process which farmers must go through to get permission to protect their crops 
is cumbersome, attacked at the policy level by animal rights activists both in the courts and 
within government, constantly challenged in court and often unworkable, especially for the 
small farmer. Forest departments often do not issue permissions and courts take a long time 
to deliver judgements most often in favour of farmers rights to protect their crops. By the 
time a farmer is usually ‘allowed’ to protect his own property and crops from marauding wild 
animals, he has lost too much, and years have passed, or entire ha rvests and livelihood 
potentials lost. This situation can be argued to be unconstitutional and against the right of a 
farmer to protect his or her livelihood. 
 
The original , pre 1972  definition of “hunting” may be used , slightly modified following 
international precedents and effective protocols. 
(16) “hunting”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes— 
(a) capturing, killing, poisoning, snaring, and trapping of any wild animal and every attempt 
to do so. 
(b) driving or baiting any wild animal for any of the purposes specified in sub-clause (a) and 
every attempt to do so; 
(c) injuring or destroying or taking any part of the body of any such animal or, in the case of 
wild birds or reptiles, damaging the eggs of such birds or reptiles,  or disturbing the eggs or 
nests of such birds or reptiles. 
It is recommended that REGULATED hunting may be allowed outside PA s, especially in 
agricultural areas, with significant  derived revenue being allowed to stay at rural level to 
ensure community conservation, and within PAs if it serves a Wildlife Management function. 
Likewise falconry may be allowed as it has been since 2010 been added to the Representative 
List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity  by the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). 
The retaining of the schedule IV for vermin might not be needed and especially if regulated 
hunting is allowed.  
If hunting is legalized, revenue enabled so that revenues stay at the rural level and regulated 
then a species need not be labelled vermin, as being notified vermin is for a certain time and 
for a specific district/area etc. The Act is a permanent instrument and allowing for sustainable 
use of potential ‘vermin’ species following wildlife management protocols and  can be an 
incentive for community conservation across India, revenue generation from designated 
‘wastelands’ which include wild game species populations, and increase the GDP. 
The addition of regulated hunting can cause a reclassification of so called ‘wastelands’ (which 
include grasslands, mountainous regions and biomass rich scrub/desert regions)  in India to 
254

7 
 
becoming significant revenue generating “Game Lands” fulfilling both WCS protocols and 
increasing GDP and ensuring vast lands treated so far as wasteland, will henceforth be 
allowed to remain wildlife habitat due to both revenues earned, and communities benefitted. 
Refer Annexures 4,5,6,9 
• Amendment of Section 9:  
This should be changed. The section refers to hunting only under Sections 11 and 12 while 
the Act also provides for de facto hunting under section 29 and 35 (6) (No person shall destroy, 
exploit, or remove any wildlife ---). What should be said is that “No person shall hunt wild 
animals except as provided for and allowed in this Act , except in the case of indigenous 
populations or other communities including farmer communities guaranteed that “right” for 
specific areas and species. For example: The Sentinelese of the Andaman Islands /other tribal 
groups communities granted resource rights under FRA 2006  Example 2: Farmers protecting 
crops from particular and prolific crop raiding species. 
Refer Annexures 4,5,6,9 
• Substitution of Section 32: This amendment is good, but the provision should be 
applicable to waterways upstream of a sanctuary. Hundreds of rare  gharials in the 
National Chambal Sanctuary were lost by release of chemical pollutants by upstream 
industries, 2008. The waters flowing into sanctuaries should be ensured unpolluted. 
 
• Insertion of new Sections 33C and 33D: These insertions seem unnecessary, although 
harmless. Section 33B already provides for the constitution of advisory committees 
for sanctuaries and there does not seem to be any material differen ce between the 
two. Similarly, section 38 X already provides for the constitution of foundations in tiger 
reserves. Instead of bringing in new sections and making the Act cumbersome to read 
and interpret, the existing sections can perhaps be modified slightly to meet objectives 
of these new insertions. 
Refer Annexures 4,5,6,9 
• Amendment of Section 34:  
14. In section 34 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely— "(4) No renewal of any licence under the Arms Act, 1959, shall be 
granted to any person residing within ten kilometres of a sanctuary except  under the 
intimation to the Chief Wildlife Warden or the authorised officer." 
This is an erroneous amendment which is likely to be both unconstitutional and against 
several Supreme Court precedents regarding Article 21, the ‘bedrock’ of the constitution 
and a fundamental right (to life, livelihood and freedom of movement that guarantee the 
right of a citizen to protect him or herself with a licensed firearm and especially where it 
might be needed the most. ) Laws already exist for disallowing firearms withi n Protected 
Areas. Disallowing them outside PAs and especially in areas near PAs where dwellings are 
255

8 
 
isolated, subject to dacoity or the depredations of dangerous animals including leopards, 
tigers, wild boar, and elephants amounts to an unconstitutional act.  
India leads the world in wildlife related deaths and human wildlife conflict and one of the 
reasons for this is the Wildlife “Protection” Act which prevents farmers from defending 
crops without bureaucratic sanction. To  further add insult to injury would be to remove 
citizens the right to defend themselves and would invite legal actions across the country 
that would likely impact the entire act in various ways.  Poaching’ or illegal hunting, is 
rarely done with licensed w eapons and snares/ explosives etc. are most often used . 
Inconveniencing law-abiding citizens and farmers who might need a weapon to protect 
life, livelihood and limb from both human wild threats invites a legal response to an 
authoritarian “fortress’ appro ach to wildlife conservation.  Some points reg arding 
proposed amendment with respect to arms licenses within 10 km. - 
1. Article 21 and its interpretation which include the Right to live with human dignity, 
right to protection, right to freedom of fear, right to livelihood, right to health, right 
against inhuman treatment, right of women to be treated with decency and dignity, 
right to reputation, right to social security and protection of the family, right to social 
and economic justice and empowerment and the  right to sleep. These rights cannot 
be ensured if the right to self -protection is prohibited especially in remote or areas 
with dangerous wild animals where it might be most needed. 
 
2. A law-abiding person who lives within the 10-kilometre radius of a National Park or 
Sanctuary retains his or her right to self -protection which is allowed for citizens 
regardless of where they choose to legally live. It is common knowledge that farms 
abutting forest blocks tend to have an influx of animals that do crop damage or man 
eating. The isolation of these areas can also attract dacoits and more so if the citizenry 
is disarmed.  Not renewing or issuing arms licenses in these areas is akin to banning 
cars in city centres because of the irresponsible driving of a few.  
 
3. The recent Arms rules have increased penalties for misuse of arms. Divesting people 
of arms in areas where they are required can be considered a constitutional violation. 
 
4. Man-animal conflicts occur regularly in almost all states, as these animals continue to 
trespass into human territories and the predators follow their prey including leopards 
being attracted to settlements due to stray dog populations. Contrary to Animal right 
inspired tropes that humans invade wild animals ’ territories wild animals most often 
travel to croplands for easy food and create conflict. A few hours in crop lands are 
equivalent to animals foraging for days in forests which is why animals will always 
travel to the easiest food source. Inhibiting a farmer, the right to protect himself is 
tantamount to a violation of Article 21 which also ensures livelihood protection. 
 
5. It is estimated that huge crop loss of farmers (up to 90 percent in some areas) can be 
attributed to animals like boar, nilgai, birds including peacocks/pigeons/doves/grey 
partridge/parakeets and rodents and monkeys in various areas. Elephants regularly 
attack and kill humans and the estimate is that approximately 500 people are killed in 
a year i n West Bengal alone. Predatory animals such as Tigers and Leopards have 
256

9 
 
become man-eaters as the proximity to humans has increased, especially after the 
beef slaughter ban, which  often ensures easy food to tigers , ensuing increase in 
numbers and human deat hs as tigers , which are territorial, push other tigers out of 
PAs into human inhabited areas. Wild animals are prolific, and their numbers are on 
the rise in many contexts, especially when they are unmolested and have easy access 
to food. Preventing people the right to self-defence especially in areas most prone to 
conflict, is tantamount to an unconstitutional act. 
 
6. As it is, an arms licensee or applicant must undergo various background checks, about 
criminal antecedents and propensities, medical cer tificates and proofs of sound mind 
and body, physical competence to safely handle firearms and safe storage facilities at 
home etc. are to be submitted to the licensing authorities. Penalizing law -abiding 
citizens who might live in remote areas, is unnecessary and unconstitutional. 
 
7. In Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration, the Supreme Court reiterated with the approval 
the above observations and held that the “right to life” included the right to lead a 
healthy life to enjoy all faculties of the human body in their prime conditions. It would 
even include the right to protection of a person’s tradition, culture, heritage, and all 
that gives meaning to a man’s life.  It includes the right to live in peace, to sleep in 
peace and the right to repose and health.  Indigenous and rural tradition, culture, 
heritage includes hunting for food or cultural needs, currently prohibited under the 
WPA’s existing definition of hunting and further compromised by this proposed 
amendment. Fear of attack while going home at night  / Watching over fields raided 
by wild animals including elephants, Traditional ‘rights’ of indigenous people to hunt 
(ensured under FRA 2006), fear of attack while going to practice one’s livelihood while 
farming or watching over crops, loss of sleep due to crop protection and loss of health 
due to attack by both wildlife and stray dogs in these areas. Loss of health due to 
rabies which is 100 percent fatal (about 20,000 people die due to rabies every year 
due to transm ission from dogs and that is the number reported. Rabies is not a 
notifiable disease, and most deaths occur in rural areas.) 
 
8. The court in Board of Trustees of the Port of Bombay v. Dilip  Kumar 
Raghavendranath Nandkarni , came to hold that “the right to life” guaranteed by 
Article 21 includes “the right to livelihood”. In Olga Tellis v. Bombay Municipal 
Corporation, “The state  may not by affirmative action, be compelled to provide 
adequate means of livelihood or work to the citizens. But any person who is deprived 
of his right to livelihood except according to just and fair procedure established by law 
can challenge the depriva tion as offending the right to life conferred in Article 21 .” 
Farmers rights to protect crops and livelihood compromised by this in areas where 
greatest threats might occur. 
 
9. In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, the Supreme Court gave a new dimension to Art. 
21 and held that the right to live is not merely a physical right but includes within its 
ambit the right to live with human dignity. Elaborating the same view, the Court in 
Francis Coralie v. Union Territory  of Delhi, observed that: “The right to live includes 
the right to live with human dignity and all that goes along with it, viz., the bare 
necessities of life such as adequate nutrition, clothing and shelter over the head and 
257

10 
 
facilities for reading writing  and expressing oneself in diverse forms, freely moving 
about and mixing and mingling with fellow human beings  and must include the right 
to basic necessities the basic necessities of life and also the right to carry on functions 
and activities as constitu te the bare minimum expression of human self.” One might 
note that in areas near PAs where man eaters and other dangerous animals are found 
it would be essential to be able to protect oneself, especially in Uttarakhand that leads 
the world in leopard related deaths and constituency of petitioner mentioned above. 
 
10. The theme of life to dignity is to be found in Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India. 
Characterizing Art. 21 as the heart of fundamental rights, the Court gave it an 
expanded interpretation. Bhagwati J. observed: “It is the fundamental right of 
everyone in this country… to live with human dignity free from exploitation. This right 
to live w ith human dignity enshrined in Article 21 derives its life breath from the 
Directive Principles of State Policy and particularly clauses (e) and (f) of Article 39 and 
Articles 41 and 42 and at the least, therefore, it must include protection of the health 
and strength of workers, men and women, and of the tender age of children against 
abuse, opportunities and facilities for children to develop in a healthy manner  and in 
conditions of freedom and dignity, educational facilities, just and humane conditions 
of work and maternity relief. “These are the minimum requirements which must exist 
in order to enable a person to live with human dignity and no State neither the Central 
Government nor any State Government -has the right to take any action which will 
deprive a person of the enjoyment of these basic essentials.  
 
11. In N.H.R.C. v. State of Arunachal Pradesh , (Chakmas Case), the supreme court said 
that the State is bound to protect the life and liberty of every human -being, be he a 
citizen or otherwise, and it cannot permit anybody or group of persons to threaten 
other person or group of persons. No State Government worth the name can tolerate 
such threats by one group of persons to another group of persons; it is duty bound to 
protect the threatened group from such assaults and if it fails to do so, it will fail to 
perform its Constitutional as well as statutory obligations. This judgement would likely 
apply to all areas of the country, including those areas near Protected Areas which are 
subject to greater threats than others. 
 
12. In Milk Men Colony Vikas Samiti v. State of Rajasthan, the Supreme Court held that 
the “right to life” means clean surrounding which leads to healthy body and mind. It 
includes the right to freedom from stray cattle and animals in urban areas.  Currently 
stray dogs (also Invasive alien species in any wildlife habitat as per IUCN definition that 
specifically mentions stray dogs as being part of the second greatest threat to wildlife 
globally after habitat loss) kill more people than all wildlife put together in India except 
snakes. Interestingly, India leads the  world in wildlife related deaths beating even 
Africa which is a continent. Freedom from stray animals includes dogs and cattle. It 
also includes invasive alien species that have been defined in proposed amendments, 
that could include wild boar and other c rop raiding species including peacock, grey 
partridge, blue rock pigeons, parakeets etc whose numbers in crop lands are 
exponentially higher as compared to forest/ protected areas due to easy food 
availability and lack of predators.  
 
258

11 
 
• Amendment of Section 38:  
“Conservation reserve” is an unnecessary PA category (as are “Community reserves”) as it 
neither provides for any special protection to the habitat (animals are protected anywhere in 
India as per the act) nor helps community conservation by allowing s ustainable benefits to 
rural communities (as per FRA 2006, etc.).  
Refer Annexures 4,5,6,9 
• Amendment of Section 39:  
This section must be redefined and written, to allow ownership of wild animals by both 
communities and the public to invite private industry into conservation, bring additional land 
under wildlife and enrich rural communities with wildlife/fishing/sustainable revenues as is 
practiced the world over. 
Namibia’s conservation model which enabled wildlife to be profitably included in more than 
50 percent of the country  (raised from about 15 percent)  is a model worth studying in this 
regard. People across the country have given up cattle farming and replaced  it with wildlife 
farming simply because it is more profitable and easier. 
 This would save the country’s biological diversity, address the needs of farmers and protect 
their livelihood, completely adhere to international treaties and protocols, restore an d 
increase wildlife habitat by incentivizing communities to protect wildlife and their habitats via 
value generation, fulfil India’s international obligations regarding sustainable use of 
biodiversity, that includes wildlife and community conservation and ensure that ‘ecotourism’ 
benefits the poorest communities directly and resonate with the Indian constitution which 
currently, both the WPA and its proposed amendments, debatably do not. 
This would include but not be limited to allowing local communities to utilize the meat of 
culled or hunted animals as per the law instead of wast efully destroying the same. Currently 
wildlife is regarded as state property, and this inhibits the population (whose resources we 
are talking about) from helping conserve and using wild resources sustainably.  
Refer Annexures 4,5,6,9 
• Amendment of Section 40:  
• Amendment of Section 40 A:  
• Amendment of Section 41 
Schedule V should be extended to include Palm squirrels and rose ringed parakeets -  prolific 
crop pests. 
Refer Annexure 6 
• Insertion of Section 42 A:  
If CITES is to be followed in other parts of the act, then hunting trophy imports INTO and OUT 
of India should be allowed if they have been procured via legal means in sustainable CITES 
259

12 
 
enabled and supported contexts. This is unclear  and the MoEFCC should not cherry-pick 
rules/laws as they seem fit. 
Refer Annexures 4,5,6,9 
• Amendment of Section 49A 
This section (along with sections 49B and 49C) is unnecessary. These sections (Chapter VA) 
prohibit trade in animals belonging to schedule I and part II of schedule II. As section 40 -2A 
already provides that ownership of these species cannot be transferred except by way of 
inheritance, trade is thus not possible. This chapter can be deleted. 
• Insertion of Chapter VB: 
The amendment can be “All import and export of wildlife or wildlife products shall be in 
accordance with the provisions of CITES and the rules that may be made in this regard”.  
• Amendment of Section 62:  
 
As mentioned before, there is  no need to create a schedule for listing locally and 
temporarily declared vermin. Schedule IV is unnecessary. 
 
• Amendment of Schedules:  The basis of classification of animals into two schedules 
needs to be clarified.  In the original Act (enacted in 1972) schedules were given titles 
(Big game, Special Game, Small Game). In the new schedules the wildlife may be called 
the same. The word game is used as the wildlife may be sustainably used depending 
on its status as being safe or unsafe. 
Refer Annexures 2, 4,5,6,7, 9 
ADDITIONAL RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING THE WPA 
Human-wildlife conflict is a huge issue pan India. A great part of why this happens is because 
wildlife has no value to people living alongside them i.e only has pest value or meat value. 
Other values that could be generated sustainably are inhibited by the  WPAs definition of 
hunting especially, as well as its emphasis on ownership by the state alone of wildlife. 
• Amendment of Section 11: The provisos below sub-section (b) seriously compromises 
the powers of the CWLW and others in dealing with man -eaters must be deleted. A 
lot of human lives are lost in trying to comply with this provision in gross violation of 
article 21 which supersedes the WPA. It should be made easy for a CWLW to allow for 
man eaters, crop raider species or rogue elephants etc. to be killed when necessary 
and as quickly as possible so as to uphold article 21, the bedrock of fundamental rights. 
Due to delays people die or suffer and wildlife is also poisoned/killed randomly. 
 
• Amendment of Section 12: The definition of scientific management (ban on killing in 
the name of management) given here is unscientific, follows no effective precedent, 
violates international precedent into WCS protocols, disallows various wildlife 
management strategies, inhibits adding value to wildlife in the conservation context  
260

13 
 
and should be modified or deleted. There are situations when killing of animals is 
necessary because translocation is not possibl e, human life is in danger, carrying 
capacity is exceeded or economics  of management necessitate the same. Therefore, 
the ban on killing must be deleted if this act is to  be in consonance with scientific 
wildlife management principles following global precedents and international treaties 
where lethal control / management is crucial to effective wildlife management.  
 
This section also deeply contradicts section 29 and 35 (6) which provide for allowing 
the destruction and exploitation of wildlife in PAs in the name of “improvement and 
better management of wildlife therein” i.e., which follow scientific management 
principles that allow fo r removal of species that have exceeded carrying capacity  of 
the PA and need translocation or culling etc. 
Refer Annexures 2,4,5,6,7, 9 
Proposed Wildlife Laws so as to - 
1. Enable states to deal with human wildlife conflict situations contextually  
2. Make it obligatory for the State to prevent and mitigate HWC and to make the 
communities the owners of any benefits that HWC management strategy may 
produce from time to time (Sections 9 and 10).  
3. Another novel feature of the proposed draft is its linkage with CITES (Section 43 -A). 
Import and export of trophies may require dealing with CITES authorities if hunting is 
accepted, as supported by CITES and IUCN, and carried out by most countries on earth, 
as a HWC, conservation, rural livelihood, and wildlife management tool. 
4. Save the country’s biological diversity following global precedent and protocols 
5. Address the needs of farmers and protect their livelihood currently suffering terri bly 
due to crop pests and wildlife raiding farms 
6. Restore and increase wildlife habitat by incentivizing communities to protect wildlife 
and their habitats  
7. Fulfil India’s international obligations regarding sustainable use of biodiversity, that 
includes wildlife and community conservation 
8. Ensure that ‘ecotourism’ benefits the poorest communities directly 
9. Unlock resources prevented from yielding benefits to the country, that if sustainably 
used and profited from can result in huge benefits to biodiversity and people 
10. Addressing protein deficiency and hunger in the country 
11. Curbing poaching of animals 
12. Adherence to international commitments to the WCS to which India is a signatory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
261

14 
 
The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 
Chapter I 
Preliminary 
Section 2. Definitions. — 
(16) “hunting”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes— 
(a) capturing, killing, poisoning, snaring, and trapping of any wild animal and every attempt 
to do so. 
(b) driving or baiting any wild animal for any of the purposes specified in sub -clause (a) and 
every attempt to do so. 
(c) injuring or destroying or taking any part of the body of any such animal or, in the case of 
wild birds or reptiles, damaging the eggs of such birds or reptiles, or disturbing the eggs or 
nests of such birds or reptiles. 
Chapter III 
Management of Human-Wildlife Conflict 
Section 9. Obligation to manage human-wildlife conflict   
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act or any other law, it is mandatory 
for the State Government to take steps as deemed necessary from time to time to control 
danger caused by wild animals to human life and property while ensuring the long -term 
survival of the species causing, or likely to cause, such danger. 
Section 10. Hunting of wild animals 
(1) No person shall hunt any wild animal specified in Schedules I, II, III, and IV except 
as provided in this Act and in accordance with rules that may be made in this 
regard. 
(2) The first charge on any benefits accruing from the hunting of wild animals sha ll 
be to local and indigenous communities who live alongside wildlife. 
 
Section 11. Hunting of dangerous or disabled wild animals. 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
the Chief Wildlife Warden or the authorised officer may, by an order in writing, 
permit any person to hunt any wild animal or animals or cause such animals to 
be hunted in any manner deemed effective, if he is satisfied that any wild animal 
or a group of wild animals 
(a) has become dangerous to human life, buildings, crops, infrastructure, or any 
other property; or 
(b) is so disabled or diseased as to be beyond recovery. 
(c) Is present in an urban or semi urban area and poses a threat to human beings 
or human resources 
(2) The killing, driving, or wounding in good faith of any wild animal in defence of a 
person or property, including standing crops, except by snaring, food explosives, 
262

15 
 
explosives, or electrocution, shall not be an offence. Provided that nothing in 
this sub-section shall exonerate any person who, when such defence becomes 
necessary, was committing any act in contravention of any provision of this Act 
or any rule or order made thereunder. 
(3) Any wild animal killed or wounded in accordance with sub -section (2) sh all be 
Government property which may be, with due process, handed over or left with 
communities or individuals for personal/community consumption or usage. 
(4)  In the case of wildlife farming, animals of specific species may be farmed, bred, 
humanely killed, consumed and sold in any form. 
 
Section 12. Hunting of wild animals for special purposes 
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, it shall be lawful for the Chief 
Wildlife Warden, to grant a permit, to a person, institution, community -based 
organisation, or any other entity, on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, and 
subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, to hunt or capture via trapping 
any wild animal or animals specified in such permit, for the purpose of- 
(a) education. 
(b) research including zoological/ botanical/medical /pharmaceutical research 
(c) collection of specimens for recognised zoos, museums, and similar institutions. 
(d) collection or preparation of snake-venom for the manufacture of life-saving drugs; 
and 
(e) Conservation purposes including community conservation ventures , regulated 
hunting and fishing 
(f) Crop raiding species population management 
(g) Wildlife Farming 
(h) Hunting to serve a Wildlife Management function such as reducing numbers of a 
chosen species that exceeds the carrying capacity within any protected area  i.e. 
Wildlife population management. 
(i) Tribal festivals, initiations and hunting rites (for particular species) or for particular 
species for food allowed in tribal areas, especially common crop raiding species. 
 
Section 13: Refusal, suspension, or cancellation of a hunting licence 
The Chief Wildlife Warden or the authorised officer may, subject to any general or special 
orders of the State Government, for good and sufficient reason, to be recorded in writing, 
refuse to grant a licence, or suspend or cancel any permit granted under this Chapter. 
Provided that no such refusal, suspension, or cancellation shall be made except after giving 
the holder of the licence a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
Section 14: Appeal from an order under Section 13  
(1) An appeal from an order refusing to grant a license, or an order suspending or 
cancelling a license under Section 13, shall lie— 
(a) if the order is made by the authorized officer, to the Chief Wildlife Warden, or 
(b) if the order is made by the Chief Wildlife Warden, to the State Government. 
(2) In the case of an order passed in appeal by the Chief Wildlife Warden under sub-
section (1), a second appeal shall lie to the State Government. 
263

16 
 
(3) Subject as aforesaid, every order passed in appeal under this section shall be final. 
(4) No appeal shall be entertained unless it is pr eferred within fifteen days from the 
date of the communication to the applicant of the order appealed against: 
Provided that the appellate authority may admit any appeal after the expiry of the period 
aforesaid, if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal 
in time. 
Section 15. Hunting of young and females of wild animals 
No person shall, unless specially authorised by a licence, hunt any deer with antlers in velvet 
or hunt the young or female of a wild animal, other than vermin or crop raiding species like 
wild boar and nilgai , when specifically allowed .  Exceptions can be made for prolific and 
problematic species especially crop raiding species like pigeons, doves, wild boar, rats, palm 
squirrels, etc. Exceptions can also be made with regard to sustainable use when permitted. 
For example: Young wild boar , a noted crop raiding species  maybe harvested with little or 
no effect to populations (as is widely practiced in Ger many and other nations). The female 
of a species can be hunted when the male/female ratio is skewed or even when there is a 
very high density of a species and management of the population is needed. 
Section 16. Declaration of closed time 
(1)  The State Government may, by notification, declare the whole year or any part 
thereof, to be a closed time/season throughout the State, or any part thereof, for 
such wild animal as may be specified in the notification and no hunting permits 
under Section 12 shall be issued during the said period, in the area specified in 
the notification. When numbers exceed the carrying capacity of the reserve or 
area a hunting season should be allowed. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to vermin or certain crop raiding 
species like wild boar, Nilgai or crop raiding birds like pigeons , rose ringed 
parakeets and doves or crop raiding species like rhesus monkeys, (lists can be 
maintained based on context  as some crop pests attack particular crops and are 
more abundant in some contexts than others ) unless otherwise specified by the 
State Government in this behalf. 
 
Refer Annexures 2, 4,5,6,7, 9 
Section 17. Restrictions on hunting 
(1)  No person shall, for the purpose of sub-section (e) of Section 12 — 
(a) hunt any wild animal, from or by means of, a wheeled or a mechanically propelled 
vehicle on water or land, or by aircraft; unless for crop raiding species  or man 
eaters. Under no circumstances should a person be less than 5 0 metres from a 
vehicle while hunting, except for crop raiding species or man eaters. 
(b) use an aircraft, motor vehicle, or launch for the purpose of driving or stampeding 
any wild animal; unless for man eaters. 
(c) hunt any wild animal with chemicals, explosives, poisoned -weapons, snares, or 
traps except in so far as they relate to the capture of wild animals under a Wild 
Animal Trapping License or in the case of man eater big cats when any effective 
method may be used to save human life in as quickly a time frame as possible. 
264

17 
 
(d) hunt any wild animal other than with a rifle of suitable calibre, or a shot-gun using 
single-slug bullet/projectile or for birds using bird shot in a shot gun  or for any  
common crop raiding bird species, Schedule 5 species or rodents with an air rifle/ 
air gun of effective caliber. 
(e) for the purpose of hunting, set fire to vegetation  unless under strictly controlled 
circumstances in pursuit of a man eater or crop raiding species like wild boar. 
(f) use any artificial light for the purpose of hunting, except when specially 
authorized to do so under a license in the case of carnivora over a kill or man eater 
big cat, or nocturnal crop raiding species like wild boar. 
(g) hunt any wild animal during the hours of night  between sunset and sunrise, 
except when specially authorized to do so under a license in the case of man-
eating carnivore/rogue elephants or nocturnal crop raiding species like wild boar. 
(h) hunt any wild animal on a saltlick or water hole or other drinking place or on path 
or approach to the same, except sandgrouse and water -birds; or for a certified 
man eater/man killing animal of any species. 
(i) hunt any wild animal on any land not owned by Government, without the consent 
of the owner or his agent or the lawful occupier of such land. 
(j) hunt any wild animal during the closed time referred to in Section 16. 
(k) hunt, with the help of dogs, any wild animal except game birds, chukor, partridge, 
quail or crop raiding species like wild boar. Dogs may be used to follow wounded 
man eaters or any wounded animal so as to effect humane dispatch. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to vermin or if specially exempted 
in the case of other species for reasons to be recorded in writing. 
 
Section 29. Hunting in a sanctuary 
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, no licence to hunt wild animals 
under Section 12 shall be issued in a sanctuary  without the previous approval of the State 
Government under usual circumstances. 
Regulated Hunting in a sanctuary may be allowed  without approval of state government if it 
serves a wildlife management , conservation or scientific research  purpose, for example: 
reducing the numbers of species that have exceeded carrying capacity and negatively affect 
the environment. For example: 1. Spotted deer in some PAs. Example 2: Species like spotted 
deer in the Andaman Islands where they are an invasive alien  species Example 3: Excessive 
predators that cannot be translocated which can be hunted when carrying capacities are 
exceeded with ensuing human predator conflict  etc. 4. Hunting of any invasive alien species 
including free ranging dogs, Khibsang or cross bred dogs and wolves in Ladakh, non-endemic 
invasive fishes, invasive alien bird species like mynahs in the Andaman Islands, common crows 
that can deplete other birds which migrate into PAs from settlement areas  5)free ranging 
domestic cats.  5) Collection of specimens for scientific research  or museum specimen 
collection when adequate numbers allow the same. 
Further, licences for the purposes of sub -sections (d) and sub -section (e) of Section 12 shall 
be issued in consultation with the State Board for Wildlife. 
 
 
265

18 
 
Section 35 (6). Hunting in a national park (other sub-sections are not related to hunting) 
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, no licence to hunt any wild animals 
under Section 12 shall be issued in a national park without the previous approval of the State 
Government under usual circumstances. 
Regulated Hunting in a national park may be allowed without approval of state government  
if it serves a wildlife management, conservation or scientific research purpose, for example: 
reducing the numbers of species that have exceeded carrying capacity and negatively affect 
the environment. For example: 1. Spotted deer in some PAs. Example 2: Species like spotted 
deer in the Andaman Islands whe re they are an invasive alien species Example 3: Excessive 
predators that cannot be translocated which can be hunted when carrying capacities are 
exceeded with ensuing human predator conflict  etc. 4. Hunting of any invasive alien species 
including free ranging dogs, Khibsang or cross bred dogs and wolves in Ladakh, non-endemic 
invasive fishes, invasive alien bird species like mynahs in the Andaman Islands, common crows 
that can deplete other birds which migrate into PAs from settlement areas 5)free ranging 
domestic cats. 5) Collection of specimens for scientific research or museum specimen 
collection when adequate numbers allow the same. 
Refer Annexures 2, 4,5,6,7, 9 
Section 39. Wild animals, etc. to be Government property  unless granted to 
communities or individuals. 
(1) Every- 
(a) wild animal, other than vermin, which is hunted under Section 11 or bred or kept 
in captivity, or hunted in contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule or 
order made thereunder, or found dead, or killed by mistake; and 
(b) animal article, trophy or uncured trophy or meat derived from any wild animal 
referred to in clause (a) in respect of which any offence against this Act or any rule 
or order made thereunder has been committed. 
(c) ivory imported into India and an article made from such ivory in respect of which 
any offence against this Act or any rule or order made thereunder has been 
committed. 
 
…shall be the property of the State Government, and, where such animal is hunted in 
a sanctuary or National Park declared by the Central Government, such animal or any 
article, trophy, uncured trophy, or meat derived from such animal shall be the 
property o f Central Government. This right to the property of the animal can be 
conferred upon communities or individuals . For example: Communities may be 
allowed to have community management of wildlife and to  retain profit from these 
resources via regulated huntin g. A certain number of permits may be issued by the 
gram Sabha or panchayat and fees charged. Etc This wildlife becomes and is allowed 
to be a community resource worth managing effectively. 
Any person who obtains, by any means, the possession of Government property, shall, 
within forty -eight hours of obtaining such possession, make a report as to the 
obtaining of such possession to the nearest police station or authorized officer and 
shall, if so required, hand over such property to the office in charge of  such police 
station or such authorised officer as the case may be. 
266

19 
 
(2) No person shall, without the previous permission in writing of the Chief Wildlife 
Warden or any authorised officer- 
(a) acquire or keep in his possession, custody or control, or 
(b) transfer to any person, whether by way of gift, sale or otherwise, or 
(c) destroy or damage such Government property. 
 
Refer Annexures 2, 4,5,6,7, 9 
Section 43. Regulation of transfer of animals etc. 
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), sub-section (3), and sub-section (4), a 
person (other than a dealer) who does not possess a certificate of ownership shall 
not— 
(a) sell or offer for sale or transfer whether by way of sale, gift, or otherwise, any wild 
animal specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II or any captive animal 
belonging to that category or any animal article, trophy, uncured trophy or meat 
derived therefrom; 
(b) make animal articles containing part or whole of such animal; 
(c) put under a process of taxidermy an uncured trophy of such a nimal, etc. except 
with the  previous permission in writing of the Chief Wild Life Warden or the 
authorised officer. 
(2) Where a person transfers or transports from the State in which he resides to 
another State or acquires by transfer from outside the State any such animal, 
animal article, trophy, or uncured trophy as is referred to in sub -section (1) in 
respect of which he has a certificate of ownership, he shall, within thirty days of 
the transfer or transport, report the transfer, or transport to the Chief Wild Life 
Warden or the authorised officer within whose jurisdiction the transfer, or 
transport is affected. 
(3) No perso n who does not possess a certificate of ownership shall transfer or 
transport from one State to another State or acquire by transfer from outside the 
State any such animal, animal article, trophy, or uncured trophy as is referred to 
in sub-section (1) except with the previous permission in writing of the Chief Wild 
Life Warden or the authorised officer within whose jurisdiction the transfer or 
transport is to be affected. 
(4) Before granting any permission under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3), the Chief 
Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer shall satisfy himself that the animal or 
article referred to therein has been lawfully acquired. 
(5) While permitting the transfer or transport of any animal, animal article, trophy, 
or uncured trophy, as is referred to in sub-section (1), the Chief Wild Life Warden 
or the authorised officer— 
(a) shall issue a certificate of ownership after such inquiry as he may deem fit; 
(b) shall, where the certificate of ownership existed in the name of the previous 
owner, issue a fresh certificate of ownership in the name of the person to whom 
the transfer has been affected; 
(c) may affix an identification mark on any such animal, animal article, trophy, or 
uncured trophy. 
(6) Nothing in this section shall apply— 
267

20 
 
(a) to animal articles or trophies made out of feathers of peacocks which form a rural 
livelihood practice where the feathers are collected from the ground;  any legally 
taken CITES allowed species from anywhere on earth. 
(b) crop raiding species  like boar, nilgai, common crop raiding bird species  that are 
legally culled or hunted 
(c) to any transaction entered into by a public museum or recognised zoo with any 
other public museum or zoo. 
 
Refer Annexures 2, 4,5,6,7, 9 
 
Section 43-A. Import and export of specimens of wildlife specimens: - 
(1) For the purposes of this section, the words 'species' and 'specimen' carry the same 
meaning as in the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of 
Wild Flora and Fauna (CITES) of the United Nations. 
(2) From the day of commencement of this Act, n o person shall import, export, re -
export, or introduce from sea any specimens of a species of wild animals or wild 
plants, or a species included in any of the Appendices of CITES, except in 
accordance with the provisions of CITES as applicable to India and  the rules that 
may be made in this behalf. 
(3) Quarantine certificate, issued by the appropriate authority of the country of 
export shall be produced for each imported wild animal or wild plant, upon arrival 
at customs port of entry. 
 
Chapter VA. (Section 49 -A to Section 49 -C). Prohibition Of Trade or Commerce in 
Trophies, Animal Articles, Etc., Derived from Certain Animals. 
(To be omitted) 
Section 61. Power to alter entries in Schedules— 
(1) The State Government may, if it is of opinion that it is expedient to do so, by notification, 
add or delete any entry to or from any Schedule or transfer any entry from one Part of a 
Schedule to another Part of the same Schedule or from one Schedule to another. 
(2) On the issue of a notification under sub-section (1) the relevant Schedule shall be deemed 
to be altered accordingly, provided that every such alteration shall be without prejudice to 
anything done or omitted to be done before such alteration. 
Section 62. Declaration of certain wild animals to be vermin— 
 
The State Government may, by notification, declare any wild animal other than those 
specified in Schedule I and Part II of Schedule II to be vermin for any area and for such period 
as may be specified therein and so long as such notification is in force, such wild animal shall 
be deemed to have been included in Schedule V. 
Refer Annexures 2, 4,5,6,7, 9 
 
268

21 
 
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE WILDLIFE PROTECTION ACT – A CRITICISM 
1.To prohibit hunting of wild animals and other various species of birds etc. 
• Fishing is however allowed even though it is hunting of wild animals by another name. 
• The reasoning behind this objective might be considere d anti-constitutional and anti 
UN charter for human rights which allows indigenous people the right to practice their 
traditions and food gathering methods practised traditionally. 
• Subsequent SC judgements define article 21 as right to livelihood and the aims and 
objects of the act are in contravention  
• To what end is not specified. 
• Wildlife Management principles not defined. 
2. To regulate the proper control over the activities of human beings and serve other purposes 
of the Act. 
• Notably it does not regulate the control over the activities of wildlife, especially 
problem wildlife like crop raiding and man eaters. 
• The control over wildlife causing problems to people including man eaters and crop 
raiders should be exerted in a timely manner. 
• Indigenous rights? Farmers rights? These are ignored. 
• Article 21 looms over this Aims/Objects like a colossus. 
3. To protect the endangered species and provide shelter to the animals which are not in 
danger. 
• Shelter? Why? what does the term mean in this context? What shelter do wild animals 
need? 
• This might allow animal rights NGOs leeway in requisitioning both state and private 
funds to set up unnecessary in the conservation sense ‘shelters. 
• What about shelter in croplands? Private property? or when animals exceed carrying 
capacity? What if this so-called shelter is at the expense of human resources? 
• Why shelter for animals not in danger when those same animals might cause harm to 
ecosystems’ (or people) 
• Is the WPA outdated given India signed onto the WCS by virtue of its membership to 
IUCN in 1980. This aim certainly makes it look so. 
4. To specifically protect animals that can be easily hunted like - ducks, deer etc.   
• Is the WPA outdated given India signed onto the WCS by virtue of its membership to 
IUCN in 1980  
• what about animals that are difficult to hunt?  
• Does not define well. Why specifically? What principles does this follow? 
• Specifically protecting animals that are easily hunted does not follow any wildlife 
management principle. It contradicts conservation principles as laid down by WCS 
India has already agreed to model its wildlife laws upon. 
269

22 
 
5. To help the state government and central government declare any area as the 
sanctuary or national park.  
• To what end? 
• Once a park is created, what about its management? what are those criteria? 
• Why is wildlife protected? Not defined clearly. 
6. To plant trees and build protected animal parks, so that endangered species can be 
protected in environment-friendly and natural areas.  
• Define these terms? 
• What does ``environment’ friendly mean? Currently the WPA has removed all value 
to humans of wildlife and wildlife only has value to the relatively wealthy who own 
cameras and who can afford trips to national parks not to farmers  and indigenous 
groups who live alongside wildlife every day. 
• Plant tress where? Grasslands? Often tree planting is detrimental to ecosystems 
• What plans for different habitats? Deserts? Grasslands? ‘wastelands’.  
• Wasteland definitions cover high biomass ecosystems  including grasslands, deserts, 
mountains and scrub lands. Often tree planting is very bad for these ecosystems. 
7. To impose a ban on the commercial dealings of certain protected species.  
• Why? If the activity is conservation related and can generate funds, why not? 
• Why is the word ban used? 
• What are the criteria for a ban or its lifting? 
• Given that all species are currently protected in India, why so? 
• What evidence based scientific precedents is this based on? 
8. To provide commercial dealings of wild species by providing a license for possession, sale, 
and transfer.   
• When has this been used? 
• What are the criteria? 
• Why do some aspects of the act contradict and are ultra vires to this? 
9. To maintain the diversity of flora and fauna within the country and maintain a healthy 
ecological balance.  
• What are the parameters for this balance? 
• What is a healthy ecological balance? Who sets the parameters?  
10. To establish wildlife advisory boards, wildlife warden and to appoint the members with 
their duties and power.  
• Foundational wildlife management principles? Not set. 
• What's the point of setting up boards if the foundations wildlife management are 
missing? 
270

23 
 
ANNEXURE 1 
 
BACKGROUND and HISTORY of the WPA 
 
The Constitution of India guarantees citizens a quality of life enjoyed by few nations. Of 
particular interest is Article 21, referred to as "the bedrock of the Constitution”, which reads, 
“No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except  according to a procedure 
established by law”. 
 
The Supreme Court has interpreted Article 21 in several contexts. Of relevance is the 
interpretation which asserts that the “Right to Life” includes “the right to livelihood”. The 
court held that, “an equally important facet of the right to life is the right to livelihood because 
no person can live without the means of livelihood” and observed, “any person who is 
deprived of his right to livelihood except according to just and fair procedure established by 
law can challenge the deprivation as offending the right to life conferred in Article 21”. 
 
In the early 1970s, hunters and naturalists petitioned the then prime minister, Indira Gandhi, 
to ban tiger hunting for three years, to allow populations to recover. Gandhi responded with 
the Wildlife (Protection) Act of 1972 that was shortly followed shortly by the emergency and 
the 42nd amendment to the constitution when ‘secular’ and ‘socialist’ were inserted into the 
preamble.In 1972, with no studies, scientific data, evidence or requirement, the Wildlife 
(Protection) Act became law and banned hunting throughout India with no explanation, 
superseding all existing laws regarding hunting and crop protection.  
 
The definition of “‘hunting’, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes 
(a) killing or poison ing of any wild animal or captive animal and every attempt to do so; (b) 
capturing, coursing, snaring, trapping, driving or baiting any wild or captive animal and every 
attempt to do so”. “Driving” in this sense means “to frighten or prod (game, cattle etc .) into 
moving in a desired direction”.  
 
Hinduism was a hindrance to the Socialist/Marxist objective. Therefore, to create a radically 
new society a new generation of Indians had to be trained to imbibe this ‘materialistic spirit’ 
of the age. One of the f eatures of the modern state is not only the monopoly over violence 
but also monopoly over education. The Marxists would control and dominate every social 
science and cultural institute of importance, and indoctrinate the next generation of Indians 
to this materialistic conception of India’s past, its traditional practices, its deep connection 
with nature and thus affect its future.  
 
It can be postulated that the WPA was one such technique, where at the stroke of a 
“compassionate” pen, 38 million tribals we re separated from their traditional practice and 
tens of millions of farmers inhibited from protecting their land. It was thus no coincidence 
that the Islamist, Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad, and the Marxist, Sayid Nurul Hasan, were made 
the education minister during the reign of Nehru and Indira Gandhi respectively. He was 
instrumental in deeply impacting the political neutrality of education. Education and the arts 
were handed over to the Marxists and control over all wild resources 
(forests/plains/grasslands etc.) were taken away from traditional ownership and usage and 
handed over to the state. 
271

24 
 
In this remaking of India, the idea was to create citizens who are cut off from their civilizational 
roots and turned into empty slates that could be retrained in the ‘scientific spirit’ of the age. 
This sense of rootlessness, present after belief systems are undermined and the ground 
prepared, was a fertile ground on which the seeds of Marxist thought could be planted. The 
ahimsa ideal was likely one such area and the anti-hunting WPA a methodology for the 
takeover of resources across the subcontinent. Under the guise of ‘compassion’ natural 
resources were taken over by the state and the entire farming community and indigenous 
population criminalized.  
 
India was once a  proud martial country with warrior and hunting traditions across its 
mythologies and history, much downplayed by the socialists, who chose to look at Indians as 
being “ahimsa loving”, tolerant types, adhering more to the remade ideals of Buddha, Ashoka 
and Akbar, a ‘secular’ and peaceful people suitable for eventual socialist authoritarianism.   
The WPA criminalizes a farmer who attempts to chase monkeys off his crop. Since rhesus 
monkeys are included in Schedule 2, if a farmer chases them, he is liable to be prosecuted for 
‘hunting’ and jailed from 3 to 7 years. In order to legally chase monkeys, he needs to obtain 
written permission from the Chief Wildlife Warden of the state. On the other hand, a sounder 
of wild boar or a troupe of monkeys require only a  few hours to completely destroy a 
subsistence level farmer’s crop. Thereafter, the family faces starvation or debt unless 
alternative income is found. Villages are thus abandoned and cities overwhelmed. 
 
Similar process was evolved a century ago and appli ed to countries like China, North Korea, 
Cuba and a few other unfortunates. In this, the dream of Marxism was sold to the public, who 
supported the ‘compassion’ and ‘equity’ of the movement, imagining a utopia of equality and 
happiness. What they actually got was authoritarian regimes and an unelected government 
taking over all their resources. 
 
In India, the public is lulled into a sense of security about how wild animals are protected by 
banning hunting. Instead, the Act cleverly inhibits the fundamental right of farmers to 
livelihood that has resulted in a large, wretchedly poor, labour force ready for industrial 
exploitation, at great cost to tradition, culture and economy.  
 
Meanwhile, it is illegal to protect crops without bureaucratic sanction. Minor forest produce, 
which helped villages remain self-sufficient in the past, are burnt up. The Forest Department, 
instead of recognizing the threat posed by forest fires to the Ind ian economy, cooks up 
excuses about how fires are ‘natural’ and claim the existence of ‘cycles of forest fires’. But 
that is blatantly false as nearly all forest fires in India are set with a match, as is evident from 
the highly reduced number of fires during lockdowns. 
 
It should be kept in mind that after the French Revolution, the first laws repealed were 
hunting laws, so one can understand what role they played in creating fault lines in society, 
that eventually led to the wholesale slaughter of French aristocracy and others. We should 
not let false narratives influence legislation and create fault lines with potentially disastrous 
consequences for the economy, Sanatan dharma, wildlife and human society. 
 
 
 
272

25 
 
ANNEXURE 2 
 
ANIMAL RIGHTS VS ANIMAL WELFARE - DIFFERENCES 
 
By definition - Animal Rights is a doctrine that seeks to abolish all animal uses by man and 
believes that man has no right whatsoever to use any animal for his own benefit in any 
way. While there are some variations in belief between groups, the Animal Rights ideology 
seeks to remove all categorizations of value given by man  to species from the animal world 
and believes it’s not acceptable to kill any animal even if it is rabid, a danger to human life or 
a man eater, that animals are to possess or be considered to possess the same basic rights as 
humans and that animal life deserves and requires ‘equal’ consideration by human society i.e. 
the same consideration applicable to a human being. 
 
This is in contradiction to the ‘Anim al Welfare’ philosophy that accepts that animals provide 
useful benefits to humankind, that civilization would be seriously diminished if society was 
denied the right to avail themselves of those uses and calls for as far as possible, the humane 
usage of a nimals including for consumption, entertainment and work.  True animal welfare 
organisations, therefore, oversee man’s civilised standards in his treatment of the animals 
that he owns, uses and manages.  
 
The Indian subcontinent has historically been home t o various religions and cultures, 
including Buddhism, that preach compassion for living creatures. Emperor Ashoka (304 -232 
BC) converted to Buddhism and is believed to be the first ruler to have recognized ‘animal 
rights’ and banned the killing of animals.  Since land revenue was almost certainly the main 
source of revenue and his edicts prevented farmers from protecting their crops from wildlife, 
it follows that crop-raiders proliferated, harvests suffered, revenue fell and Ashoka’s empire 
collapsed about 5 0 years after his death. That a blanket ban on the killing of animals with 
ensuing revenue loss had something to do with the collapse is evident from the fact that no 
ruler, Buddhist or otherwise dared to repeat the mistake for the next 2,000 years.  
 
In 1972, the then Congress government promulgated the Wildlife (Protection) Act, bringing 
widespread misery to rural and tribal areas over the next 50 years. Hunting was made illegal 
and defined as even chasing a wild animal off your fields regardless of the damage caused to 
the crop. If a farmer uses lethal means to protect his crops without bureaucratic sanction, it 
is a criminal act and the offender is liable to a jail term up to 7 years, depending on the species 
the citizen dared to kill. If bureaucratic sa nction is obtained, it is subject to a series of 
impossible riders, including that the carcass has to be deposited with the Forest Department 
for destruction. Additionally, if the government eventually does decide to permit the culling 
of a crop raiding sp ecies like boar or nilgai, usually after protracted litigation and much 
economic damage to harvests, a very tiny but highly vocal section of urban society opposes it 
on grounds of Animal Rights.  
 
The result is that small farmers were forced to give up agriculture and abandon their villages, 
severing links to land, tradition and culture. It is remarkable that 50 years of WPA policy has 
caused in part, countless villages to be abandoned across India. In Uttarakhand, every 
sixteenth village is empty and the remaining have a fraction of their original inhabitants. Large 
tracts of previously cultivated land lie fallow. Blanket bans on killing and animal rights per se, 
273

26 
 
whether promulgated by Ashoka or the Congress government two thousand years later, do 
not elevate the value of animal life, but rather devalue both human and paradoxically animal 
life, because if you don’t look after the interests of humans who live alongside wildlife, one 
reduces the value of wildlife to those same people, with disastrous consequences.  
 
The Animal Welfare outlook is opposed to Animal Rights and embodies a practical point of 
view rather than an ideology, recognising that for food to be produced for humans, it needs 
to be protected from the depredations of numerous competitors. Since  these competitors, 
whether monkeys, boar, rodents, antelope, birds or insects are prolific and nowadays often 
exist in exponentially higher numbers in croplands as compared to forests, crop protection 
entails killing or better still, sustainably using crop raider species via legal hunting.  
 
This is normal throughout the world, except in India, where narratives of ‘killing is always bad’ 
are financed and propagated by international animal rights organisations with double 
standards. Many of these legal effo rts are funded and carried out by animal rights NGOs 
funded from animal rights groups abroad, actively seeking to extend their ideological agenda, 
whose expressions are often illegal in their home countries. For example: The maintenance 
and feeding of unowned dogs on the streets and public places – illegal in the US but promoted 
and funded in India by US animal rights organizations or opposition to sustainable hunting 
practice or the rights of tribal peoples. For example, in India PETA condemns the killing of 
man-eaters and crop raiders and promotes the public maintenance of unowned dogs as 
national policy, while not promoting the same in the USA where PETA euthanizes 97% of the 
dogs in their care. 
 
The Wildlife Protection Act, even in its proposed modified avatar, has not modified the 
definition of hunting and inhibits farmers their rights to livelihood enshrined in Article 21 of 
the Constitution. This is despite international precedent and Wildlife Management Protocols 
where regulated hunting is a proven co nservation methodology that benefits both wildlife 
and people (by preventing population outbreaks, protecting crops, protecting biodiversity 
and generating revenues). The WPA continues to champion an Animal Rights view over 
Animal Welfare and the damage it has caused during the past half century to rural India and 
its wildlife will continue until better sense prevails.   
 
Animal Rightists reject the WCS entirely. They are particularly opposed to the third principle 
of the living resource conservation ethic and thus separable, from ‘environmentalists’ and 
animal welfarists. Animal rightists are fanatical in their belief that man has no right 
whatsoever to use an animal – ANY animal – for his own benefit – in ANY way. They believe 
that animals – both domesticated and wild – have the same right to life as have human beings. 
Animal rights ideology and activism are the biggest obstacle to the attainment of WCS goals 
everywhere. The healthy status of wild animal populations, wild habitats, and bi ological 
diversity is adversely affected whenever and wherever  animal rightists have been able to 
successfully interfere in wildlife management principles and practices.  
 
In the practice of their ideology which has taken on religious tones, animal rightists reject the 
fact that man is an integral part of the animal kingdom or that he exists and survives, as do all 
other animals, only in terms of the natural trophic rules and processes that make food chains 
and food webs in nature, function.  
274

27 
 
They reject entirely, therefore, the idea that man can – and should– live within the sustainable 
parameters of these natural systems and in symbiosis with nature, thereby using the earth ’s 
living resources in a sustainable manner in order that man, together with the living resources 
that he uses, can and will survive into posterity. 
 
It is important to note that what animal rightists do undermines mankind’s efforts to achieve 
WCS objectiv es and negates the actions every sovereign state undertakes to achieve its 
economic and sustainable goals. The animal rights ideology is financially, socially, traditionally 
and governmentally destructive and misdirects human energies at the societal level . It is 
deeply wasteful of our living natural resources, of taxpayer and donor monies and causes 
immense hardship to the poorest and most vulnerable. 
 
Animal rights agendas are not conservation agendas  and the philosophy of animal rights is 
incompatible wi th science -based wildlife management. Conservation works at the 
population, species and ecosystem levels. Animal rights work at the individual level. And what 
might be good for an individual or a collection of individuals in the short term might, not be 
good for the long -term survival of populations, species, human interests and biodiversity.  
Animal Welfare philosophy supports the WCS protocols and falls within the Indian 
Constitution’s understanding of what the status of animal i.e. property.  
 
The government must differentiate between animal rights and animal welfare, and supports 
TRUE animal welfare philosophy which holds that animals can be studied and managed 
through science-based methods and that human use of wildlife – including regulated hunting, 
fishing, and the lethal control of animals in the interests of human safety and the maintaining 
biological diversity, for the benefit of habitats and wild animals, and in the interests of human 
society– is totally acceptable, sanctioned globally and absolutely necessary provided practices 
are sustainable and individual animals are treated ethically and humanely as possible. 
Indian constitutional understanding of animal rights. 
 
The Supreme Court has stated: "Every species has a right to life and security, sub ject to the 
law of the land, which includes depriving its life, out of human necessity. Animals’ well-being 
and welfare have been statutorily recognised under Sections 3 and 11 of the Act and the rights 
framed under the Act. Right to live in a healthy and clean atmosphere and right to get 
protection from human beings against inflicting unnecessary pain or suffering is a right 
guaranteed to the animals under Sections 3 and 11 of the PCA Act read with Article 51A(g) of 
the Constitution. Right to get food, shelter is also a guaranteed right under Sections 3 and 11 
of the PCA Act and the Rules framed thereunder, especially when they are domesticated.” 
The Apex court clearly makes the case that human and animal 'life' are both protected under 
relevant laws under the Constitution. However, the court also clearly lays down that, unlike 
humans, animals derive their ‘right to life' from the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 
1960. And this is meant to protect them from "torture, unnecessary pain and suffering", as 
envisaged under relevant sections of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960. It is not 
in any way meant to grant them the same rights given to humans and Article 21 is not 
applicable to animals as it is to citizens and it is not meant to exclude th e possibility of 
NECESSARY killing, especially when fundamental rights of people are at stake. 
 
 
275

28 
 
ANNEXURE 3 
 
WHY THE WPA NEEDS RENAMING 
 
The Wildlife Protection Act should be renamed/redeveloped as  “The Wild Resources 
Management Act”. Changing the name ensures that via policy the following objectives are 
followed and maintained as agreed upon already: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
India is a signatory to the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s (IUCN) zero draft 
which states (Target 3 and 4) that wild species are to be used sustainably. India being a 
signatory has to fulfil an international obligation to support this rule. Thus, by allowing 
sustainable use of resources, India would meet its international commitments.  The 
government can help India meets its international obligations to its people and wildlife and 
secondarily to the WCS and the IUCN, 
 
• by formulating a Wild Resources Management Act; 
• by ensuring sustainable-use of wild living resources for the benefit of mankind, is the right 
and best way for mankind and nature to progress into posterity together; 
• by supporting the view that renewable wild animal and plant populations can & should be 
sustainably used for both commercial & subsistence purposes for the benefit of mankind;  
• by an internationally accepted and sustainable model for the creation of symbiotic 
partnerships between man and nature.  
 
So as to - 
 
• Save the country’s biological diversity following global precedent and protocols 
276

29 
 
• Address the needs of farmers and protect livelihoods under threat from crop pests  
• Restore & increase wildlife habitat by incentivizing communities to protect wildlife  
• Fulfil India’s international obligations regarding sustainable use of biodiversity, that 
includes wildlife and community conservation 
• Ensure that ‘ecotourism’ benefits the poorest communities directly 
• Unlock resources prevented from yielding benefits to the country  by policy , that if 
sustainably used can result in huge benefits to biodiversity and people 
 
ANNEXURE 4  
 
‘WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT’ AS PER GLOBAL PRECEDENTS AND THE WCS PROTOCOLS 
Many wildlife issues end up being controversial in the public domain because the vast 
majority possess a lack of understanding about even the most fundamental principles of 
wildlife management. 
In very basic terms, wildlife management is the action that man takes to achieve a man -
desired objective. There is nothing natural about wildlife management. It is an artefact of man 
– a man-invented plan of action. Wildlife management is, therefore man conceived, designed, 
implemented, manipulated and man is the principal beneficiary. 
Why is man the principal beneficiary? Even when particular animals or plants benefit from 
man’s wildlife management programmes, such advantages occur only because that was part 
of man’s predetermined desideratum. So, in terms of the various results that sometimes 
emanate from a single man -conceived wildlife management programme, the biggest 
accomplishment of them all, is the attainment of man’s own primary goal. 
Wildlife management has its origins in ecology  and Ecology is the study of living organisms 
(plants and animals) and their environment; and their interaction with other living organisms 
with which they share that e nvironment. Studies produce results.  Wildlife management, 
therefore, is simply applied ecology to achieve a man-made objective. 
Wildlife Management has two main Functions – Conservation Management and 
Preservation or Protection Management.  The objective of Conservation Management is to 
use SAFE wildlife population sustainably and wisely. The objective of Preservation or 
Protection Management is to render UNSAFE wildlife populations SAFE. Once they are 
rendered SAFE the wildlife population in tha t particular context may be transferred to the 
Conservation Management function.  
The Priorities of WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT are - 
FIRST PRIORITY – THE SOIL: Society’s most important wildlife management priority is for the 
protection and/or wise use of the soil – because without soil no plants can grow; and without 
plants life on planet earth would be non-existent.  
277

30 
 
SECOND PRIORITY – THE PLANTS: Society’s next wildlife management responsibility is for the 
protection and/or wise use of plants. Plants appear second on the priority list – before animals 
– because those plants that contain the green pigment called chlorophyll are the only primary 
food producers on planet earth. Simply put: If there were no green plants there would be no 
animals. In fact, without gree n plants life, in its every dimension, would be impossible. The 
chlorophyll in green plants is the only biological mechanism that can change amorphous 
energy from the sun into tangible carbohydrates that animals can eat.  Besides being our 
primary producers of food, plants play a number of very important roles in the environment: 
• They provide cover for the soil, protecting it from the erosive force of the sun, wind 
and (especially) the rain; also from excessive heat and cold; 
• They provide herbivorous animals with energy (food) – which is the first step in a range 
of energy transfers involving all the consumer organisms within nature’s multifarious 
food chains and food webs; 
• They provide cover for animals, too, protecting them from the vagaries of the weather 
and hiding them from their enemies; and finally 
• Plants – coupled with the physical character of their local environment – have created 
the many different habitat types that are essential for the existence and survival of 
the world’s hugely diverse spectrum of wild animal species. 
THIRD PRIORITY – THE ANIMALS: Society’s third, and last, wildlife management responsibility 
is for the protection and/or wise use of animals (both domestic and wild).  The fact that 
animals appear last on the wildlife management priority list is not because they are 
unimportant, but because they are “less important” in the ecological sense than the soil and 
plants i.e. upon which animals depend upon for survival. 
Therefore, conservation success in some national parks with large tiger numbers is not 
necessarily a success as the tiger population is likely inflated (in some contexts) because of 
large numbers of free roaming cattle that give tigers easy food and larger litter survival rates. 
Tigers then exceed the carrying capacity of the protected area and since they are territorial, 
young or old tigers are pushed out into human occupied lands by other tigers and kill people 
and cattle. This is not a conservation success as per WCS protocols as people suffer and stray 
cattle also compete with and displace natural tiger prey , compromising biodiversity. 
Conservation thus is as much about people as it is about wildlife. 
The most important wildlife management objective in any and all nature reserves or national 
parks, is the maintenance of a sanctuary’s species diversity. No other wildlife management 
priority consideration exists. Maintaining large mammal numbers (like tigers and elephants 
alone) to attract tourism is particularly not a worthwhile option. Tourism infrastructure 
should never be allowed to: undermine the mai ntenance of a healthy and stable 
environment; to change the natural physiognomy (general visual appearance) of a PA; or to 
detract from the natural attractions that brought tourists to such sanctuaries in the first place. 
General ecosystem management in a national park, therefore, should prevail over all else. 
In India excessive wildlife populations over carrying capacities are only managed when 
farmers agitate, file court petitions and after years of loss, wildlife is then slaughtered by 
culling. Excessive animal populations can and should be utilised consumptively.  The 
278

31 
 
management objective in this case must be to maintain the biological diversity and balance 
of the area in as profitable and effective way as possible.  
Public consensus or sentimentality has nothing to do with applied Ecology as maintenance of 
biodiversity is of paramount importance for both humans and wildlife  ensuring the 
environment within which humanity survives. Thus, public emotion or sentiment must not be 
taken into consideration in the formulation of wildlife management policy. 
THE DERIVATIONS AND FUNCTIONS OF WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT AS PER WCS PROTOCOLS 
 
ANNEXURE 5 
 
SUSTAINABLE USE OF WILD RESOURCES  
 
SUSTAINABLE USE of natural resources is key to the survival of those same resources. In a 
human controlled and driven environment, when value is ascribed to ‘resources’, they are 
protected. When value is not derived from those resources and the land they exist upon, they 
lose value and the land is converted to other uses that are more profitable. 
 
With no value emanating from wildlife outside protected areas, wildlife more often than not 
has either pest or meat value and not much else. A common line in many academic papers 
and articles about human wildlife conflict is that Indian s are a ‘tolerant’ people regarding 
279

32 
 
wildlife. A point missed is that this so-called tolerance comes from poverty as no person with 
any self -worth would want his family killed, resources plundered and life threatened by 
marauding wild animals. While articles often state ‘farmers’ are tolerant of wildlife, the view 
seems to be the one held by the writer rather than the people he writes about given the 
number of agitations regarding crop pests like wild boar, nilgai, monkeys and elephants. 
 
For example: if more value is gained by coal, agriculture or timber then that will often be 
taken, with political and vote  bank considerations weighing in. If those same forests 
financially benefitted local populations and the state in significant amount, were an integral 
part of local lives and traditions and are sustainably used, thus becoming valuable to both 
local populations ad politics, their survival and protection is more ensured. 
 
Many conservationists now acknowledge that mistakes have been made, but in their “war” 
against the illega l wildlife trade have rarely troubled to distinguish traditional subsistence 
hunters from commercial poachers or sustainable options vs destructive ones. So why should 
hunter-gatherers – the greater Andamanese or Nari Koravas in India – be banned from doing 
what they have done for millennia? The answer  is that the state owns the wildlife that they 
want to hunt. The WPA exists in contradiction to Article 26 of the UN Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous Peoples that ensures as a human right “their right to the resources which 
they have traditionally used” – resources which include animals sustainably hunted for 
subsistence. Conservation is impossible without including Indigenous people and those living 
alongside wildlife. Areas managed by indigenous peoples and local communities hold as much 
as 80% of the Earth's biodiversity, and studies show that that local participation in 
conservation management can profoundly improve biodiversity outcomes. 
 
Recent FRA judgements have supported this within Indian consti tutionality. The question to 
ask is not whether one likes or dislikes the idea or not of hunting or fishing or other sustainable 
and regulated uses, but “Is it sustainable?”  and “how can it be made so.” 
 
 
Regulated Hunting and fishing as necessary for Wildlife Management 
 
Sustainable use includes regulated Hunting or fishing and gives wildlife managers and 
ecosystems an important tool in managing populations that exceed the carrying capacity of 
their ecosystems and threaten the well -being of other species, or damage human health, 
resources or safety.  
 
Illegal hunting  of wild species contrary to wildlife management laws is called poaching. 
Hunting is a legal activity and should be considered so. When it is conducted illegally it is not 
hunting but poaching. 
 
In India this vital component of Wildlife Management used globally, included in WCS protocols 
and with numerous successful examples – was effectively banned in most regards by Indira 
280

33 
 
Gandhi thus converted many if not most of India’s farmers and indigenous peoples to 
poachers and criminals at the stroke of a pen.  
 
Currently as per some amendments proposed that would include fish as wildl ife, this would 
effective end the entire fishing industry in India because as per the definition of hunting in 
the PA (which includes chasing wildlife) fishing both in the sea and fresh water would come 
under the ambit of the forest department? Even catch and release sport fishing that plays a 
crucial role in mahseer conservation can then be seen as 'hunting' and banned with disastrous 
consequences.  
 
Hunting of animals is seen as a controversial topic with much sentiment and emotion attached 
to the idea an d especially to “trophy hunting” which evokes an image of a white person 
standing next to a dead animal with the usual colonial connotations. There are many kinds of 
hunters from “Trophy Hunters” to “Sustenance hunters” to “crop protection hunters”  to 
“tribal hunters” etc. It is important to note that in the ecological sense there is no difference 
between a trophy hunters & a tribal hunter. The animal ends up dead both ways.  
 
What is important is to ensure that the practice is sustainable. 
 
‘Trophy’ hunters importantly ensure revenue is earned which enables land is set aside for 
various wildlife, as it is profitable for communities and individuals to do so. Thus , trophy 
hunting, when properly managed, ensures a future for both biodiversity and people. What is 
key to this success is ensuring that significant revenue and value stays at the community level. 
When wildlife is made valuable to communities in terms of revenue, communities ensure 
protection of wildlife and are much happier to live alongside wildlife, even dangerous wildlife. 
 
This is common practice followed all over the world with very few exceptions, and a key 
aspect of countries that top the megafauna index. 
 
Did a (almost complete) ban on hunting help India's wildlife and forests thrive, o r ruin 
them? – Taken in great part from an article by Mr. Peter Smetacek 
 
Hunting is more or less banned by the Indian WPA and thus removes an important function 
of wildlife management, a huge revenue source at both community and government levels 
and an important tool for managing wild populations that have exceeded carrying capacity of 
both wild and agricultural lands. Overnight  any farmer protecting his lands or indigenous 
tribal hunting as he had from time immemorial was converted to being a “poacher”. In one 
swoop, it became illegal for a farmer to protect his crops against wild boar, monkeys, 
porcupines, nilgai, peacock, parakeets, etc without permission from a forest officer. Not only 
was the farmer required to obtain permission to protect his fields against crop pests, but the 
carcass of the wild animal had to be deposited with the forest department for disposal and 
thus no protein could be derived from animals feeding off farmers resources in the first place. 
50 years later, the benefit or even the reasoning behind the act and its ban is not clear. There 
was a survey of mammals of India during the 1960s by the late M Krishna n, but it was not 
associated with any recommendation for a blanket ban on hunting and bureaucratisation of 
crop protection. 
 
281

34 
 
One must keep in mind that practically all wild animals are prolific, so that the only real way 
of limiting population growth when hunting is removed as a legal methodology, is by 
destroying habitats. The criminal practice of setting fire to forests destroyed the habitat for 
most creatures, wiped out their food sources and more often than not, incinerated the 
creatures themselves. Tod ay, across India, Farmers routinely agitate when monkeys, wild 
boar, nilgai or other crop pests including elephants ravage their fields. The state spends huge 
amounts in compensation but the end result is not tenable, as most losses are unreported 
and the process of compensation is difficult and often impossible for a small farmer who lives 
day to day. 
 
Meanwhile, the more than 5,500-year old art of falconry, which is banned in India, is inscribed 
on UNESCO’s Representative List of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity, since it is 
associated with nature conservation, cultural heritage and social engagement within and 
among communities, according to the citation. Article 26 of the UN Declaration on the Rights 
of Indigenous Peoples talks of “their right to the resources which they have traditionally used” 
– resources which include animals sustainably hunted for subsistence.  
 
If the primary aim of our conservation laws was to make rural and indigenous life unliveable 
in order to keep people in poverty or feed industry with cheap labour, it has succeeded. The 
WPA in India has failed on numerous accords. It has resulted in – 
 
a. No record keeping of various species in forest areas including PA’s and reserve forests/ 
Agri lands/ scrub lands/ grasslands. Only tigers are counted and on occasion elephant 
census are taken. When hunting was allowed, forest officials kept counts of all the 
wildlife species on their beats and thus had an idea of carrying capacities. 
b. No proper definitions of various habitats like grass lands and other habitats. 
c. Disallows a main function of conservation globally which is sustainable use of wild 
resources by citizens thus adding to both GDP and well-being of biodiversity and citizens 
d. Forces farmers to use snare, bombs and spears to kill and poach wildlife as they are left 
with few options to protect their crops. 
e. Reduces GDP of the country 
f. Disallows farmers the right to protect c rops as guaranteed under article 21 of the 
constitution, 
g. Seriously inhibits indigenous communities from practising their cultures and traditions 
and thus this aspect of Sanatan Dharma is directly attacked. 
h. Increases human wildlife conflict 
i. No definitions for invasive alien and invasive species and remedies for their elimination 
as practised globally. 
j. Prevents ownership of Indian species on a sustainable and conservation friendly basis by 
the public and private sectors and inhibits commercial  farming applications that could 
directly benefit rural, poor or disadvantaged or tribal communities (deer antler farming, 
crocodile farming, snake venom collection, reptiles in pet trade , other species in pet 
trade etc.) 
 
 
 
 
282

35 
 
REVENUE AND COMMUNITY BENEFITS OF REGULATED HUNTING  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When regulated hunting is conducted well,  the monies received from this hunt go back into 
community   development and community conservation. The hunter is free to use the carcass 
in any way he chooses. Hunting means the legal and sustainable use of wildlife with revenues 
mostly going to local communities and also government agencies. Poaching means ILLEGAL 
killing and use of wildlife with no benefit or revenues to local communities or 
government. Regulated hunting achieves the following - 
 
1. Ends poaching - as it gives value to wild life to communities.  Once local communities realise 
the economic benefits of having game in and around their lands, they will prevent poaching 
as currently it is allowed as poachers help farmers protect crops. Once revenue is allowed, the 
community will consider the game animals their resource and protect it so. 
2. Helps conserve and extend protected areas  - since part of the funds received are used for 
environment development like building water holes, setting up salt licks and food plots.   
3. Helps control Invasive Alien Species - Local communities will prevent the surge in population 
of Invasive animal species that are harmful to game animals.  
4. Maintain a record of species across Flora and Fauna groups as given revenue is earned, it 
suits the community to maintain records of the same like pre 1972 when the forest 
department had records of all revenue earning (via hunting) species. 
283

36 
 
5. Providing compensation to farmers for crop losses. Rather than rely on the government for 
crop losses farmers will have their own income generation system. 
6. Provides various forms of employment to tribal groups, indigenous peoples and local 
communities who have ‘tradition al’ knowledge of wildlife, tracking and/or hunting, thus 
providing a legal context within which tribal rites, culture, skills and pride can flourish. Tribal 
or local ‘Poachers’ at the rural level could be incentivized to profit and develop a livelihood 
from sustainable use of wildlife and community conservation, rather than illegal activities. 
7. Prevents encroachment on community lands - Once local communities realise the benefits of 
hunting including trophy hunting, they will prevent encroachment of land and  also reduce 
over grazing, cutting of trees etc since that will adversely affect game populations.  In Namibia 
livestock farmers have reduced goats hugely in favour of wild game. 
8. Helps keeps populations of game animals at optimum levels since excess and older animals 
past their prime are selectively removed from the gene pool after their genetic potentials have 
been expended.  Due to sufficient and easily available forage the animals can be healthier.  
9. Protection is extended to an entire biodiversity and not only the game animals as habitat is 
kept aside for wildlife including fauna. 
10. Encouraging tourism in rural areas  that have none. The agricultural areas where hunting is 
most likely to take place tends to be backward and , in most cases, lack tourism. Sustainable 
hunting tourism (SU tourism) can bring huge benefits to rural communities as has been seen 
in numerous contexts worldwide. Much of India's wildlife lives outside National parks or PAs 
in areas which do not have the same game densities and thus they do not satisfy the majority 
of photo tourists, making them extremely prone to poaching, encroachment and habitat 
destruction as can be seen across India. Making wildlife valuable helps ensure their protection. 
11. Making the forest department an enabling force rather than an enforcement agency at the 
rural level. This would lead to less ‘harassment’ of villagers when they protect their lands from 
wild boar and a better relationship and appreciation of government. 
12. Control expanding crop raiding species populations and protection of farmers resources and 
rights by adherence to Constitutional values under Article 21 of the Indian Constitution (Right 
to life, Right to livelihood and Right to freedom of movement) at minimal or no cost. 
13. Adherence t o the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s (IUCN)  zero draft to 
which India is a signatory, which states (Target 3 and 4) that wild species are to be used 
sustainably and thus assist India in reaching its international obligations. i.e. Reflect the 
objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity  
14. Adherence to international commitments to the WCS  to which India is a signatory. This 
community Conservation Venture would adhere to all three WCS objectives i.e. 1. to maintain 
essential ecological processes and life support systems, 2. To preserve genetic diversities, 3. to 
ensure the sustainable utilization of species and ecosystems (notably fish and other wildlife, 
forests and grazing lands), which support millions of rural communities as well a s major 
industries 
15. Improves conditions and health of communities  –A major part of the funds received are 
utilised for community development and the meat recovered is also consumed by the 
community. It is a myth to say that the meat of trophy animals is wasted. 
16. Revive the lost art of taxidermy in the country – India had at one time some of the best 
Taxidermists in the world with many hunters from various parts of the world sending their 
the African, American and European trophies to India for taxidermy. Many zoos and 
museums need representative animal mounts for their displays and this could well lead to a 
new income stream for the nation.   
17. Creates a permeant mechanism for Human-Wildlife Conflict Management of any sort. 
284

37 
 
18. Adherence to the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s (IUCN) 
19. Adherence to international commitments to the WCS to which India is a signatory 
20. Providing a legal and sustainable protein source in protein deficient rural contexts 
 
ANNEXURE 6 
THE MEGAFAUNA CONSERVATION INDEX  
The megafauna index assesses the spatial, ecological, and financial contributions of 152 
different countries towards the conservation of the world's terrestrial megafauna - large land 
animals. The countries that do the best are not the wealthiest but those  that have extracted 
maximum income from wildlife which ensures conservation of wildlife and wild spaces. 
• Botswana tops the list of countries that are doing the most to protect wildlife. It has 
the highest conservation land ratios in Africa, and more than 25 percent of its land 
area is reserved for parks and other reserves.  
• Namibia ranks second in the list. The country is so serious about wildlife conservation 
it’s the first nation in Africa to include laws that work towards protecting the 
environment in its constitution. From about 15 percent of its entire land under wildlife 
it has moved to more than 50 percent, simply because it became profitable to do so. 
Since 1998, more than 50 natural resource management institutions, known as 
conservancies, have been established to manage wildlife resources, on communal 
lands in Namibia with a high level of success. 
• Tanzania is dedicated to protecting their animals in the wild so much so that a third of 
this vast nation is protected. Big game hunting and wildlife viewing are big revenue 
earners. 
All these countries have legalized hunting and sustainable use of natural resources, following 
the wildlife management principles laid down above, with differences based on contexts  in 
these countries.  A study published in Global Ecology and Conservation shows that the 
countries that have been the best at conservation tend to be the ones with the most to gain 
from conservation economically.  
Countries that do well raise the most amount of revenue from wildlife tourism in all its avatars 
including hunting, wildlife farming and fishing.  
Areas not suitable for wildlife viewing like classified ‘wastelands’ or remote areas can be made 
suitable for hunting/fishing/wildlife farming and revenues earned ensure the protection and 
maintenance of healthy populations of wildlife as well as increasing habitats set aside for 
wildlife.  
India’s huge issue of crop raiding species , arid lands not suitable for other uses , grasslands 
overrun with cattle that could be profitably converted to wildlife farming - can be converted 
to CNBRM projects like the campfire projec t (mentioned at end) and others which directly 
benefit communities. 
 
285

38 
 
ANNEXURE 7 
CROP PROTECTION AND THE WPA 
 
Conservation is not meant to be only for “animals” but for the long -term sustainable co -
existence and usage of the earth and its resources by man, so as to ensure the survival of 
biodiversity and safeguard man’s dependence and inter connection with the same. 
 
India is perhaps the only country on earth where farmers are prevented and inhibited from 
protecting their crops, livelihoods and property  as per the stipulations of the Wildlife 
Protection Act 1972 that has put in place procedures for crop pest management that are 
illogical, unsustainable and practically impossible or near impossible for a farmer to use to 
protect his resources and livelihood.  
 
India's official farmer population is up to about 150 million people who work against 
tremendous odds to achieve harvests and sustain livelihoods. Up to 70 percent (and in some 
cases more) of the harvest can be lost to vertebrate pests including bird s, mammals and 
rodents and vast losses go unreported, at great cost to both the GNP and India’s farmers.  
 
Under the Wildlife Protection Act (WPA) in India, it is illegal for a farmer to even chase a wild 
boar, nilgai or monkey off his land, let alone shoo t it, even if it is destroying his crops and 
livelihood or posing a threat to his life and livestock. Currently the WPA defines ‘hunting’ as 
even chasing an animal. Likewise, on paper, farmers are prevented from protecting their 
crops using lethal methods from various birds and monkeys that cause immense losses to 
both farmers and to food security of the nation even though these species are not endangered 
in any way and are present in exponentially greater numbers in croplands compared to wild 
habitat’s sim ply because farmers resources form the bulk of their diet and predators are 
absent or inadequate in number.  
 
India is among the first countries in the world to have passed legislation granting Farmers' 
Rights in the form of the Protection of Plant Varieti es and Farmers' Rights Act, 2001. The 
PPVFR Act initially emerged as a result of the demands of the seed industry for breeder's 
rights. A chapter on Farmers' Rights was added. However, paradoxically while the Act protects 
the genetic potential and strains of crops grown by Indian farmers it does not include the right 
for farmers to actually protect their plant resources on the ground from attack by crop pests. 
So, while intellectual property is protected, actual property is not allowed to be protected 
from many crop pests using lethal, sustainable or consumptive means. Likewise, the process 
which farmers have to go through to get permission to protect their crops is cumbersome, 
attacked at the policy level by animal rights activists both in the courts and wi thin 
government, constantly challenged in court and often unworkable, especially for the small 
farmer.  
 
Forest departments often do not issue permissions and courts take a long time to deliver 
judgements most often in favour of farmers rights to protect their crops. By the time a farmer 
is usually ‘allowed’ to protect his own property and crops from marauding wild animals, he 
has lost too much and years have passed or entire harvests and livelihood potentials lost. This 
situation can be argued to be unconstitutional and against the right of a farmer to protect his 
or her livelihood. 
286

39 
 
 
Community Conservation Projects that involve and benefit human communities living in and 
around protected spaces are crucial for long term survival and value being add ed to wild 
resources, thus ensuring their survival and benefit to man. A clear and comprehensive policy 
is often what prevents holistic management of crop pests and Human wildlife conflicts and 
therefore also what holds back the economic development of a r egion. This is ultimately 
detrimental to the future of biodiversity and people.  
 
To ‘save’ India’s wildlife, it is imperative that we provide a viable future for the people living 
alongside wildlife, first. Currently, given how the Wildlife Protection Act treats and considers 
solutions for crop pest management, this is not the case. ‘B lind Flag Waving Conservation’, 
with an emphasis on fortress conservation and an ‘animal rights’ influenced view, is almost 
always at the cost of people living alongside wildlife and to the detriment of wildlife as well.  
To ‘save’ India’s wildlife we must first ensure the rights of India’s people, especially its farmers 
and communities that live alongside wildlife. With no value attached to wildlife that is often 
a pest to farmers, people who live alongside wildlife have no reason to want it there. In 
addition, wildlife NGOs, tend to be filled with researchers educated in cities, not resource 
managers. These people often have fortress protection views in mind, and not Adaptive 
Management principles - and work in contexts where adherence to fortress views en sures a 
successful career to the detriment of rural livelihoods. 
 
The actions of various NGOs are often destructive tending to alienate rural Indians by cutting 
them off from using and living off their natural resources. It can be postulated that Wildlife 
NGOs actively seek to control and gain from wild resources themselves, often under the guide 
of virtue signalling, while denying farmers and indigenous people the rights to their own 
resources. Sustainable use of wild resources can play a positive role in supporting 
conservation as well as local community rights and livelihoods. 
 
Profitable wildlife/natural resource management that links generational traditional 
knowledge (like monkey trappers or tribal hunters)  with community -based initiatives and 
concepts of wildlife/habitat management adapted to India will help stem both the 
degradation of wildlife and farmers livelihoods. The integration of traditional natural resource 
users into the management of “their” natural resources will as precedent shows, genera te 
significant rural revenues and convert former crop pest species to profitable assets to be 
protected and managed. 
 
The government must work towards the creation of a Community Based Natural Resources 
Management System (CBNRM) in the State that works towards a sustainable, profitable, and 
permanent solution to the problem of crop raiding animals and loss of livelihoods of farmers, 
with significant income from such ventures remaining at the community level and not lost to 
middlemen or NGO’s. 
 
a. CBNRM ensures that local people benefit from the use of wildlife and tourism resources in 
their area by forming a community -based organisation which manages those resources. In 
India the Biodiversity Management Panels (BMC) already exist at the panchayat l evel for 
enacting such ventures via the Biodiversity Act. As per the Biological Diversity Act 2002, BMCs 
are created for “promoting conservat ion, sustainable use and documentation of biological 
287

40 
 
diversity” by local bodies across the country. However other legislation like the WPA has not 
kept pace with this development. For example: The government had formally declared the 
constitution of Biodiv ersity Management Committees in all the 978 grama panchayats, 60 
municipalities, and the five Corporations in Kerala, signalling the shift to a broad-based system 
for the conservation of biological resources. Most states have adopted the same, but they 
remain defunct bodies. The primary function of the BMC is to prepare and maintain a 
Panchayat Biodiversity Register (PBR) — a document on local biological resources and 
associated traditional knowledge. Its mandate also includes the conservation, sustainable 
use, and documentation of biodiversity and equitable sharing of benefits arising from its use. 
 
b. In many cases globally CNBRM has resulted in permanent solutions to crop pests, 
compensation for crop losses and wildlife conservation, meeting many of the objective set by 
the IUCN and World Conservation Strategy 1980, resulting in empowered communities that 
profit from natural resources and protect the same due to the value they now generate.  
 
c. CBNRM promotes economic empowerment of formerly disadvantaged farme rs and their 
entrance into wildlife tourism in all its avatars, Biopharma, and other wildlife -based 
industries. It also enhances the conservation of biodiversity and maintenance of ecological 
integrity in proclaimed protected areas and on other lands both private and public. 
 
d. CBNRM increases, through concessions, the economic value of proclaimed areas, wildlife, and 
plant resources. It is a means of promoting sustainable development, poverty alleviation and 
employment creation in both public and private lands.   
 
 
ANNEXURE 8 
 
INVASIVE ALIEN SPECIES (IAS) 
According to the IUCN Issues brief 1, An Invasive Alien Species (IAS) is defined as a species 
introduced outside its natural past or present distribution; if this species becomes 
problematic i.e. has negative impacts on native biodiversity or human resources like crops 
etc. it is termed an ‘invasive alien species’. In other words:  
According to the US Dept. of Commerce  an invasive species is an  organism that causes 
ecological or economic harm in a new environment where it is not native.  
What harm do IAS cause? 
Invasive species can harm both the natural resources in an ecosystem as well as threaten 
human use of these resources. An invasive species can be introduced to a new area via 
accidental releases of aquaculture species and the removal of lethal control methods of IAS . 
Invasive species can cause extinctions of native plants and animals, reducing biodiversity, 
 
1 IUCN Issues Briefs provide key information on selected issues central to IUCN’s work. They are aimed at policy -makers, journalists or anyone looking 
for an accessible overview of the often complex issues related to nature conservation and sustainable deve lopment. 
288

41 
 
competing with native organisms for limited resources, and altering habitats. This can result 
in huge negative economic and ecological impacts. 
Dogs (excluding endemic wild dogs and endemic wolf species), ‘domestic’ cats and non -
endemic species like lantana and parthenium e tc. in Protected Areas in India can be 
considered a 'biological invasion’, which occurs when a species expands into an area it hasn't 
previously occupied. Currently unowned dogs slaughter wildlife across India and spread 
diseases like Canine distemper lethal to big cats including Asiatic lions, killed in large numbers 
by Canine Distemper Virus. 
According to The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, IAS are one of the top causes of 
biodiversity loss and the second most common cause of species extinctions. IAS impacts go 
beyond biodiversity and seriously affect economic activities, livelihoods, food security, and 
human health and well-being.  IAS are the most common threat to amphibians, reptiles, and  
mammals on The IUCN Red List; they may lead to changes in the structure and composition 
of ecosystems detrimentally affecting ecosystem services, human economy, and wellbeing. 
IAS are considered such a serious problem that  Aichi Biodiversity Target 9 and one clause of 
UN Sustainable Development Goal 15 – Life on Land specifically address the issue. Overall, IAS 
risk undermining progress towards achieving 10 of the 17 UN Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs).  
IAS are not necessarily only species like free ranging dogs or invasive ’foreign’ species of plants 
and fish. In India, species endemic in some regions may be invasive in other areas where they 
are not endemic, like on islands for example . For example, Invasive Alien Species in India 
include by definition 1. Spotted deer in the Andaman Islands. 2. Asian elephants on Interview 
Island in the Andaman Islands, 3. Rhesus macaques that are spreading from the north to the 
south displacing bonnet macaques. 4. Blue rock pigeons are also invasive species which nest 
in cities at night and raid farmers crops by day 5. The common mynah in the Andaman Islands. 
It is imperative to note that as per the “IUCN Guidelines for the Prevention of Biodiversity 
Loss Caused by Invasive Alien Species (IAS) ” including dogs (Canis lupus familiar is) and 
domestic cats, are the second largest threat to wildlife, second only to habitat loss.  
Excerpts from the above IUCN mentioned guidelines 
● “The impacts of alien invasive species are immense, insidious, and usually irreversible. 
They may be as damaging to native species and ecosystems on a global scale as the loss 
and degradation of habitats.” 
● "Feral animals can be some of the most aggressive and damaging alien species to the 
natural environment, especially on islands. Despite any economic or genetic value, they 
may have, the conservation of native flora and fauna should always take precedence 
where it is threatened by feral species." 
● “Where it is achievable, promote eradication as the best management option for dealing 
with alien invasive species where prevention has failed. It is much more cost effective 
financially than ongoing control, and better for the environment.” 
289

42 
 
● “Where relevant, achieve significant benefits for biological diversity by eradicating key 
alien mammalian predators (e.g., rats, cats, lantana, mustelids, dogs, domestic cats)  
from islands and other isolated areas with important native species.” 
 
ANNEXURE 9 
SANTAN DHARMA AND SUSTAINABLE USE OF WILD RESOURCES  
 
Myths, religious or otherwise, are stories that shape an understanding of reality and how one 
sees the world, encapsulating logos , belief and truth in the form of metaphors and symbols. 
Hunters appear in Hindu and other mythologies and occupy an important place in myth. 
Hunting animals for food was an essential part of life in all cultures, and remains important in 
most communities, post industrialization.   
 
Myths related to hunters and hunting can reflect a culture's views about the relationship 
between human beings and the natural world and profoundly affect politics, industry, and 
ways of living. Hunters in mythology are often shown in conflicting ways, which reflects the 
act of hunting itself: to succeed as a hunter, one must understand, watch, protect and 
appreciate nature and develop skills with arms to kill quarry, the object of a quest; at the 
same time, however, the result of hunting involves killing and consuming a pi ece of nature. 
Myths about hunters or hunting can be divided into two categories: myths about hunting as 
a way of obtaining food or resources, and myths about the hunting of a specific creature or 
man killer or eater —usually to destroy it. A hunting deity is a god or goddess in mythology 
associated with the hunting of animals and the skills and equipment involved. They are a 
common feature of polytheistic religions as stories and myths of these religions have arisen, 
been nurtured and live in rural and indi genous populations in close contact with nature and 
the earth. Cultural anthropologists have a concept called sense of place to describe the 
important connections that people have with landscapes and hunting provides this sense of 
important in a profound manner. 
 
In Hinduism Banka-Mundi is the goddess of the hunt and fertility, Rudra the Rigvedic god 
associated with the hunt and Bhadra is the god of hunting, one of Shiva's ganas and the name 
of one of south India’s tiger sanctuaries. In Vedic traditions, Rudra raises his bow and shoots 
a deer. This pins the antelope to the sky stopping him from chasing a female deer. The hunt 
thus controls desire and allows for discipline over desire. A deer hunt is a recurring motive in 
Hindu mythology and sig nifies the pursuit of a goal. Both the Ramayana and Mahabharata 
begin with a hunt. In the Ramayana, during his fourteen -year exile, Ram hunts the Golden 
Deer on Sita’s request. Ram and Laxman did a lot of hunting. They used the skins as clothes 
and gifted them to sages. They used the bones for weapons and meat for food. Rama, Sita 
and Laxman all ate venison. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
290

43 
 
THE CASE FOR SUSTAINABLE USE OF WILDLIFE IN THE MAHABHARAT 
 
Yudhishthira and his brothers hunt for food in the forest during the exile. A deer appears in 
their dreams and requests them to hunt in another forest as their population is dwindling. If 
the brothers continued hunting, the deer population would diminish. If the deer population 
comes to an end, it would mean that the tigers would starve as they have nothing to eat. The 
grass would overgrow and prevent the growth of other plants. Thus, the eco system would 
be damaged. The deer says, “We are, O Bharata! those deer that are still alive after many that 
had been slaughtered. We shall be exterminated totally. Therefore, do change your residence. 
O mighty king! All your brothers are heroes, conversant with weapons; they have thinned the 
ranks of the rangers of the forest. We few - the remnants - O mighty-minded one! remain like 
seed. By your favour, O king of kings! let us increase.” 
 
Yudhishthira - “Those deer that are alive after them that have been slaughtered, accosted me 
at night, after I had awakened, saying, “We remain like the cues of our lines. Blessed be you! 
Do you have compassion for us?” And they have spoken truly. We ought to feel pity for the 
dwellers of the forest. We have been feeding on them for a year together and eight months. 
Let us, therefore, again repair to the romantic Kamyakas, that best of forests abounding in 
wild animals, situated at the head of the desert, near lake Trinavindu. There let us happily 
pass the rest of our time.” 
 
It is important to note that the deer do not ask the hunters not to hunt but ask to be allowed 
to replenish their ranks. Yudhishthira replies that they would move to another forest 
abounding in wild animals and pass the rest of their time (happily hunting).  
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 10 
 
HUNTING AND SUSTAINABLE USE: THE GLOBAL CONTEXT 
 
Throughout the 20 thcentury, South Africans witnessed the continuous decimation of what 
remained of the country’s wildlife on private property. This was because the Roman -Dutch 
laws at that time continued to try to implement an ancient law (res nullius) that tried to 
enforce the idea that the government had the right to hold the wildlife on private land in trust 
for the people. It did not work. The wildlife continued to decline. By the middle of the 20th 
Century, the wild animals of South Africa – which two hundred years before had numbered 
in their millions – had declined to just (estimated) 500,000.  So private landowners continued 
to try to get government to award them legal ownership of the wild animals tha t lived on 
their private properties. 
 
In 1991, the South African Courts ruled – by reason of the promulgation of the Game Theft 
Act – that private ownership would be allowed provided the land -owners secured their 
privately owned game animals inside ‘adequately fenced enclosures’. Furthermore, that the 
private game owners would be allowed to buy and to sell their privately owned game animals, 
and to breed them in captivity, to advance their wildlife business interests. And hunting these 
animals became their means of harvest. This established a new Wildlife Industry in South 
291

44 
 
Africa which, from its inception, was commercial in orientation. In one stroke of the pen, 
therefore, South Africa’s new wildlife culture began in an entirely new direction. It was a bold 
experiment. But it worked.  And, within 20 years, 10  000 new game ranches surrounded by 
high game fences, had been created and  private game holdings had increased to over 22 
million animals. The Game Theft Act, therefore, was the exact right solution for South Africa’s 
wildlife woes.   Why?  Because South Africa’s wildlife resources were pulled back from the 
brink of extinction and set on a new road to prosperity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“It is important for rural development and nature conservation to be combined . 
Conservationists must take into account needs of people around reserves. They need to 
encourage education programmes about protecting wildlife and always act in co-operation 
with local communities.” 
                                                                                                                         – Nelson Mandela 
 
 
The American wildlife culture which allows hunting and fishing for personal consumption, and 
the South African commercial wildlife cultur e, which allows for commercial farming of wild 
game species evolved at different times, on different continents, for different historical 
reasons. Nevertheless, they both satisfied the needs of their respective nations and have 
resulted in massive biodiver sity successes, huge incomes for both industry and society via 
outdoor equipment companies, tourism, and hospitality and some of their population well in 
tune with nature and tradition. 
 
 Legal Hunting Poaching 
As per the three principal objectives of what the WCS 
describes as living resource conservation 
Yes No 
Involves local communities in conservation  Yes No 
292

45 
 
Legal activity i.e., Laws, regulations, quotas, and rules apply Yes No 
Training and Official Hunting license required Yes No 
Observe wildlife laws and regulations/ hunting seasons Yes No 
Generates Income for wildlife department Yes No 
Generates income for government Yes No 
Generates Income for communities  Yes No 
Generates jobs at every level Yes No 
Manages animal human conflict by providing financial 
incentives for having wildlife on private lands 
Yes No 
Raises money for crop compensation due to wildlife Yes No 
Builds market for the manufacturing sector including 
camping gear, arms, clothing, footwear, vehicles etc.  
Yes No 
Helps conserve existing wildlife habitats Yes No 
Expands Wildlife habitats Yes No 
Reduces and stops poaching Yes No 
Pays for anti-poaching efforts Yes No 
Increases wildlife numbers and wildlife habitats Yes No 
Contributes valuable data on areas and their wildlife  Yes No 
Protect the whole diversity of species of flora and fauna via 
habitat protection  
Yes No 
 
 
 
WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT DEFINITIONS 
 
Wildlife Management 
Hunting  
Culling and population reduction management carried out 
to eliminate problem animals in a humane manner. The 
meat may be consumed by local communities instead of 
being destroyed. 
Hunting Hunting is the practice of pursuing and capturing or killing 
wildlife or feral animals. The most common reasons for 
humans to hunt are to harvest useful anima l products 
(meat, fur/hide, bone/tusks, horn/antler, etc) for 
recreation/taxidermy including for but not limited to 
trophy hunting, to remove predators dangerous to 
humans or domestic animals and property, to eliminate 
pests and nuisance animals that damag e 
crops/livestock/poultry or spread diseases, for 
trade/tourism (see safari), or for ecological conservation 
against overpopulation and invasive species. 
Poaching  Is Illegal hunting that includes hunting without a hunting 
license/tags, and/or using prohibited hunting techniques, 
including wire and steel cable snares, electric cables, 
dynamite, and explosives. 
 
293

46 
 
Poacher(s)  Sustenance poachers: Concerned with procuring meat for 
personal or family consumption. Includes tribal groups 
who hunt for food and have been doing so for millennia 
often to add protein to highly deficient diets. Others might 
be people who travel into agricultural or forest areas to 
capture or kill animals for food. 
 
Commercial meat poachers: Hunt meat, which they sell 
commercially, includes organized criminal gangs. 
 
Commercial Big Game poachers: Illegal hunters who kill 
elephants, rhinos and big cats and sell their horns, tusks, 
and skins – usually into the Far Eastern ivory and rhino 
horn markets.  
 
Crop protecting poacher: As per the current law in India a 
farmer protecting his crops and who kills animals raiding 
his resources, is also considered a poacher. A farmer who 
even chases animals off his land is considered a poacher 
as per the current definition of hunting. 
 This person mig ht not own a weapon and might call on 
people who own a weapon to kill crop-raiding animals on 
or around his land. Even chasing an animal off land is 
considered poaching under the WLPA.  
 
 
ANNEXURE 11 
 
HUNTING MODELS, WILDLIFE CULTURES AND REVENUE SYSTEMS 
 
1. AFRICA 
 
The General African model: With some variations, generally speaking, hunting in Africa is 
conducted as follows:   1. On Privately owned land 2. On Government hunting concessions 
leased to hunting companies within and outside national par ks. 3. In Communal areas that 
operate like government concessions except that the local community sells the hunting rights 
directly to the hunting companies and keeps the monies. In all the different scenarios. 
 
• All hunting clients have to buy a hunting license. 
• All hunts are conducted by a licensed professional hunter, who is in charge of the 
client’s actions and safety, success of the hunt and following all the hunting laws. 
• In government concessions a game scout from the game department is typi cally 
assigned to each hunt to ensure compliance and only the quota of species that is on 
the hunting permit can be hunted. In the case of communal areas, a communal game 
scout performs this role. 
• All hunts are conducted within designated hunting seasons. 
294

47 
 
• The annual hunting quota is set by the game department (even on private property), 
however in most instances the game departments in Africa are not very well managed 
or have enough expertise so this is done in conjunction with the hunting operator. This 
varies by country, as you will read below. 
• Once the quota has been allocated to the outfitter, he decides how to package his 
quota and market it. We can get in to this detail later. And I can provide price lists from 
various countries. 
• Clients typically pay a daily rate which typically includes all meals and lodging, hard 
liquor or not, guide and hunting team and use of camp staff for daily laundry etc. 
Extras include, any government or tourism tax, transfer to camp by road from nearest 
airport or air charter  by bush plane if required, gun permit, medical evacuation 
insurance, hunting license, cost of first preparation and treatment of trophies in the 
field to prepare them for export, export paperwork, crating and packing and freight 
cost of trophies to final destination. 
• A trophy fee is also charged at the end of the safari on all animals that are killed or 
wounded and lost. If blood is found it is deemed that the animal is killed even if it is 
not recovered. And it is counted against the allocated quota. 
• The daily rate depends on each hunting operator as well as the game that is to be 
hunted. With regular plains game being the cheapest and specialized plains game and 
dangerous game hunts being more expensive. A minimum number of days is also set 
based on the game to be hunted. E.g. A plains game hunt maybe 7 to 10 days @$300-
$600/day. Leopard and plains game hunts are typically 14 to 18 days $750 to 
$1200/day. 
• In the event the hunt is on private land the daily rate and the trophy fees for each 
animal taken is k ept by the hunting operator 100%. In the event of a government 
concession or communal area, the daily rate portion is kept 100% by the operator and 
the trophy fees is shared between them and the government or community. 
• These trophy fees are set by the government or community and the outfitter typically 
adds a mark -up to it when selling it to the hunting client. Example in Tanzania an 
outfitter pays $2,500 for a buffalo to the government but sells the same for between 
$3,500 to $4,800 to the hunting client. 
 
2. NORTH AMERICAN HUNTING MODEL 
 
USA : The right to hunt − sometimes in combination with the right to fish − is protected 
implicitly, as a consequence of the right of ownership or explicitly, as a right on its own, in a 
number of jurisdictions. For instance, as of 2019, a total of 22 U.S. states explicitly recognizes 
a subjective right to hunt in their constitutions. 
 
 “Regulated hunting is the foundation of the North American Model of Wildlife Conservation. 
This conservation paradigm arose out of a movement, led by prominent hunters, to stop over-
exploitation of wildlife and the desire to have wildlife accessible to al l people. Since then, 
hunters have contributed billions of dollars to wildlife management that benefit countless 
wildlife species. These funds support wildlife management agencies, which manage all wildlife 
species, not just those that are hunted and contr ibute to conservation programs worldwide, 
including projects in India. This  conservation paradigm is responsible for supporting a wide 
variety of conservation activities, including law enforcement, research, information and 
295

48 
 
education, habitat management and acquisition, as well as wildlife population restoration and 
management.”  
 
To summarize in America hunting is not a privileged sport and 13.5 million hunting licenses 
were sold in 2018. However, like any other activity or sport, the further up the ladder you go 
the more expensive it gets. Then policing of hunters and outfitters is generally conducted by 
each States wildlife department as well as by any other law enforcement agency. 
 
 3. EUROPEAN HUNTING MODELS 
 
Hungary/Bulgaria/Romania 
Russia and most Eastern European countries have very strong hunting traditions dating back 
to communist times when only the elite hunted. These are rural countries with poor 
populations, yet there is great respect for wildlife and the game laws. 
 
• Government forest areas: In these countries most of the game is found on government 
forestlands and this is where most of the hunting takes place. Example in Bulgaria 
there are 32 such Forest areas where hunting is allowed. 
• Hunting is organized as one of the activities entr usted to the forest department or 
forestry companies which manage the area for lumber etc. There is a section of the 
game department that is responsible for the management of the game as well as 
setting annual hunting quotas for each hunting area. A minimu m trophy fee is set by 
government, although each hunting area can increase these fees depending on supply 
and demand. 
• Many of these forest areas have very nice lodges which are available for hunters to 
stay.  All hunting is conducted by registered hunting guides. 
• As the forestry areas do not have a marketing initiative in place, most of the hunts are 
sold to independent hunting outfitters who book a quota of animals depending upon 
their demand and they bring their clients. These outfitters make their money by 
charging a mark-up on the daily fees which covers the clients stay, food, guide, trophy 
care etc as well as a mark-up on the trophy fees of the animals that is shot. 
• Village Areas:   These are areas that are designated hunting areas around each 
village/collection of villages. The local villagers form a hunting club or association and 
its members are allowed to hunt these areas. These areas mainly hold small game and 
birds. Depending upon the area, its members may be allowed to hunt a given quota 
of birds per day, example 5 doves and 2 partridge. If game like wild boar and roe deer 
are present then an annual quota is set and once that quota has been met by its 
members the hunting for that species is over for the year. For example, an annual 
quota maybe set at 20 wild boar and 10 roe deer. It is also up to the village association 
to sell part of this quota to outside hunters or outfitters at a price determined by them 
if they wish to generate some income. Most of these village hunting areas do not have 
lodges for hunters to stay so they have to make their own accommodation 
arrangements. 
• The local hunting associations police their own hunting areas so far as anti -poaching 
goes. 
• The annual hunting turnover in Bulgaria is between 5 to 6 million euros annually. 
*Spain, France and Germany follow similar systems of hunting and managing their wildlife 
296

49 
 
  
4. UNITED KINGDON HUNTING MODEL 
 
The UK model is an exception. All hunting is done on private estates. There is no government 
quota management system. Neither is there an official hunting license, other than one’s arms 
license for a shotgun or rifle. There is a list of protected species t hat cannot be hunted and 
the rest is fair game. All a hunter needs is permission from the landowner to hunt on his 
property and pays whatever fee and conditions is set by the landowner. Typically, any game 
that is shot on an estate belongs to the landowner  who sells it to game dealers. The sale of 
organic wild game meat is growing annually in the UK as a healthy alternative to domestic 
raised animals. 
 
In the UK people hunt 50 million captive -bred pheasants and 10 million captive - bred 
partridges released i nto the countryside every year. This supports a multi -million-pound 
industry that ensures vast areas are kept as ‘wild habitat’ supporting numerous species. In 
the UK, the deer population has been increasing steadily over the last 25 years, year on year. 
Shooting is worth 2 Billion Pound Sterling in the UK. It supports the equivalent of 74,000 full 
time jobs. More information can be found at www.shootingfacts.co.uk 
 
 
 
REGULATED HUNTING IN PAKISTAN: A CASE STUDY COMPARED TO INDIAN MODEL 
 
In Pakistan there are six registered outfitters. In Pakistan the Provincial governments decide 
hunting decisions.  Essentially there are two types of hunting areas, Communal hunting areas 
and Private game farms. 
 
Communal Areas: 
 
• Mountain hunting in Pakistan is only done in ‘Communal areas’.   In these areas the 
only livelihood was goat herding and tourism (now finished due to Islamic extremism). 
• People in those areas used to kill the Markhor, Ibex and blue sheep fr eely especially 
for ‘dawats’ and celebrations to feed their guests. Today given the value each animal 
represents to the community, the community itself has stopped the practice almost 
completely. Poaching in these areas is more or less non -existent as the game is very 
valuable to the whole village and no local poacher dares to illegally hunt these animals. 
The consequences could be lethal. In other cases draconian fines are levied (In one 
case a fine of  136,000 USD was levied  which is equivalent to the trophy fee at that 
time). 
• The hunting is organized at the Provincial government level. A quo ta is decided 
annually, and an auction held for tags for various species. 
• Talking specifically about Markhor, 12 markhor are auctioned each year – 4 of each of 
the 3 species found in Pakistan. 
• In September/October each year the local government advertises the auction date 
and the outfitters bid for these animals depending on the demand they have from 
their clients. Last year (2019) an outfitter bought a single Markhor permit for $150,000 
(1.13 crore Indian rupees). He then sold the hunt for $200,000 to his client. 
297

50 
 
• The costs involved in the hunt are high given the terrain, the local community 
headman has to be looked after, helicopter charges, etc. From the permit fees of 
$150,000, 80% of the money goes straight to the local community. Balance 20% goes 
to the wildlif e department of that area who spends the money to hire guards from 
that area and implement initiatives to conserve the markhor. In essence all the money 
gets spent on the conservation of the Markhor and the community benefits hugely. 
• Permits for blue sheep sell for about $12,500 and the hunt for about $25,000. 
• All the mountain game species taken in communal areas is exportable and under the 
blessing of CITES, US fish and wildlife etc. who have all been involved in these projects 
and support them. 
 
THE SUCCESS OF THE WWF BACKED MARKHOR COMMUNITY CONSERVATION PROJECT  IN 
PAKISTAN 
 
• Four permits auctioned for the markhor trophy hunting for year 2021-2022 
• The highest amount obtained for the trophy hunting permit was $160,250 
• The auction of permits fetch Pakistan a record-high revenue of $575,500 in total 
 
 
In the Gilgit -Baltistan region of Pakistan, the 
numbers of Markhor were dwindling fast owing 
to indiscriminate poaching, habitat loss, and the 
competition with livestock for grazing pastures. 
Moreover, the region of Gilgit Baltistan faced 
high unemployment ratios and low socio -
economic indicators. The challenge for 
policymakers and conservationists was to 
create a conservation framework which did not 
scuttle the economic prospects of the region’s 
already impoverished communities. In the 
1990s, Pakistan officially started regulated 
trophy hunting in the region and as counter-
intuitive as it may sound to many Indian 
‘conservationists’, the project in Gilgit-Baltistan 
has helped not just save the Markhor from 
possible extinction but also brought in much 
needed prosperity for the local community.  
 
To incentivise the local community to ac tively 
participate in the conservation process, the 
Government decided that 80% of the revenue 
generated by trophy hunting operations shall go back to the local communities  and the 
remaining 20% to the wildlife department. It is pertinent to mention that the main threat to 
Markhor population came from local impoverished communities who used to hunt it for food 
during winter. The trophy hunting project changed the relationship between the animal and 
the local community in a way that the villagers are now at the forefront of conservation efforts 
due to the benefits markhor bring to the community. 
298

51 
 
Hunting season lasts from November to April where a limited number of permits are issue d 
based on the annual population survey of the animal. An open bidding takes place for 
individual permits and each permit can cost well over 100,000 USD . Once sold, they are 
open to the free market and are resold by the bid winners for much higher prices. In trophy 
hunting, only old male goats, well past their reproductive prime, are shot and they are usually 
identified from body and horn size.  
 
Due to the success of the trophy hunting operations, there has been a substantial increase in 
the number of Markhor to the extent that it is now considered ‘near threatened’ in the IUCN’s 
red list, a two level improvement from its earlier status as critically endangered. On the other 
hand, the communities which receive 80% of the revenue use a share of it to invest in anti -
poaching operations as well as paying off the salaries of guards who protect the animals. The 
Village Conservation Committees (VCCs)  which manage the funds have used the money to 
fund roads, hospital infrastructure and schools, bringing prosperity to the communities.  
 
The trophy hunting has produced positive results as the markhor population has now 
increased to 3,500-4,000 in the country as compared to 1,500-2,000 in 2001. 
 
In India our Biodiversity Management Committees (BMC’s) remain unused across the country. 
The markhor story on the India side is also markedly different.  There has been substantial 
fragmentation of the habitat, and habitat loss  due to poorly planned development 
projects.  Overgrazing by livestock as well as poac hing also severely affect the population. 
Markhor has been included as a protected animal under the Jammu & Kashmir Wildlife 
Protection Act, 1978. India’s response to this crisis has followed the ‘guns and guards’ 
approach by cordoning off the habitat of Markhor as ‘protected areas’ and limiting as well as 
criminalising human activity in these zones. This is followed across the country.  
 
The evidence in terms of conservation outcome has been mixed i.e. in some areas the 
population of Markhor has remained s table while in places such as Hirapora, the numbers 
have reduced alluding to a failure. While the political volatility in the region and increased 
militarisation does act as a significant impediment to any conservation activity, it is pertinent 
to note that the threat of livestock overgrazing by nomadic pastoralists and illegal poaching 
pretty much remain at the core of the problem. For the nomadic pastoralists such as the 
Gujjars and Bakharwal community, Markhor is an economic liability competing for grazi ng 
pastures with their livestock. The Government has tried to find a middle ground by creating 
some pasture management schemes. As part of the scheme, no -grazing zones were 
established in the protected areas with patrolling activity to guard pastures from illegal 
grazing. However, it has shown little success owing to no incentives for the communities to 
sacrifice their livestock i.e. their only source of income.  
 
The Markhor conservation regimes adopted by the Indian and Pakistani Governments 
highlight two different visions through which wildlife conservation has been approached. The 
Indian Government’s policies are closely aligned with the fortress approach which 
presupposes that the only relationship between human activity and wildlife is that of conflict. 
Cordoning off wildlife habitats, restricting human activity in protected areas and using guns 
& guards, are reflective of the Indian approach to the issue of Markhor. The approach has not 
just failed to protect the Markhor but further alienated the local communities who now have 
299

52 
 
little incentive to protect the Markhor. In fact, it may lead to local communities colluding with 
poachers to safeguard their pastures from being designated as protected areas.  This is 
happening across the country. 
 
Properly aligning incentives as well as calibrating the force of markets can assist remarkably 
well in funding conservation which also decreases the burden on the State exchequer. While 
the ethical dimensions of activities such as trophy hunting are controversial for some, it must 
be remembered that both local people and the markhor, the imagined victim of trophy 
hunting, have benefitted greatly from this scheme.   
 
In the end, what’s at stake are not urban sentiments but the country’s biodiversity, its wildlife, 
its economy and the well-being and prosperity of its people. 
 
 
TRUE CONSERVATION ALLIANCE FOUNDATION 
 
TCA has been co-founded by Ryan Lobo, Marcus Campos and Meghna Uniyal. It was set up to 
work towards advocacy, litigation and implementation of policies, procedures, programmes, 
legislation and education at all levels of Government and in the media and public with respect 
to environmentally sustainable development, promotion and protection of  biodiversity, 
community conservation ventures, human -wildlife conflict solutions, sustainable usage of 
wild resources and solutions to other environmental issues and civic responsibilities regarding 
these ventures in any region or geography within Bharat. 
 
trueconservationalliance@gmail.com 
 
300

Increase FINES AND NO TAKE MARINE RESERVES  
TO FURTHER PROTECT CORAL REEFS IN INDIA.  
 
To, 
Shri Rakesh Anand, 
Additional Directorate, 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
New Delhi. 
 
This has reference to your call for insights on changes in protection of wildlife Act 2021. 
 
Impliment Fines-- 
 
1.Marine pollution in the form of plastic pollution and other activities has led to the corals 
being suffocated. Coral reefs need air and space to breathe. Enforce  
 
2. Pollution from water run offs. 
 
3. Add a special Amendment Act  to the protection of ALL Corals Reefs in marine habitats. 
  
4.No-take marine reserves are by far the most effective type of MPA. They restore the 
biomass and structure of fish assemblages, and restore ecosystems to a more complex and 
resilient state. Partially protected MPAs can have some value by restricting specific activities 
(e.g. banning trawling to prevent habitat destruction), but in general they are not as 
effective.  
 
Background- 
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change makes and ensures the guidelines 
and laws protecting coral reefs are followed properly. The State Wildlife department takes 
care of the corals if the coral reef region comes un der a protected area. This should be 
altered to ALL coral reefs should be protected NOT only those under protected areas. 
So far,All marine resources are protected under the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) of 1991. 
It provides protection to all coral reefs u nder the CRZ1 category of the law. The specific 
Section 7 (2) of the CRZ states that no hotels or resorts are to be made on coral reefs. The 
mining and quarrying of coral reefs are banned in some states, except for scientific 
purposes. Fines should be elaborated. 
We should incorporate with references from the Coral Reef Conservation Act 2000 of USA. 
 Marine reserves are no guarantee to the ocean’s problems specifically the coral reefs, but  it 
is important to know which types of MPAs are more effective, and under which conditions. 
No-take marine reserves – the MPAs with stronger protection – are very effective in restoring 
and preserving biodiversity, and in enhancing ecosystem resilience. 
We request for a new ammendment act for protection of Coral Reefs,  looking at the drastic 
effects of climate change. If India is to meet its 2030 net zero targets, this could well assist in 
the process.  
 
Thanking you  
Elsie Gabriel  
Founder  
Young Environmentalists Programme Trust  
National Cordinator Oceans Climate Reality Project India  
Ambassador for India Global Quest International.  
Mumbai.  
9967347511 
301

Respected sir/madam, 
 
We are a student led animal welfare group in Delhi-NCR. We are extremely concerned about the proposed 
amendments to the Wildlife Protection Act (WPA) with respect to elephants. 
 
Keeping in mind that elephants are Schedule I status we urge you to - 
o Not go ahead with the amendment to dilute Section 43 of the Wild Life (Protection) 
Act, permitting sale of elephants 
o Withdraw proviso under Section 40 (2B) permitting private ownership of live 
elephants 
The condition of captive elephants in our country is extremely concerning and by taking away this 
layer of protection we will cause their condition to deteriorate even further. Please do reconsider the 
proposed amendments as the future of our heritage animal depends upon it. 
 
Warm regards 
Nikita Dhawan 
(On behalf of Youth for Animals) 
 
302

303

304

305

306

307

 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  www.kalpavriksh.org 
PUNE:  Apt. 5, Shree Dutta Krupa , 908, Deccan Gymkhana, Pune – 411004   
              Tel:  020-25654239/ 25675450 email: kalpavriksh.info@gmail.com 
Kalpavriksh Environment Action Group 
Comments on the Draft Wild Life Protection (Amendment) Bill 20211 
 
The draft WLPA (Amendment) Bill 2021 is coming 15 years after the enactment and 
implementation of The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of 
Forest Rights Act), 2006 (also the Forest Rights Act or FRA) but has still not attempted to take into 
account its various provisions. The current amendment process provides an opportunity for 
reducing the present contradictions or lack of clarity at the interface of these two laws tying various 
loose ends. Doing so will also be keeping in line with the Programme of Work on Protected Areas 
(PoWPA) of the UN Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and a step forward towards Target 
3 being currently discussed under the Post 2020 Global Biodiversity Framework. Our comments 
below are related to both what is already in the proposed amendments as also some of what has 
been omitted: 
 
                                                 
1 This submission by Kalpavriksh is in response to the invitation to suggestions and views by the Department related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, regarding the draft Wild 
Life (Protection) Amendment Bill 2021 
Settlement of rights process: 
 
The draft amendments do not reconcile the relationship of the settlement of rights procedure as laid 
down in Sections 19 to 25A of the WLPA with that of the recognition of rights as well as alteration 
of rights process under Sections 3 (1) and (2) and Sections 4 (1), (2) and (5) of the Scheduled 
Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act 2006 (Act No. 2 
of 2007). In the current draft the settlement of rights process continues to remain unchanged except 
to say that the compensation for extinguishing rights in Sanctuaries and National Parks will be in 
accordance with the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act 2013 (LARR 2013) replacing the Land Acquisition Act 1894.  
 
The 2010 draft amendments to the WLPA had proposed insertion of  “26B. Compliance with 
Forest Rights Act. In the settlement of rights for all scheduled tribes and forest dwellers in 
sanctuaries and National Parks for which the notification under sub-section (1) of Section 18 or 
sub-section (1) of Section 35 has been issued after the commencement of The Scheduled Tribes 
and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act 2006 (Act No. 2 of 
2007), the Collector shall ensure that the provisions of that Act are complied with.” We strongly 
suggest that this statement is reinserted in the current amendments.  
 
It is important to incorporate in the present amendment the following text:  “In settling the rights 
of Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers residing in the proposed sanctuary, 
the Collector shall be guided by sections 3 and 4 of The Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (Act No. 2 of 2007) and 
related provisions of the Rules under this Act”.  
 
Also in order to harmonise the settlement of rights process with FRA, the following also needs to 
be added: “No right recognized under FRA can be extinguished by this process without the 
consent of the rights holders and following due process as per Section 4 (1), (2) and (5) of The 
Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act 
2006 (Act No. 2 of 2007), the Collector shall ensure that the provisions of that Act are 
complied with”.   
 
308

 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  www.kalpavriksh.org 
PUNE:  Apt. 5, Shree Dutta Krupa , 908, Deccan Gymkhana, Pune – 411004   
              Tel:  020-25654239/ 25675450 email: kalpavriksh.info@gmail.com 
Kalpavriksh Environment Action Group 
Regarding consultation with the gram sabhas for notification of Protected Areas: 
 
The current draft does not provide for any gram sabha consultations before the declaration of 
Protected Areas, thus coming in direct contradiction with FRA and PESA as most areas being 
declared as National Parks, Sanctuaries as well as Tiger Reserves, are either already or have a 
potential to be claimed under the FRA and also where provisions of the Panchayat Extension to 
Scheduled Areas (2006) Act apply. PESA requires Gram Sabha’sconsent (and not just consultation) 
in Scheduled Areas before the declaration of any project including protected areas within the PESA 
area. The process of notification as well as denotification of PAs (irrespective of whether it is a 
Scheduled area or not) needs to go through a detailed process of consultation with and consent from 
those who either already have rights or are likely to claim rights over these forests.  
 
Management of Protected Areas: 
 
The current draft amendments provide that in the case of a Sanctuary, management plans are to be 
prepared in ‘consultation’ with the concerned Gram Sabhas. This is contradictory to Section 5 of 
and Rule 4 (e) and (f) of The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition 
of Forest Rights) Act 2006 (Act No. 2 of 2007) which provides for constitution of wildlife 
conservation and management committees and drafting of wildlife management and conservation 
plans in ALL areas where rights holders whose rights under the FRA have been recognised, reside. 
This includes areas within wildlife sanctuaries, national parks and tiger reserves. The amendments 
must provide for such management and conservation plans prepared by gram sabha constituted 
wildlife management and conservation committees to be incorporated in the larger plans of the 
conservation reserves, wildlife sanctuaries, national parks and Tiger Reserves. Additionally, 
considering  the immense significance of these plans for ensuring biodiversity conservation as well 
as reconciling rights of the local communities, it is important that the draft Management Plans are 
prepared in consultation with the concerned gram sabhas and also made public for wider comments 
and suggestions. These plans should also be placed before the State Board for Wildlife for its 
approval.  
 
Power to remove encroachments 
 
We suggest that in Section 34A of the WLPA, dealing with power to remove encroachments, the 
following provision is added in the power to remove encroachment, ‘Provided that no such order 
shall be passed unless the affected person is given an opportunity to be heard, and the processes 
under The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest 
Rights) Act, 2006 (Act No. 2 of 2007) have been completed.’ 
 
Prohibition of activities and Section 29: Destruction, etc, in a sanctuary prohibited without a 
permit 
The current draft reads  
Explanation.-- For the purposes of this section, grazing or movement of livestock permitted under 
clause (d) of section 33, or hunting of wild animals under a permit granted under Section 11 or 
hunting without violating the conditions of permit granted under Section 12, or the exercise of any 
rights permitted to continue under clause (c) of sub-section 24, or the bona fide use of drinking and 
household water by local communities, shall not be deemed to be an act prohibited under this 
section.  
309

 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  www.kalpavriksh.org 
PUNE:  Apt. 5, Shree Dutta Krupa , 908, Deccan Gymkhana, Pune – 411004   
              Tel:  020-25654239/ 25675450 email: kalpavriksh.info@gmail.com 
Kalpavriksh Environment Action Group 
In addition to the above all rights recognised under Section 3 (1) and (2) of  The Scheduled 
Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (Act 
No. 2 of 2007), should be included as “not be deemed to be an act prohibited under this section”.  
. 
In the same explanation the term “local community” needs to be defined clearly to mean 
“scheduled tribe and other traditional forest dwellers” residing within and in the immediate 
vicinity of the PA (area to be specified). 
  
Considering that a private land owner is volunteering to declare their area as Community 
Reserve, no forest department official should be on the decision making committee of the 
Community Reserved declared on lands privately owned. This will be a huge deterrent towards 
Conservation Reserves and Community Reserves  
 
The current draft does not address this but an amendment needs to be inserted in Section 36 B of 
the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act of 2006 to say that the Conservation Reserve 
Management Committee should be the main managing body, rather than  being only an 
advisory to the CWLW.  Current draft Bill needs to incorporate this amendment. 
 
For Section 36 D, the current draft amendments suggest that the Community Reserve Management  
Committee “shall consist of not less than five representatives nominated by the Village Panchayat 
or where such Panchayat does not exist by the members of the Gram Sabha and one representative 
of the State Forests or Wild Life Department under whose jurisdiction the community reserve is 
located.” 
 
Considering that the land does not belong to the forest department and the community is 
volunteering for the conservation of the area, the forests department representative should NOT be 
on the committee, this is a deterrent for declaration of many areas as community reserves.  The 
Community Reserve Management Committee should include as its members, two 
representative (one woman and one man) from the gram sabhas (as defined under PESA and 
FRA to be the assembly of individual pada/settlement/revenue villages falling within a 
Panchayat) or other similar institutions (AND NOT THE PANCHAYATS) of the villages in 
and around the conservation reserve, with adequate representation from the disprivileged 
sections.  In case of Villages which have constituted  wildlife management and conservation 
committees under Rule 4 (e) of The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (Act No. 2 of 2007), Such committees should be part of 
the Community Reserve Management Committee.  
 
Representative of the Forest Department as also the representatives of other government 
departments, NGOs working on social and rights issues, NGOs working on conservation issues,  
should be in advisory and supportive role as part of a district or sub district level convergence 
committee which ensures that such plans as prepared by the Community Reserve Management 
Committees are supported and facilitated.  
 
Insert 2A of the current amendment draft states that “Where a community reserve is declared on 
private land under Sub Section 1 of Section 36C, the community reserve management committee 
shall consist of the owner of the land, a representative of the State Forests or Wildlife Department 
under whose jurisdiction the community reserve is located and also the representative of the 
Panchayat concerned or the tribal community, as the case may be”. 
 
310

 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  www.kalpavriksh.org 
PUNE:  Apt. 5, Shree Dutta Krupa , 908, Deccan Gymkhana, Pune – 411004   
              Tel:  020-25654239/ 25675450 email: kalpavriksh.info@gmail.com 
Kalpavriksh Environment Action Group 
declaration of such lands as community reserves as it places power in the hands of the forest 
department. Representative of the forest department as also the representatives of other government 
deparments should be in advisory and support role as part of a district and sub district level 
convergence committee which ensures that such plans as prepared by the Community Reserve 
Management Committee are supported and facilitated. 
 
Neema Pathak Broome (
Formation of Standing Committee of State Board of Wildlife 
 
The formation of the Standing Committee (SC) of the State Board of Wildlife (SBWL) under 
Section 6(a) of the current amendment may lead to centralization of decision making power in the 
hands of a few individuals in the State. The State Board of Wildlife in its current capacity itself is 
underrepresented by forest-dwelling communities and NGOs working on social and forest rights 
issues. The amendment under Sec. 6 A (2) allowing for the Vice-Chairperson to select not more 
than 10 members from the board in effect means that the Standing Committee can function with 
just two members i.e the forest minister and a member, with no accountability to the State Board 
and hence rendering the state board defunct and of cosmetic value only. The Bill intends to 
replicate the model of the National Board for Wildlife and its Standing Committee. It is pertinent to 
point out that the National Board for Wildlife headed by the Prime Minister has not met since 2014; 
all its statutory functions are carried out by the Standing Committee headed by the Environment 
Minister with no accountability to the Board. At present the State Boards by virtue of their 
composition are still able to speak in the interest of wildlife. This will no longer be the case once 
the Standing Committee of the State Board is constituted. 
 
Comments submitted by Kalpavriksh on 11
th February 2022 
For further communication, pl contact 
neema.pb@gmail.com)  
Meenal Tatpati (meenaltatpati01@gmail.com) 
Akshay Chettri (akdhay04@gmail.com) 
 
 
311

Memoranda submitted by e minent Conservationists/retd. IFS officers/retd 
officials/Academics 
 
1. Shri M.K. Ranjitsinh, New Delhi 
2. Shri Rom Whitaker, Chennai 
3. Shri H.S. Pabla, Bhopal 
4. Shri Akula Kishan, Guntur 
5. Shri S.K. Khanduri, Dehradun 
6. Shri Sanjay Kumar Srivastava, Chennai 
7. Shri R.S. Bhadauria, Lucknow 
8. Shri B.M.T. Rajeev, Bengaluru 
9. Smt. Prerna Singh Bindra, New Delhi 
10. Shri Dr. E.K. Easwaran, Aruvikkara, Kerala 
11. Shri V.G. Bhandi, Sirsi 
12. Shri L.A.K. Singh, Bhubaneswar 
13. Shri K. Sivakumar, Pudhucherry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
312

1 
 
Comments on “The Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021,” (Bill No 159 of 
2021) 
 
By Dr M. K Ranjitsinh 
Former Director of Wildlife Preservation, Government ofIndia 
 
The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (in short – the Principal Act) was enacted with the 
specific purpose of protecting wild fauna and conserving their habitats, by providing for the 
setting up and management of protected areas, and the control of hunting, trade and 
taxidermy in India. All subsequent amendments in the Act have been ancillary to this 
objective - the setting up of the National Tiger Conservation and Central Zoo Authorities 
and the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau.  
 
Key Observations on the Amendments contained in the Bill:  
 
1.0. Insertion of Chapter VB on CITES 
 
1.1. Fundamentally, the Principal Act is a Restrictive legislation that contains many 
prohibitions in order to ensure complete protection and management of fauna and flora of 
India and their habitats. On the contrary, the Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species of Fauna and Flora (CITES) is largely regulatory in nature and thus 
contains enabling provisions pertaining to import and export of species listed in the 
Appendices of the Convention. It is for this fundamental reason that the bringing in of the 
proposed Chapter VB into this Act is gravely disturbing and altering the very nature of the 
Principal Act. If the overall goal is not only to strengthen the existing protection to species 
specified in the Schedules of the Principal Act but also to clamp down on the rampant 
illegal trade in CITES species, two simple amendments in sub-section (36) of Section 2 
(definition of wild animals) and Section 9 (prohibition on hunting), as provided in the 
specific suggestions at the end of this submission, is all that is required. It is my clear and 
considered view that the introduction of the CITES chapter VB not only dilutes the intent 
and purpose of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, but it even subsumes it. It also creates a 
marked dichotomy and conflict of interest. One example is the proposed schedules to be 
inserted, the size of which has swelled from the current 16 pages to 97 pages, most of the 
species not even occurring in India but perforce having to be included, to be in 
consonance with CITES requirements. What is more, the listing of species in the 
Schedules under the extant Act is alphabetical to facilitate the layman who will be using 
this Act. The proposed schedules in the Amendment Bill are in accordance with CITES 
needs - scientific, technical, in Latin and labyrinthine and what is more, most of them non-
Indian, submerging as it were the Indian species to protect which the Principal Act was 
framed. If the schedules were to be incorporated, it will substantially complicate the 
313

2 
 
handling and implementation of the Act, by officers and staff whose responsibility it will be 
to do so. 
 
1.2. Furthermore, the conflict of interest is very apparent in the amendments sought. 
Sections 3 and 4 of the extant Act empower the Director of Wildlife Preservation at the 
Central Government level, and Chief Wildlife Wardens at the state level. The proposed 
Section 49(E)1 mandates the appointment of a Management Authority who will then 
exercise powers under the Act. Is the Management Authority going to be the same as the 
Director of Wildlife Preservation? If not, then are there going to be two authorities and will 
the Management Authority exercise the same powers as that of the Director of Wildlife 
Preservation by virtue of what is stated in Section 49E(1) of the Amendment Bill, viz, “…for 
discharging the functions and exercising the powersunder this Act…”? This, in my view, is 
bound to trigger legal, administrative and even personal complicationsdue to a conflict 
between restrictive provisions and enabling provisions by which these two authorities will 
be empowered to make decisions, and which will create serious ambiguities in the 
interpretations of the provisions of this Act.  
 
1.3. The proposed Chapter VB enables the transfer and breeding of species, including 
endangered ones, by private parties, which is precisely what was sought to be stopped or 
curtailed in the extant Principal Act and which will create dichotomy & clash of interest. 
Captive breeding for conservation purposes can be achieved and is being achieved under 
the current provisions. It is apparent that the amendments are sought to enable large 
private zoos and individuals to breed endangered species, exchange them and perhaps 
even trade in them, as is permissible under CITES. 
 
2.0. Reorganization of Schedules  
 
2.1. The listing of species under the schedules is truly mystifying. There has been sizeable 
duplications and omissions, with no reason given. Some transfers from Schedule I to 
Schedule II or totally from any of the Schedules, could be an omission by mistake or by 
ignorance. But if it is deliberate, then it would imply that an impetus is sought to be given 
for the restarting of trade in these species, by lowering the protection status of such 
species.  
 
Some examples are as follows – 
 
- Many of the snake species have been omitted from any of the schedules. Will it not 
give impetus to the restarting of trade in snake skins which was thriving when this 
Principal Act came into being in 1972?  
 
314

3 
 
- Why are the Indian, Burmese and reticulated pythons being downgraded from 
Schedule I to Schedule II? Their status has slightly improved, but they are still far 
from safe and will be the first target of traders in snake skins.  
 
- The sand boa is sought for tantric rituals and a single specimen sells for over a 
crore, one of the most sought-after species in illegal trade. Yet it has been 
downgraded to Schedule II.  
 
- The endangered loggerhead sea turtle has inexplicably been deleted from all 
schedules.  
 
- The Himalayan bharal or blue sheep has been mistakenly moved from Schedule I 
to Schedule II.  Both the large and small Indian civets have also been downgraded 
from Part II of Schedule II to Schedule II (equivalent to species in Schedule III & IV 
of the Principal Act), when their scent glands are in great demand for medicinal, 
perfumery and other purposes in illegal markets. 
 
- The similar downgrading of the martens, weasels, jackal, foxes and jungle cat will 
also restart the fur market in these commodities, which has been stalled by the 
Principal Act. In 1972, this author had made the cardinal mistake of not according 
protection to jackal and foxes. The furriers whose activities of trade in endangered 
species had been stopped by the coming into force this Act, immediately shifted to 
trade in these items and a consignment of over 50,000 skins of jackal, jungle cat 
and foxes was caught, whereby this author, in his capacity as the Director of 
Wildlife Protection of India, immediately brought them into a protected category. 
Now the same mistake is sought to be repeated. 
 
- The Nilgiri pine marten is a highly endemic, rare and threatened species and it is 
very surprising to find it being downgraded.  
 
- Some dolphins, always over exploited, have also been left out of the schedules. 
 
- Amongst the birds, four species of birds - the very endemic Nicobar megapode, the 
Nicobar pigeon, the red-necked/red-headed or Merlin falcon & Lord Derby‘s 
parakeet, are listed in both Schedules I & II and need to retained in Schedule I. 
 
- The Hill mynah is a very sought-after bird in the pet trade and it must be in 
Schedule I and not in Schedule II, as proposed. 
 
315

4 
 
- A large number of birds need to be transferred from Schedule II to Schedule I. 
Amongst them are - Andaman teal, Marbled teal. Chestnut-breasted partridge, 
white-cheeked partridge, swamp partridge or francolin, Manipur bush quail, Nilgiri 
wood pigeon, Andaman wood pigeon, Macqueen‘s bustard or houbara much 
sought after by Arab Sheikhs, the rare and very localised greater adjutant stork, and 
the even rarer Stoliczka‘sbushchat. The downgrading of the houbara has even 
raised doubts in certain quarters that this is to allow Arab Sheikhs to practice 
falconry as does Pakistan, in what is called ‗oil diplomacy‘ in popular parlance. 
 
- There are a larger number if bird species which do not now appear in any schedule 
& must be included in Schedule I, due to their threatened status. Amongst them are 
the lesser flamingo, greater painted-snipe, the masked finfoot, and a number of 
hornbills which are a target of poachers because of the purported medicinal 
qualities of their casques. 
 
2.2. It is, therefore. my considered view that the schedules need very careful and in-depth 
examination by experts who know ground realities of the current status and distribution of 
each species and the threats that they are facing, both present and potential. 
 
3.0. Specific suggestions on Amendments: 
 
CITES is an important factor in the control of international trade and India has been a 
signatory of CITES since its inception and we must take advantage of it to prevent illegal 
trade in our wildlife. There are, therefore, two options before us.  
 
Firstly, this author is of the considered opinion that the needs of CITES could be 
accomplished by some elementary amendments suggested below, which would 
harmonise with the extant Act and achieve the objective without jeopardising the raison 
d’etre of the present Act and making it and its Schedules impossibly complicated and 
cumbersome. They are- 
 
3.1. In Section 2 clause (36) of the Act, the following amendment be made, the proposed 
change being in capital letters— (36) ―wild animal‖ means any animal specified in 
Schedule I or Schedule II OR IN APPENDIX I AND II OF THE CONVENTION ON 
INTERNATIONAL TRADE IN ENDANGERED SPECIES OF WILD FAUNA AND FLORA  
 
Note: This will ensure that the term wild animal mentioned in various sections of the 
Principal Act viz. Section 39, 48A, 49B, 50, 51,57 will include CITES species, thereby 
overcoming a lacuna in the law with regard to exotic species found in illegal trade. 
 
316

5 
 
3.2. In Section 9 of the extant Act, the following change can be done, the new insertion 
being in capital letters— ―No person shall hunt any wild animal specified in Schedule I or 
Schedule II OR IN APPENDIX 1 AND 2 OF THE CONVENTION ON INTERNATIONAL 
TRADE IN ENDANGERED SPECIES OF WILD FAUNA AND FLORA‖ 
 
Note: It is highlighted that this amendment is critical by virtue of the fact that “hunting” as 
defined in Section 2(16) of the Principal Act, includes not just killing but – capturing, 
trapping, injuring… and every attempt to do so. With the suggested amendment, 
empowered officers will get legal jurisdiction to enforce these provisions, when they detect 
CITES species being smuggled or traded.  
 
3.3. The empowerment of a customs officer under Section (50)(1) is already being 
provided for in the Amendment Bill (para 32), which would take care of search and seizure 
under CITES. 
 
It is on the basis of properly justified reasons that the above two suggested amendments 
of sections 2(36) and 9 above, together with the existing provisions of the Act and Section 
50 (1) as in the proposed Amendment Bill, would suffice to ensure appropriate legal 
safeguards for CITES species and for meeting India‘s commitment to the International 
Convention.  
 
If, however, if the Ministry of Law considers these inadequate, then the second option 
should be to remove Chapter 5B from the proposed Amendment Bill and a new act for it 
should be framed, so that both that act and the extant Wild Life (Protection) Act could 
complement each other, instead of the requirements of both being cluttered in the same 
Act and causing confusion, complications and conflict of interest. It may also be kept in 
mind that CITES is a dynamic and worldwide convention which will require constant 
changes, both in the provisions and more so in its appendices? Will such alterations not 
require periodic amendments of the Principal Act, causing more complications? 
Furthermore, if India becomes a signatory to other such regional or international 
conventions or treaties dealing with trade or transfer of wild fauna or flora, will they all be 
loaded willy-nilly into the Wild Life (Protection) Act, even if the intent and purpose of those 
are not in synch with this Act? 
 
4.0. Other suggestions on the proposed amendments in the Bill: 
 
4.1. In the proposed new Clause 16(A) under Section 2, (para 3), the word ―alien‖ is not 
required and will cause confusion. All alien species may be invasive, but all invasive 
species are not alien. A definition of ―invasive species‖ would be very essential and will 
have to be comprehensive and adequate. It should include both foreign species as well as 
317

6 
 
Indian species which are non-native to the locality in question and therefore ―alien‖ there. 
An example is the removal of Sal Forests and planting of the lucrative teak in the Buxa 
Tiger Reserve in the past. The definition of invasive species must include feral domestic 
dogs, which in some parts of India including in the Himalaya, pose a greater threat to 
native species of animals than even human poachers.  
 
4.2. A conjoint reading of the proposed amendment to Section 2(34) and Section 61 along 
with Section 62 in the extant law, reveals the true import on declaration of certain species 
as ―Vermin‖. By virtue of what is stated in Section 2(34) in the Bill, it is evident that even 
those species specified in Schedule I can be declared as a ―Vermin‖. This is completely 
unacceptable. In the extant law, Section 62 imposes a bar on the declaration of a species 
listed in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II, as ―Vermin‖.  In the Amendment Bill, Section 
62 does continue with the bar on declaration of Vermin, of species in Schedule I. However, 
many species specified in Schedule I and Part II of Schedule II in the extant law have 
been downgraded to Schedule II, as mentioned in Para 2.1.  This is highly problematic 
and the implications are that any species including those specified in Schedule 1, 
could simply be deleted from any schedule and/or downgraded from Schedule 1 and 
declared as “Vermin. It is therefore imperative that the amendment needs to be modified 
by the following manner –  
 
In Section 2(34), the words ―specified in schedule II and‖ must be inserted after the words 
―any wild animal‖; 
 
In section 61 of the principal Act, for the words “add or delete any entry to or from any 
Schedule” the phrase “amend any schedule or add” be substituted. This covers the 
requirements of amendment and the words ―or delete‖ become totally redundant and 
unnecessary and may hence be dropped. 
 
4.3 Next, the confusion and complications concerning the Schedules of the Act as already 
mentioned above, being ad hoc, unscientific and the declaration of vermin mentioned in 
the previous paragraph could be based on political considerations. It is, therefore, 
proposed that any amendments pertaining to the Schedules, including declaration of 
vermin, must be only decided, as and when necessary, only after scrutiny by a technical 
expert committee consisting of independent ecologists, taxonomists, wildlife wardens and 
expert members of civil society known for their knowledge and experience in the field.  
 
4.4 Furthermore, declaration of vermin should be site-specific and should pertain to a 
particular area and not an ad hoc general one applicable to the entire state or region. 
Vermin when killed or captured, must remain as Government Property as defined in 
318

7 
 
Section 39 of the extant law and not be available for sale, alive or as meat. The 
amendments should clarify and provide for what has been suggested in paras 4.1 to 4.4. 
 
4.5. In Section 5B sub-section (3) the phrase ―on such terms and conditions as may be 
prescribed‖ needs to be deleted, as the duties & functions of the Standing Committee have 
already been prescribed by the National Board for Wild Life (NBWL). Besides, who will 
prescribe the other terms and conditions of the committee when sub-section (3) defines 
them as being those assigned to the NBWL? Is it proposed that some other functions 
other than those assigned to the NBWL are to be prescribed for the Standing Committee?   
 
4.6 The proposed addition of the new Section 6A, under the present circumstances, can 
be deemed to be ominous. The NBWL has not convened now for almost nine years and 
only it‘s Standing Committee meets periodically, almost entirely for the purpose of 
approving projects affecting Protected Areas. Records show that it has given approval to 
over 98% of project proposals that it has considered. Almost the same situation applies to 
most of the State Boards for Wildlife. Regrettably, the Statutory bodies that were created 
under the Act to provide policy and directions to safeguard the nation‘s wild fauna and its 
habitats, are preoccupied with proposals that do not contribute to conservation, to say the 
least. By inserting Section 6A in the Act, is it the intention to give a legal status to Standing 
Committees of the State Boards to facilitate such clearances and also to make the State 
Boards redundant? It is, therefore, imperative that this proposed amendment be dropped.   
 
4.7 The proposed amendment or rather the substitution of the ‗explanation‘ under Section 
29 of the Act (Para 12 of the Amendment Bill), is objectionable and fraught with severe 
consequences. The way it is framed, it will permit hunting, including that of animals that 
may cause damage to crops, even in a National Park or Sanctuary. It is, therefore 
proposed that the phrase ―or hunting of wild animals under a permit granted under Section 
11…permit granted under Section 12‖, be deleted from the proposed ‗explanation‘. 
 
4.8. In Section 33 (para 13 of the Amendment Bill), the proposed amendment of sub-
section (a) is extremely problematic. This author can vouchsafe that most of the 
management plans that are proposed for the Protected Areas, are prepared by persons 
mainly untrained in wildlife management as specialisation in the wildlife wings of the states 
is not in practice, and are therefore of poor quality. To give such shoddy management 
plans statutory status and to manage the last surviving samples of the nation‘s national 
natural heritage which remain in our parks and sanctuaries, would be catastrophic. The 
prior approval of the Central Government, which is extant today, must remain to ensure 
their quality. Furthermore, there would be a conflict of interest with the Gram Sabha in the 
management of a number of protected areas. While public consultations and opinion 
including that of the Gram Sabha should be taken into account, the management plan 
319

8 
 
formulation must be carried out by a committee comprising of the Chief Wildlife Warden 
and expert wildlife ecologists, and the long-term conservation interest of the concerned 
protected area must prevail. 
 
4.9. In Section 34 (Para 14 of the Amendment Bill) the proposed sub-section (4), the 
renewal of an arms license should only be with the approval of the Chief Wildlife Warden. 
 
4.10. In the five decades that have elapsed since the passage of the Principal Act, the 
status of some of the species listed under Schedule 1 whose habitats encompass areas 
outside of the protected areas defined under this Act, has drastically declined. Amongst 
them are the great Indian bustard, the lesser florican, the caracal and others. There is 
almost a universal policy not to establish any more protected areas and on the contrary, a 
number of them have been reduced in size or even denotified altogether. Under such 
circumstances, provisions need to be made to safeguard the last remaining habitats 
outside of the established protected areas, of the critically endangered species whose 
world populations are say, below 300. An appropriate place to provide for this contingency 
would be a new Section 36E. 
 
4.11.  Unlike most legislation‘s, the Wild Life (Protection) Act lacks a clause which would 
overcome conflict with other legislations operating in the same field. It is, therefore, 
strongly suggested that a new Section 60C, be inserted, stating: ―Section 60C- Act to have 
an overriding effect - The provisions of this Act shall have effects notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, or in any other instrument having 
effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act.‖ The importance of including this section 
cannot be over emphasised. 
 
 
Sd/- 
Dr. M.K. Ranjitsinh 
28-01-2022 
320

Below are my considered comments on the proposed amendments to the Wildlife Act, an Act I've 
had a lot of dealing with over the decades. My main focus is on the listing of the Schedules, I 
hope this may help. 
 
All good wishes, 
Rom 
Romulus Whitaker 
 
1. While the new Scheduling appears to simplify the Act, the inclusion of the non-Indian species 
and CITES Appendices in a new Schedule IV makes the Act so ponderous and heavy to be 
almost unusable. And who is the competent authority here to accurately identify all the newly 
listed species, with more to be added? 
 
2. In viewing the listing of species in Schedules I and II, it is apparent that certain experts, 
specializing in their taxa, have gone all out to provide their proposals whereas others are sadly 
depopulate, and thus you have such glaring anomalies in the listings: 
 
Schedule I 
Mammals - 131 
Birds - 112 
Reptiles - 43 
Amphibians - 1 (!) 
Fishes - 26 
Insects - 63 Butterflies, but not a single other insect nor arachnid species! 
Crabs - 3 
Corals - 388 (!!) Hats off to the coral experts, but is there data to prove the rarity of all these 
species? Which raises the question--What are the criteria for listing? 
Mollusks - 10 
Holothurians - 32 
 
Schedule II 
Mammals - 41 
Birds - 864 (!!) And to the bird people. 
Reptiles - 12 
Amphibians - 5 
Insects - 57 Butterflies and 1 Dragonfly, nothing else! 
Mollusks - 14 
Sponges - 10 
 
One could go on and on about the shortcomings of such listings, debate whether it is the rarity of 
the species (most of which for data is non-existent) or the likelihood of trade in the species which 
determines whether they get listed.  
 
The fact remains that much more work is needed to make accurate listings determined by 
species rarity, destruction of their habitats, and susceptibility to over-exploitation. And we have 
the experts to do this. 
 
Surely, the foremost biological institutions in India, including the Government of India's own ZSI, 
BSI, CMFTRI, NCBS, WII, and prominent private institutions like the Bombay Natural History 
Society and the host of great field and lab biologists we have can contribute to a much more 
comprehensive and logical listing for the Amended Act. And it would be very advantageous to 
have an inbuilt system by which species can be added or deleted as scientifically determined. 
 
321

The Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
(Comments from Dr. HS Pabla) 
 
Preliminary: In the draft bill, the term “wild life” has been written as “wildlife” in several 
places. In the original Act, only the term “wild life” has been used. This may be corrected and 
only one expression may be used. 
My para wise comments on the draft are as follows: 
• Short Title and Commencement: No comments 
• Amendment of preamble: The use of the expression “conservation” in the preamble 
is welcome. This word has not been used in the original Act and any of the subsequent 
amendments. This word has very special significance as it implies sustainable use of 
wildlife and encompasses the “protection and management of wildlife”, the other 
expressions used in the preamble. The use of this word indicates a welcome shift in 
the orientation of the Act, although none of the other amendments proposed in the 
draft bill indicate anything like that. If the Act shifts its goal from “protection” of wild 
life to “conservation”, it will be possible to prevent and minimise human -wild life 
conflict. Conservation of dangerous animals is much easier and sustainable than their 
preservation. Therefore, further thinking in this direction is recommended. 
• Amendment of section 2:  Section 2 gives a list of the definitions of important 
expressions used in the Act. All the amendments and additions proposed are 
important and justified. However, the definition of the word “hunting” (sub -rule 16) 
should also be amended. The current definition implies that driving wild animals out 
of somebody’s home or fields also amounts to hunting {clause (b)} and cannot be done 
without the permission of an authorised officer. This is a very absurd situation, 
although nobody seems to have realised this absurdity so far. T he original definition 
of “hunting” was very practical but was later amended for some reason. I think it will 
be much better to revert to the original definition of this word which was as follows: 
(16) “hunting”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes,— 
(a) capturing, killing, poisoning, snaring, and trapping of any wild animal and every attempt 
to do so; 
(b) driving or baiting any wild animal for any of the purposes specified in sub-clause (a) and 
every attempt to do so; 
(c) injuring or destroying or taking any part of the body of any such animal or, in the case of 
wild birds or reptiles, damaging the eggs of such birds or reptiles, or disturbing the eggs or 
nests of such birds or reptiles. 
Although it has not been specified anywh ere in the draft bill, it appears the  six schedules of 
the existing Act are going to be replaced with four, out of which schedule III shall be about 
plants and schedule IV shall be the list of vermin. There are going to be only two schedules of 
wild animal s protected by this Act . Whereas the reduction in the number of schedules is 
welcome, the bill neither indicates the basis  on which the schedules have been devised nor 
322

has shown the actual schedules. Therefore, it is difficult to comment on their logic or 
contents. 
However, the retention of  the schedule IV for vermin does not seem necessary. Species are 
notified as vermin only for a specified time and for a specific area, while the Act is a 
permanent instrument. Vermin shall come and go. A species declared vermin in one state or 
district cannot become a part of the law which is applicable in the whole country. Therefore, 
it will be better to have only three s chedules, presuming the division of all wild animals into 
two schedules is justified. 
• Amendment of Section 4: While specification of qualifications for the post of CWLW 
seems a good idea, it might create problems in the management of IFS cadres in the 
states. For example, if the person due to be promoted as PCCF does not qualify to 
become a CWLW but that is the  only post vacant, he will have to be superseded. 
Therefore, this provision will be difficult to be complied with. Such a provision is more 
important and practical for the selection of the Director Wild Life Preservation  in the 
Central Government which is a selection post and the Central Government can easily 
pick and choose officers for appointment. 
• Insertion of new section 8 A: No comments. 
• Amendment of Section 9: This amendment should be reworded as the proposed 
language is defective. This is because the section refers to hunting only under sections 
11 and 12 while the Act also provides for de facto hunting under section 29 and 35 (6) 
(No person shall destroy, exploit or remove any wild life ---). Therefore, either these 
sections should also be listed here or no sections be mentioned.  For example, the 
section may simply say that “No person shall hunt any wild animal except as provided 
in this Act”. It is also not necessary to mention schedules as only the species 
mentioned in schedule I and II qualify to be called “wild animals” as per the Act. Others 
are just “wildlife”. 
• Amendment of Section 24: No comments. 
• Amendment of Section 25: No comments. 
• Substitution of Section 32: This amendment is welcome but the provision should also 
be applicable to the waterways upstream of a sanctuary. Nearly a hundred gharials in 
the National Chambal Sanctuary were lost to gout caused by the release of  chemical 
pollutants by the upstream industries in 2007 or 2008. 
• Insertion of new Sections 33C and 33D: These insertions seem unnecessary, although 
harmless. Section 33B already provides for the constitution of advisory committees 
for sanctuaries and there does not seem to be any material difference between the 
two. Similarly, section 38 X already provides for the constitution of foundations in tiger 
reserves. Instead of bringing in new sections and making the Act cumbersome to read 
and interpret, the existing sections can perhaps be tweaked a little to meet the 
objectives of these new insertions. 
• Amendment of Section 34: This is an unnecessary amendment and will lead to public 
inconvenience and resentment. It is well known that poaching is rarely done with 
323

licensed weapons. Therefore, inconveniencing law-abiding citizens will not give us any 
conservation benefits. 
• Amendment of Section 35: This is a faulty amendment. Bringing in section 18 A here 
means only duplication  of what has already been provided in this section. Only 
inserting sections 33 C and 33 D after 33 A would have been enough. 
• Amendment of Section 38: No comment, except that the “conservation reserve” is a 
useless PA category as it neither provides for any  special protection to the habitat 
(animals are protected everywhere) nor helps to improve local stakes in conservation 
by allowing special benefits to local people. Same goes for community reserves. 
• Amendment of Section 38 L: No comments. 
• Amendment of Sec tion 39: No comment on the proposed amendment. However, I 
strongly feel that this sections should be completely recast to allow ownership of wild 
animals by the public in order to invite private investments in conservation and bring 
additional land under wildlife management. 
• Amendment of Section 40: No comments. 
• Amendment of Section 40 A: No comments. 
• Amendment of Section 41: No comments. 
• Insertion of Section 42 A: No comments. 
• Amendment of Section 43: No comments. 
• Amendment of section 48: No comments. 
• Amendment of Section 49A:  No comments except that this section (along with 
sections 49B and 49C) is unnecessary. These sections (Chapter VA) prohibit trade in 
animals belonging to schedule I and part II of schedule II . As section 40 -2A already 
provides that ownership of these species cannot be transferred except by way of 
inheritance, where is the question of trade then? I think the entire chapter should be 
deleted. 
• Insertion of Chapter VB:  This is a long overdue amendment but could have been 
better done in a different way. The amendment could have simply said that “All import 
and export (international trade) of wildlife or its products and derivatives (these words 
shall need to be defined in section 2) shall be in accordance with the  provisions of 
CITES and the rules that may be made in this regard”. This would be more convenient 
in case amendments are frequently required, as is happening in the case of  other 
sections of the Act (WLPA is perhaps the most frequently amended Act in the country). 
• Amendment of Section 51: No comments. 
• Amendment of Section 62:  As mentioned before, t here is no need to create a 
schedule for listing locally and temporarily declared vermin. Schedule IV is 
unnecessary. 
• Amendment of Schedules:  No comments, except that the basis of classification of 
animals into the two schedules should be mentioned here  and the schedules should 
be shared with the states and the public before finalisation . In the original Act 
(enacted in 1972) schedules were given titles (Big game, Special Game, Small Game) 
which were deleted later.  Something on those  lines can be done for the new 
schedules. 
324

Additional Suggestions 
Apart from the amendments proposed in the draft bill, some even more urgent amendments 
are required to deal with growing human-wildlife conflict. Some of these are as follows: 
• Amendment of Section 11: The provisos below sub -section (b) which  seriously 
compromise the powers of the CWLW  in dealing with man -eaters and other 
authorised officers must be deleted. A lot of human li ves are lost in trying to comply 
with this provision. 
• Amendment of Section 12: The definition of scientific management (ban on killing in 
the name of management)  given in this section is absolutely unscientific and should 
be either modified or deleted. There are situations  when killing of certain number of 
animals is unavoidable because translocation is impractical for various reasons (E.g. 
no alternative habitat available, mass capture is technically difficult and expensive, 
animals tend to come back, maintenance of captured animals is expensive  and 
unaffordable etc.). Therefore, the ban on killing must be deleted. Secondly, this 
section also contradicts section 2 9 and 35 (6) which provide for allowing the 
destruction and exploitation of wild life in PAs in the name of  “improvement and 
better management of wild life therein”. It seems we are moving in circles, without 
going anywhere. Therefore, these provisions should be rationalized and harmonized. 
In fact I have provided a complete draft of the relevant sections of the Act , required to deal 
with the growing menace of human-wildlife conflict, in my new book entitled “Besides Loving 
the Beasts (Wildlife Conservation in India-4)”. The approach in this draft is to go back to the 
original WLPA as it was  enacted in 1972, as far as possible, with some additional insights 
resulting from newer thinking on conservation (e.g. community benefits from wildlife). A copy 
of that draft is attached herewith in the hope that some of those ideas may find place in the 
official draft. 
 
Dr. HS Pabla IFS (Retd.) 
Former CWLW Madhya Pradesh. 
Mail: pablahsifs@gmail.com 
Phone: 9425007850 
October 10, 2021. 
  
325

An extract from the book “Besides Loving the Beasts (Wildlife Conservation in India-4)” by HS Pabla 
APPENDIX-3 
Wildlife Law for the Future 
 
 
In Chapter 1, we have proposed the revamping of WLPA as a part of the proposed HWC management 
strategy for the country. The outline of the revised law is briefly discussed there. Presented in the 
following pages is the actual draft of the amended sections and chapters in accordance with the need 
discussed there. 
The draft shows how the sections mentioned here need to read (post amendment) in order to 
facilitate the effective implementation of this strategy. Other sections which do not need any 
modification have not been mentioned. 
As mentioned there, b y and large, we need to bring back the original character of the Act, as it was 
passed by the parliament in 1972. That would provide all the freedom to the states to deal with conflict 
situations as they emerge  from time to time. However, the draft also contains some new elements 
proposed in the light of the need to make it obligatory for the State to prevent and mitigate HWC and 
also to make the communities the owners of any benefits that HWC management strateg y may 
produce from time to time ( Sections 9 and 10). This vision did not exist in WLPA when it was 
promulgated in 1972, nor it does today. In view of this new orientation of the proposed law, the title 
of Chapter III itself has been changed. Another novel feature of the proposed draft is its linkage with 
CITES ( Section 43 -A). Although this feature is not directly linked to HWC management, export of 
trophies may require dealing with CITES authorities if hunting is ever accepted as the principal HWC 
management tool. 
 
The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 
 
Chapter I 
Preliminary 
Section 2. Definitions. — 
(16) “hunting”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes,— 
(a) capturing, killing, poisoning, snaring, and trapping of any wild animal and every attempt to do so; 
(b) driving or baiting any wild animal for any of the purposes specified in sub -clause (a) and every 
attempt to do so; 
(c) injuring or destroying or taking any part of the body of any such animal or, in the case of wild birds 
or reptiles, damaging the eggs of such birds or reptiles, or disturbing the eggs or nests of such birds or 
reptiles. 
Chapter III 
Management of Human-Wildlife Conflict 
326

Section 9. Obligation to manage human-wildlife conflict   
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act or any other law, it is mandatory for the 
State Government to take steps as deemed necessary from time to time to control danger caused by 
wild animals to human life and property while ensuring the long-term survival of the species causing, 
or likely to cause, such danger. 
Section 10. Hunting of wild animals 
(1) No person shall hunt any wild animal specified in Schedules I, II, III , and IV except as 
provided in this Act and in accordance with the rules that may be made in this regard. 
(2) The first charge on any benefits accruing from the hunting of wild animals shall be of 
the local communities. 
Section 11. Hunting of dangerous or disabled wild animals. 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the 
Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer may, by an order in writing, permit any 
person to hunt wild animals or cause such animals to be hunted in any manner deemed 
fit, if he is satisfied that any wild animal or a group of wild animals 
(a) has become dangerous to human life, buildings, crops, infrastructure , or any other 
property; or 
(b) is so disabled or diseased as to be beyond recovery. 
(2) The killing, driving, or wounding in good faith of any wild animal in defence of a person 
or property, including standing crops, except by snaring, trapping, food explosives, 
poisoning, or electrocution, shall not be an offence. 
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall exonerate any person who, when such 
defence becomes necessary, was committing any act in contravention of any provision 
of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 
(3) Any wild animal killed or wounded in accordance with sub -section (2) shall be 
Government property. 
Section 12. Hunting of wild animals for special purposes 
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, it shall be lawful for the Chief Wild 
Life Warden, to grant a permit, to a person, institution, community-based organisation, or any 
other entity, on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, and subject to such conditions as 
may be specified therein, to hunt any wild animal or animals specified in such permit, for the 
purpose of:- 
(a) education; 
(b) research; 
(c) collection of specimens for recognised zoos, museums, and similar institutions; 
(d) collection or preparation of snake-venom for the manufacture of life-saving drugs; and 
(e) population management. 
Section 13: Refusal, suspension, or cancellation of a hunting licence 
The Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer may, subject to any general or special 
orders of the State Government, for good and sufficient reason, to be recorded in writing, 
refuse to grant a licence or suspend or cancel any permit granted under this Chapter. 
Provided that no such refusal, suspension, or cancellation shall be made except after giving 
the holder of the licence a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
Section 14: Appeal from an order under Section 13  
327

(1) An appeal from an order refusing to grant a licence, or an order suspending or cancelling 
a licence under Section 13, shall lie,— 
(a) if the order is made by the authorised officer, to the Chief Wild Life Warden, or 
(b) if the order is made by the Chief Wild Life Warden, to the State Government. 
(2) In the case of an order passed in appeal by the Chief Wild Life Warden under sub-section 
(1), a second appeal shall lie to the State Government. 
(3) Subject as aforesaid, every order passed in appeal under this section shall be final. 
(4) No appeal shall be entertained unless it is preferred within fifteen days from the date of 
the communication to the applicant of the order appealed against: 
Provided that the appellate authority may admit any appeal after the expiry of the period 
aforesaid, if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal 
in time. 
Section 15. Hunting of young and females of wild animals 
No person shall, unless specially authorised by a licence, hunt the young of any wild animal, 
other than vermin, or any female of such animal, or any deer with antlers in velvet. 
Section 16. Declaration of closed time 
(1)  The State Government may, by notification, declare the whole year or any part thereof, 
to be a closed time throughout the State, or any part thereof, for such wild animal as may 
be specified in the notification and no hunting permits under Section 12 shall be issued 
during the said period, in the area specified in the notification. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to vermin unless otherwise specified by 
the State Government in this behalf. 
 
Section 17. Restrictions on hunting 
(1)  No person shall, for the purpose of sub-section (e) of Section 12,— 
(a) hunt any wild animal, from or by means of, a wheeled or a mechanically propelled vehicle 
on water or land, or by aircraft; 
(b) use an aircraft, motor vehicle , or launch for the purpose of driving or stampeding any 
wild animal; 
(c) hunt any wild animal with chemicals, explosives, nets, pitfalls, poisons, poisoned -
weapons, snares, or traps, except in so far as they relate to the capture of wild animals 
under a Wild Animal Trapping Licence; 
(d) hunt any wild animal other than with a rifle, unless specially authorised by the licence to 
hunt with a shot-gun using single-slug bullets; 
(e) for the purpose of hunting, set fire to any vegetation; 
(f) use any artificial light for the purpose of hunting, except when specially authorised to do 
so under a licence in the case of carnivora over a kill; 
(g) hunt any wild animal during the hours of night, that is to say, between sunset and sunrise, 
except when specially authorised to do so under a licence in the case of carnivora over a 
kill; 
(h) hunt any wild animal on a salt -lick or water hole or other drinking place or on path or 
approach to the same, except sandgrouse and water-birds; 
(i) hunt any wild animal on any land not owned by Government, without the consent of the 
owner or his agent or the lawful occupier of such land; 
(j) hunt any wild animal during the closed time referred to in Section 16; 
(k) hunt, with the help of dogs, any wild animal except waterbird, chakor, partridge, or quail. 
328

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to vermin or if specially exempted in the 
case of other species for reasons to be recorded in writing. 
 
Section 29. Hunting in a sanctuary 
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, no licence to hunt any wild animals under 
Section 12 shall be issued in a sanctuary without the previous approval of the State Government. 
Further, no licence for the purposes of sub-sections (d) and sub-section (e) of Section 12 shall be issued 
and no permission for the diversion or destruction of wildlife habitat in a sanctuary shall be granted 
for any purpose except in consultation with the State Board for Wild Life. 
Section 35 (6). Hunting in a national park (other sub-sections are not related to hunting) 
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, no licence to hunt any wild animals under 
Section 12 shall be issued in a national park without the previous appro val of the State Government. 
Further, no licence for the purposes of sub-section (d) and sub-section (e) of Section 12 shall be issued 
and no permission for the diversion or destruction of wildlife habitat in a national park shall be granted 
for any purpose except in consultation with the National Board for Wild Life. 
Section 39. Wild animals, etc. to be Government property 
(1) Every- 
(a) wild animal, other than vermin, which is hunted under Section 11 or bred or kept in captiv-
ity, or hunted in contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule or order made 
thereunder, or found dead, or killed by mistake; and 
(b) animal article, trophy or uncured trophy or meat derived from any wild animal referred to 
in clause (a) in respect of which any offence against this Act or any rule or order made 
thereunder has been committed; 
(c) ivory imported into India and an article made from such ivory in respec t of which any 
offence against this Act or any rule or order made thereunder has been committed; 
shall be the property of the State Government, and, where such animal is hunted in a 
sanctuary or National Park declared by the Central Government, such animal  or any article, 
trophy, uncured trophy , or meat derived from such animal shall be the property of Central 
Government. 
(2) Any person who obtains, by any means, the posses sion of Government property, shall, 
within forty-eight hours of obtaining such possession, make a report as to the obtaining 
of such possession to the nearest police station or authorized officer and shall, if so 
required, hand over such property to the office in charge of such police station or such 
authorised officer, as the case may be. 
(3) No person shall, without the previous permission in writing of the Chief Wild Life Warden 
or the authorised officer- 
(a) acquire or keep in his possession, custody or control, or 
(b) transfer to any person, whether by way of gift, sale or otherwise, or 
(c) destroy or damage such Government property. 
 
Section 40. Declarations 
(1) Every person having at the commencement of this Act the control, custody, or possession 
of any captive animal specified in Schedule 1 or Part II of Schedule II,  or animal article, 
trophy, or uncured trophy  derived from such animal or salted or dried skins of such 
animal or the musk of a musk deer or the horn of a rhinoceros, shall, within thirty days 
from the commencement of this Act, declare to the Chief Wild Li fe Warden or the 
329

authorised officer the number and description of the animal, or article of the fore going 
description under his control, custody, or possession and the place where such animal or 
article is kept. 
(2) No person shall, after the commencement of  this Act, acquire, receive, keep in his 
control, custody or possession, sell, offer for sale, or otherwise transfer or transport any 
animal specified in Schedule 1 or Part II of Schedule II, or any uncured trophy or meat 
derived from such animal, or the s alted or dried skins of such animal or the musk of a 
musk deer or the horn of a rhinoceros, except with the previous permission in writing of 
the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer. 
(3) Nothing in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall apply to a recognised zoo subject to the 
provisions of Section 38I or to a public museum. 
(4) The State Government may, by notification, require any person to declare to the Chief 
Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer any animal or animal article or trophy (othe r 
than the musk of a musk deer or the horn of a rhinoceros), or salted or dried skins derived 
from an animal specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II in his control, custody , or 
possession in such form, in such manner, and within such time, as may be prescribed. 
Section 40-A. To be omitted 
Section 43. Regulation of transfer of animals etc. 
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), sub-section (3), and sub-section (4), a person 
(other than a dealer) who does not possess a certificate of ownership shall not— 
(a) sell or offer for sale or transfer whether by way of sale, gift, or otherwise, any wild animal 
specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II  or any captive animal belonging to that 
category or any animal article, trophy, uncured trophy or meat derived therefrom; 
(b) make animal articles containing part or whole of such animal; 
(c) put under a process of taxidermy an uncured trophy of such animal, etc. except with the 
previous permission in writing of the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer. 
(2) Where a person transfers or transports from the State in which he resides to another 
State or acquires by transfer from outside the State any such anim al, animal article, 
trophy, or uncured trophy as is referred to in sub-section (1) in respect of which he has a 
certificate of ownership, he shall, within thirty days of the transfer or transport, report 
the transfer, or transport to the Chief Wild Life Wa rden or the authorised officer within 
whose jurisdiction the transfer, or transport is effected. 
(3) No person who does not possess a certificate of ownership shall transfer or transport 
from one State to another State or acquire by transfer from outside the State any such 
animal, animal article, trophy, or uncured trophy as is referred to in sub-section (1) except 
with the previous permission in writing of the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised 
officer within whose jurisdiction the transfer or transport is to be effected. 
(4) Before granting any permission under sub -section (1) or sub -section (3), the Chief Wild 
Life Warden or the authorised officer shall satisfy himself that the animal or article 
referred to therein has been lawfully acquired. 
(5) While permitting the transfer or transport of any animal, animal article, trophy , or 
uncured trophy, as is referred to in sub -section (1), the Chief Wild Life Warden or the 
authorised officer— 
(a) shall issue a certificate of ownership after such inquiry as he may deem fit; 
(b) shall, where the certificate of ownership existed in the name of the previous owner, issue 
a fresh certificate of ownership in the name of the person to whom the transfer has been 
effected; 
(c) may affix an identification mark on any such animal, animal article, trophy , or uncured 
trophy. 
(6) Nothing in this section shall apply— 
330

(a) to animal articles or trophies made out of feathers of peacocks; 
(b) to any transaction entered into by a public museum or recognised zoo with any other 
public museum or zoo. 
Section 43-A. Import and export of specimens of wildlife specimens: - 
(1) For the purposes of this section, the word s 'species' and  'specimen' carry the same 
meaning as in the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora 
and Fauna (CITES) of the United Nations. 
(2) From the day of commencement of this Act, no person shall import, export, re-export, or 
introduce from sea any specimens of a species of wild animals or wild plants, or a species 
included in any of the Appendices of CITES, except in accordance with the provisions of 
CITES as applicable to India and the rules that may be made in this behalf. 
(3) Quarantine certificate, issued by the appropriate authority of the country of export shall 
be produced for each imported wild animal or wild plant, upon arrival at customs port of 
entry. 
Chapter VA. (Section 49 -A to Section 49 -C).Prohibition Of Trade Or Commerce In Trophies, 
Animal Articles, Etc., Derived From Certain Animals. 
(To be omitted) 
Section 61. Power to alter entries in Schedules.— 
(1) The State Government may, if it is of opinion that it is expedient so to do, by notification, add or 
delete any entry to or from any Schedule or transfer any entry from one Part of a Schedule to another 
Part of the same Schedule or from one Schedule to another. 
(2) On the issue of a notification under sub-section (1) the relevant Schedule shall be deemed to be 
altered accordingly, provided that every such alteration shall be without prejudice to anything done 
or omitted to be done before such alteration. 
Section 62. Declaration of certain wild animals to be vermin.— 
The State Government may, by notification, declare any wild animal other than those specified in 
Schedule I and Part II of Schedule II to be vermin for any area and for such period as may be specified 
therein and so long as such notification is in force, such wild animal shall be deemed to have been 
included in Schedule V. 
331

CHAPTER 2 
The Wild Life (Protection) Act 1972 
Faulty Wiring 
 
The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (WLPA) was enacted to usher in a comprehensive and uniform 
regulation regime for hunting and trade in wild animals, trophies etc.  apart from providing protection 
to wildlife habitats in the country. Until then, the subject of wildlife was governed under a plethora of 
pre-independence instruments, including those promulgated by the feudal states. None of these dealt 
with the subject holistically. Most of them provided for regulation of hunting only, without giving any 
thought to the regulation of trade and protection of wildlife habitats. 
The Madras Elephants Preservation Act 1873 was perhaps the first organised attempt in colonial 
India to preserve wild life. The Elephants Preservation Act 1879 became applicable to most of British 
India as more and more states adopted it. Wild Birds Protection Act, 1887 enabled the Government to 
frame rules prohibiting the possession or sale of specified wild birds killed or taken during the breeding 
season. The Wild Birds and Animals Protection Act, 1912 , which was adopted and amended by most 
states later on, provided for nothing more than a closed season for hunting, primarily for a few game 
birds and animals. There were several other local laws such as The Mysore Game and Fish Preservation 
Regulations, 1901, The Madhya Pradesh Game Act, 1935, The Indore Game Act, 1907 etc. Some states 
also used IFA to frame hunting rules, such as the Madhya Pradesh (Hunting, Fishing, Poisoning Water 
and Setting Traps or Snares in Reserved or Protected Forests) Rules, 1963. I am not yet sure under what 
law what is now Kanha National Park was made the Banjar Valley Sanctuary in 1933. But MP passed 
its own Madhya Pradesh National Parks Act in 1955. Kanha, Bandhavgarh and Madhav national parks 
were created under this law . Corbett National Park (formerly Hailey's National Park) was created in 
1936 under The United Provinces National Parks Act, 1935. 
Rather than amending IFA to provide for wildlife conservation, we decided to promulgate a new law 
on the subject. WLPA, passed by the parliament on the request of several states (as wildlife was a state 
subject then), consolidated all the relevant laws and rules under one umbrella law. For the first time, it 
provided for a licensing system for regulating trade and transit of wildlife products, without which the 
regulation of hunting would have been of no use.  In one stroke, it amended all existing laws by 
providing that anything contained in any other legislation related to wildlife shall stand repealed (section 
66) with the passage of  this law. It also provided a framework for creating sanctuaries and national 
parks, as well as for the constitution of wild life advisory boards in all states. The law seemed perfect 
in all aspects.  It provided for almost all aspects of modern wildlife conservation, except perhaps  for 
captive breeding and game farming. With the almost simultaneous advent of the Project Tiger in 1973, 
the country seemed to have entered the golden period of conservation. 
Evolution of WLPA Since 1972 
Until 1976, the Parliament did not have the power to make laws regarding 'wildlife' unless requested 
by the legislatures of tw o or more states, as it was a state subject. Mrs. Indira Gandhi virtually arm -
twisted the states ruled by her party to pass resolutions to request a central law on wildlife in 1972 
(Ranjitsinh 2017). 'Forests' and 'Protection of wild animals and birds' became a concurrent subject with 
the 42nd amendment of the constitution in 1976, giving the Centre power to make laws on this subject. 
332

This empowered the Central Government to amend WLPA as and when required and it has been doing 
so merrily ever since. Although the constitution requires that such legislation should be in consultation 
with the states, such consultations, if any at all, have been only perfunctory. The states were either not 
informed at all or were given too little time to respond  to amendment proposals. They generally came 
to know of the amendments only after they had become a fact of life. 
WLPA is perhaps one of the most frequently amended law s of the country as shown by the list of 
amendments given below. 
• The Wild Life (Protection) (Amendment) Act 1982 (23 of 1982). 
• The Wild Life (Protection) (Amendment) Act 1986 (28 of 1986). 
• The Wild Life (Protection) (Amendment) Act 1991 (44 of 1991). 
• The Wild Life (Protection) (Amendment) Act 1993 (26 of 1993). 
• The Wild Life (Protection) (Amendment) Act 2002 (16 of 2003). 
• The Wild Life (Protection) (Amendment) Act 2006 (39 of 2006). 
Another amendment is already in the works and has been pending  with the parliament since 2013. 
The primary objectives of all the amendments have been: 
• To strengthen the protectionist character of the law; 
• To concentrate all decision making powers in the Centre; and 
• To create new statutory authorities in Delhi. 
The original Act reflected the belief that wildlife was depleting and that controls on its harvesting 
and trade w ere necessary to ensure its survival  and sustainable utilisation . However, over time, we 
started feeling that, rather than sustainable utilisation, no -utilisation is a better tool to save wildlife. 
Therefore, we have outlawed any form of utilisation and trade in wildlife or its products and derivatives. 
Amendments have also been aimed at concentrating more and more powers in the Central Government 
and central institutions. The states now need the permission of the Centre and its agencies for virtually 
every substantive action. Tiger reserves can be notified only after prior permission from NTCA. States 
need the central nod for changing the boundaries of PAs . Central permission is required to capture 
schedule-I animals except when they become d angerous to human life. Central permission is also 
needed to capture or kill animal s of any schedule  in a national park or alter wildlife habitat in a NP . 
Also to bring animals to or take out of zoos. Management plans and tourism plans of tiger reserves are 
also approved by NTCA. These .permissions are required either from the ministry or from the National 
Board for Wildlife (NBWL) or from NTCA or from the Central Zoo Authority (CZA) , often from all 
of them. These organisations did not exist when the law was first made. Therefore, there was no question 
of permissions back then. 
 In fact, the creation of NTCA has almost completely destroyed the original power structure of the 
Act. It has reduced the Director of Wild Life Preservation (DWP) in the country to be only a titular head 
of conservation, and the Chief Wild Life Warden to the status of a mere post office.  These were the 
only two statutory authorities in the original Act. 
The goal of the Act is given in its opening statement, which says that it is "An Act to provide for the 
protection of  wild animals, birds and plants ––– with a view to ensuring the ecological and 
environmental security of the country".  'Protection' of wild animals is a rather complex subject as 
animals interact with human beings as well as among themselves in the form of competition, conflict, 
predation etc. Too many animals can become a serious problem for local people. Too many animals can 
destroy their own habitat by overuse . Overpopulation of one species can spell doom for some other 
species. Therefore, sometimes animals need to be killed or captured for their own sake as well as for 
333

harmonious human-wildlife relations. But successive  amendments of the Act have made their killing 
and capture more and more difficult.  Perhaps our bureaucrats and law makers have taken the world 
'protection' too literally. 
The real goal of every law has to be the enhancement of human well-being. Same applies to this Act. 
However, perhaps because  this goal has not been stated in the Act , the progressive deletion or 
denaturing of the provisions which could have helped in preventing  human suffering caused by wild 
animals, and possibly also generate some benefits from them, has gone unnoticed. As a result, success 
in conservation becomes a misfortune for local people as wildlife depredations go up. In fact, we have 
never felt the need to devise new ways of  enhancing human welfare through wildlife . Not even for 
reducing pain. Therefore, innovation in conservation in India has been conspicuously absent. 
The continuous stream of amendments indicates that the country is still groping around for a perfect 
law. Despite the repeated attempts to change the character of the original Act, bits and pieces of original 
provisions have escaped modification or deletion perhaps through oversight. This has resulted in serious 
contradictions and confusion within the Act.  Several such discrepancies are discussed in the next 
section. 
Internal Contradictions and Inconsistencies of the Act 
The goal of the Act, as mentioned before, appears to be "the ecological and environmental security 
of the country" to be achieved through "the protection of wild animals, birds and plants". Although the 
1972 version of the Act did not state this goal, it eminently facilitated its achievement as wildlife showed 
all round recovery in the country for a few years. However, things started slipping as the Act was 
amended again and again in the succeeding years. At present, the goal is clear but the tools provided in 
the original Act to achieve it have been blunted through unthinking amendments . Apart from  the 
questions about the long -term sustainability of its outcomes, the law does not seem to be clear about 
how to go about achieving its own declared objectives  i.e. protection of wild animals . The prin cipal 
structural drawback of the  current law seems to be that successive amendments have been conceived 
without taking a holistic view of the statute. Several provisions have been inserted or deleted without 
organically linking them with the existing eleme nts. This has often resulted in either making the 
amendments redundant or in creating conflict with other provisions. 
The Act, apart from providing for penalties for violations of the Act, mainly provides for the 
following: 
• Creation of certain statutory authorities to discharge the functions allocated to each. 
• Constitution and management of protected areas, such as national parks, wildlife sanctuaries, 
community reserves, conservation reserves. Some PAs can even be tiger reserves. 
• Regulation of hunting, trade, possession and trade of wild animals, their products and derivatives. 
• Rule-making powers of the Centre and States to facilitate the implementation of the Act. 
Various superfluous or contradictory provisions related to these features of the Act are disc ussed 
and illustrated below: 
1. Statutory Authorities 
The Act now provides for the creation of several statutory authorities and institutions, namely: 
• National Board for Wild Life (NBWL); 
• State Boards for Wild Life (SBWL); 
334

• Director of Wild Life Preservation at the centre; 
• Chief Wild Life Wardens (CWLW), for each state; 
• Central Zoo Authority (CZA); 
• National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA); and, 
• Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB). 
While the plethora of authorities and institutions created by the Act is itself a recipe for confusion, 
the crosscutting and overlapping powers and jurisdictions of some of th em have led to utter chaos . 
Sample the following:  
1.1. The National and State Wild Life Boards 
NBWL had existed at the Centre , without any statutory status , for long. It was given a statutory 
status through an amendment to the Act in 1991.  The provision for SBWLs was  in the Act since 
inception, albeit under a slightly different name i.e. the State Wildl ife Advisory Boards. Both these 
bodies are meant to advise the Centre and the States, at their respective levels, regarding the formulation 
of conservation policies and the declaration and management of protected areas, among other things.  
The intention behind the dropping of the word 'advisory' from the names of the state boards is not clear 
and may have been done with a view to make them look more significant. The existence of two advisory 
bodies, albeit at different levels, is both wasteful as well as a recipe for conflict between the Centre and 
the States. There is hardly any scope for policy setting at the state level as far as wildlife conservation 
is concerned, as the entire country is governed by the central laws and policies. The States cannot make 
any policy changes related to hunting, trade or transactions in wildlife products as the law does not 
allow such activities. Although PAs can be created by the States, with or without the recommendations 
of the State Boards, but any changes in their bounda ries can be done only with the concurrence of the 
NBWL {sec 26-A (3) and 35 (5)}. The state proposals on the subject are always supported by the 
recommendations of the SBWL, as NBWL always wants that. But views of the SBWL hardly ever carry 
any weight with the NBWL. If the recommendations of the SBWL are inconvenient,  they are simply 
overlooked by the NBWL. 
Similarly, matters related to developments that can result in the destruction of habitat in sanctuaries 
also end up at the doors of the NBWL, in view of Supreme Court orders dated 09.05.2002 in I.A. No. 
18 in WP No. 337/1995. It says that, " –– no permission under Section 29 of the Wildlife (Protection) 
Act, 1972 should be granted without getting approval of the Standing Committee of Indian  Board for 
Wildlife –––." The law requires consultation with the NBWL only in the case of national  parks {sec. 
35 (6)}. In this case as well, the views of the NBWL take precedence over those of the SBWL. This 
shows the SBWL as a useless body and does not serve any purpose for conservation. 
Moreover, keeping the Prime Minister (PM) and the Chief Ministers (CM) as the Chairpersons of 
the respective boards also serves no useful purpose. While it is extremely difficult for these dignitaries 
to spare adequate ti me for the meetings, the discussions in these meetings are usually constrained by 
their presence. In fact, the boards did not meet for years until the Supreme Court made it mandatory 
that all development projects within 10 km from any PA  (called 'ecosensitive zones') be examined by 
the National Board, and consequentially, by the state boards  (order dated 4.12.2006, Writ Petition no 
460/2004, Goa Foundation Vs. UoI and Ors.). Now the states have also been forced to constitute, with 
virtually the same composition as the SBWL “Steering Committees” for tiger conservation (section 38-
U), under the CM’s chairmanship. These committees, of course, will rarely hold a meeting, if any. 
Incidentally, the recommendations of state boards  are always based on what the CM ag rees or 
disagrees with. A case in point is the proposal to construct a railway line passing along the northern 
335

flank of Panna Tiger Reserve. While every member of the board opposed the proposal, the matter was 
recommended only because the CM wanted it supported. Some members agreed to it because they knew 
that the recommendation had no meaning.  
I was privy to several cases of NBWL ignoring the recommendations of the SBWL completely. The 
Karera Wildlife Sanctuary in Madhya Pradesh (MP) was created, almost entirely in private croplands, 
to preserve the endangered great Indian bustard (GIB). Over time, the species disappeared from the area 
but the restrictions on the people remained. The recommendations of the Madhya Pradesh SBWL in 
favour of denotification of the sanctuary, were ignored by the NBWL. Later on, NBWL agreed to allow 
the denotification on the co ndition that the forest area equal to the area of the denotified sanctuary 
should be added to some other sanctuary of the state. Similarly, the proposal for widening the national 
highway no. 7 along the boundary of the Pench Wildlife Sanctuary, was recommended by the SBWL 
with certain safeguards for providing animal crossings of international standards, but the 
recommendation was summarily rejected by the standing committee of the NBWL. 
Obviously, the SBWLs are considered inferior to the NBWL, which does not go well with our federal 
structure of the country. If the recommendations of a body, chaired by the CM himself, does not carry 
any weight even with an advisory body of the Centre, why have such a body? 
1.2. Director Wild Life Preservation, Chief Wild Life Warden, and the National Tiger 
Conservation Authority 
In the original scheme of the Act, DWP and CWLW were the chief functionaries of th e law at the 
Centre and the States, respectively. However, the powers and importance of these two authorities have 
now been seriously eroded, particularly with the creation of the NTCA in 2006. Now they are only the 
titular heads of their dom ains. In fact, the law never gave any specific role to DWP in the first place. 
Rightly so, because the real conservation action, like notification and control of PAs, controlling 
offences, issuing permits and licenses etc. lies with the states and their CWLWs. All important functions 
of the CWLWs have now been taken over by the NTCA. While the law does not say a single word on 
the generic powers of DWP and CWLW  in conservation, NTCA has been given the power to "issue 
directions to any person, officer or authority for the protection of tiger, and such person, officer or 
authority shall be bound to comply with the directions" [section 38-O (2)]. This means non-compliance 
with NTCA guidelines is a punishable offence. DWP has virtually no jurisdiction over issues related to 
tiger conservation, the species that rules the wilds, minds and sensibilities of India. The NTCA, which 
theoretically is an organ of the Ministry, hogs most of the conservation budget, and distributes it to the 
tiger reserves, thereby earning tremendous clout with the states. The ministry, i.e. the DWP, is left to 
distribute grants only to minor PAs. 
NTCA’s powers (section 38 -O), in the name of tiger conservation, are all encompassing, ranging 
from approving the management plans (now called tiger conservation plans) for tiger reserves, laying 
down “normative standards and guidelines” on tourism, down to approving research projects on tiger. 
It is also mandated to ensure that no land is diverted for ‘ecologically unsustainable uses’ anywhere in 
India. The tiger conservation plans, which need approval from the NTCA, must also ensure that the 
‘forestry operations of regular forest divisions  are not incompatible with the needs of tiger 
conservation’. NTCA often insists on deciding the posting of officers in tiger reserves as well. 
These powers of NTCA regarding the control of PAs are in serious conflict with the role of the 
CWLW who is still the legal authority that should decide what can happen in protected areas (section 
33). The failed attempts of the NTCA to ‘phase out’ tourism from protected areas, overriding the 
objections of the states, is a pointer to the shape of things to come. For example, in August 2010, the 
336

CWLW MP approved a scheme to permit small groups of tourists to join selected pa trolling parties in 
protected areas, in order to give them a unique wilderness experience. The NTCA immediately issued 
an advisory to all states not to entertain such thoughts. 
The interference of NTCA in state mattes is increasing day by day. It first advised the states to phase 
out wildlife tourism from core areas of tiger reserves into buffer zones. The states did not stop tourism 
in the core zones of tiger reserves but spread it over to buffer zones also. Strangely, it has now issued 
an advisory not to improve the wildlife habitat in buffer zones (for improving tourism) as it may lead 
to increased human -wildlife conflict. Recently, NTCA directed the CWLWs to obtain its permission 
before exercising their statutory power (under section 11) to destroy any problem tiger. Knowing fully 
well that no hunting skills are left in the forest departments, due to the long ban on all hunting, NTCA 
has now ordered that private hunters should not be used to eliminate or capture problem tigers, risking 
the lives of foresters. I hope the states will refuse to obey such mad orders. If not, NTCA should be held 
responsible for any human deaths or injuries resulting from delays in eliminating man-eating tigers (this 
title is also banned by NTCA) due to inept handling. 
Most CWLW s seriously resent such encroachment of their domain by a central body, but are 
reluctant to take a firm stand in view of the fact that virtually all the funds for conservation come from 
the Centre. They also do not want to be seen as a bickering lot. As a  result of the Centre usurping all 
the powers of the states, the ownership of conservation programmes by the states is progressively going 
down. For example, MP government has not agreed, to convert Ratapani sanctuary into a tiger reserve, 
despite NTCA's r epeated directives for over a decade, because the state is fed up with NTCA's 
interference in other tiger reserves of the state.  This does not bode well for the future of conservation 
in the country. 
1.3. NTCA and NBWL 
The NTCA and the NBWL are composed of officials and non-officials, many being the same 
or from similar professions. NBWL was the top policy making and consultative body in the country 
since 2003 (section 5-C) until the birth of NTCA. Now all decisions which have any significant impact 
on the ground are taken by the NTCA while the NBWL has been reduced to be a ritualistic assembly 
whose meetings are almost unnecessary. Even the development projects which need NBWL approval, 
either as per law [section  and 35 (6)] or by the order s of the Supreme C ourt, need the ‘advice’ of the 
NTCA [section 38-O (1) (g)]. NTCA's advice is binding on every "person, officer or authority"  {sec. 
38-O (2)}. Thus, a body headed by the Prime Minister has been virtually subordinated to a body headed 
by one of his own ministers! 
In fact, section 3 8-O (1) (g) has another very sinister implication for conservation of wildlife. 
According to section 29 and 35 (6), no one can be permitted to "destroy or damage" the wildlife habitat 
within a PA unless it is "necessary for the improvement and better management of wildlife therein". 
Any clearance under these sections, if any, has to be in consultation with the NBWL in the case of a 
national park and SBWL in the case of a sanctuary. However, section 38-O (1) (g) provides that "a tiger 
reserve –––" can now be " ––– diverted for ecologically unsustainable uses  ––– in public interest ––– 
with the approval of the National Board for Wild Life and on the advice of the Tiger Conservation 
Authority". Thus, a sanctuary or national park forming the core of a tiger reserve can now be "diverted" 
even if it is not "necessary for the improvement and better management of wildlife therein", if the 
authorities or judges read section 38 -O (1) (g) instead of  29 or 35 (6)! Incidentally, tiger reserves are 
the most important sanctuaries of India. 
337

Recently, the Central Empowered Committee (CEC) of the Supreme Court recommended against 
the construction of the controversial Ken-Betwa river linking project, in Panna Tiger Reserve, primarily 
on the ground that there was no provision to "destroy, damage or divert the habitat ––– except for the 
improvement and better management of wild life"  in a national park under section 35 (6). If the 
government advocates, arguing in favour of the project, had read section 38-O (1) (g) to the CEC, they 
would probably have got away with the murder  which the conservation world sees this project to be! 
While no authority had the power to divert PA land for any other purpose until 2006, now a bunch  of 
cronies of the government can do anything with these sacred lands. Thus, NTCA and NBWL have now 
been given the license to play havoc with the ecology of the country rather than being its guardians. 
Clearly, the people who brought in this new provision did not read the existing provisions before 
mutilating the law. 
Perhaps, the country needs to think whether such a plethora of statutory bodies is of any use or not. 
For example, we may easily scrap the post of the DWP and CWLW now, if the NTCA is to remai n in 
this shape. Above all the damage done to the federal fabric of the country by the concentration of powers 
in central bodies, like the NTCA, should be critically examined. (Also see section 2.9 ahead) 
2. Constitution and Management of Protected Areas 
Sections 18 to 35 of the Act prescribe the process for the constitution of wildlife sanctuaries and 
national parks as well as provide directions for their management. Some of the problematic areas related 
to this feature are discussed below: 
2.1. When does a Sanctuary Come into Existence? 
Apart from banning the killing  of animals except when they become a danger to human life and 
property (section 11), constitution of sanctuaries and national parks is the main tool provided by WLPA 
to preserve wildlife. These PA s can be constituted only after settling the rights of the people on the 
lands proposed to be included in a PA. Sections 18 to 26 provide the process for settling rights. Section 
26-A provides that if an area is a reserved forest or a part of the territori al waters of India, there is no 
need to settle rights to make it a WLS. These areas are presumed to have no  or minimal rights. Same 
applies to a NP. Prior to 1991, it was possible to notify a sanctuary first and settle the rights later, while 
the national parks could be created only after extinguishing all rights. This distinction between a 
sanctuary and a national park was removed in 1991. Both can now be declared only after settling private 
rights. This means any restrictions applicable to a sanctuary or national park can be enforced only after 
settling rights and issuing the final notification. 
However, the 2003 amendment to section 18 has turned the clock back to where it was before 1991 
but in a strange manner. The following new provisions (section 18-A) inserted in 2003 are relevant 
here, namely: 
• that sections 27 to 33-A of the Act become applicable from the day of notification of intention to 
constitute a sanctuary;  
• that the State Government has to make alternative arrangements for fuel, fodder and other forest 
produce for the affected persons until the rights of the affected people are finally settled. 
Sections 27 to 33 -A provide a list of the restrictions  applicable in a sanctuary. These include 
restrictions on entry and residence, carrying weapons, grazing livestock and destruction of habitat (e.g. 
cutting fodder, collecting minor forest produce or collecting firewood)  causing fire, using injurious 
substances etc. People need prior permission for doing any of these activities  in a sanctuary. Making 
these restrictions applicable even before the sanctuary comes into existence  virtually annuls the 
338

amendments of 1991. It is another matter that these restrictions are virtually unenforceable. If people  
are already living  inside sanctuaries, they will  continue to do so and will  use the forest to survive . 
Poachers also won't ask for permission to carry guns into a sanctuary. 
As mentioned before, settlement of rights before converting a land into a WLS was not necessary 
until 1991. You could impose the restrictions first and settle the rights later, puttin g people in serious 
difficulty. This was obviously untenable in a democracy and was changed. The 1991 amendment 
provided that these restrictions could be imposed only after the rights have been settled and the 
sanctuary is duly notified. Now the law says that a sanctuary cannot be made without settling rights but 
the restrictions will come into force from the day the intention to do so is declared. Thus, the law gives 
relief with one hand but takes it away with the other. It is not clear who we are trying to fool by making 
a law that moves in circles! 
The provision for making alternative arrangements for fuel, fodder and other forest produce appears 
to be in line with the same confusion. The need for making this provision would have arisen only when 
someone’s right to these products has been extinguished and if one deserves to be given an alternative. 
Does the introduction of this provision mean that we treat all rights as extinguished the moment a 
notification of intention is issued? Then what was the need to insert sub-section 18 (1) which mandates 
that a WLS cannot be created abruptly by a simple notification? In any case, most forest products are 
available free, at present, while the ‘alternative arrangements’ would have to be purchased by people. 
There is no way this can work, even if the government is able to undertake this nearly impossible task! 
And if the government starts providing ‘alternatives’ for a right and the right is later allowed to continue 
under section 24 (2) (c), it will be another paradox. 
It seems that amendments in 1991 and in 2003 were done under pressure of different lobbies. While 
the so-called champions of people’s rights were able to make the settlement of rights mandatory before 
making an area a sanctuary in 1991, the conservation lobbies had all those provisions neutralised by the 
introduction of contradictory provisions in 2003. 
Despite this confusion, the undisputed essence of the Act is that a sanctuary or national park comes 
into being only with effect from the day the final notification is issued after the settlement/extinction of 
all rights. But, contrary to this incontrovertible truth, the CEC has advised the states that the restrictions 
imposed by the Supreme Court order dated 13.11.2000 in WP 337 /1995 also apply to propose d 
sanctuaries where only a notification of intention has been issued. This order says that "Pending further 
orders no dereservation of forest/National Parks/ Sanctuaries shall be effected." This means no area can 
be deleted from a sanctuary or national park without the prior permission of the Supreme Court.  
An important fallout of this obviously erroneous interpretation is that the process of settlement of 
rights in proposed sanctuaries and national parks has come to a complete standstill in the country. This 
process empowers a district collector to decide whether all the areas originally proposed to be included 
in a sanctuary should be retained or not, looking at the needs of the local people. He could earlier excise 
certain areas if necessary. But the collector can no longer exercise this discretion in view of the order  
of the Supreme Court . If the states now want to excise any areas from a sanctuary, it will be a long 
drawn process needing approvals of wildlife boards, central government agencies, CEC and  the 
Supreme Court. Therefore, many states have taken no interest in this issue for decades. Not that the 
process was going anywhere before this order (see section 2.3). As the settlement of rights is a painful, 
expensive and politically unpopular action, no state was ever taking much interest in it. This order has 
put a seal of near permanence on this situation. 
339

Logically, this order of the court should be applicable only in cases where the excision of land is 
proposed from a duly constituted or deemed sanctuary, or from a duly constituted national park. Perhaps 
the court has been led into giving the extant dispensation on the basis of the 2003 amendments in section 
18 of the Act, which says that an area becomes a sanctuary virtually from the day the idea is announced. 
We now have a situation where a baby acquires his property rights from the day of conception not from 
the day of birth! 
2.2. Accrual of New Rights in Protected Areas 
According to section 20, "no new right can be acquired in or over the  land comprised w ithin the 
limits of" a proposed WLS "except by succession". This provision is being interpreted as a bar on sale 
and purchase of lands  once the notification of intention  of a WLS  is issued. Sometimes this is even 
interpreted as a bar on the improvement of homes inside a proposed PA {High Court of Jabalpur, WP 
no. 5937/2002, AVM DS Mishra VS. State of MP & others.). This provision has become a huge bone 
of contention between the government and hundreds of villages, even towns, situated within proposed 
PAs. Although it is difficult to find a sizable chunk of forests in India without interspersed villages (for 
making a PA for wild animals), a large number of villages were deliberately included in the proposed 
PAs with the intention of creating grasslands by their eviction.  If the rights and properties in these 
villages had been acquired by the government quickly, and if the affected people were not so many, this 
provision would not have been a big issue. However, many decades have passed and hun dreds of 
villages have neither been resettled nor have they been allowed to sell their properties and get out. On 
top of that, a ll the restrictions mentioned before have been imposed.  Whether these people will be 
friends or enemies of conservation is anybody's guess. 
Several questions in the legislative assembly of MP were raised on the plight of the 32 villages 
situated in the Karera WLS. This sanctuary was created in 1981 on the lands which did not belong to 
the forest department at all. So, the restrictions came in before the settlement of rights. Not to speak of 
the ban on selling or developing properties, the villagers were not even allowed to graze livestock on 
their own lands. In the initial years, the GIB flourished. Along with GIB, flourished the blackbuck and 
wild pig that destroyed their crops. The condition of the villagers was so miserable that people stopped 
giving them girls in marriages. Reportedly, they killed all the bustards for whom the sanctuary was 
created, in order to force  the denotification of the sanctuary (no GIB, no sanctuary). The residents of 
village Dihaila almost admitted this to me  sometimes in 2002, but promised to protect wildlife if we 
merely allowed sale and purchase of their lands. Although it was too late to save the GIB by then, they 
were not asking for the moon. Ever since I have been trying to sell an alternative interpretation of section 
20, i.e. "sale/purchase of land is only the transfer of an existing right, not the creation of a new right ", 
but there are no takers. Interestingly, section 5 of IFA, on which this section was modelled, allows the 
acquisition of new rights in a proposed reserve forest by way of "a grant or contract in writing made or 
entered into by or on behalf of the Government or some person in whom such right was vested" at the 
time of the notification. But not WLPA. 
Incidentally, GoI and Supreme Court have since agreed to the denotification of Karera WLS which 
was never there in the first place, because not an inch of land belonged to MPFD. It was only a proposal 
to make people's homes and fields a sanctuary for wild animals, which had misfired. 
It was to get over this legal imbroglio that the apex court allowed the villages in Pachmarhi WLS as 
"enclosures" where WLPA would not apply i.e. people can sell or purchase lands (IA 2202-2203 in WP 
202/1995). Still these villages opted for relocation and have since gone.  Nobody wants to live in a 
concentration camp! 
340

2.3. Acquisition of Rights in Protected Areas 
Section 18 to 26 lay out the process of settlement of rights for creating PAs for wildlife. Section 24 
gives the district collector the discretion in respect of the lands to be included in the PA . Once the 
ownership of a person over any land proposed to be included in the sanctuary ha s been admitted, the 
collector has to decide whether the sai d land should be retained in the sanctuary or  not. The same 
principle applies to rights over government lands, e.g. grazing livestock or collection of fuelwood. But, 
here, the collector has the additional option of treating the right and the land separately. He can keep in, 
or excise from, the sanctuary, either the land or the right, or both, as he deems fit , based on practical 
considerations. Obviously, the collector's decision would depend upon how important the land is to the 
sanctuary or how critical the right is to the right holder. Or how expensive it will be to acquire the right. 
Also, whether any alternative lands are available for the exercise of certain community rights like 
grazing livestock, collection of fuelwood etc. 
In its original form, section 24 gave the collector three options {clauses 2 (a) and 2 (b)}: 
(i) the land could be excised from the proposed PA; 
(ii) the owner of land  could surrender his right to the  government under an agreement  (on agreed 
payment); or 
(iii) the collector could acquire the land or the right, or both, depending on who owns the land, by 
paying compensation, through the process prescribed under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. 
However the insertion of clause 24 (2) (c) , in 1991, has dramatically changed the nature of  this 
section. It provides that, the collector can allow, "in consultation with the Chief Wild Life Warden, the 
continuance of any right of any person in, or over any land within the limits of the sanctuary" (not in a 
NP). Thus, now the collector has the option of doing none of the above. Using this convenient route, 
many collectors have passed blanket orders, without any enquiry, saying that all exis ting rights in the 
sanctuary shall continue  (e.g. Chambal, Ratapani, Pachmarhi WLS and many others). Legalistically 
speaking, they may be correct. But such an order defeats the very purpose for which the sanctuaries are 
meant to be created i.e. giving wild animals some space free from conflict with human beings. In fact, 
the objective of insertion of clause 24 (2) ( c), must have been to permit the people living in the 
neighbourhood of sanctuaries (not inside) to use the sanctuary forests for limited grazing, collection of 
non-timber forest products, right of way, harvesting water etc. However, it stopped short of specifying 
this objective. This lack of clarity has created the scope for using this clause as a license to defeat the 
very core of the law i.e. only government land can be made a wildlife sanctuary. Thus, villages continue 
to exist in many sanctuaries even after the settlement proceedings have been completed. 
As per the procedure prescribed in the Act, the final limits of a sanctuary are to be decided by 
acquiring or excising privately owned lands situated within the proposed boundaries. If the land in 
question is situated close to the boundary , it can be excised, if needed, by altering the boundary. 
However, if the private land (or an entire village) is situated deep inside the sanctuary, it should logically 
be acquired either by using the land acquisition law, or through an agreement. If it cannot be acquired, 
for any reason, it can be excised only by creating an islan d within the sanctuary , where the legal 
restrictions would not apply . Creation of exclusions within a sanctuary is a bit odd but has been 
permitted by the Supreme Court in the case of Pachmarhi WLS , because relocation of all the villages 
seemed impossible at that time . However, in cases where settlement proceedings have not been 
conducted or the villagers refuse to go away, we often tend to treat them as part of the PA. This amounts 
to giving the government rights over private  properties without paying any compensation. This could 
never have been the intention of the authors of the law. As they cannot sell their lands, it condemns 
341

people to continue to live in a sanctuary, until the government has the wherewithal and the w ill to 
relocate their villages. 
In fact the provision to forcibly acquire lands for PAs {section 24 (b)} was thrown out of the window 
with the insertion of section 38 -V (5) in WLP A (only applicable to tiger reserves) and the coming of 
FRA 2006 {section 4 (2)}. These provide that nobody can be moved out of PAs without his/her consent 
(also see "FRA and the Relocation of Villages from PAs" in Chapter 4).  Thus, the prevailing legal 
position is that the acquisition of rights in a sanctuary is optional but if it has to be done, it can be done 
only on the basis of the consent of the affected people. Acquisition of rights is mandatory in national 
parks but cannot be done unless the affected people accept the compensation deal. 
Interestingly, the texts of section 38-V (5) of WLPA and section 4 (2) of FRA are exactly the same. 
It is believed that this provision was inserted in WLPA as a part of the deal with the communists who 
had threatened to block the creation of NTCA in Parliament unless this provision was inserted. 
Strangely, the lengthy procedure given these sections, which in any case is almost impossible to comply 
with, does not have to be followed  if the "voluntary relocation" is "on mutually agreed terms and 
conditions" and if such terms "satisfy the requirements laid down in this sub-section". This legal double 
talk is precisely the reason why the rights activists always claim that all relocations are in violation of 
FRA. 
Incidentally the state has rarely used its legal power to forcibly acquire private lands to create 
sanctuaries for wild animals. It has been more of persuasion than coercion. People have been moving 
out of PAs, especially in MP, just because compensation has been relatively liberal. Earlier it was the 
lure of two hectares of agricultural land and a house. One was entitled to it even if one owned nothing 
in the original site. Now it is a million rupees per adult (or couple) that is luring people out of PAs. The 
28 villages allowed, by the Supreme Court, to stay inside the Pachmarhi WLS as enclosures, have also 
moved out as the lure of a million rupees per person was enough to encourage them to leave a difficult 
life behind. 
Thus, the law has been moving in circles here also. First it provided t hat private lands inside PAs 
have to be acquired either amicably or through the force of law. Then it provided that acquisition is not 
at all necessary in a sanctuary. Now it again provides that, if rights have to be acquired, it can be done 
only through mutual agreement. And, the new procedure provided in the laws  is only for general 
guidance, not mandatory. What next? 
2.4. Management and Control of Protected Areas 
Section 33 empowers the CWLW of a state to "control, manage and maintain all sanctuaries" and 
he, for that purpose, "may take such measures, in the interests of wildlife, as he may consider necessary 
for the improvement of any habitat." There are no fetters on his powers under this section, except about 
the "construction of commercial tourist lodges, hotels, zoos and safari parks' in a sanctuary. He can also 
authorise any person to "destroy or damage the habitat " in a sanctuary to that end (section 29).  This 
power he can exercise only with the prior permission of the Government and the SBWL. The Supreme 
Court has also made the approval of the standing committee of NBWL mandatory (orders dat ed 
09.05.2002 in I.A. No. 18 in WP No. 337/1995). NBWL has to be consulted in the case of a NP before 
undertaking an operation that can "destroy or damage the habitat" {section 35 (6)}. 
In fact most of the actions that can improve or destroy a habitat are the same i.e. cutting, burning or 
uprooting of vegetation. Whether the actions are taken u/s 29 or 33 is a matter of subjective judgment. 
These are routine PA management operations and cannot await any permissions. In fact, powers u/s 33 
are usually delegated to the field officers to ensure timely action. Most grasslands have to be burnt 
342

periodically to keep them productive. Fire lines have to be cut and burnt to prevent larger fires. Weeds 
have to be uprooted or burnt. PA management would come to a complete halt if section 2 9 overtakes 
section 33 and multiple permissions are required for each small action. However, critics, or even vested 
interests, can dispute the CWLW's actions due to these conflicting provisions. In fact, all these activities 
in Panna Tiger Reserve were the subject matter of a public interest litigation (PIL) in the Supreme Court 
and the department had to invest a lot of time and money in defending some very innocuous sanctuary 
management interventions in courts (CEC Application 376/2004 by WPSI). 
The original form of section 29 concerned itself only with hunting in a sanctuary and had nothing to 
do with habitat management. Therefore, there was no conflict with section 33. Senseless tinkering with 
this section has created a potential roadblock to PA management. Thank God, nobody reads these two 
sections together and life goes on! 
More than 50 of the most important PAs of the country are now the 'core areas' or 'critical tiger 
habitats' of tiger reserves. Since 2006, NTCA has been given complete control of tiger reserves (section 
38-O). Although the law says nothing about whose writ will run, the world considers NTCA superior 
to CWLW in hierarchy because the NTCA represents the Centre. NTCA sends management advisories 
to states almost every day. Tiger conservation plans, which cover not only the tige r reserves but also 
the surrounding forests, are approved by NTCA not by the CWLW. Thus, the law has relegated the 
CWLW, who represents the authority of the state, to an insignificant position in his  or her own state. 
No wonder that no creative conservation ideas are coming out of the states now. 
2.5. Civil Infrastructure in Protected Areas 
There are thousands of villages situated within protected areas and several major highways, railway 
lines and power lines crisscross them. Development of civil infrastructure such as roads, canals, power 
lines, railways etc. in PAs amounts to destruction of wildlife habitat in every sense of the word. Sections 
29 and 35 (6) prohibit the destruction of wildlife habitat in a PA except for "the improvement and better 
management of wild life therein". No authority has the power to allow such developments in a PA (but 
see ahead). However, the authorities and institutions including the SBWLs and NBWL have been using 
the same provisions to allow the destruction of PAs for purposes not envisaged in law. Even the 
Supreme Court has agreed with this course of action. It regularly approve s diversion of PA lands for 
development purposes in accordance with its order dated 14.2.2000 which restrained authorities "from 
ordering the removal of dead, diseased, dying or wind -fallen trees, drift wood and grasses, etc. from 
any National Park or Game Sanctuary––". 
It is a fact of life that lakhs of people are going to live in the sanctuaries for a long time and they are 
going to need development. There is no provision in the law to use sanctuary land for their benefit. In 
fact, the repeated amendments  of the law have made modification of the wildlife habitats even for 
conservation purposes nearly impossible. So many authorities are now involved in making these 
decisions that the chances of all of them agreeing to a proposal are remote. The law says that the CWLW 
can issue a diversion permit with the permission of the state government, who will have to consult the 
SBWL or NBWL before giving its permission. All such proposals are now cleared by the Supreme 
Court and its CEC. In fact, permission of the Supreme Court is now required for infrastructure projects 
outside PAs also. In the "ecosensitive zone" if notified around a PA and in a 10-km belt if 'ecosensitive 
zone' has not been notified. The 2006 amendment also mandates the permission of NTCA for any 
changes in land use anywhere in the country! 
The entire scheme of the law related to the issue of diverting PA land has been turned on its head by 
the introduction of section 38-O (1) (g) in 2006. This section empowers NTCA and NBWL to permit 
343

the diversion o f land, inside tiger reserves, even "for ecologically unsustainable uses", "in public 
interest". This provision clearly contradicts sections 29 and 35 (6). Although clearly unintended, the 
provision seems to open the door for legitimising the extremely serious violations of the law carried out 
by all the institutions, including the courts, responsible for safeguarding our ecology, all along. Perhaps 
the standing committee of the NBWL which clears diversion proposals inside PAs, on behalf of the 
NBWL, should start using this section, rather than sections 29 or 35, to destroy PAs "in public interest". 
A proper course for the law would be to empower the local authorities, and CWLW, to take decisions 
regarding removing or destroying wildlife, or modifying its habitat in PAs, if it is required for improving 
wildlife management (as was provided in the original Act in 1972). Other institutions and courts may 
be involved in the decision-making if the destruction etc. is for other purposes. ( Also see section 1.3: 
NTCA and NBWL) 
2.6. Protected Areas and Recreation (Tourism) 
Tourism is one more area in which the country has tied itself in tight knots due to conflicting 
legal provisions to regulate it. While the law has empowered, since beginning, the CWLW to manage 
protected areas as per his or her best judgement (section 27, 28, 33), under the supervision of the State 
Government, NTCA has now been given the power to lay down “normative standards“ and “guidelines” 
for tourism in tiger reserves [section 38 -O (c)]. Management plans of all PAs, which also included 
prescriptions for tourism, used to be approved by the CWLWs. But now, this power has also been given 
to NTCA in respect of tiger reserves [section 38-O (1)], as mentioned before. The law has not reduced 
the role and responsibility of the CWLW in the management of PAs included in tiger reserves, but has 
given parallel powers to NTCA, thus creating a recipe for conflict. When NTCA wanted to “phase out” 
tourism from PAs, the states, particularly Madhya Pradesh, resisted this move. In an unprecedented 
situation, the State and the Centre were on the opposite sides in the High Court, and later in Supreme 
Court, when the demand for a ban on tourism in PAs came up for adjudication in a PIL. Such a situation 
would never have arisen if NTCA had not been given the power to interfere in the management of 
protected areas. NTCA has been, absolutely erroneously, trying to label wildlife tourism as illegal in 
the context of the expression ‘inviolate areas' used to describe core areas of tiger reserves, although the 
law and all the policy documents of the government, clearly endorse the role and relevance of tourism 
in conservation of wildlife [section 28, 38-X (2)(b)]. If tourism is undesirable, let the laws clearly say 
it, rather than letting the competing authorities decide through a slugfest. It is also necessary to keep the 
line of authority in the management of PAs clear. Giving the central agencies the power to interfere in 
the management of s tate-owned areas is not only administratively abhorrent, it is also fundamentally 
flawed in view of our federal constitution . (Please see "Tourism: A Conservation Tool" in Road To 
Nowhere and "Saving Wildlife Tourism" in Wardens in Shackles, both by the same author). 
2.7.  Fishing in Protected Areas 
Fishing in the irrigation reservoirs situated inside PA s is prohibited as removal of anything from a 
PA is illegal {section 29 and 35 (6)}, unless it is for improving wildlife management  and is approved 
by a bunch of authorities (even Supreme Court). This is a serious bone of contention between the forest 
departments, fishing communities and fisheries departments. Most of these reservoirs were constructed 
before the PAs were notified or proposed and are the pr operty of water resources departments. As 
fishing is the livelihood of many neighbouring communities, there is a very high pressure of illegal 
fishing in these reservoirs. 
Fishing is the only kind of "hunting" offence that is compoundable in a PA (although no offence is 
compoundable in a tiger reserve). As per section 2 of the Act, fresh water fishes are not "wild animals" 
344

as none of them is listed in any of the schedules.  Therefore fishing in a PA does no t come under the 
definition of "hunting"  which is a more serious crime. Fish is also not a "forest produce"  as per the 
Indian Forest Act  (some ambiguity here) . Despite this lack of importance given to  fishes in the key 
conservation laws, illegal fishing in these reservoirs is one of the biggest headaches fo r the field staff. 
Apart from the scope for corruption created by the money involved, the staff spends valuable time in 
fighting fishermen who may usually not be any threat to the animals for whom the PAs are primarily 
created. I do not remember even a single case of fishermen poaching other animals in my entire career 
as a PA manager and also as CWLW. These reservoirs were either constructed on diverted forest lands 
or on non-forest lands which later got included in the protected areas, many of which have still not been 
finally notified. As the ownership of these reservoirs is with the irrigation department, and is going to 
remain as such, the forest department should not be meddling with the management of these properties. 
Particularly so in the PAs which have not yet been finally notified. As a result of this c onfusing legal 
situation, stand-offs between the fishing stakeholders and the forest departments are common place. 
The committee drafting the amendments to WLPA, referred to elsewhere, had suggested in 2007-08 
that fishing should not be completely prohibited in irrigation tanks situated within PAs, but the 
suggestion did not find place in the draft that went to the parliament. 
This prohibition of fishing in protected areas has also resulted in some bizarre implications. In many 
cases cleared for diversion of forest l and fo r the construction of hydro  or hydroelectric projects, 
Government of India has imposed a condition that the reservoirs shall be notified as sanctuaries, besides 
retaining the legal status of the diverted land as forest. Even if it is a hundred meters under water. The 
States are not at all keen to comply with this condition as they do not want to forgo the opport unities 
for developing fisheries in these reservoirs. None of the reservoirs constructed since the eighties, at least 
in MP, have yet been notified as PAs. Nor will they ever be. Still, MoEF&CC has never questioned the 
implementation agencies for non -compliance with this condition. N obody has taken them to court. 
Perhaps we all have a feeling of guilt about the issue! 
2.8. Removal of Wildlife from Protected Areas 
Sections 29 and  35 (6) empower the CWLW , to "destroy, exploit, or remove" wildlife and other 
forest produce from PAs, "if it is necessary for the improvement and better management of wild  life 
therein". The permits can be iss ued with the prior a pproval of the State Government  in consultation 
with the SBWL  in the case of sa nctuaries, and the NBWL  in the case of national parks. This is an 
empowering provision, which enables the State to allow hunting of wild animals if the welfare of 
wildlife in a PA so demands. But, paradoxically, the option to h unt wildlife for its "improvement and 
better management" is not available outside PAs. This means that the protection provided to the animals 
inside our so-called PAs is less than that available to wild animals outside. This paradox, again, is the 
result of the adhoc tinkering with the Act over time. The original Act, through sections 9 to 17, provided 
for issuing and regulating hunting permits for various reasons. While permits outside PAs could be 
issued for recreational hunting or for  eliminating dangerous and harmful animals,  hunting could be 
allowed in PAs only for one reason that is, " for the improvement and better management of wildlife". 
The removal of sections 9 to 17, and the denaturing of sections 11 and 12, has created this peculiar 
situation in which wild animals can be 'destroyed' in a PA even if they are not a threat to human life and 
property, but not outside. What a paradox! 
In fact, the word "sanctuary" or "protected area" now appears a complete anachronism in the Act. 
The expression was justified when hunting outside could be allowed more liberally than inside a PA. 
But here it is the complete opposite. Nobody seems to notice or care! 
345

Moreover, these procedures are so complicated that even the implementing authorities do not 
understand them fully. For example, we removed tigers from three national parks of MP, for 
translocation to Panna, with due permission from GoI, under section 12, without the mandatory 
permission of the NBWL. Similarly, we removed 50 gaurs from Kanha for t ranslocation to 
Bandhavgarh. Perhaps, w e also required the permission of the Supreme Court. In view of the 
widespread opposition to these projects within conservation circles, I am absolutely sure that we would 
never have got all the permissions needed to create history. Although I had realised my mistakes before 
implementing the projects, but decided, quite cheekily perhaps, to keep quiet, as we had already spent 
a lot of resources and time on preparations. Perhaps, some mistakes are worth making! 
2.9. Commercial Use of Forest Produce Removed from Protected Areas 
Another queer feature of these two sections [29 and 35(6)] is that they allow the use of forest produce 
removed from a protected area, only for bonafide needs of the people, not for commercial purposes. At 
first sight, it seems to be a worthy provi sion. However, the expressions "forest produce"  and 
‘commercial’ are not defined in the Act. As far as the difference between bonafide and commercial use 
is concerned, it is merely a question of perception and the economic condition of the person in question. 
What may be bonafide for one, can be commercial for another. Is selling of mahua flowers by a tribal 
to get a few rupees a commercial purpose? If he is permitted to collect mahua, he must be free to either 
use it at home or buy salt or grains or sugar by selling it. We are unable to stop collection of most minor 
forest products (MFP) by the people living inside sanctuaries, despite the Supreme Court order banning 
the removal of even grasses and f allen wood. It is impossible to find out whether they are using 
everything at home or are taking it to the nearby weekly market. And they will continue to do so unless 
they are relocated elsewhere. The provision was perhaps inserted with the intention of c urbing the 
state’s desire to exploit these forests for  revenue but has had a totally unintended and undesirable 
impact. Now it is mostly used to harass the tribals living inside or along the PAs. 
3. Hunting and Trade 
The Act, in its original form, had a compl ete framework for issuing hunting permits and trading 
licenses for wild animals and their products, in the form of Chapter III (Hunting of Wild Animals) and 
Chapter V (Trade or Commerce in Wild Animals, Animal Articles and Trophies). Most of these 
provisions were either deleted or denatured over time to allow hunting only for very limited purposes. 
However, these amendments seem to have been done so haphazardly, that neither the public nor the 
authorities understand  what the intent of the law is. Major contradictions in these  chapters are 
highlighted below. 
3.1. Capture for Translocation is Also Hunting 
The definition of "hunting" in the Act also includes "capturing, coursing, snaring, trapping, driving 
or baiting any wild or captive animal  and any attempt to do so" . Animals can be killed or captured if 
they become dangerous to human life or property , or, if they are needed for ed ucational or research 
purposes. B ut they can not be killed  for the purpose of "scientific management". They can only be 
captured (sections 11 & 12). While permits for eliminating dangerous animals can be issued by the 
CWLW without the permission of any other authority (section 11), he can permit the killing or capture 
for any other purpose only with the permission of the government (Central Government in the case of 
Schedule I animals) as per section 12. There lies the problem. 
Permissions for capture are often required by research and training institutions like the Wildlife 
Institute of India (WII). WII scientists regularly complain that their research is hampered by the delay 
346

in getting permissions. As most of this research and training is to be done inside PAs, where sections 
29 and 35 would also apply, it is a miracle that any permissions are still being issued by the CWLWs. 
Scientific management of wildlife is still not a part of the Indian conservation culture. Therefore, 
perhaps nobody asked for permission for translocation of animals until Madhya Pradesh started 
translocating other animals from PA to PA since 2006 in the name of scientific management. All these 
were schedule I animals. Therefore, permission of Central Government was required in each case. 
Central permissions were either unreasonably delayed or were cancelled midstream. As a result, tigers 
in Panna Tiger Reserve went extinct because the central permission to translocate two females did not 
come in time. Reintroduction of gaur in Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve took five years from conception to 
conclusion because permission was cancelled  midstream as the state could not comply with some 
impossible 'preconditions' imposed by the Centre. MP was able to finally get what it wanted, only 
because of dogged pursuit and the proactive approach of the then minister Mr. Jairam Ramesh . 
Fortunately, nobody realised at that time that 'removal' of a wild animal from a national park also 
required the permissions of the SBWL, NBWL {section 35 96)} and the Supreme Court (order dated 
14.02.2000). Thanks to this slip, translocation of wild animals has become a regular practice in MP 
now. The state now transfers hundreds of animals from one park to another every year without having 
to await permissions from the boards or the Supreme Court. 
History of conservation in MP would have been totally different if it had sought all those additional 
permissions. Either they would not have come or they would have been intolerably delayed. The 
protagonists of these initiatives would have moved on long ago. 
For averting such situations in future, it is important to differentiate between hunting and scientific 
interventions. The meaning of hunting should be limited to killing or capture for recreation, 
consumption or commerce while all other forms of killing or capture should be kept in a separate 
category. Different procedures and criteria for allowing and disallowing the two should be developed. 
We also need to empower CWLW to take decisions regarding killing or capture for scientific 
management as per the demands of a situation and execute them without outside interference. To believe 
that mandarins in Delhi are more capable of deciding on critical issues, is a grave misconception. They 
all come from the same school. The men in Delhi may in fact be handicapped by lack of local knowledge 
and commitment to the project. Even if the states make some mistakes, no mistake will be big enough 
to have national consequences. Not allowing people on the ground to innovate is already proving 
disastrous. Easy translocation of animals can enable us to save populations before they are wi ped out. 
We can correct gender imbalances and even reverse local extinctions . But our law, rather than 
facilitating conservation, is the main road block. 
3.2. Scientific Management of Wildlife 
Section 12 of the Act permi ts hunting of wild animals for "scientific management", but strangely, 
the authors of the amendments went out of their way to emasculate the word ‘scientific management’ 
and define it as only ‘translocation’ and "population management without killing ––". By being so 
conservative, they have robbed the section of whatever utility it was meant to provide. Under section 
11, animals can be killed if they become dangerous to human life or property, including standing crops. 
But, the scientific management of their populations, under section 12 , is possible only through 
translocation. This means that  crop losses can be prevented only by translocating animals elsewhere. 
This means nothing can be done because  India just does not have the expertise to undertake mass 
translocation of crop-raiding herbivores. In fact no one has ever undertaken a translocation exercise at 
a scale required to control crop damage, at any significant scale, even in countries where translocation 
expertise and skills are well establi shed. Incidentally , Andhra Pradesh Forest  Department has 
347

transferred several thousand blackbucks from agricultural fields to forest areas. But the problem is far 
from over as the remaining population is breeding faster than they can be removed. Therefore, it has to 
be an unending exercise, c osting a huge amount. Defining  "scientific management"  as population 
management through only non-lethal means is not scientific at all. 
Strangely, sections 29 and 35 (6) provide that CWLW can permit one to "destroy, exploit or remove 
wild life" from PAs, for the purpose of "better management" of wild  life. Obviously this means 
"scientific management". Thus, despite section 12, we can kill animal s in the name of scientific 
management. So? If you want to hunt, make the place a national park!  But, you cannot  "destroy" a 
mosquito in a PA without the permission of the CWLW who cannot give this permission without the 
approval of a myriad other authorities. After all, a mosquito is "wild life". 
3.3. The Law and Human Wildlife Conflict (HWC) 
WLPA does not even mention "human-wildlife conflict" but some of its features have a bearing on 
the management of HWC in the country, namely: 
• Wild animals can be killed or captured if they become dangerous to human life or property, 
including standing crops (section 11). 
• Wild animals can be captured and translocated in the name of "scientific management" (section 
12). Although the purpose of "scientific management"  is not specified in the Act, management 
of HWC must logically be one of its objectives. 
• Wild animals in PAs can be "destroyed, exploited or removed" for the "improvement and better 
management of wild life the rein" {sections 29 and 35 (6) }. Here also the t erm " better 
management" has not been defined but lowering HWC is certainly "better management". 
• Excessively harmful animals , such as pigs and monkeys,  can also be declared verm in for 
unrestricted destruction from time to time (section 9 and 62). 
• Schedule I animals, like the elephant and the blackbuck, cannot be killed or captured even if they 
are a threat to crops or other property (section 11). They can be killed only if they are a threat to 
human life. But they can be captured in the name of "scientific management". 
The difference between hunting an animal under section 11 and any other section is that the CWLW 
does not need any permission to order the hunting of an animal under section 11 but needs several 
permissions to do it under any other section. 
Although section 11 specifically allows hunting of dangerous animals, the new proviso added in 
2003 has made a mockery of our HWC management concerns. It says: 
"Provided that no animal shall be ordered to be killed unless the Chief Wild Life Warden is satisfied 
that such animal cannot be captured, tranquilised or translocated. 
Provided further that no such captured animal shall be kept in captivity unless the Chief Wild Life 
Warden is satisfied that such animal cannot be rehabilitated in the wild and the reasons for the same are 
recorded in writing. 
Explanation: For the purpose of clause (a), the process of capture or translocation, as the case may 
be, of such an animal shall be made in such manner as to cause minimum trauma to the said animal." 
 This means the Chief Wildlife Warden cannot order the killing of a man-eater (apologies for using 
the prohibited term) without letting it kill or maim sufficient number of people during unsuccessful 
attempts to capture it. Although efforts to kill or capture carn ivores, that have become dang erous to 
348

human life, generally go on simultaneously, the law does not allow such an approach. Animal rights 
organisations can easily use this provision to harass authorities, as they did in the famous case of Avani, 
the tigress that killed nearly a dozen people in Chandrapur area of Maharashtra before being shot dead 
by a hired hunter.  
The direction to rehabilitate delinquent animals, such as man -eating tigers and leopards, is a sure 
recipe for disaster. Translocated leopards kill dozens of people in Maharashtra every year. A tigress that 
killed a lady in Bandhavgarh was shifted to Satpura Tiger Reserve where it immediately killed two, 
before it was captured  again and sent to a zoo, in 2019. Blackbucks translocated to Nag arjuna Sagar 
Sriselam Tiger Reserve in Andhra Pradesh from croplands disappeared within days, dying of stress and 
capture myopathy. Animal rights activists can take every person involved in a capture operation to court 
as no capture is without trauma.  They dragged MPFD to court when 5 rampaging elephants were 
captured (one later died) by a Bandhavgarh team at huge personal risk. Activists wanted them to be let 
loose again because the law ordained it. 
Presence of such recipes in a conservation law indicates that the framers of these provisions did not 
know their job and had perhaps never been in the frontline of conservation. 
Hunting of wild animals, except that in self-defence, and that of vermin, can be done only under a 
permit from authorities. Hunting permits are normally sought by hunters and adventurers, not by victims 
or prospective victims of HWC e.g. farmers. Therefore, if wild animals enter a crop field, its owner 
cannot kill them as he does not have a permit. He can also not claim any compensation a s there is no 
provision in law . Although most states have compensation schemes, it is not their legal obligation. 
Similarly, officials may issue hunting permits or may themselves have the problem animals hunted, 
under the above provisions, but it is not mandatory for them to do so. Thus , we are a strange country 
where wild animals are free to cause damage but the victims are neither allowed to defend themselves 
properly nor are they entitled to any compensation. Government is under no legal obligation to protect 
people against the depredations  caused by protected animals . Most other countries either allow 
landowners to kill any animals entering their properties or provide compensation for losses if only non-
lethal means are used to prevent losses. 
Further, wild animals, except vermin, hunted under section 11, 29 or 35 are  state property and can 
be consumed, transferred or traded by the hunter only if specifically so permitted  (section 39). Most 
states issue permits to hunt nilgai and wild pig, the most widesp read pests in the county, but do not 
allow the hunters to consume or sell their meat (Punjab has permitted it recently). As a result, there are 
very few takers for hunting licenses, as the cost of hunting a single animal runs into thousands of rupees 
in the form of license fee, bullets, transportation, labour, lodging, food, time etc. 
Even if the states allow hunters to retain the booty, as they can under section 39, hunters cannot sell 
excess meat or trophies as there are no licensed dealers in wildlife pr oducts. Section 44 allows the 
authorities to issue licences for wildlife dealers, except for species from schedule I and part II of 
schedule II, but no licenses are being issued in any state. The hunters cannot sell the excess booty to the 
public as public is obliged to buy wildlife products only from licensed dealers (section 49). Thus there 
is nowhere to go. 
3.4. Declaration of Trophies and Captive Animals 
According to section 40, all trophies or captive animals listed in Schedule I and part II of Schedule 
II, acquired prior to the promulgation of the Act, are required to be registered with forest department. 
There is no provision to register any other trophies. However, according to section 39, all wild animals 
or animal articles, acquired legally or illegally, after the Act came into being, are a state property and 
349

need to be reported to police or an authorised officer within 48 hours of acquiring possession. Nobody 
can acquire, keep, sell, purchase or gift such property without permission from the  government as per 
section 39. This discrepancy causes serious problems in the implementation of the law as many of the 
common herbivores have also been moved from one schedule to another repeatedly. For example , 
sambar (Rusa unicolor), spotted deer (Axis axis) and nilgai (Boselaphus tragocamelus) were in schedule 
III at inception. MP moved them into part II of schedule II in the eighties. Now they are in schedule III 
again. Thus, if someone has a sambar skin from the pre -WLPA days or he acquired it lawfully during 
the days when its reporting was not required, he bec ame a criminal for a few years when registration 
was required for this species. And if he did report when it became mandatory, how could he prove that 
it was indeed an old specimen? On the other hand, anybody acquiring a sambar skin illegally now can 
claim it to be an old specimen, and can trade it without requiring any permission. Thus, the law keeps 
moving in circles, allowing something in one section, disallowing the same thing in another, and again 
allowing it somewhere else. 
The introduction of section 40-A through the 2003 amendment is another strange action on the part 
of the government. This provision empowered the Central Government to allow declaration of trophies 
whenever it wants (this power already existed under sub-section 4 of section 40) and any proceedings 
underway against any person for possessing unaccounted wildlife property shall stand abated if such a 
declaration is made. So, if Sansar Chand, who was believed to have poached more tigers than anybody 
else, had made a declaration, during the last  period of amnesty in 2003, that he had inherited all the 
tiger and leopard skins from his ancestors, or got them as a gift from somebody, and that he or the 
original owner forgot to have them registered in 1972, he would h ave died an honourable man . 
Fortunately the period for declarations is over now, although many ill-gotten properties must have been 
registered during the period of amnesty. However, all the criminals can go hunting again,  in the hope 
that there will be another chance to declare and legalise their illegal acquisitions, as government keeps 
reopening the registration time and again. 
3.5. Trade or No Trade? 
Section 9 now prohibits all hunting except for the purposes of section 11 and 12 (to protect human 
life and property, and for education, research, management etc.). These sections are silent about the 
power to "destroy, exploit, or remove" wildlife from PA s allowed under section 29 and 35 (6) "for 
improvement and better management of wild life". These limited provisions for allowing hunting were 
never likely to produce any goods worth trading. Even these provisions have rarely been used to hunt 
animals anywhere, except occasional killing/capture of problem carnivores , pigs or nilgai. Even here, 
hunters are usually not allowed to keep the proceeds of their hunts. But, for no obvious reason, 
provisions for licensing wildlife trade (including meat, eating houses) have been retained in the Act, in 
the shape of section 44 to 48. 
Section 40 (2) empowers the CWLW to issue permission for possession, sale and purchase of 
animals, animal articles and trophies of species belonging to schedule I and part II of schedule I I. No 
permission or license is required for keeping or trading in specimens of other species as per section 40. 
Section 43 (1) empowers the CWLW to permit the sale/purchase, transfer or transportation of 
animals/trophies belonging to restricted category even if the owner does not have a certificate of 
ownership. Here again there is no restriction on other species. Section 49-B prohibits "business" of any 
kind in animals, trophies, articles etc. derived only from the restricted species (called scheduled animals 
here). 
Thus, the essence of the Act seems to be that none of the restrictions regarding the possession, 
sale/purchase or transfer apply to the species other than the restricted category (schedule I and part II 
350

of schedule II). Business in restricted species is totally prohibited but isolated transactions in even these 
species can be permitted. No problem so far. 
Matters get complicated when section 40 (2 -A) says that nobody can acquire the restricted species 
or articles made from them except through inheritance. Then there is section 39 which says that all wild 
animals or their products, acquired legally or illegally are government property and no one can acquire, 
keep, sell, purchase, gift, destroy or damage such property without the prior permission of an authorised 
officer. This means that transactions even in species other than those in schedule I or Part II of schedule 
II need permission. This is clearly in contradiction to section 40 (2), 43 and 49 -B. How can the poor 
authorities implement such poorly drafted law? 
Even stranger is the existence of section 44 which provides that one requires a license to start or 
carry on a business in manufacturing or dealing in animal articles and trophies, taxidermy, meat, snake 
venom etc. When hunting is prohibited (except for a few special purposes) and all animals and animal 
articles are also government property, why keep a business licensing system in the law?  
Equally strangely, despite the drastic amendments to the Act, the states have not yet amended the 
rules made in the seventies when hunting of wild animals could still be allowed. The Madhya Pradesh 
Wildlife (Protection) Rules, 1974 still provide for the constitution of shooting blocks and prescribe 
hunting fees (royalty) for various species. 
It is obvious that there are so many contradictions in sections related to hunting (Chapter III) and 
trade (Chapter V and V-A) that it is virtually impossible for both the public as well as the authorities to 
make any sense of the law. Perhaps, nobody seems to bother to  even look at these provisions because 
all commercial hunting is banned and, therefore, there is no question of trade . But a look at various 
sections shows that repeated amendments to the original law have robbed it of all its coherence and 
have made it a jumble of contradictory provisions.  
Wading and winding through this maze of sections and sub sections, one conclusion is unavoidable: 
that the law intends to prohibit dealings only in species belonging to schedule I and part II of schedule 
II, and that trade in other species can be allowed under a license. However, nobody is willing to admit 
that. A glaring victim of this confusion is the trade in Japanese quails (Coturnix japonica) a species not 
found in most of India . GoI has issued numerous circulars, each contradicting the rest, allowing and 
disallowing business in quails and their meat. When the states cancelled licenses under pressure from 
GoI, the licensees went to court. N umerous litigations on the issue are going on  in nearly every state. 
Licensed trade in quails  is perfectly legal but no licenses are being issued or renewed due to the 
prevailing confusion. After a decision of the Indore High Court  in favour of the licensees,  in 2009, a 
few licenses for keeping and trading Japanese quails in MP were issued. More are being demanded. A 
simpler legal regime, specifying clearly what is permitted and what is not permitted, would have been 
much easier to enforce. 
There is one more catch. All these birds are produced through captive breeding and there is no 
provision in the law for regulating captive breeding of wild animals/birds. Where do the people and the 
authorities find guidance? 
Interestingly, India is a party to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of 
Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), which obliges the country to make a law to regulate international trade 
as per the provisions of the convention. Despite going in circles over domestic trade in wildlife, WLPA 
does not say a word about international trade. As a result, we continue to regulate international trade in 
wild animals and products on the basis of general export -import laws rather than meeting  our 
international obligation to have a CITES specific legal framework. This creates serious legal problems 
351

in the implementation of CITES. For example, anybody can challenge the orders of the CITES scientific 
and management authorities as there is no law to create these authorities. As such , the existing 
authorities have no legal powers to allow or disallow any international trade or transit  in wildlife 
specimens. But we continue to believe everything is hunky dory. 
3.6. Procurement of Wildlife Specimens by Zoos and Museums 
Sections 40, 43 and 49 of WLPA, which regulate the transactions and transport of wild animals and 
articles, do not apply to recognised zoos and public museums {sections 40 (3) and 43 (3) (b)}. Section 
49 provides that public can purchase a wildlife specimen only from a licensed dealer. The exemption 
means the zoos and museums can procure their stuff even from illegal sources and transport the same 
without even informing the regulatory authorities. This became obvious to us when the famous Museum 
of Man at Bhopal wanted to bring tribal artefacts, made from schedule  I animal parts, from Nagaland. 
They had bought the stuff  from villagers. When we tried to explain the standard procedures, they 
showed us the law. And with telling effect. 
4. Dealing with Offences 
There are several strange features of the Act when it comes to dealing with its violations. Please take 
a look. 
4.1. Forfeiture of Vehicles and Weapons 
Provisions for dealing with offences are contained in Chapters VI and VI-A (sections 50 to 58-Y) of 
the Act. However, insertion of clause 39 (1) (d) in chapter V (Trade Or Commerce in Wild Animals, 
Animal Articles and Trophies), has introduced a major anomaly in the scheme of the Act. 
Section 39 (1) (d) provides that "Every vehicle, vessel, weapon, rope or tools that has been used in 
commission of an offence, and has been seized under the provisions of this Act shall be the property of 
the State Government". 
However, the Act also provides that "Any person detained, or things seized ––, shall forthwith be 
taken before a Magistrate to be dealt with according to law  ––– {section 50 (4)}. Then section 51 (2) 
provides that the court "may order  that ––– any trap, tool, vehicle, vessel or weapon, used in the 
commission of the said offence be forfeited to the State Government–––." 
How can the two contradictory positions co-exist? 
Perhaps, the provision under section 39 was created as a deterrence on the lines of IFA provision for 
the confiscation of seized vehicles, weapons etc. by an authorised forest officer. The authors probably 
wanted it to be even tougher than IFA provision by making seized goods state property right away  
(rather than having to follow a process). Forest officers have been confiscating private vehicles seized 
by them by citing this provision, w ithout having been authorised by law or by any other government 
notification. Several courts, including the Supreme Court (SC order dated 09.01.2008, State of MP and 
Ors. vs. Madhukar Rao, civil appeal no. 5196/2001) have declared this procedure unsustainable but the 
practice has perhaps not stopped yet. 
It is surprising why the authors of the 1991 amendment preferred to insert a dubious provision in the 
wrong place (the chapter on wildlife trade) and run the risk of having it struck down. They could have 
drafted a straight forward provision on the lines of IFA , and placed it in Chapter VI. Now sanctuaries 
like National Chambal Sanctuary which houses the largest gharial (Gavialis gangeticus) population in 
352

the country, but  is not a forest area, does not enjoy the protection which other PAs enjoy due to the 
power back up available under IFA 1927. Illegal sand miners are playing havoc in this vital sanctuary. 
4.2. Investigation 
Forest offences, including wildlife offences, are conventionally investigated by a forester or a deputy 
ranger level offic ial, under the supervision of the R ange Officer. Only a forest range r has been 
empowered (notified) to submit the cases to the court for prosecut ion. But, inexplicably, WLPA  
provides that the investigation of a wildlife offence shall be done by an officer no less than an Assistant 
Conservator of Forests (ACF) and only he can compel th e presence of witnesses, the discovery and 
submission of documents and material objects, and can receive evidence {section 50 (8)}. Obviously, 
it will be a derogation of the office of an ACF if he has to investigate a case and submit his report to his 
subordinate ranger for filing a prosecution. No ACF is happy doing that. As a result, most wildlife cases 
continue to be investigated by the foresters and deputy rangers and often fail in the court because the 
case has not been investigated by a competent officer. Thus, in an effort to make the wildlife offences 
look more important, by having them investigated by a senior officer, we have virtually undermined the 
Act itself. 
4.3. Compounding of Offences 
The forest laws re cognise the fact, though without stating so, that forests are, virtually, an item of 
mass consumption, as far as the local people are concerned, due to their daily interaction. This 
interaction will often result in small offences or indiscretions which need to be discouraged but cannot 
be totally prevented without seriously inconveniencing the masses. In recognition of this fact, the laws, 
both WLPA and IFA provide that minor offences such as illicit grazing, trespass, removal of small 
timber etc., which ne arly everyone commits, are compoundable, while serious crimes like hunting in 
protected areas, changing boundary pillars, counterfeiting official marks etc. are dealt with more 
severely. This is also expedient for the enforcement agencies as they do not ha ve to prosecute every 
small offender. Otherwise, it would take a huge amount of time and money to prosecute thousands of 
tribals and other poor people each year. But the amended WLPA provides, in section 51 (1C), that in 
the core area of a tiger reserve, n o offences can be compounded as it provides minimum penalty 
(imprisonment for 3 years) for all offences, irrespective of their gravity. The states find it impossible to 
enforce this section as thousands of people still live in the core areas of tiger reserves (thankfully no 
more in MP) and it will be a herculean task for the field staff to be able to launch prosecutions against 
them every day. As a result, the authorities continue to compound petty offences even in core areas 
while simultaneously begging the NTCA to change the law. But the latest proposal (2013) to amend the 
law does not carry any provision to that effect. 
5. Why Five Schedules? 
The five schedules in the Act (other than schedule VI, which relates to endangered plants) were 
obviously meant to classify our wildlife according to their rarity or the prevailing threat perception. The 
word game was used as a synonym for wild animals, in line with the global practice, meaning thereby 
that wild animals were meant to be hunted for recreation as well. Accordingly, the schedules were given 
titles such as, special game (Sch. II), big game (Sch. III), small game (Sch. IV), vermin ( Sch. V) etc. 
The hunting fees were also prescribed on the basis of the schedule in which a species occurred. Although 
these titles were deleted in 1991, perhaps in order to purge the publ ic mind of the very concept of 
"game", the existence of these five schedules shows the five levels of "game" value assigned to various 
species by the original authors of the Act. [Schedule I contains a list of animals with the highest threat 
(no game value)]. Accordingly, graded restrictions were imposed on hunting, trade a nd possession of 
353

these species. However, in most sections providing protection to animals listed in Schedule I, animals 
listed in part II of schedule II, are also mentioned (section 40, 41, 43, 48, 49, 51). It is not clear why all 
the endangered animals could not be kept in schedule I itself. Strangely entries in part I of schedule II 
have no special protection and are completely at par with entries in 3rd and 4th schedules.  There is no 
difference in protection levels available to schedule III and IV. Several adhoc changes in the schedule 
have also robbed them of whatever order they may have had to begin with. Obviously, there is no 
justification for so many schedules at all. The Act provides stiffer penalties for offences related to 
animals from schedule I and part II of schedule II, while all other schedules attract relatively lighter, 
uniform, punishment. Accordingly, it should be much more convenient to have only two schedules, 
according to the protection they are provided. Any animal not in the two sched ules will automatically 
be unprotected or vermin. The unnecessary plethora of schedules creates confusion in the minds of the 
public as well as the implementing authorities and serves no purpose at all. 
Moreover, it is impractical to provide the same level  of protection to a species throughout the 
country. A species may be common in one state or even a district and rare in other parts of the country, 
with concomitant implications for the local people. It is illogical and unviable to let some people suffer 
at the hands of a pest on the grounds that the species is rarer somewhere else. The level of protection 
provided to a species should be decided by the States, on a population to population basis, depending 
upon its abundance or rarity. For example, blackbuck is a schedule I species. It is a serious crop pest in 
most parts of north and central India, but it cannot be killed or captured. Wild pig and nilgai are other 
common crop pests but can be allowed to  be hunted. In MP, demand for crop protection measures 
against blackbuck is as high as that for the pig and nilgai but the state cannot do anything, not even an 
eyewash. Even capturing them for crop protection is illegal, as per our law. 
Thus, there is a strong case not only for reducing the number of schedules, but also for allowing their 
state level customisation. 
6. Rule Making Powers of Centre and States 
Section 63 and 64 list the rule making powers of the Centre and the states respectively. Apart from 
other things, these sections also empower the Centre and the States to make rules regarding permits, 
licences, trade and transactions related to wildlife and wildlife articles. Clauses (h) to (j) of section 63 
and clauses (d), (e), (f) and (g) of section 64 empower both the governments to make rules regarding 
hunting, sale, purchase, transactions etc. related to wildlife. As several sections of the Act have been 
amended to disallow any transactions related to wildlife, these p owers are superfluous at the moment 
but remind us of the days gone by when wildlife was still a possession to be proud of. If utilisation of 
wildlife for human well-being had not been banned, these overlapping powers could have been a source 
of conflict between the states and the centre. 
7. Concentration of Powers in the Centre 
At the outset, the law assigned a preeminent role to the states in conservation as they notified and 
denotified protected areas, regulated hunting and trade in wildlife products and controlled poaching and 
other crimes. Centre had virtually no role in the actual happenings except making the law and providing 
some funding. However, a series of amendments have seriously depleted the decision-making powers 
of the states and they have now been reduced to doing the biddings of the centre. For example: 
• Until 2003, wildlife sanctuaries could be notified or denotified by the states but now the states 
can notify a sanctuary  but cannot denotify it , or change its boundaries, without the prior 
permission of the NBWL i.e. the GoI {section 26-A (3)}. 
354

• Similarly the states could earlier alter the boundaries of a national park with the permission of 
the state legislature, but since 2003, the permission of the NBWL has been made mandatory 
{section 35 (5)}. 
• Any deletion of areas from sanctuaries and national parks also needs the permission of the 
Supreme Court (order dated 13.11.2000 in I.A. No. 2 in WP No. 337/1995). 
• Until 2003, the CWLW was empowered to allow the destruction, exploitation or removal  of 
animals or removal of forest produce from national parks or modification of the habitat therein, 
for better management of wildlife, but now he needs the permission of the NBWL [section 35 
(6)]. Although in the case of sanctuaries, he needs the permission of th e SBWL [sec tion 29], 
instead of the NBWL, the Supreme Court has ordered that permission of the standing committee 
of the NBWL is mandatory before giving any permission under section 29 (orders dated 
09.05.2002 in I.A. No. 18 In WP No. 337/1995 ). Of course the permission of the court is also 
required. Since 2006, permission of the NTCA is also required as per section 38 -O (1) (g) in 
relation to tiger reserves. 
• Until 2006, the CWLW was competent to decide the management of PAs as per section 33, but 
now the NTCA approves the management plans (tiger conservation plans) of nearly all important 
PAs as they are the core areas of tiger reserves . Every sin gle aspect of the tiger reserve 
management like, tourism, research, ecodevelopment etc. requires NTCA approval now (section 
38-O). 
• NTCA and NBWL approve all major development projects even outside PAs [section 38-O (g)]. 
• NTCA has been given the power to ”issue directions to any person, officer or authority for the 
protection of  tiger and that person, officer or authority shall be bound to comply with the 
directions” [section 38-O (2)]. This power is unprecedented in India. 
• NTCA also controls the management of forests outside tiger reserv es, through the tiger 
conservation plans which need NTCA approval [38 V (3) (c)]. The forestry operations of regular 
forest divisions adjoining tiger reserves cannot be incompatible with the needs of tiger 
conservation. 
• NBWL, which did not exist till 2003,  can frame policies related to conservation in the country 
(section 5C). In effect, NBWL means central bureaucracy. 
Whether this shift in power balance is good or bad for the future of conservation can be debated. In 
my opinion, these changes have been ext remely counterproductive. Most of these chang es have been 
brought about as an expression of the distrust of the central government regarding the commitment of 
the states to conservation. How the states have allowed such a humiliating depletion of their powers to 
manage their own resources is very surprising. Perhaps the states were never consulted on these 
amendments, despite it being a constitutional requirement. Isn't it bizarre that the Centre can make laws 
about a property it does not own, without even consulting the owners? Perhaps, it happens only in India! 
Wildlife Laws in Our Neighbourhood 
Although India prides itself as the role model in conservation for the South Asian countries, wildlife 
laws of our neighbours seem to be much more realistic than o urs. They have several elements which 
we may do well to examine for inclusion in our law. 
Bangladesh’s Wildlife (Conservation and Security) Act 2012, for example, allows game farming in 
the form of crocodile farms, deer farms and snake farms etc. If used c reatively, this provision has the 
potential to show that wild animals can also be a natural resource for the country. Due to its small size, 
Bangladesh has very limited scope for using in situ conservation as a means of rural development. 
Although we, in I ndia, would say that such farms can be a threat to in situ conservation as they may 
355

encourage poaching from the wild, Bangladesh, perhaps, feels that these farms can create significant 
rural employment, and save the species in the wild, in turn. 
Bhutan has probably the best and simplest forest law in the region. Unlike all other countries, there 
is a single law for forests and wildlife, which makes life much easier for all concerned. Forest and 
Nature Conservation Act of Bhutan 1995, provides that all fores ts in the country are government 
reserved forests, but any reserved forest can be converted into a community forest and vice versa. 
Protected areas, namely the national parks and wildlife sanctuaries etc. are part of the forest law rather 
than nesting in a separate wildlife law. The law has only one schedule containing a list of protected wild 
animals and plants. While the protected animals can be hunted only under special circumstances, other 
animals can be hunted under a regular hunting permit. 
Nepal’s National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act, 1973 provides for only one schedule 
containing protected animals which cannot be hunted while other species can be hunted under a hunting 
permit, in hunting reserves, within a specified annual quota. Nepal has a unique law in that it can legally 
entrust the management of natural areas to c onservation “institutions” (or NGOs ) for integrated 
management in the name of "conservation reserves". The law also provides for the constitution of ”users 
committees” in protected areas “for the management of fallen trees, dry wood, firewood and grass”. 
The law provides for earmarking 30 -50% of park revenues for community development. Along with 
these rather liberal provisions, the Nepalese law has some very harsh provi sions for offenders. The 
maximum penalty for a wildlife crime can go upto 15 years, which is t he highest in the region. 
Surprisingly, this punishment can be awarded by a wildlife warden or a forest officer in charge of a 
protected area. In Nepal, the army guards the important PAs like Chitwan National Park. That Nepal 
enjoyed 5 years of zero poaching between 2011 and 2018, in relation to tiger, rhino and elephant, may 
be the result of such special provisions in their laws. 
In Pakistan, forests and wildlife is a provincial subject and all states have their own conservation 
laws, although they are mere duplications of “The Pakistan Wildlife Ordinance 1971”, except some 
differences in the schedules of protected species. The law provides for two schedules. Anima ls in the 
First Schedule are called the “game birds” and can be hunted with a permit while those in the Second 
Schedule cannot be hunted, except in special circumstances. The law provides very clear distinction 
between a wildlife sanctuary, national park a nd a game reserve. A sanctuary is an area for the 
“protection of wildlife”, national parks are areas of “outstanding scenic merit”. Hunting of animals 
and birds can be allowed in “game reserves” and “private game reserves”. The sport hunting 
programmes of endangered species like the markhor (Capra falconeri jerdeni) and Afghan urial (Ovis 
orientalis cycleros) in the north western Pakistan are a role model in conservation for the entire world. 
They have helped to replace indiscrim inate poaching with limited off-take and impressive gains in 
animal populations and local incomes. 
Although USA is not our neighbour, a brief reference to her conservation framework will be useful. 
All major national parks in that country, such as Yellowstone National Park, Yosemite National Park 
etc. are created under independent laws. Therefore, there is complete clarity about how they are going 
to be managed and controlled. Secondly, 'national parks', 'national forests' and 'national monuments' are 
created on federal lands while the state properties are called state parks, state forests etc. Unlike India, 
federal government in USA has no role or authority in the management of states' assets. As a result, the 
scope for conflict between the federal and state agencies is perhaps far less in USA than here. 
356

Conclusion 
As we have seen above, WLPA is a bundle of contradictions and inconsistencies. The reason why 
wildlife is still surviving in the country despite such a poor law, is, perhaps, that the law is irrelevant to 
what happens on the ground. That we have lost most animals from 95% of our forests is proof that 
someone is killing, eating or trading wildlife, despite the absence of permits and licenses. Perhaps one 
can argue that the loss of wildlife is due to poor implementation of the law rather than due to the 
deficiencies of the law. But if the law  ignores basic ground realities and  is such that it just cannot be 
implemented, poor implementation would not be an issue at all. Perhaps the law is barking up the wrong 
tree. It ignores the fundamental reality that large wil d animals can survive in a densely populated and 
poor country only if they are useful to man. They will not be safe only as ecological actors as their 
ecological role, i.e. controlling herbivore populations and vegetation composition, as the case may be, 
has already been taken over by man.  Whether we have lost our wildlife due to our law, or despite it, 
will always remain a matter of debate. But, what is beyond debates is that most of its amendments have 
been ill-planned and are inconsistent with one another. More importantly, they have robbed the Act of 
its original pragmatism and worldliness. 
Apart from the fact that the Act does not provide any clear direction to the authorities for preserving 
wildlife, it also does not say what to do when there are too many animals, locally or regionally. The 
objective of the law is to protect wild animals, but it does not recognise the fact that protection of 
one animal can be the demise of another due to interspecific conflict and competition. While one 
species can be food for another, species also have to fight over shared resources. Human 
intervention is necessary under such circumstances but the law does not allow much freedom of 
action. Wherever, the law does provide some scope for action, too many authorities are involved in 
decision making. States have virtually no authority to decide how to manage their wildlife or PAs as 
permissions of central agencies are always required. Several sections contradict each other or repeat 
what is already provided elsewhere. Thus, the Act is in an urgent need of overhaul, even 
replacement. The best course perhaps will be to return to the original character of the Act and 
strengthen it further in the light of global best practices. Haphazard tinkering, as has been the 
practice so far, will compound the confusion further, leaving animals as well as people in ongoing 
pain. 
357

Remarks on Wildlife (Protection) Act,1972 as contained in Bill no.159 of 2021 
 
Sl.No. Section Amendment After Amendment Remarks of MoEFCC on amendment Remarks 
1 Preamble for the words "protection 
of wild animals, birds 
and plants", the words 
"conservation, protection 
and management of wild 
life" shall be substituted. 
An Act to provide for the 
conservation, protection and 
management of wild life and for 
matters connected 
therewith or ancillary or incidental 
thereto with a view to ensuring the 
ecological and environmental 
security of the country 
This clause seeks to amend the 
preamble of the Wild Life 
(Protection) Act,1972 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act). It 
proposes to include the aspects of 
"conservation" and "management" of 
wild life in the preamble in addition 
to the existing term"protection" 
since these broader actions are the 
need of the time and are to be 
provided forin the Act. Instead of 
using the terms wild animals, birds 
and plants separately, the term 
"wildlife" is proposed to be included 
since as per the principal Act, wild 
animals include birds andwild life 
includes wild animals and plants.. 
As  wild animals, 
birds and plants are 
included in the 
definition of wildlife, 
the amendment is 
justified 
2 2(5) for the words and figures 
"Schedule I, Schedule II, 
Schedule III 
or Schedule IV", the 
words and figures 
"Schedule I or Schedule 
II" shall be substituted 
“captive animal” means any animal, 
specified in Schedule I or 
Schedule II,  which is captured or 
kept or bred in captivity; 
This clause seeks to amend section 
2 of the principal Act which relates 
todefinitions 
Due to substitution of 
new Schedules , the 
amendment is 
suggested 
3 2(16) after the words "wild 
animal", the words "or 
specified plant" 
shall be inserted; 
“habitat” includes land, water or 
vegetation which is the natural 
home of any wild animal or 
specified plant 
This clause seeks to amend section 
2 of the principal Act which relates 
todefinitions 
Due to inclusionof 
plants in the 
schedules the 
amendment is 
suggested 
4 2(16A) '(16A) "invasive alien New definition inserted This clause seeks to amend section The definition enables 
358

species" means a species 
of animal or plant which 
is 
not native to India and 
whose introduction or 
spread may threaten or 
adversely 
impact wild life or its 
habitat;'; 
2 of the principal Act which relates 
todefinitions 
identification of 
foreign species which 
damage local 
vegaetation 
5 2(18A) for the words and figures 
"Schedules I to V", the 
words and 
figures "Schedules I, II 
and IV" shall be 
substituted 
“livestock” means farm animals and 
includes buffaloes, bulls, bullocks, 
camels, cows,donkeys, goats, 
sheep, horses, mules, yaks, pigs, 
ducks, geese, poultry and their 
young but does notinclude any 
animal specified in Schedules I,II 
and IV 
This clause seeks to amend section 
2 of the principal Act which relates 
todefinitions 
Due to  substitution of 
Schedules, the 
amendment is 
suggested 
6 2(19) for the words and figures 
"Schedules I to V and VI", 
the wordsand figures 
"Schedules I, II and III" 
shall be substituted 
“manufacturer” means a person 
who manufactures articles from any 
animal or plantspecified in 
Schedules I,II and III, as the case 
may be; 
This clause seeks to amend section 
2 of the principal Act which relates 
todefinitions 
Due to  substitution of 
Schedules, the 
amendment is 
suggested 
7 2(24) '(24) "person" shall 
include any firm or 
company or any authority 
or 
association or body of 
individuals whether 
incorporated or not;'; 
'(24) "person" shall include any 
firm or company or any authority 
or 
association or body of individuals 
whether incorporated or not;'; 
This clause seeks to amend section 
2 of the principal Act which relates 
todefinitions 
The existing clause 
“person” includes a 
firm is substituted by 
wider definition 
8 2(26A) '(26A) "Schedule" means 
a Schedule appended to 
this Act;'; 
New amendment This clause seeks to amend section 
2 of the principal Act which relates 
todefinitions 
The new amendment 
specifies that 
„schedule‟means 
schedule appended to 
359

the Act 
9 2(27) for the word and figures 
"Schedule VI", the word 
and figures 
"Schedule III" shall be 
substituted 
“specified plant” means any plant 
specified in Schedule III; 
This clause seeks to amend section 
2 of the principal Act which relates 
todefinitions 
Due to  substitution of 
Schedules, the 
amendment is 
suggested 
10 2(34) "vermin" means any wild 
animal notified under 
section 62;'; 
“vermin” means any wild animal 
notified under section 62 
This clause seeks to amend section 
2 of the principal Act which relates 
todefinitions 
Due to deletion of 
Schedule VI, the 
notification is 
proposed under 
Section 62 
 
11 2(36) for the words and figures 
"Schedules I to IV", the 
words and 
figures "Schedule I or 
Schedule II" shall be 
substituted; 
 “wild animal” means any animal 
specified in Schedules I or 
Schedule II and found wild in 
nature 
This clause seeks to amend section 
2 of the principal Act which relates 
todefinitions 
Due to  substitution of 
Schedules, the 
amendment is 
suggested 
12 2(39)  "zoo" means an 
establishment whether 
stationary or mobile, 
where 
captive animals are kept 
for exhibiting to the 
public or ex-situ 
conservation and 
includes a circus and off-
exhibit facilities such as 
rescue centres and 
conservation 
breeding centres, but 
does not include an 
establishment of a 
Existing clause is substituted This clause seeks to amend section 
2 of the principal Act which relates 
todefinitions 
The existing clause  
“zoo” means an 
establishment, 
whether stationary or 
mobile, where captive 
animals are 
kept for exhibition to 
the public and 
includes a circus and 
rescue centres but 
does not include an 
establishment of a 
licensed dealer in 
captive animals 
is substituted. 
360

licensed dealer in 
captive animals.'. 
13 5A in sub-section (1), for 
clause (d), the following 
clause shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
"(d) Member, NITI Aayog 
in-charge of 
Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change 
5A. Constitution of the National 
Board for Wild Life.—(1) The 
Central Government shall,within 
three months from the date of 
commencement of the Wild Life 
(Protection) Amendment Act, 2002 
(16 of 2003), constitute the National 
Board for Wild Life consisting of the 
following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the Prime Minister as 
Chairperson; 
(b) the Minister in-charge of Forests 
and Wild Life as Vice-Chairperson; 
(c) three members of Parliament of 
whom two shall be from the House 
of the People and one 
from the Council of States; 
(d)Member, NITI Aayog in-charge 
of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change; 
… 
…. 
This clause seeks to amend section 
5A of the principal Act which relates 
tothe constitution of the National 
Board for Wild Life. It proposes to 
replace the "Member,Planning 
Commission in-charge of Forests 
and Wild Life" with the "Member, 
NITI Aayogin-charge of 
Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change" as a member of the 
National Boardsince the Planning 
Commission has been replaced with 
NITI Aayog. 
Due to constitution of 
NITI Aayog in place of 
Planning Commission 
14 5B(3) for the words "in 
properdischarge of 
functions assigned to it", 
the words "on such terms 
and conditions as may be 
prescribed for proper 
discharge of functions 
assigned to it under the 
Act'' shall be substituted 
The National Board may constitute 
committees, sub-committees or 
study groups, as may benecessary, 
from time to time on such terms 
and conditions as may 
beprescribed for proper discharge 
of functions assigned to it under 
the Act 
This clause seeks to amend sub-
section (3) of section 5B of the 
principalAct which relates to the 
Standing Committee of the National 
Board for Wild Life. It is proposed 
to provide that rules may be made 
to prescribe the terms and 
conditions of committees,sub-
committees or study groups to be 
This is enabling 
clause for constituting 
Committees or Sub-
Committees by the 
National Board. 
361

constituted by the National Board 
for proper dischargeof functions 
assigned to it under the Act. 
15 6A "6A. (1) The Board may 
constitute a Standing 
Committee for the 
purpose of 
exercising such powers 
and performing such 
duties as may be 
delegated to it by the 
Board. 
(2) The Standing 
Committee shall consist 
of the Vice-Chairperson, 
the 
Member-Secretary, and 
not more than ten 
members, to be 
nominated by the 
Vice-Chairperson, from 
amongst the members of 
the Board. 
 (3) The Board or its 
Standing Committee 
referred to in sub-section 
(1) may, 
constitute committees, 
sub-committees or study 
groups, as may be 
necessary, from 
time-to-time, for proper 
discharge of the 
functions assigned to it.". 
New provision inserted This clause seeks to insert a new 
section 6A allowing the State Board 
forWild Life to constitute a Standing 
Committee to exercise such powers 
and perform suchduties as may be 
delegated to it by the Board. It 
provides for the membership of such 
Standing Committee to be the Vice-
Chairperson, the Member-Secretary, 
and not more thanten members, to 
be nominated by the Vice-
Chairperson, from amongst the 
members of theBoard. It further 
provides for such Standing 
Committee to constitute 
committees,sub-committees or 
study groups as may be necessary 
As National Board 
cannot meet 
frequently, standing 
committees are 
formed to attend to 
concerned matters. 
362

16 9 for the words and figures 
"Schedules I, II, III and 
IV", the words and figures 
"Schedules I and II" shall 
be substituted. 
No person shall hunt any wild 
animal specified in Schedules I 
and  II,  
except as provided under section 11 
and section 12. 
This clause seeks to substitute the 
words and figures "Schedules I, II, 
III 
and IV" with the words and figures 
"Schedules I and II" in section 9 
which relates toprohibition on 
hunting. This is a consequential 
amendment in view of 
rationalisation of theSchedules to 
the principal Act. 
 
Due to  substitution of 
Schedules, the 
amendment is 
suggested 
17 11 in sub-section (1), in 
clause (b), the words 
andfigures ", Schedule III, 
or Schedule IV," shall be 
omitted 
(b) the Chief Wild Life Warden or 
the authorised officer may, if he is 
satisfied that any wildanimal 
specified in Schedule II, has become 
dangerous to human life or 
to property (including standing 
crops on any land) or is so disabled 
or diseased as to be beyond 
recovery, by order in writing and 
stating the reasons therefor, permit 
any person to hunt such animal 
or group of animals in a specified 
area or cause such animal or group 
of animals in that specified area 
to be hunted 
This clause seeks to omit the words 
and figures ", Schedule III, or 
ScheduleIV," in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 11 which 
relates to hunting of wild animals 
tobe permitted in certain cases. This 
is a consequential amendment in 
view of rationalisation ofthe 
Schedules to the principal Act. 
Due to  substitution of 
Schedules, the 
amendment is 
suggested 
18 24 in sub-section (2), in 
clause (b), for the words 
andfigures "Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894", 
the words and figures 
"Right to Fair 
Compensation 
and Transparency in 
(b) proceed to acquire such land or 
rights, except where by an 
agreement between the owner 
ofsuch land or holder of rights and 
the Government, the owner or 
holder of such rights has agreed 
tosurrender his rights to the 
Government, in or over such land” 
This clause seeks to amend section 
24 of the principal Act which relates 
toacquisition of rights to substitute 
the reference to the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 
1894)with the Right to Fair 
Compensation and Transparency in 
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitationand 
The repealed Act has 
been substituted by 
new Act. 
363

Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013" 
shall be 
substituted. 
and on payment of such 
compensation,as is provided in the 
Right to Fair Compensation 
and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013 
Resettlement Act, 2013 (30 of 2013) 
since the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 
has beenrepealed. 
19 25 (a) in clause (a), for the 
words and figures "Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894", 
thewords and figures 
"Right to Fair 
Compensation and 
Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) in clauses (b) and (c), 
for the word and figure 
"section 9", the word and 
figures "section 21" shall 
be substituted; 
(c) in clause (d), for the 
words and figures 
"section 18" and "Part 
III", the wordsand figures 
"section 64" and "Chapter 
VIII" shall respectively be 
substituted; 
(d) in clause (e), for the 
words "the Court", the 
words "the Authority" 
shall besubstituted; 
(e) after clause (f), the 
(1) For the purpose of acquiring 
such land, or rights in or over 
suchland,— 
(a) the Collector shall be deemed to 
be a Collector, proceeding under 
Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land 
Acquisition,Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013; 
(b) the claimant shall be deemed to 
be a person interested and 
appearing before him in 
pursuanceof a notice given under 
section 21 of that Act; 
(c) the provisions of the sections, 
preceding section 21 of that Act, 
shall be deemed to have been 
complied with; 
(d) where the claimant does not 
accept the award made in his 
favour in the matter of 
compensation, he shall be deemed, 
within the meaning of section 64 of 
that Act, to be a personinterested 
who has not accepted the award, 
and shall be entitled to proceed to 
claim relief against theaward under 
the provisions of Chapter VIII of 
This clause seeks to amend section 
25 of the principal Act which relates 
to acquisition proceedings to 
substitute references to Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894) 
(hereinafter referred to as the Act, 
1894) with the Right to Fair 
Compensation and Transparency 
in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation 
and Resettlement Act, 2013 (30 of 
2013) (hereinafterreferred to as the 
Act, 2013) since the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 has been 
repealed. 
It proposes, in sub-section (1) of 
section 25 of the principal Act, to— 
(i) substitute the Act, 1894 with the 
Act, 2013 in clause (a); 
(ii) substitute the reference to 
section 9 of the Act, 1894 with 
section 21 of theAct, 2013 in 
clauses (b) and (c); 
(iii) substitute the references to 
section 18 and Part III of the Act, 
1894 withsection 64 and Chapter 
VIII respectively of the Act, 2013 in 
clause (d); 
(iv) substitute the reference to the 
The amendments are 
due to consequential 
substitution of Acts. 
364

following Explanation 
shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
'Explanation.—The 
expression "Authority" 
referred to in clause (e), 
shallmean the Land 
Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Authority 
establishedunder section 
51 of the Right to Fair 
Compensation and 
Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013.'. 
that Act; 
(e) the Collector, with the consent of 
the claimant, or the court, with the 
consent of both the 
parties, may award compensation 
in land or money or partly in land 
and partly in money; and 
(f) in the case of the stoppage of a 
public way or a common pasture, 
the Collector may, with the 
previous sanction of the State 
Government, provide for an 
alternative public way or common 
pasture,as far as may be 
practicable or convenient. 
Court under the Act, 1894 with the 
Authorityunder the Act, 2013 in 
clause (e); and 
(v) insert an Explanation to the 
effect that the expression 'Authority' 
shall meanthe Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation, and Resettlement 
Authority established under 
section 51 of the Act, 2013 
20 28(1) in sub-section (1), in 
clause (b), after the word 
"photography", the words 
"and film-making without 
making any change in 
the habitat orcausing any 
adverse impact to the 
habitat or wild life" shall 
be inserted. 
The Chief Wild Life Warden may, on 
application, grant to any person 
apermit to enter or reside in a 
sanctuary for all or any of the 
following purposes, namely:— 
(a) investigation or study of wild life 
and purposes ancillary or incidental 
thereto; 
(b) photographyand film-making 
without making any change in 
the habitat or causing any 
adverse impact to the habitat or 
wild life; 
(c) scientific research; 
(d) tourism; 
(e) transaction of lawful business 
with any person residing in the 
This clause seeks to amend section 
28 of the principal Act which relates 
to grant of permit. It proposes to 
include film-making without making 
any change in thehabitat or causing 
any adverse impact to the habitat or 
wildlife as one of the purposes for 
which permits may be granted to 
enter or reside in a sanctuary 
The amendment 
enables permits film 
shootings 
365

sanctuary 
21 29 (a) for the word "Board", 
the words "National 
Board" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) for the Explanation, 
the following Explanation 
shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
"Explanation.—For the 
purposes of this section, 
grazing or movement of 
livestock permitted under 
clause (d) of section 33, 
or hunting of wild 
animalsunder a permit 
granted under section 11 
or hunting without 
violating theconditions of 
a permit granted under 
section 12, or the 
exercise of any 
rightspermitted to 
continue under clause (c) 
of sub-section (2) of 
section 24, or the 
bona fide use of drinking 
and household water by 
local communities, shall 
notbe deemed to be an 
act prohibited under this 
section.". 
Destruction, etc., in a sanctuary 
prohibited without a permit.—No 
person shall destroy, 
exploit or remove any wild life 
including forest produce from a 
sanctuary or destroy or damage or 
divertthe habitat of any wild animal 
by any act whatsoever or divert, 
stop or enhance the flow of water 
into oroutside the sanctuary, except 
under and in accordance with a 
permit granted by the Chief Wild 
LifeWarden, and no such permit 
shall be granted unless the State 
Government being satisfied in 
consultationwith the National 
Board that such removal of wild life 
from the sanctuary or the change in 
the flow of water into or 
outside the sanctuary is necessary 
for the improvement and better 
management of wild life 
therein,authorises the issue of such 
permit: 
Provided that where the forest 
produce is removed from a 
sanctuary the same may be used 
formeeting the personal bona fide 
needs of the people living in and 
around the sanctuary and shall not 
beused for any commercial 
purpose. 
Explanation.—For the purposes 
This clause seeks to amend section 
29 of the principal Act which relates 
destruction, etc., in a sanctuary 
prohibited without a permit. 
It proposes to substitute the 
reference to the State Board for Wild 
Life in the sectionwith the National 
Board. 
It further proposes to substitute the 
Explanation to section 29 of the 
principal Act so asto enhance the 
scope of the Explanation to exclude 
hunting of wild animals under a 
permitgranted under section 11 or 
hunting without violating the 
conditions of a permit granted 
under section 12 or the exercise of 
any rights permitted to continue 
under clause (c) ofsub-section (2) of 
section 24, and the bona fide use of 
drinking and household water by 
localcommunities from the scope of 
the prohibition in section 29. 
The revised 
explanation includes 
many exemptions. 
366

of this section, grazing or 
movement of livestock permitted 
under clause (d) of section 33, or 
hunting of wild animals under a 
permit granted under section 11 
or hunting without violating the 
conditions of a permit granted 
under section 12, or the exercise 
of any rights permitted to 
continue under clause (c) of sub-
section (2) of section 24, or 
thebona fide use of drinking and 
household water by local 
communities, shall not be 
deemed to be an act prohibited 
under this section.". 
22 33 (a) after the words 
"manage and maintain all 
sanctuaries", the words, 
bracketsand figures "in 
accordance with such 
management plans for 
the sanctuary approved 
by him as per the 
guidelines issued by the 
Central Government and 
in case the sanctuary 
also falls under the 
Scheduled Areas or areas 
where the Scheduled 
Tribes and Other 
Traditional Forest 
Dwellers (Recognition of 
Forest Rights) Act, 2006 
Control of sanctuaries.—The Chief 
Wild Life Warden shall be the 
authority who shall control, 
in accordance with such 
management plans for the 
sanctuary approved 
by him as per the guidelines 
issued by the Central 
Government and in case the 
sanctuary 
also falls under the Scheduled 
Areas or areas where the 
Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) 
Act, 2006 is applicable, in 
accordance with the management 
plan for such sanctuary prepared 
This clause seeks to amend section 
33 of the principal Act which relates 
to control of sanctuaries. It proposes 
that the Chief Wild Life Warden 
shall control, manageand maintain 
all sanctuaries in accordance with 
the management plan prepared as 
per 
guidelines issued by the Central 
Government and in the case of 
sanctuaries falling in Scheduled 
Areas or areas where the Scheduled 
Tribes and Other Traditional Forest 
Dwellers (Recognitionof Forest 
Rights) Act, 2006 is applicable, in 
accordance with the management 
plan preparedafter due consultation 
with the concerned Gram Sabha. It 
The Wildlife 
sanctuaries 
management is 
pr0posed to be done 
with approval of Gram 
Sabha as provided in 
Forest Rights 
Act,2006 
367

is applicable, in 
accordance with the 
management plan for 
such sanctuary prepared 
after dueconsultation 
with the Gram Sabha 
concerned" shall be 
inserted; 
(b) in clause (a), in the 
proviso, for the words 
"commercial tourist 
lodges", thewords "tourist 
lodges, including 
Government lodges, for 
commercial purposes" 
shallbe substituted. 
after due consultation with the 
Gram Sabha concernedand for 
that purpose, within the limits of 
any sanctuary,— 
(a) may construct such roads, 
bridges, buildings, fences or barrier 
gates, and carry out such other 
works as he may consider 
necessary for the purposes of such 
sanctuary: 
Provided that no construction of 
tourist lodges, including 
Government lodges, for 
commercial purposes, hotels, zoos 
and safari parksshall be 
undertaken inside a sanctuary 
except with the prior approval of 
the National Board. 
(b) shall take such steps as will 
ensure the security of wild animals 
in the sanctuary and the 
preservation of the sanctuary and 
wild animals therein 
c) may take such measures, in the 
interests of wild life, as he may 
consider necessary for the 
improvement of any habitat; 
(d) may regulate, control or 
prohibit, in keeping with the 
interests of wild life, the grazing or 
movement of live-stock. 
further proposes to include 
Government lodges for commercial 
purposes within the purview of the 
proviso to clause (a)of section 33. 
368

23 34(3) after sub-section (3), the 
following sub-section 
shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
"(4) No renewal of any 
licence under the Arms 
Act, 1959, shall be 
granted to any 
person residing within 
ten kilometres of a 
sanctuary except under 
the intimation to the 
Chief Wild Life Warden or 
the authorised officer.". 
New sub-section added This clause seeks to amend section 
34 of the principal Act which 
relates to registration of certain 
persons in possession of arms. It 
seeks to insert a newsub-section (4) 
whereby no renewal of any arms 
licences shall be granted to any 
personresiding within ten kilometres 
of a sanctuary except under the 
intimation to the Chief WildLife 
Warden or the authorised officer. 
The amendment 
provides for 
permission of Chief 
Wildlife Warden for 
renewal of Arms 
Licence. 
24 35(8) in sub-section (8), for the 
words and figures 
"sections 27 and 28", the 
words, figures and letter 
"sections 18A, 27 and 28" 
shall besubstituted. 
The provisions of sections 18A, 27 
and 28, sections 30 to 32 (both 
inclusive), and clauses (a), (b) and 
(c) of section 33, section 33A shall, 
as far as may be, apply in relation 
to a National Park as they apply 
in relation to a sanctuary. 
This clause seeks to amend section 
35 of the principal Act which relates 
to declaration of National Parks. It 
proposes to extend section 18A of 
the principal Act whichrelates to 
protection to sanctuaries, which 
currently applies only to 
sanctuaries, to NationalParks as 
well 
The protection 
available proposed 
Sanctuaries under 
Section 18A is 
extended to proposed  
National parks  
25 36D(2) in sub-section (2),— 
(a) for the words "five 
representatives", the 
words "not less than five 
representatives" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (2), 
the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
(2) The committee shall consist of 
not less than five representatives 
nominated by the Village Panchayat 
or wheresuch Panchayat does not 
exist by the members of the Gram 
Sabha and one representative of the 
StateForests or Wild Life 
Department under whose 
jurisdiction the community reserve 
is located 
This clause seeks to amend section 
36D of the principal Act which 
relatesto community reserve 
management committee. It proposes 
to change the representatives to 
be nominated to the committee by 
the Village Panchayat or Gram 
Sabha from "five" to "not 
less than five". 
It further proposes to insert a new 
The private 
community reserve 
also is proposed to 
provided with a 
management  
committee. 
369

"(2A) Where a community 
reserve is declared on 
private land under 
sub-section (1) of section 
36C, the community 
reserve management 
committeeshall consist of 
the owner of the land, a 
representative of the 
State Forests or 
Wild Life Department 
under whose jurisdiction 
the community reserve is 
locatedand also the 
representative of the 
Panchayat concerned or 
the tribal community, 
as the case may be." 
"(2A) Where a community reserve 
is declared on private land under 
sub-section (1) of section 36C, 
the community reserve 
management committee shall 
consist of the owner of the land, 
a representative of the State 
Forests orWild Life Department 
under whose jurisdiction the 
community reserve is located and 
also the representative of the 
Panchayat concerned or the 
tribal community,as the case 
may be." 
sub-section (2A) which provides that 
where acommunity reserve is 
declared on private land under sub-
section (1) of section 36C, the 
community reserve management 
committee shall consist of the owner 
of the land along witha 
representative of the State Forests 
or Wildlife Department under whose 
jurisdiction thecommunity reserve is 
located. 
 
26 38 (a) in the marginal 
heading, after the words 
"National Parks", the 
words "or 
conservation reserves" 
shall be inserted; 
(b) after sub-section (2), 
the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
"(2A) The Central 
Government may, if it is 
satisfied that the 
conditionsspecified in 
sub-section (1) of section 
36A are fulfilled in 
38. Power of Central Government 
to declare areas as sanctuaries or 
National Parksor Conservation 
Reserves—(1) Where 
the State Government leases or 
otherwise transfers any area under 
its control, not being an area within 
asanctuary, to the Central 
Government, the Central 
Government may, if it is satisfied 
that the conditionsspecified in 
section 18 are fulfilled in relation to 
the area so transferred to it, declare 
such area, bynotification, to be a 
sanctuary and the provisions of 
sections 18 to 35 (both inclusive), 
This clause seeks to amend section 
38 of the principal Act which relates 
to power of the Central Government 
to declare areas as sanctuaries or 
National Parks. Itproposes to amend 
section 38 so as to allow the Central 
Government to declare conservation 
reserves in areas leased or otherwise 
transferred to it by the State 
Government 
Provision is made for 
Conservation reserves 
on par with 
Sanctuaries or 
National Parks. 
370

relation to any area 
referred to in sub-section 
(1), declare such area, by 
notification, to be a 
conservation reserve and 
the provisions of sections 
36A and 36B shall apply 
inrelation to such 
conservation reserve as 
they apply in relation to a 
conservationreserve 
declared by the State 
Government."; 
(c) in sub-section (3),— 
(i) after the words "or 
National Park", the words 
"or conservation reserve" 
shall be inserted; 
(ii) for the words, 
brackets and figures 
"sub-sections (1) and (2)", 
the 
words, brackets, figures 
and letter "sub-sections 
(1), (2) and (2A)" shall be 
substituted 
54 and 55 shallapply in relation to 
such sanctuary as they apply in 
relation to a sanctuary declared by 
the StateGovernment. 
(2) The Central Government may, if 
it is satisfied that the conditions 
specified in section 35 are 
fulfilled in relation to any area 
referred to in section (1), whether or 
not such area has been declared, to 
bea sub sanctuary by the Central 
Government or the State 
Government, declare such area, by 
notification, tobe a National Park 
and the provisions of sections 35, 
54 and 55 shall apply in relation to 
such NationalPark as they apply in 
relation to a National Park declared 
by the State Government. 
"(2A) The Central Government 
may, if it is satisfied that the 
conditions specified in sub-
section (1) of section 36A are 
fulfilled in relation to any area 
referred to in sub-section (1), 
declare such area, by 
notification, to be aconservation 
reserve and the provisions of 
sections 36A and 36B shall apply 
in relation to such conservation 
reserve as they apply in relation 
to a conservation reserve 
declared by the State 
Government 
371

 
(3) In relation to a sanctuary or 
National Park or Conservation 
Reservedeclared by the Central 
Government, the powers and 
duties of the Chief Wild Life Warden 
under the sections referred to in 
sub-sections (1),(2) and (2A), shall 
beexercised and discharged by the 
Director or by such other officer as 
may be authorised by the Director 
inthis behalf and references, in the 
sections aforesaid, to the State 
Government shall be construed as 
references to the Central 
Government and reference therein 
to the Legislature of the State shall 
beconstrued as a reference to 
Parliament. 
27 38L(2) in sub-section (2), in 
clause (o), for the words 
"Inspector General of 
Forests or an officer of 
the equivalent rank", the 
words "an officer not 
below the rank of 
Inspector General of 
Forests" shall be 
substituted. 
38L.Constitution of National 
Tiger Conservation Authority.—
(1) The Central Government shall 
constitute a body to be known as 
the National Tiger Conservation 
Authority (hereinafter in this 
Chapter referred to as the Tiger 
Conservation Authority), to exercise 
the powers conferred on, and to 
perform the functions assigned to it 
under this Act. 
…… 
……. 
 
(o) an officer not 
This clause seeks to amend clause 
(o) of sub-section (2) of section 38L 
ofthe principal Act which relates to 
the constitution of the National 
Tiger ConservationAuthority. It 
proposes to change the rank 
specified for the Member-Secretary 
of the National 
Tiger Conservation Authority from 
Inspector-General of Forests or an 
officer of equivalentrank to an officer 
not below the rank of Inspector-
General of Forests. 
The amendment 
enable to name 
Member Secretary of 
rank of an officer not 
below the rank of 
Inspector General of 
Forests 
372

below the rank of Inspector 
General of Forests having at least 
ten yearsexperience in a tiger 
reserve or wildlife management, 
who shall be the Member-Secretary 
28 38X After section 38X of the 
principal Act, the 
following section shall be 
inserted, 
namely:— 
“38XA.The provisions 
contained in this Chapter 
shall be in addition to, 
and notin derogation of, 
the provisions relating to 
sanctuaries and National 
Parks (whetherincluded 
and declared, or are in 
the process of being so 
declared) included in a 
tigerreserve under this 
Act.”. 
New provision This clause seeks to insert a new 
section 38XA which provides that 
theprovisions contained in Chapter 
IVB shall be in addition to, and not 
in derogation of, theprovisions 
relating to the sanctuaries and 
National Parks (whether included 
and declared, orare in the process of 
being so declared) included in a tiger 
reserve under the principal Act 
The amendment 
clarifies that the 
provisions in Chapter 
IVB will be in addition 
to other provisions of 
the Act. 
29 Chapter 
IVC 
in the heading, for the 
words "TIGER AND 
OTHER ENDANGERED 
SPECIES", the words 
"WILD LIFE" shall be 
substituted. 
Chapter IV C 
WILDLIFE CRIME CONTROL 
BUREAU 
This clause seeks to amend the 
heading of Chapter IVC of the 
principalAct which relates to TIGER 
AND OTHER ENDANGERED 
SPECIES CRIME CONTROL 
BUREAU. It is proposed so as to 
change the name of the Chapter 
from "TIGER AND OTHER 
ENDANGERED SPECIES CRIME 
CONTROL BUREAU" to "WILD LIFE 
CONTROL 
BUREAU". 
The chapter heading 
is simplified 
373

30 38Y (a) in the marginal 
heading, for the words 
"Tiger and other 
Endangered Species", 
the words "Wild Life" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) in the opening 
portion, the words "Tiger 
and other Endangered 
Species 
Crime Control Bureau to 
be known as the" shall be 
omitted; 
(c) in clause (e), for the 
words "Central Excise", 
the words "Central Goods 
and 
Services Tax" shall be 
substituted 
38Y. Constitution of Wildlife 
Crime Control Bureau.—The 
Central Government may, for the 
purposes of this Act, by order 
published in the Official Gazette, 
constitute athe Wildlife Crime 
ControlBureau consisting of— 
… 
… 
(e) the Additional Commissioner 
(Customs and Central Goods and 
Services Tax)—Joint Director; and 
This clause seeks to amend section 
38Y of the principal Act which 
relatesto the constitution of the 
Tiger and other Endangered Species 
Crime Control Bureau. It is 
proposed to amend the marginal 
heading and section so that the 
Bureau is referred to as the 
"Wild Life Crime Control Bureau". It 
is further proposed to change the 
reference fromAdditional 
Commissioner (Customs and 
Central Excise) to Additional 
Commissioner (Customsand Central 
Goods and Services Tax). 
The word Wildlife is 
used in a simple way 
31 39(3) after sub-section (3), the 
following sub-sections 
shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
"(4) Where any such 
Government property is a 
live animal, the State 
Governmentshall ensure 
that it is housed and 
cared for by a recognised 
zoo or rescue centre 
whereit cannot be 
released to its natural 
habitat. 
(5) Any such animal 
New provisions This clause seeks to amend section 
39 which relates to wild animals, 
etc.,to be Government property. 
It proposes to insert a new sub-
section (4) to provide that where 
Government propertyis a live animal 
and it cannot be released to its 
natural habitat, the State 
Government shallensure that it is 
housed and cared for by a 
recognised zoo or rescue centre. 
It further proposes to insert a new 
sub-section (5) and proviso so as to 
enable theState Government or 
Central Government to dispose of 
The amendment 
provides clarification 
in dealing with live 
animals and trophies 
etc without specific 
orders from 
Magistrate 
374

article, trophy or uncured 
trophy or meat derived 
from anywild animal, as 
referred to in sub-
sections (1) and (2) may 
be disposed of by the 
StateGovernment or the 
Central Government, as 
the case may be, in such 
manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central 
Government: 
Provided that such 
disposal shall not include 
any commercial sale or 
auctionand no certificate 
of ownership shall be 
issued for such disposal." 
animal articles, trophies or uncured 
trophies or meat derived from wild 
animals in the manner prescribed 
by the CentralGovernment.  
The proviso to the sub-section 
provides that such disposal shall 
not includeany commercial sale or 
auction and no certificate of 
ownership shall be issued. 
32 40 the words and figures "or 
Part II of Schedule II" 
wherever they occur shall 
be omitted. 
40. Declarations.—(1) Every 
person having at the 
commencement of this Act the 
control, custody or 
possession of any captive animal 
specified in Schedule Ior animal 
article, trophy or uncured trophy 
derived from such animal or salted 
or dried skins of such animal or the 
musk ofa musk deer or the horn of 
a rhinoceros, shall, within thirty 
days from the commencement of 
this Act,declare to the Chief Wild 
Life Warden or the authorised 
officer the number and description 
of the animal,or article of the 
This clause seeks to amend section 
40 of the principal Act which relates 
to declarations. It proposes to omit 
the words and figures "or Part II of 
Schedule II" from 
sub-sections (1), (2), (2A), and (4) of 
the principal Act. This is a 
consequential amendment 
proposed in view of rationalisation of 
the Schedules to the principal Act. 
Due to changes in the 
Schedules proposed 
375

foregoing description under his 
control, custody or possession and 
the place where suchanimal or 
article is kept. 
(2) No person shall, after the 
commencement of this Act, acquire, 
receive, keep in his control, custody 
or possession, sell, offer for sale or 
420 otherwise transfer or transport 
any animal specified in Schedule I 
or any uncured trophy or meat 
derived from such animal, or the 
salted or driedskins of such animal 
or the musk of a musk deer or the 
horn of a rhinoceros, except with 
the previouspermission in writing of 
the Chief Wild Life Warden or the 
authorised officer. 
(2A) No person other than a person 
having a certificate of ownership, 
shall, after the commencement 
of the Wild Life (Protection) 
Amendment Act, 2002 (16 of 2003) 
acquire, receive, keep in his control, 
custody or possession any captive 
animal, animal article, trophy or 
uncured trophy specified in 
Schedule I,, except by way of 
inheritance. 
(2B) Every person inheriting any 
captive animal, animal article, 
trophy or uncured trophy under 
sub-section (2A) shall, within ninety 
days of such inheritance make a 
376

declaration to the Chief Wild Life 
Warden or the authorised officer 
and the provisions of sections 41 
and 42 shall apply as if the 
declarationhad been made under 
sub-section (1) of section 40: 
Provided that nothing in sub-
sections (2A) and (2B) shall apply to 
the live elephant. 
(3) Nothing in sub-section (1) or 
sub-section (2) shall apply to a 
recognised zoo subject to the 
provisions of section 38-I or to a 
public museum. 
(4) The State Government may, by 
notification, require any person to 
declare to the Chief Wild Life 
Warden or the authorised officer 
5[any animal or animal article] or 
trophy (other than a musk of a 
muskdeer or horn of a rhinoceros) 
or salted or dried skins derived 
from an animal specified in 
Schedule I  
in his control, custody or 
possession in such form, in such 
manner, and within such 
time, as may be prescribed 
33 40A in sub-section (1), the 
words and figures "or 
Part II of Schedule II" 
shall be omitted. 
(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub-sections (2) and 
(4) of section 40 of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by 
notification, require any person to 
declareto the Chief Wild Life 
This clause seeks to amend sub-
section (1) of section 40A of the 
principalAct which relates to 
immunity in certain cases. It 
proposes to omit the words and 
figures "orPart II of Schedule II" from 
Due to changes in the 
Schedules proposed 
377

Warden or the authorised officer, 
any captive animal, animal article, 
trophy oruncured trophy derived 
from animals specified in Schedule 
I in his control,custody or 
possession, in respect of which no 
declaration had been made under 
sub-section (1) orsub-section (4) of 
section 40, in such form, in such 
manner and within such time as 
may be prescribed 
the sub-section. This is a 
consequential amendment proposed 
inview of rationalisation of the 
Schedules to the principal Act. 
34 41(1)(b) in sub-section (1), in 
clause (b), the words and 
figures "and Part II of 
Schedule II" shall be 
omitted. 
(b) make inquiries and prepare 
inventories of animal articles, 
trophies, uncured trophies, salted 
and dried skins and captive 
animals specified in Schedule I and 
found 
thereon; and 
This clause seeks to amend clause 
(b) of sub-section (1) of section 41 of 
the principal Act which relates to 
inquiry and preparation of 
inventories. It proposes to omit 
the words and figures "and Part II of 
Schedule II". This is a consequential 
amendmentproposed in view of 
rationalisation of the Schedules to 
the principal Act. 
Due to changes in the 
Schedules proposed 
35 42 After section 42 of the 
principal Act, the 
following section shall be 
inserted, 
namely:— 
"42A. (1)Any person 
having a certificate of 
ownership in respect of 
any captiveanimal, 
animal article, trophy or 
uncured trophy, meat or 
ivory imported into India 
or anarticle made from 
New provision added This clause seeks to insert a new 
section 42A in the principal Act wild 
tosurrender of captive animals, 
animal articles, etc. The proposed 
section will allow persons 
with an ownership certificate to 
surrender any captive animal, 
animal article, trophy or uncured 
trophy, meat or ivory imported into 
India or an article made from such 
ivory to the Chief Wild 
Life Warden if they are not desirous 
of keeping it in their control, 
Provides for enabling 
clause of receiving 
captive animal, animal 
article etc from 
owners 
378

such ivory, and who is 
not desirous of keeping it 
in his control,custody or 
possession may, after 
giving notice of seven 
working days to the Chief 
Wild Life Warden, 
surrender the same to 
him and any such 
certificate of ownership 
shall stand cancelled 
from the date of such 
surrender. 
(2) No compensation shall 
be payable to any person 
for surrender ofany such 
animal, article, trophy, 
meat or ivory to the Chief 
Wild Life Warden under 
sub-section (1). 
(3) Any such animal, 
article, trophy, meat or 
ivory surrendered under 
this sectionshall become 
the property of the State 
Government and the 
provisions of section 39 
shall apply.". 
custody or possession. Itprovides 
that any such ownership certificate 
will stand cancelled and no 
compensation shall 
be payable for such surrender. It 
also provides that the surrendered 
animal, animal article,trophy, etc., 
shall be State Government property 
and the provisions of section 39 
shall apply. 
36 43 In section 43 of the 
principal Act, after sub-
section (3), the following 
sub-sectionshall be 
inserted, namely:— 
"(4) This section shall not 
New provision This clause seeks to amend section 
43 of the principal Act which 
relatestoregulation of transfer of 
animal, etc. It proposes to insert a 
new sub-section (4) whichprovides 
that the section will not apply to 
The amendment 
relaxes for transfer of 
animal by person 
having a certificate of 
ownership.  
379

apply to the transfer or 
transport of any live 
elephantby a person 
having a certificate of 
ownership, where such 
person has obtained prior 
permission from the State 
Government on fulfilment 
of such conditions as 
may beprescribed by the 
Central Government.". 
transfer or transport of a live 
elephant by a personhaving a 
certificate of ownership where prior 
permission of the State Government 
has been 
obtained, and on fulfilment of such 
conditions as may be prescribed by 
the CentralGovernment 
37 48 In section 48 of the 
principal Act, in clause 
(b), in sub-clause (ii), the 
words and 
figures "or Part II of 
Schedule II" shall be 
omitted. 
(ii) acquire, receive keep in his 
control, custody or possession, or 
sell, offer for sale or transport, 
any captive animal specified in 
Schedule I or any animal article 
trophy,uncured trophy or meat 
derived therefrom or serve such 
meat, or put under a process of 
taxidermyor make animal article 
containing part or whole of such 
animal, 
This clause seeks to amend sub-
clause (ii) of clause (b) of section 48 
ofthe principal Act which relates to 
purchase of animal, etc., by 
licensee. It proposes to omit 
thewords and figures "or Part II of 
Schedule II" from the sub-clause. 
This is a consequentialamendment 
proposed in view of rationalisation of 
the Schedules to the principal Act. 
Due to changes in the 
Schedules proposed 
38 49A In section 49A of the 
principal Act, the words 
and figures "or Part II of 
Schedule II" 
at both the places where 
they occur, shall be 
omitted. 
49A. Definitions.—In this 
Chapter,— 
(a) “Scheduled animal” means an 
animal specified for the time being 
in Schedule I : 
(b) “Scheduled animal article” 
means an article made from any 
Scheduled animal and includes an 
article or object in which the whole 
or any part of such animal has 
been used but does not include 
tail feather of peacock, an article or 
This clause seeks to amend section 
49A of the principal Act which 
relatesto definitions. It proposes to 
omit the words and figures "or Part 
II of Schedule II" from 
clause (a) and sub-clause (ii) of 
clause (c) of the section. This is a 
consequential amendment 
proposed in view of rationalisation of 
the Schedules to the principal Act. 
Due to changes in the 
Schedules proposed 
380

trophy made therefrom and snake 
venom or its derivative. 
(c) “Specified date” means— 
(i) in relation to a scheduled animal 
on the commencement of the Wild 
Life (Protection)(Amendment) Act, 
1986, the date of expiry of two 
months from such commencement; 
(ii) in relation to any animal added 
or transferred to Scheduled I at 
any time after such 
commencement, the date of expiry 
of two months from such addition 
or 
transfer 
[(iii) in relation ivory imported into 
India or an article made from such 
ivory, the date of 
expiry of six months from the 
commencement of the Wild Life 
(Protection) (Amendment) Act, 
1991 (44 of 1991).] 
39 Chapter 
VA 
After Chapter VA of the 
principal Act, the 
following Chapter shall 
be inserted, 
namely:— 
'CHAPTER VB 
CHAPTER VB 
REGULATION OF INTERNATIONAL 
TRADE IN ENDANGERED SPECIES 
OFWILD FAUNA AND FLORA AS 
PER CONVENTION ON 
INTERNATIONAL 
TRADE IN ENDANGERED SPECIES 
OF WILD FAUNA AND FLORA 
49D. In this Chapter, unless the 
context otherwise requires,— 
(a) "artificially propagated" means 
plants which have been grown 
This clause seeks to insert a new 
Chapter VB in the principal Act for 
Regulation of International Trade in 
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna 
and Flora (hereinafter 
referred to as the Convention). 
The proposed new section 49D 
seeks to inter alia, define the words 
and expressionsfor the purposes of 
the proposed new Chapter. 
The proposed new section 49E 
provides for the designation of 
The new Chapter is 
introduced to cater to 
the commitments 
contained in 
International 
Conventions to which 
India is signatory. 
381

under controlled conditions from 
plant materials grown under similar 
conditions; 
(b) "bred in captivity" means 
produced from parents in captivity; 
(c) "Convention" means the 
Convention on International Trade 
inEndangered Species of Wild 
Fauna and Flora signed at 
Washington D.C., 
in the United States of America on 
the 3rd of March, 1973, and 
amended atBonn on the 22nd of 
June, 1979, its appendices, 
decisions, resolutionsand 
notifications made thereunder and 
its amendments, to the extent 
binding on India; 
(d) "export" means export from India 
to any other country of a 
specimen; 
(e) "import" means import into India 
from any other country of a 
specimen; 
(f) "introduction from the sea" 
means transportation into India of 
specimens of any species which 
were taken from the marine 
environmentnot under the 
jurisdiction of India or any other 
country; 
(g) "Management Authority" means 
the Management Authority 
designated under section 49E; 
Management Authority 
by the Central Government. It 
provides that such Management 
Authority shall be an officer 
not below the rank of an Additional 
Director General of Forests and 
shall be responsible forissuance of 
permits and certificates for trade of 
scheduled specimens (i.e.specimens 
ofspecies listed in Schedule IV), 
submission of reports, and shall 
perform such other functions 
as may be necessary to implement 
the provisions of the Convention. It 
enables the CentralGovernment to 
appoint officers and employees to 
assist the Management Authority 
and forthe Management Authority to 
delegate its powers with the 
approval of the Central Government 
to officers not below the rank of 
Assistant Inspector General of 
Forests. 
The proposed new section 49F 
provides for the designation of 
institutes engaged in 
scientific research as Scientific 
Authorities by the Central 
Government. It provides that the 
Scientific Authority shall advise the 
Management Authority on matters 
referred to it. Itprovides that the 
Scientific Authority shall monitor 
and advise on trade of species listed 
382

(h) "plant" means any member, alive 
or dead, of the plants listed in 
Schedule IV including seeds, roots 
and other parts thereof; 
(i) "readily recognisable part or 
derivative" includes any specimen 
which appears from an 
accompanying document, the 
packaging or a mark 
or label, or from any other 
circumstances, to be a part or 
derivative of ananimal or plant of a 
species listed in Schedule IV; 
(j) "re-export" means export of any 
specimen that has previously 
been imported; 
(k) "Scientific Authority" means a 
Scientific Authority designated 
under section 49F; 
(l) "scheduled specimen" means any 
specimen of a species listed in 
Appendices I, II or III of the 
Convention and incorporated as 
such inSchedule IV; 
(m) "species" means any species, 
sub-species, or geographically 
separate population thereof; 
(n) "specimen" means— 
(i) any animal or plant, whether 
alive or dead; 
(ii) in the case of an animal,— 
(A) for species included in 
Appendices I and II of 
Schedule IV, any readily 
inAppendix II of Schedule IV so as to 
maintain such species throughout 
their range at a level 
consistent with their role in the 
ecosystems in which they occur. 
The proposed new section 49G 
provides that the Management 
Authority and the 
Scientific Authority, while 
performing their duties and 
exercising powers, shall be subject 
tosuch general or special directions, 
as the Central Government may, 
from time to time, give. 
The proposed new section 49H 
provides that no person shall engage 
in trade ofscheduled specimens 
except as provided for under 
Chapter VB. It further provides that 
theCentral Government shall 
prescribe by rues the conditions and 
procedures by which the 
exemptions provided in Article VII of 
the Convention may be availed. It 
also provides that 
every person engaging in trade of 
scheduled specimens shall report 
the details to theManagement 
Authority or authorised officer in the 
manner prescribed. It also provides 
that every person engaging in trade 
of scheduled specimen shall present 
it for clearance to theManagement 
Authority or authorised officer or 
383

recognisable part or derivative 
thereof; 
(B) for species included in Appendix 
III of Schedule IV, 
any readily recognisable part or 
derivative thereof specified 
in Appendix III of Schedule IV in 
relation to the species; and 
(iii) in the case of a plant,— 
(A) for species included in Appendix 
I of Schedule IV, 
any readily recognisable part or 
derivative thereof; 
(B) for species included in 
Appendices II and III of 
Schedule IV, any readily 
recognisable part or derivative 
thereofspecified in Appendices II 
and III of Schedule IV in relation to 
the species; 
(o) "trade" means export, re-export, 
import and introduction from 
the sea. 
49E. (1) The Central Government 
shall, by notification, designate an 
officernot below the rank of an 
Additional Director General of 
Forests as theManagement 
Authority for discharging the 
functions and exercising the powers 
under this Act. 
(2) The Management Authority shall 
be responsible for issuance of 
permitsand certificates for trade of 
customs officer only at the ports of 
exit andentry as may be specified by 
the Central Government. 
The proposed new section 49-I 
provides the conditions for export of 
scheduledspecimen. It further 
provides for the permits or 
certificates that are required to be 
granted andpresented for export of 
species listed in each Appendix of 
Schedule IV and the conditions to 
be satisfied for issue of export 
permits. 
The proposed new section 49J 
provides the conditions for import of 
scheduledspecimen. It further 
provides for the permits or 
certificates that are required to be 
granted andpresented for import of 
species listed in each Appendix of 
Schedule IV and the conditions to 
be satisfied for issue of import 
permits. 
The proposed new section 49K 
provides the conditions for re-export 
of scheduledspecimen. It further 
provides for certificates that are 
required to be granted and 
presented forre-export of species 
listed in each Appendix of Schedule 
IV and the conditions to be satisfied 
for issue of re-export certificates. 
The proposed new section 49L 
provides the conditions for 
384

scheduled specimens in accordance 
with theConvention, submission of 
reports, and shall perform such 
other functions asmay be necessary 
to implement the provisions of the 
Convention. 
(3) The Management Authority shall 
prepare and submit annual and 
biennial reports to the Central 
Government. 
(4) The Central Government may 
appoint such officers and 
employees asmay be necessary to 
assist the Management Authority in 
discharging itsfunctions or 
exercising its powers under this 
Chapter, on such terms and 
conditions of service including 
salaries and allowances as may be 
prescribed. 
(5) The Management Authority may, 
with the prior approval of the 
CentralGovernment, delegate its 
functions or powers, to such 
officers not below therank of the 
Assistant Inspector General of 
Forests, as it may consider 
necessary 
for the purposes of this Chapter. 
49F. (1) The Central Government 
shall, by notification, designate one 
ormore institutes engaged in 
research on species as Scientific 
Authority for thepurposes of this 
introduction from the sea 
of scheduled specimen. It further 
provides that introduction from the 
sea of species listed in 
Appendix I and II of Schedule IV 
requires the prior grant and 
presentation of a certificate of 
introduction from the sea. It also 
provides the conditions to be 
satisfied for issue of certificates 
of introduction from the sea. 
The proposed new section 49M 
provides that every person 
possessing a livingspecimen of an 
animal species listed in Schedule IV 
shall report details to the 
ManagementAuthority and the 
Management Authority shall, if he is 
satisfied that it has not been 
obtainedin contravention of any law 
relating to protection of fauna and 
flora, issue a registration 
certificate allowing the owner to 
retain such specimen. It further 
provides for reporting and 
registration of transfers, births, and 
deaths of such specimens in 
accordance with rules 
prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
The proposed new section 49N 
provides that every person breeding 
or artificiallypropagating species 
listed on Appendix I of the 
385

Chapter, for fulfilling the functions 
under the Convention. 
(2) The designated Scientific 
Authority shall advise the 
ManagementAuthority in such 
matters as may be referred to it by 
the Management Authority. 
(3) The Scientific Authority shall 
monitor the export permits granted 
forspecimens of species listed in 
Appendix II of Schedule IV and the 
actual exportof such specimens. 
(4) Whenever a Scientific Authority 
is of the opinion that the export of 
specimens of such species requires 
to be limited in order to maintain 
that speciesthroughout its range at 
a level consistent with its role in the 
ecosystems inwhich it occurs and 
well above the level at which that 
species might become 
eligible for inclusion in Appendix I 
of the Convention, it shall advise 
theManagement Authority to take 
such appropriate measures to limit 
the grant ofexport permits for 
specimens of that species as the 
Scientific Authority may 
deem necessary for said purpose. 
49G. The Management Authority 
and the Scientific Authorities, shall, 
whileperforming their duties and 
exercising powers under this 
Chapter, be subject to 
Convention shall apply for 
registration tothe Chief Wild Life 
Warden in the form and manner 
prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
The proposed new section 49-O 
provides that when the required 
conditions, including 
the relevant resolutions of the 
Convention relating to breeding in 
captivity or artificialpropagation of 
Appendix I species are satisfied, the 
Chief Wild Life Warden shall issue a 
certificate of registration to a person 
making an application under sub-
section (1) ofsection 49N. It further 
provides that the certificate of 
registration shall be valid for two 
years,and also provides for an 
appeal to the State Government in 
case of refusal or cancellation of 
registration by the Chief Wild Life 
Warden. 
The proposed new section 49P 
provides that no person shall alter, 
deface, erase orremove a mark of 
identification affixed on a scheduled 
specimen or its package. 
The proposed new section 49Q 
provides that every scheduled 
specimen in respect ofwhich any 
offence under the Act or rules has 
been committed shall become the 
property ofthe Central Government 
386

such general or special directions, 
as the Central Government may, 
from time totime, give. 
49H. (1) No person shall engage in 
trade of scheduled specimens 
exceptas provided for under this 
Chapter. 
(2) The Central Government shall 
prescribe the conditions and 
proceduresby which the exemptions 
contained in Article VII of the 
Convention may be 
availed. 
(3) Every person engaging in trade 
of a scheduled specimen shall 
reportthe details of the scheduled 
specimen and the transaction to the 
ManagementAuthority or the officer 
authorised by it in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 
(4) Every person engaging in trade 
of a scheduled specimen, shall 
presentit for clearance to the 
Management Authority or the 
officer authorised by it or acustoms 
officer only at the ports of exit and 
entry as may be specified by the 
Central Government. 
49-I. (1) The export of any specimen 
of species included in Appendices I 
or II of Schedule IV shall require the 
prior grant and presentation of an 
exportpermit. 
(2) The export of any specimen of 
and the provisions of section 39 
shall, without prejudice to the 
Customs Act, 1962, apply to it as 
they apply to wild animals, captive 
animals and animalarticles. It 
further provides that when a living 
specimen of a species listed in 
Schedule IV hasbeen imported into 
India in contravention of the Act, 
the Management Authority shall 
after 
consultation with the country of 
export, return the specimen to that 
country at the expense 
of that country or ensure it is 
housed and cared for by a 
recognised zoo or rescue centre. It 
also provides that the Management 
Authority may for such purposes 
consult the Scientific 
Authority as it deems appropriate. 
The proposed new section 49R 
provides that where the same 
species is listed in 
Schedule IV and Schedules I or II, 
the provisions of the Act applicable 
to such species listed 
in Schedule I or II and the rules 
made thereunder shall apply. 
387

species included in Appendix III of 
Schedule IV shall require the prior 
grant and presentation of an export 
permit ifthe species has been listed 
in Appendix III of the Convention by 
India or acertificate of origin in 
other cases. 
(3) An export permit shall not be 
granted unless— 
(a) the Management Authority is 
satisfied that the specimen 
concerned has not been obtained in 
contravention of any law for the 
timebeing in force relating to 
protection of fauna and flora; 
(b) the Management Authority is 
satisfied that any living specimen 
will be so prepared and shipped as 
to minimise the risk of injury, 
damage tohealth or cruel treatment; 
(c) in the case of a specimen of a 
species listed in Appendices I or II 
of Schedule IV, the Scientific 
Authority has advised that the 
export will notbe detrimental to the 
survival of that species; and 
(d) in the case of specimens of 
species listed in Appendix I of 
Schedule IV, an import permit has 
been granted by the competent 
authorityof the country of 
destination. 
49J. (1) The import of any specimen 
of a species included in Appendix I 
388

ofSchedule IV shall require the 
prior grant and presentation of an 
import permitand either an export 
permit or a re-export certificate 
from the country of export. 
 
(2) An import permit for a specimen 
of a species listed in Appendix I of 
Schedule IV shall not be granted 
unless— 
(a) the Management Authority is 
satisfied that the specimen 
concerned will not be used for 
primarily commercial purposes; 
(b) the Scientific Authority has 
advised that the import will be for 
purposes which are not detrimental 
to the survival of the species; and 
(c) the Scientific Authority is 
satisfied that the proposed recipient 
ofa living specimen is suitably 
equipped to house and care for it. 
(3) The import of any specimen of a 
species included in Appendix II of 
Schedule IV shall require the prior 
presentation of either an export 
permit or are-export certificate 
issued by the country of export. 
(4) The import of any specimen of a 
species included in Appendix III of 
Schedule IV shall require the prior 
presentation of— 
(a) a certificate of origin; or 
(b) in the case where the import is 
389

from a country which has included 
the species in Appendix III of the 
Convention, an export permit; or 
(c) a re-export certificate granted by 
the country of re-export. 
49K. (1) The re-export of any 
specimen of species included in 
Appendices I or II of Schedule IV 
shall require the prior grant and 
presentationof a re-export 
certificate. 
(2) A re-export certificate shall not 
be granted unless— 
(a) the Management Authority is 
satisfied that any specimen to be 
re-exported was imported in 
accordance with the provisions of 
this Chapterand of the Convention; 
(b) the Management Authority is 
satisfied that any living specimen 
will be so prepared and shipped as 
to minimise the risk of injury, 
damage tohealth or cruel treatment; 
and 
(c) in the case of any living 
specimen of species listed in 
Appendix Iof Schedule IV, the 
Management Authority is satisfied 
that an importpermit has been 
granted. 
49L. (1) The introduction from the 
sea of a specimen of a species 
includedin Appendices I or II of 
Schedule IV shall require the prior 
390

grant and presentationof a 
certificate of introduction from the 
sea. 
(2) A certificate of introduction from 
the sea shall not be granted 
unless— 
(a) the Scientific Authority has 
advised that the introduction of any 
specimen will not be detrimental to 
the survival of the species; 
(b) in the case of a specimen of a 
species listed in Appendix I of 
Schedule IV, the Management 
Authority is satisfied that it is not 
to beused for primarily commercial 
purposes and that the proposed 
recipient ofany living specimen is 
suitably equipped to house and 
care for it; and 
(c) in the case of a living specimen 
of a species listed in Appendix II 
of Schedule IV, the Management 
Authority is satisfied that it will be 
so 
handled as to minimise the risk of 
injury, damage to health or cruel 
treatment. 
49M. (1) Every person possessing a 
living specimen of an animal 
species 
listed in Schedule IV shall report 
the details of such specimen or 
specimens in 
his possession to the Management 
391

Authority or the authorised officer: 
Provided that the Central 
Government may exempt one or 
more specimensof any animal 
species included in Schedule IV 
from such declaration for such 
quantity and for such period as it 
may deem fit. 
(2) The Management Authority or 
the authorised officer may, on being 
satisfied that a person was in 
possession of a living specimen of 
an animalspecies listed in Schedule 
IV which had not been obtained in 
contravention ofany law relating to 
protection of fauna and flora, issue 
a registration certificate 
allowing the owner to retain such 
specimen. 
(3) Any person who transfers 
possession, by any means 
whatsoever, ofany living specimen 
of an animal species listed in 
Schedule IV shall report the 
details to the Management 
Authority or the authorised officer. 
(4) The Management Authority or 
the authorised officer shall register 
alltransfers of living specimens of 
animal species listed in Schedule IV 
and issuethe transferee with a 
registration certificate. 
(5) Any person in possession of any 
living specimen of an animal 
392

species 
listed in Schedule IV which bears 
any offspring shall report the birth 
of suchoffspring to the Management 
Authority or the authorised officer. 
(6) The Management Authority or 
the authorised officer shall on 
receiptof the report under sub-
section (5) register any offspring 
born to any livingspecimen of an 
animal species listed in Schedule IV 
and issue the owner with a 
registration certificate. 
(7) Any person in possession of any 
living specimen of an animal 
species 
listed in Schedule IV which dies 
shall report such death to the 
ManagementAuthority or the 
authorised officer. 
(8) No person shall possess, 
transfer or breed any living 
specimen of any 
animal species listed in Schedule IV 
except in conformity with this 
section andthe rules made by the 
Central Government in this behalf. 
(9) The form, manner and period for 
reporting possession, transfers, and 
births, deaths, and registration of 
the same under this section shall 
be asprescribed by the Central 
Government. 
49N. (1) Every person who is 
393

engaged in breeding in captivity or 
artificiallypropagating any 
scheduled specimen listed in 
Appendix I of Schedule IV 
shall make, within a period of 
ninety days of the commencement 
of the Wild Life(Protection) 
Amendment Act, 2021, an 
application for registration to the 
ChiefWild Life Warden. 
(2) The form and manner of the 
application to be made to the Chief 
WildLife Warden under sub-section 
(1), the fee payable, the form of 
certificate ofregistration, the 
procedure to be followed in granting 
or cancelling the certificate 
of registration shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
49-O. (1) On receipt of application 
under sub-section (1) of section 
49N,the Chief Wild Life Warden 
shall, if— 
(a) the application is in the 
prescribed form; 
(b) the resolutions of the 
Convention relating to breeding in 
captivity 
or artificial propagation of species 
listed in Appendix I of Schedule IV 
aresatisfied; and 
(c) the provisions of the Act and 
rules made thereunder have been 
394

duly complied with,record an entry 
of the statement in a register and 
grant the applicant a certificate 
of registration. 
(2) The Chief Wild Life Warden 
shall, if the provisions or 
resolutions ofthe Convention or this 
Act and any rules made hereunder 
have not been complied 
with, or if a false particular is 
furnished, refuse or cancel the 
registration as thecase may be after 
providing the applicant with an 
opportunity of being heard. 
(3) The certificate of registration 
under sub-section (1) shall be 
issued fora period of two years and 
may be renewed after two years on 
payment of such 
fee as may be prescribed. 
(4) Any person aggrieved by the 
refusal of the Chief Wild Life 
Warden orcancellation of 
registration under sub-section (2) 
may prefer an appeal to the 
State Government within a period of 
sixty days in such manner as may 
beprescribed. 
49P. No person shall alter, deface, 
erase or remove a mark of 
identificationaffixed upon the 
scheduled specimen or its package. 
49Q. (1) Every species or scheduled 
specimen, in respect of which any 
395

offence against this Act or rules 
made thereunder has been 
committed, shallbecome the 
property of the Central Government 
and the provisions ofsection 39 
shall, without prejudice to the 
Customs Act, 1962, apply, mutatis 
mutandis, in relation to species and 
scheduled specimens as they apply 
inrelation to wild animals, captive 
animals and animal articles. 
(2) Where a living specimen of a 
species listed in Schedule IV has 
beenseized under this Act or the 
Customs Act, 1962 or any other law 
for the timebeing in force as a 
result of import into India in 
contravention of this Act, the 
Management Authority shall, after 
consultation with the country of 
export, returnthe specimen to that 
country at the expense of that 
country, or ensure that it is 
housed and cared for by a 
recognised zoo or rescue centre in 
case it cannot bereturned to the 
country of export. 
(3) The Management Authority may 
for such purposes consult the 
Scientific Authority as it deems 
appropriate. 
49R. Where the same species is 
listed in Schedule I or II and 
Schedule IV,then, the provisions of 
396

this Act applicable to such species 
listed in Schedule I orII and the 
rules made thereunder shall apply.' 
 
40 50 In section 50 of the 
principal Act, in sub-
section (1),— 
(i) after the words "the 
Director or any other 
officer authorised by him 
in thisbehalf ", the words 
"or the Management 
Authority or any officer 
authorised by the 
Management Authority" 
shall be inserted; 
(ii) after the words "a 
sub-inspector", the words 
"or any customs officer 
not 
below the rank of an 
inspector or any officer of 
the coast guard not below 
the rank ofan Assistant 
Commandant" shall be 
inserted; 
(iii) in clauses (a) and (c), 
after the words 
"derivative thereof ", the 
words "or 
scheduled specimen" 
shall be inserted 
50. Power of entry, search, arrest 
and detention.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything 
contained in anyother law for the 
time being in force, the Director or 
any other officer authorised by him 
in this behalf or the Management 
Authority or any officer 
authorised by the 
Management Authorityorthe Chief 
Wild Life Warden or the authorised 
officer or any forest officer or any 
police officer not belowthe rank of a 
sub- inspectoror any customs 
officer not 
below the rank of an inspector or 
any officer of the coast guard not 
below the rank of an Assistant 
Commandant, may, if he has 
reasonable grounds for believing 
that any person has 
committed an offence against this 
Act,— 
(a) require any such person to 
produce for inspection any captive 
animal, wild animal, animal 
article, meat, trophy or trophy, 
uncured trophy, specified plant or 
part or derivative thereof or 
scheduled specimenin his 
This clause seeks to amend section 
50 of the principal Act which relates 
to power of entry, search, arrest and 
detention. It proposes to confer 
power of entry, search,arrest and 
detention on the Management 
Authority or any officer authorised 
by theManagement Authority or any 
customs officer not below the rank 
of an inspector or any 
officer of the coast guard not below 
the rank of an Assistant 
Commandant. It further proposes 
to extend clauses (a) and (c) of sub-
section (1) of the section to include 
scheduled specimen. 
The amendment 
enables additional 
officers to exercise the 
powers. 
397

control, custody or possession, or 
any licence, permit or other 
document granted to him or 
required to 
be kept by him under the 
provisions of this Act; 
(b) stop any vehicle or vessel in 
order to conduct search or inquiry 
or enter upon and search any 
premises, land, vehicle or vessel, in 
the occupation of such person, and 
open and search any baggage 
or other things in his possession; 
(c) seize any captive animal, wild 
animal, animal article, meat, trophy 
or uncured trophy, or 
any specified plant or part or 
derivative thereofor 
scheduled specimen, in respect of 
which an offence against this Act 
appears to have been committed, in 
the possession of any person 
together with any trap, tool, vehicle, 
vessel or weapon used for 
committing any such offence and, 
unless he is satisfied that such 
personwill appear and answer any 
charge which may be preferred 
against him, arrest him without 
warrant, 
and detain him: 
Provided that where a fisherman, 
residing within ten kilometres of a 
sanctuary or National Park, 
398

inadvertently enters on a boat, not 
used for commercial fishing, in the 
territorial waters in that 
sanctuary or National Park, a 
fishing tackle or net on such boat 
shall not be seized. 
41 51 In section 51 of the 
principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (1),— 
(i) for the words "twenty-
five thousand rupees", 
the words "one lakh 
rupees" shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) in the first proviso,— 
(A) the words and figures 
"or Part II of Schedule II" 
shall be omitted; 
(B) after the words 
"boundaries of a 
sanctuary or National 
Park", 
the words and figures "or 
where the offence relates 
to a specimen of a 
species listed on 
Appendix I of Schedule 
IV" shall be inserted; 
(C) for the words "ten 
thousand rupees", the 
words "twenty-five 
thousand rupees" shall 
be substituted; 
(iii) in the second proviso, 
(1) Any person who contravenes any 
provision of this Act (except 
Chapter VA and section 38J) or any 
rule or order made thereunder or 
who commits a breach of any of the 
conditionsof any licence or permit 
granted under this Act, shall be 
guilty of an offence against this Act, 
and shall, onconviction, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three 
years, or with fine 
which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both: 
 
Provided that where the offence 
committed is in relation to any 
animal specified in Schedule I  
or meat of any such animal or 
animal article, trophy or uncured 
trophy derived fromsuch animal or 
where the offence relates to hunting 
in a sanctuary or a National Park or 
altering theboundaries of a 
sanctuary or a National Parkor 
where the offence relates to a 
specimen of aspecies listed on 
Appendix I of Schedule IV, such 
This clause seeks to amend section 
51 of the principal Act which relates 
to penalties. Sub-section (1) of 
section 51 provides penalties for 
contravention of any provision 
of the Act or any rule or order made 
thereunder or breach of any of the 
conditions of anylicence or permit 
granted under this Act and such 
contravention is punishable 
currently withimprisonment for a 
term extending up to three years or 
with fine up to twenty-five thousand 
rupees or with both. This clause 
proposes to enhance fine for such 
offences to a maximum of 
one lakh rupees. 
Presently, the first proviso to sub-
section (1) of section 51 provides 
that offencescommitted in relation 
to any animal specified in Schedule 
I or Part II of Schedule II or the meat 
of any such animal or animal 
article, trophy or uncured trophy 
derived from such animal orwhere 
the offence relates to hunting in a 
sanctuary or a National Park or 
altering the boundaries 
The penalties are 
enhanced through 
this amendment. 
399

for the words "twenty-five 
thousand rupees", 
the words "one lakh 
rupees" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (1A), for 
the words "ten thousand 
rupees", the words 
"twentyfive 
thousand rupees" shall 
be substituted 
offence shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for aterm which shall 
not be less than three years but 
may extend to seven years and also 
with fine which shall 
not be less than twenty five  
thousand rupees. 
Provided further that in the case of 
a second or subsequent offence of 
the nature mentioned in this 
sub-section, the term of the 
imprisonment shall not be less than 
three years but may extend to seven 
yearsand also with fine which shall 
not be less than one lakh rupees 
 
(1A) Any person who contravenes 
any provisions of Chapter VA, shall 
be punishable withimprisonment 
for a term which shall not be less 
than three years but which may 
extend to seven yearsand also with 
fine which shall not be less than 
twenty five thousand rupees. 
 
of a sanctuary or a National Park 
are punishable with imprisonment 
for a term not less thanthree years 
and extending up to seven years and 
also with fine not less than ten 
thousand 
rupees. This clause proposes to 
enhance the minimum fine for such 
offences to twenty-five 
thousand rupees. It seeks to omit 
the words "or Part II of Schedule II" 
from this proviso as a 
consequential amendment in view of 
rationalisation of the Schedules to 
the principal Act. Itfurther proposes 
to include offences relating to 
specimens of species listed in 
Appendix I ofSchedule IV in this 
proviso. 
Presently, the second proviso to 
sub-section (1) of section 51 
provides that a secondor 
subsequent offence of the nature 
mentioned in sub-section (1) is 
punishable with a term 
of imprisonment not less than three 
years and extending up to seven 
years and also with finenot less than 
twenty-five thousand rupees. This 
clause proposes to enhance the 
minimumfine for such offences to 
one lakh rupees. 
Presently, sub-section (1A) of 
section 51 provides that offences in 
400

relation to ChapterVA are 
punishable with imprisonment for a 
term not less than three years and 
extending up toseven years and also 
with fine not less than ten thousand 
rupees. This clause proposes 
toenhance minimum fine for such 
offences to twenty-five thousand 
rupees. 
42 51A In section 51A of the 
principal Act, the words 
and figures "or Part II of 
Schedule II" 
shall be omitted 
51A. Certain conditions to apply 
while granting bail.—When any 
person accused of, the 
commission of any offence relating 
to Schedule I or offences relating to 
huntinginside the boundaries of 
National Park or wild life sanctuary 
or altering the boundaries …….. 
This clause seeks to amend section 
51A of the principal Act which 
relatesto certain conditions to apply 
while granting bail. It proposes to 
omit the words and figures 
"or Part II of Schedule II" from the 
section. This is a consequential 
amendment in view of 
rationalisation of the Schedules to 
the principal Act. 
Due to changes in 
schedules 
43 54 In the section 54 of the 
principal Act, in sub-
section (4), for the words 
"twenty-five 
thousand rupees", the 
words "five lakh rupees" 
shall be substituted 
(4) The sum of money accepted or 
agreed to be accepted as 
composition under sub-section (1) 
shall,in no case, exceed the sum of 
five lakh rupees: 
Provided that no offence, for which 
a minimum period of imprisonment 
has been prescribed in 
section 51, shall be compounded 
This clause seeks to amend section 
54 of the Principal Act which relates 
to the power to compound offences. 
Presently, the sum of money 
accepted or agreed to beaccepted by 
way of compounding an offence as 
per sub-section (4) of this section 
cannotexceed the sum of twenty-five 
thousand rupees. This clause 
proposes to enhance the maximum 
compounding amount to five lakh 
rupees. 
The amendment 
enhances the 
compounding amount 
44 55 In section 55 of the 
principal Act, after clause 
(ac), the following clause 
55. Cognizance of offences.—No 
court shall take cognizance of any 
offence against this Act on the 
This clause seeks to amend section 
55 of the Principal Act which relates 
to cognizance of offences. This 
The amendment 
empowers few other 
officers 
401

shall beinserted, 
namely:— 
"(ad) the Management 
Authority or any officer, 
including an officer of 
theWildLife Crime 
Control Bureau, 
authorised in this behalf 
by the Central 
Government; or 
complaint of any person other than 
…  
 
(ad) the Management Authority or 
any officer, including an officer of 
the Wild Life Crime Control Bureau, 
authorised in this behalf by the 
Central Government; or 
clause seeks to include a provision 
to empower theManagement 
Authority or any officer, including 
an officer of the Wild Life Crime 
Control 
Bureau, authorised in this behalf by 
the Central Government, to file 
complaints in courts in 
respect of offences against the Act. 
45 57 In section 57 of the 
principal Act, after the 
words "derivate thereof" 
at both the 
places where they occur, 
the words "or Scheduled 
specimen" shall be 
inserted. 
57. Presumption to be made in 
certain cases.—Where, in any 
prosecution for an offence against 
this Act, it is established that a 
person is in possession, custody or 
control of any captive animal, 
animalarticle, meat, trophy, 
uncured trophy, specified plant, or 
part or derivative thereof or 
Scheduled specimen it shall be 
presumed,until the contrary is 
proved, the burden of proving 
which shall lie on the accused, that 
such person is inunlawful 
possession, custody or control of 
such captive animal, animal article, 
meat, trophy, uncuredtrophy, 
specified plant, or part or derivative 
thereof 
This clause seeks to amend section 
57 of the principal Act which relates 
to presumption to be made in 
certain cases. It seeks to extend the 
section to scheduled 
specimen as it currently applies to 
captive animals, animal articles, 
meat, etc. 
Presumption to be 
made in case of 
scheduled specimens. 
46 61 In section 61 of the 
principal Act, for the 
word "add", the words 
"amend any 
Schedule or add" shall be 
61. Power to alter entries in 
Schedules.—(1) The Central 
Government may, if it is of opinion 
that itis expedient so to do, by 
notification, amend any 
This clause seeks to amend section 
61 of the Principal Act which relates 
to power to alter entries in 
Schedules. It seeks to substitute the 
word "add" with the words 
The amendment 
empowers amendment 
of Schedules 
402

substituted Schedule or add or delete any 
entry to or from any Schedule or 
transfer anyentry from one Part of a 
Schedule to another Part of the 
same Schedule or from one 
Schedule to another. 
"amend any Schedule or add" so as 
to make it clear that the power 
provided by the section 
to the Central Government to alter 
the entries in the Schedules 
includes the power to amend 
a Schedule. 
47 62 In section 62 of the 
principal Act,— 
(a) the words and figures 
"and Part II of Schedule 
II" shall be omitted; 
(b) the words and figure 
"and so long as such 
notification is in force, 
such wild 
animals shall be deemed 
to have been included in 
Schedule V" shall be 
omitted. 
62. Declaration of certain wild 
animals to be vermin.—The Central 
Government may, by 
notification, declare any wild 
animal other than those specified in 
Schedule I  tobe vermin for any 
area and for such period as may be 
specified therein.. 
This clause seeks to amend section 
62 of the Principal Act which relates 
to declaration of certain wild 
animals to be vermin. The section 
empowers the CentralGovernment to 
declare certain wild animals to be 
vermin for any area and for such 
period as 
may be specified by way of 
notification. The clause seeks to 
omit the references to Part II of 
Schedule II and Schedule V from the 
section. This is a consequential 
amendment in view of 
rationalisation of the Schedules to 
the principal Act. 
Due to deletion of 
Schedules on Vermin, 
the notification is 
being proposed to be 
issued. 
48 62 After section 62 of the 
principal Act, the 
following sections shall 
be inserted, 
Namely:— 
"62A. (1) The Central 
Government may, by 
notification, regulate or 
prohibit theimport, trade, 
possession or 
proliferation of invasive 
New provision  
This clause seeks to insert new 
sections 62A and 62B in the 
Principal Act. 
The proposed new section 62A will 
empower the Central Government to 
take necessaryactions for control of 
invasive alien species. It will allow 
the Central Government to regulate 
or prohibit the import, trade, 
possession or proliferation of 
The amendment 
provides for control of 
alien species and seize 
such species 
403

alien species which pose 
a threatto the wild life or 
habitat in India. 
(2) The Central 
Government may 
authorise the Director or 
any other officer to 
seize and dispose of, 
including through 
destruction, the species 
referred to in the 
notification issued under 
sub-section (1). 
62B. Notwithstanding 
any other provision of 
this Act, the Central 
Governmentmay call for 
any information or report 
from a State Government 
or any such other 
agency or body or issue 
any direction to a State 
Government or any such 
other agency 
or body for effective 
implementation of the 
provisions of the Act for 
the protection, 
conservation and 
management of wild life 
in the country 
 
invasive alien species which pose 
a threat to the wild life or habitat in 
India by way of notification. It also 
seeks to empower theCentral 
Government to authorise the 
Director or any other officer to seize 
and dispose of,including through 
destruction, such species. 
The proposed new section 62B will 
empower the Central Government to 
call for anyinformation or report 
from a State Government or any 
such other agency or body or issue 
anydirection to a State Governments 
or any such other agency or body for 
effective implementationof the 
provisions of the Act for the 
protection, conservation and 
management of wild life inthe 
country. 
49 63 In section 63 of the 
principal Act, in sub-
"(aii) terms and conditions of the 
committee, sub-committees or 
This clause seeks to amend section 
63 of the principal Act which relates 
New enabling powers 
are being made to 
404

section (1),— 
(a) after clause (ai), the 
following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
"(aii) terms and 
conditions of the 
committee, sub-
committees or study 
groups under sub-section 
(3) of section 5B;"; 
(b) after clause (gvi), the 
following clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
"(gvii) the manner of 
disposal of Government 
property under 
sub-section (5) of section 
39; 
(gviii) the conditions for 
transfer or transport of 
live alaphant under 
sub-section (4) of section 
43;"; 
(c) after clause (j), the 
following clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
"(ji) the terms and 
conditions of service 
including salaries and 
allowancesfor 
appointment of the 
officers and employees of 
the Management 
Authorityunder sub-
studygroups under sub-section (3) 
of section 5B‟ 
…. 
 
"(gvii) the manner of disposal of 
Government property under 
sub-section (5) of section 39; 
(gviii) the conditions for transfer or 
transport of live alaphant under 
sub-section (4) of section 43; 
…..  
 
…. 
 
"(ji) the terms and conditions of 
service including salaries and 
allowances for appointment of the 
officers and employees of the 
Management Authority under sub-
section (4) of section 49E; 
 
(jii) the conditions and procedures 
subject to which any exemption 
provided for in Article VII of the 
Convention may be availed under 
sub-section (2) of section 49H; 
 
(jiii) the reporting ofdetails of 
scheduled specimens and the 
transaction  as per sub-section (3) 
of section 49H; 
 
(jiv) the matters provided for in sub-
sections (8) and (9) of section 49M; 
to the power of the Central 
Government to make rules. It 
proposes to include the matters 
under the proposed legislation in 
respect of which the Central 
Government may make rules. 
make rules by Central 
Government 
405

section (4) of section 49E; 
(jii) the conditions and 
procedures subject to 
which any exemption 
provided for in Article VII 
of the Convention may be 
availed under 
sub-section (2) of section 
49H; 
(jiii) the reporting of 
details of scheduled 
specimens and the 
transactionas per sub-
section (3) of section 49H; 
(jiv) the matters provided 
for in sub-sections (8) 
and (9) of section 49M; 
(jv) the form and manner 
of the application, the fee 
payable, the form of 
certificate of registration, 
and the procedure to be 
followed in granting or 
cancelling a certificate of 
registration as per sub-
section (2) of section 49N; 
(jvi) the fee payable for 
renewal of certificates of 
registration as per 
sub-section (3), and 
manner of making appeal 
under sub-section (4), of 
section 49-O; 
(jvii) any other matter for 
 
(jv) the form and manner of the 
application, the fee payable, the 
form ofcertificate of registration, 
and the procedure to be followed in 
granting orcancelling a certificate of 
registration as per sub-section (2) of 
section 49N; 
 
(jvi) the fee payable for renewal of 
certificates of registration as per 
sub-section (3), and manner of 
making appeal under sub-section 
(4), ofsection 49-O; 
 
(jvii) any other matter for proper 
implementation of the Convention 
as maybe required under Chapter 
VB 
406

proper implementation of 
the Convention as may 
be required under 
Chapter VB;". 
50 Schedules For Schedules I, II, III, IV, 
V and VI to the principal 
Act, the following 
Schedules 
shall be substituted, 
namely 
New Schedules This clause seeks to rationalise 
Schedules appended to the principal 
Act. 
Presently, the Act broadly has two 
classes of wild animal, that is— 
(a) species listed in Schedule I and 
Part II of Schedule II; and 
(b) species listed in Part I of 
Schedule II, Schedule III, and 
Schedule IV. 
Species listed in Schedule I and Part 
II of Schedule II are provided more 
protection (forexample commercial 
trade of these species is prohibited 
and possession of these species 
requires an ownership certificate) 
and penalties for offences involving 
these species arehigher. Since the 
principal Act essentially has only 
these two levels of protection for 
animals,it is proposed to place the 
protected animal species in two 
Schedules, i.e., Schedule I and 
Schedule II. 
Along with the reduction in number 
of Schedules for protected animal 
species, itis also proposed to delete 
the schedule in which vermin 
peciesare listed (currentlySchedule 
V) and simply have such species 
New schedules are 
proposed 
407

notified. With the deletion of the 
Schedule forvermin, and the 
reduction in the number of 
Schedules for protected animal 
species from fourto two, along with 
the addition of a Schedule for 
species listed on the Appendices to 
theConvention, this clause seeks to 
reduce the number of Schedules 
from present six to four asfollows— 
Schedule I specifies the animal 
species with the highest level of 
protection. 
Schedule II specifies the animal 
species with a lesser level of 
protection. 
Schedule III specifies the protected 
plant species. 
Schedule IV specifies the species 
listed in the Appendices to the 
Convention. 
 
408

Salient features of 
Wildlife (Protection) Act Amendment Bill 2021 
( Bill no.159 of 2021) 
*** 
The Bill was presented in Lok Sabha and now is sent for consideration of Rajya 
Sabha, and the Bill is being examined by a Committee which called for remarks 
from general public to reach them by 12.02.2022.  
The salient features are: 
1. Some definitions are being changed/introduced 
2. The existing Schedules are totally proposed to be substituted. In place of 
existing (6) Schedules only (4) are proposed as follows: 
(a) Schedule I specifies the animal species with the highest level of 
protection. 
(b) Schedule II specifies the animal species with a lesser level of 
protection. 
(c) Schedule III specifies the protected plant species. 
(d) Schedule IV specifies the species listed in the Appendices to the 
Convention such as IUCN 
3. Vermin is to be notified under Section 62 of the Act 
4. Definition of “zoo” expanded as "zoo" means an establishment whether 
stationary or mobile, wherecaptive animals are kept for exhibiting to the 
public or ex-situ conservation andincludes a circus and off-exhibit 
facilities such as rescue centres and conservationbreeding centres, but 
does not include an establishment of a licensed dealer incaptive 
animals.'. 
5. The National Board of Wildlife is being empowered to form Standing 
Committees to exercise such powers as may be delegated by the Board. 
6. Wherever the expression „ Land Acquisition Act,1894 occurs, is to be 
replaced by “ Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act,2013”. 
7. Management Plans for Sanctuary is to be prepared in consultation with 
Gram Sabha in Scheduled Areas.(Sec.33) 
409

8. The renewal of Arms Licence within ten kilometers of sanctuary to be 
done under intimation to Chief Wildlife Warden (Sec.34) 
9. Provision of Section 18A made applicable to National Parks ( Sec.35) 
10. In Chapter IVC, the word „Tiger and other endangered Species” 
replaced by “Wildlife”. 
11. In section 39 power is being given to deal with live animals, 
trophies etc without reference to Magistrate. 
12. On surrender of captive animal, tophy etc. by owner to Chief 
Wildlife Warden no compensation is payable (Sec.42) 
13. Chapter VB introduced to regulate International Trade in 
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora as per Convention on 
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora. 
14. The Compounding amount enhanced to one lakh rupees from 
twenty five thousands ( Sec.51) 
15. The maximum amount of compounding is enhanced to Five lakh 
rupees from Twenty Five thousands (Sec.54) 
16. Central Government can regulate or Prohibit import of invasive 
alien species (new Sec.62A) 
**** 
 
 
410

BEFORE THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
MEMORANDUM  
Submitted by 
Dr S K Khanduri IFS (Rtd), 409, Nilaya Hills, Dehradun, Uttarakhand 
 
On the Subject 
Observations and suggestions on The Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 
 
I hereby present the following observations and suggestions on the subject mentioned 
above for kind consideration of the Honourable Committee: 
Preamble for the Bill as modified is not entirely reflected in the amendm ents 
suggested. In the 50 years old Act  withinitially 66 sections , repeated amend ments 
havealready added another 80 sections so far. Therefore, a comprehensive review of 
the Act is needed now after 50 years of initial enactment, in light of enormous changes 
as happened in the scope of the term wild life as well as the approach of management 
from only protection towards conservation paradigms.  
However, considering the urgency of enactment of a law on implementation of CITES, 
it is welcome to introduce the b ill incorporating the provisions of the Convention. So  
also the restructuring of the schedules in the background of no relevance of the 
existing schedules. Following points are made on some important aspects with basis/ 
justification of the issue/ suggestions made. 
 
No.
. 
Section/ 
Chapter in 
the Bill 
Issue/suggestion Justification 
1. Schedules Schedules I and 
II do not include 
most of the plants 
in need of 
specific 
By preamble, the aim of the amendment is 
to ensure protection , conservation and 
management of wildlife, which in cludes 
plants. Provisions for Sch III – only 
regulating collection from wild , cultivation  
411

protection. Sch III 
for regulating a 
few specified 
plants does not 
provide protection 
needed for large 
number of plant 
species including 
those listed in  
CITES, from the 
forest/ wildlife 
crimes. 
It is proposed that 
every schedule is 
provided with two 
parts – one for 
animals and other 
for plants. 
and commercial dealings for a few – 18 
species do not provide protection to  most of 
the vulnerable species. 
Many plant species, just like  the wild 
animals, are vulnerable to illicit collection, 
removal and smuggling owing to their 
characteristics. Sandalwood, red sanders, 
rosewood, white cedar, deodar and many 
highly medicinal and aromatic plants 
deserve the degree of protection available 
to the wild animal species like those in Sch I 
and II. This way the punishment for offence 
related to a Sch I plant would be same as 
for an offence related to a Sch I animal. 
It would need additional provisions enabling 
regeneration and sustainable harvesting o f 
the listed species of plants. It may be 
considered here that Indian Forest Act or 
the state acts do not provide for species 
specific protection or management 
provisions. 
2. Chapter VB Provision of 
listing of all 
CITES 
Appendices in the 
Schedule IV  
complicates the 
process of 
management of 
the provisions as 
well as CITES 
itself. 
Linking of 
Appendices I, II and III of the CITES are 
highly dynamic and keep changing not only 
in the meetings of the CoP or Standing 
Committees alone, but also with regular 
processing of the proposals received from 
the member countries from time to time. In 
such case, work of updating of the schedule 
IV concurrently is an unnecessary and 
cumbersome exercise particularly in light of 
the section 61 in which the powers of the 
Central Government are to be exercised 
every time CITES affects a change in its 
412

(referring the) 
CITES 
Appendices to 
the provision s of 
the Chapter VB is 
sufficient. All 
three indices 
need not be 
copied to  the 
Schedule IV  as 
such. 
Index. Moreover, the schedule IV will have 
to be kept concurrently up to date with all 
the Annotations and related conditions to 
the status of the entries in the Appendices . 
Any difference in the Appendices of CITES 
and Schedule IV of the Act would create 
legal issues related to imple mentation, 
which is important aspect of the 
economically important international trade  
and is prone to misuse too. 
This cumbersome process will need a 
separate, dedicated establishment for this 
task alone, which is virtual duplication of the 
contents of th e CITES Appendices and is 
avoidable.  
The model law (2021) provided by CITES 
suggests several options in this regard and 
the option D suggests as follows: 
“The official website of the Convention is the 
official reference for the Appendices” 
Ref: 
https://cites.org/sites/default/files/projects/N
LP/E-Model_law-
revised_Oct.2021.FINAL.DRAFT.pdf 
 
Honourable Committee may like to consider 
suggesting adopting the option D of the 
model law in this regard. 
 
Submitted for kind consideration. 
413

From: 
Sanjay Kumar Srivastava, IFS (Retd)  
Formerly PCCF (Apex) Tamil Nadu 
A-1203 AIS Housing Complex (TAISHA) 
Natesan Nagar West, Virugambakkam 
Chennai – 600092 
sks2700@yahoo.co.in 
Mob: 9445259770 
& A Udhayan, IFS  
APCCF & Chairman, TNPCB 
H-0304 AIS Housing Complex (TAISHA) 
Natesan Nagar West, Virugambakkam 
Chennai – 600092 
udaywild@gmail.com 
Mob: 9445546742 
 
To: 
Shri Rakesh Anand 
Additional Director, 
Rajya Sabha, Secretariat 
New Delhi - 110001 
Sir, 
 Sub: Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill 2021 - Submission of Memorandum - reg 
 We wish to submit remarks on the proposed Wildlife  (Prot) Amendment Bill 2021 as under: 
Section  Existing 
provision as 
per Act  
Prop osed  
Amendment  
(WP(A) Bill 2021) 
Suggested 
Amendment 
Justification  
Long 
Title 
…. protection 
of wild 
animals, 
birds and 
plants…. 
…… conservation, 
protection and 
management of 
wild life…… 
Amendment of 
Long Title 
Preamble was omitted by the 
Act 44 of 1991. By Act 16 of 
2003 substitution made for 
‘Long Title’, hence, the 
amendment is of ‘Long Title’ 
and not ‘Preamble’ 
2 (2 -A)  Nil  
A new term 
proposed 
for 
definition 
Nil  ‘Authorised 
Officer’ - means 
person authorized 
by the Director or 
Chief Wildlife 
Warden u/s 5(3) of 
the Act 
 
Many sections of the Act do 
mention of the Authorised 
Officer along with the Chief 
Wildlife Warden (CWLW), but 
the same has not been 
defined in Section 2 of the 
Act. Lack of this definition has 
led to lack of distinction 
between delegation of 
CWLW’s powers to officers 
u/s 5(2) and the officers 
authorised u/s 5(3) of the Act. 
 
2 (15)  “habitat”  
includes 
land….. 
Nil  “habitat” includes 
air , land……. 
‘Air ’ needs to be included in 
the definition of the habitat, 
as the “vehicle” u/s 2 (33) 
also includes conveyance 
used for movement on ‘air’ 
and therefore, flying of 
drones/ helicopters over 
sanctuaries and NPs may 
destroy or damage or divert 
414

the habitat of any wild animal 
especially arboreals 
2 (26 -A)  Nil.  
 
A new term 
proposed 
for 
definition 
Nil  Schedule I animal - 
means an animal 
specified for the 
time being in Sch I 
and is considered 
more threatened 
Original classification of the 
Schedules was based on the 
hunting parameters (Game 
animals) and penal provisions. 
Since now, we are merging 5 
Schedules into 2, the basis for 
the classification needs to be 
spelt out, as penal provisions 
are different while dealing 
with the offences related to 
the two schedules.  
2 (26 -B)  Nil.  
 
A new term 
proposed 
for 
definition 
Nil  Schedule II animal 
- means an animal 
specified for the 
time being in Sch II 
and is considered 
threatened 
29  Proviso 
under 
Section 29 
Nil  Provided that…….. 
any commercial 
purpose excepting 
where disposal is 
meant for 
improvement and 
better 
management of 
wildlife therein by 
utilization of the 
revenue so 
generated 
 
In many wildlife sanctuaries 
(WLS) and National Parks 
(NP), there are monoculture 
plantations of exotic invasive 
species like Wattle in 
Kodaikanal WLS and it 
occupies more than 50% of 
the WLS, not allowing wild 
animals like Indian Gaur to 
utilize the habitat due to deep 
thickets, forcing Gaur to come 
to towns and cities. The 
removed wattle cannot be 
fully utilized to meet the 
personal bona fide  needs of 
the people living in and 
around the sanctuary because 
of expanse cover of wattle 
and therefore can only be 
sold as pulpwood/ firewood 
to the industries. The revenue 
so generated can very well be 
utilized for improvement/ 
restoration of the habitat for 
the wild animals in the area. 
38 -I (1)  Subject to 
the other 
provisions of 
this Act, no 
zoo shall 
acquire, sell 
or transfer 
any wild 
animal or 
captive 
animal 
specified in 
Nil  In section 38 -I of 
the principal Act, in 
sub-section (1), the 
words and 
figures " and II " 
shall be omitted 
After merger of Schedules III 
and IV with the amended 
Schedule II, we need to 
differentiate between the 
more threatened species in 
Schedule I requiring prior 
approval from the CZA and 
less threatened in Schedule II 
which do not require 
permission from the CZA (as 
in respect of Schedules III & IV 
earlier) 
415

Schedules I 
and II except 
with the 
previous 
permission 
of the 
Authority 
38 -I (2)  No zoo shall 
acquire, sell 
or transfer 
any wild or 
captive 
animal 
except from 
to a 
recognized 
zoo 
Nil  No zoo shall 
acquire, sell or 
transfer any wild or 
captive animal 
except from to a 
recognized zoo 
and 
permit granted 
under section 
12(c)(1) of the Act 
 
As per 38 -I (2), only source of 
acquisition is from recognized 
zoo than how CWLW can 
grant permit u/s 12(c)(1) of 
the Act in this regard 
39(1)(a)  Wild animal, 
other than 
vermin 
which is 
hunted u/s 
11 or 29 (1) 
or 35 (6) …. 
Nil  Wild animal whic h 
is hunted u/s 11 or 
29 (1) or 35 (6) or 
62  …… 
As schedule V for vermin has 
been deleted and the animals 
now listed in Schedule II, 
which could be declared as 
vermin u/s 62, include species 
which have conservation 
significance and cannot be 
left at the mercy of the 
people for its disposal. This 
becomes more complicated 
when the notification u/s 62 
is for a limited specified area 
and the same species in non-
notified area attracts sec 39 
39(1)(d)  …..shall be 
the property 
of the State 
Govt…… 
Nil  …..shall be liable to  
be the property of 
the State Govt 
subject to 50(4)  
…….. 
Mere seizure of any vehicle, 
vessel, weapon, trap or tool 
under the provisions of the 
Act cannot make it as a Govt 
property without forfeiting or 
confiscating the same. Also, 
when compounding of the 
case is done u/s 54(4), no 
orders can be passed on the 
disposal of the seizures by the 
officer compounding the 
offence and same needs to be 
dealt as per Section 50 (4) 
and actual forfeiture by the 
Magistrate is dealt u/s 51(2) 
40 (1)  Declaration 
…..Schedule 
I or Part II of 
Schedule II .. 
Declaration  
…. “or Part II of 
Schedule II” 
wherever they 
Declaration  
…. “ Part II of ” 
wherever they 
occur shall be 
omitted) 
As section 40 (1) deals with 
the declaration of Schedule I 
animals only and there is no 
clarity as to the possession of 
captive animals and animal 
416

occur shall be 
omitted) 
articles specified in Sch II, 
where many persons are in 
the possession of the same 
through ancestral inheritance 
and in the absence of no 
provision for the issue of 
ownership certificates in such 
cases, there is always an 
apprehension of illegal 
possession from the wild. If 
we permit people to possess 
more threatened animals, 
animal articles etc under Sch I 
then there is no justification 
for disallowing ownership 
certificates for Sch II animals. 
40 (2)  Declaration 
…..Schedule 
I or Part II of 
Schedule II .. 
Declaration  
…. “or Part II of 
Schedule II” 
wherever they 
occur shall be 
omitted) 
Declaration  
…. “ Part II of ” 
wherever they 
occur shall be 
omitted) 
40 (4)  Declaration 
…..Schedule 
I or Part II of 
Schedule II .. 
Declaration  
…. “or Part II of 
Schedule II” 
wherever they 
occur shall be 
omitted) 
Declaration  
…. “ Part II of ” 
wherever they 
occur shall be 
omitted) 
40 (2 -B)  Proviso….  
Provided 
that nothing 
in sub-
sections (2-
A) and (2-B) 
shall apply 
to the live 
elephants 
Nil  Proviso….  
Provided that 
nothing in sub-
sections (2-A) and 
(2-B) shall apply to 
the live elephants 
in possession of 
the Govt Depts or 
Govt Agencies/ 
Institutions 
 
As per the decision in the 
MoEF&CC, Govt of India 
minutes of the meeting in 
F.No. 13-3/2019-PE dated 4 th  
Nov 2019, no elephants can 
be gifted or sold and 
ownership can be by 
inheritance or acquisition by 
Govt agencies by captive 
transfer etc. The above 
decision was taken to ensure 
welfare of the captive 
elephants under the control 
of the Govt Dept / agencies/ 
institutions and to avoid any 
cruelty or misuse of the 
elephants under private 
ownership 
43(4)  New  This section shall 
not apply to the 
transfer or 
transport of any 
live elephant by a 
person having a 
certificate of 
ownership, 
where such 
person has 
obtained prior 
permission from 
the State Govt on 
fulfilment of such 
conditions as 
prescribed by the 
Central Govt 
 
This section shall 
not apply to the 
transfer or 
transport of any 
live elephant by 
Govt Dept or Govt 
Agencies to 
another Govt Dept 
of Govt Agency / 
Institution 
 
As per the decision in the 
MoEF&CC, Govt of India 
minutes of the meeting in 
F.No. 13-3/2019-PE dated 4 th  
Nov 2019, no elephants can 
be gifted or sold and 
ownership can be by 
inheritance or acquisition by 
Govt agencies by captive 
transfer etc in order to wean 
off any misuse or cruelty 
under the private ownership. 
The proposed amendment 
will also lead to rampant 
trade in captive elephants 
paving way for smuggling etc 
417

66(3)  For removal 
of the 
doubts……. 
….. and 
where any 
right in or 
over any 
land in any 
such 
National 
Park which 
had not 
been 
extinguished 
……….. with 
the 
provisions of 
this Act 
Nil  For removal of the 
doubts……. 
….. and where any 
right in or over any 
land in any such 
Sanctuary or  
National Park 
which had not 
been extinguished 
……….. with the 
provisions of this 
Act 
There are many Sanctuaries in 
the State/s, which were 
declared u/s 18 (1) prior to 
1991 amendment and final 
notification subsequently was 
not done u/s 26-A on account 
of no provision for the same 
u/s 66(3) in respect of 
Sanctuaries as the same was 
limited to National Parks. 
Prior to 1991 notification, 
section 18(1) dealt directly 
with constitution of any area 
as sanctuary than ‘intention 
to constitute as sanctuary’ 
after 1991 amendment; 
leading to non-completion of 
acquisition of rights after 
issue of proclamation 
 
 We request for consideration of the above suggesti ons in the amended Act. 
 
Date: 5-2-2022         Yours faithfully, 
Place: Chennai         
For SANJAY K SRIVASTAVA & A UDHAYAN 
418

From: 
Sanjay Kumar Srivastava, IFS (Retd)  
Formerly PCCF (Apex) Tamil Nadu 
A-1203 AIS Housing Complex (TAISHA) 
Natesan Nagar West, Virugambakkam 
Chennai – 600092 
sks2700@yahoo.co.in  
& A Udhayan, IFS  
APCCF & Chairman, TNPCB 
H-0304 AIS Housing Complex (TAISHA) 
Natesan Nagar West, Virugambakkam 
Chennai – 600092 
udaywild@gmail.com  
 
To: 
Shri Rakesh Anand 
Additional Director, 
Rajya Sabha, Secretariat 
New Delhi - 110001 
Sir, 
 Sub: Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill 2021 - Submission of Memorandum - reg 
 We wish to submit remarks on the proposed Wildlife  (Prot) Amendment Bill 2021 as under: 
Section  Existing 
provision as 
per Act  
Prop osed  
Amendment as 
per WP(A) Bill 
2021 
Suggested 
Amendment 
Justification  
Long 
Title 
…. protection 
of wild 
animals, 
birds and 
plants…. 
…… conservation, 
protection and 
management of 
wild life…… 
Amendment of 
Long Title 
Preamble was omitted by the 
Act 44 of 1991. By Act 16 of 
2003 substitution made for 
‘Long Title’, hence, the 
amendment is of ‘Long Title’ 
and not ‘Preamble’ 
2 (2 -A)  Nil  
A new term 
proposed 
for 
definition 
Nil  ‘Authorised 
Officer’ - means 
person authorized 
by the Director or 
Chief Wildlife 
Warden u/s 5(3) of 
the Act 
Many sections of the Act do 
mention of the Authorised 
Officer along with the Chief 
Wildlife Warden (CWLW), but 
the same has not been 
defined in Section 2 of the 
Act. Lack of this definition has 
led to lack of distinction 
between delegation of 
CWLW’s powers to officers 
u/s 5(2) and the officers 
authorised u/s 5(3) of the Act. 
 
2 (15)  “habitat”  
includes 
land….. 
Nil  “habitat” includes 
air , land……. 
‘Air ’ needs to be included in 
the definition of the habitat, 
as the “vehicle” u/s 2 (33) 
also includes conveyance 
used for movement on ‘air’ 
and therefore, flying of 
drones/ helicopters over 
sanctuaries and NPs may 
destroy or damage or divert 
419

the habitat of any wild animal 
especially arboreals 
2 (26 -A)  Nil.  
 
A new term 
proposed 
for 
definition 
Nil  Schedule I animal - 
means an animal 
specified for the 
time being in Sch I 
and is considered 
more threatened 
Original classification of the 
Schedules was based on the 
hunting parameters (Game 
animals) and penal provisions. 
Since now, we are merging 5 
Schedules into 2, the basis for 
the classification needs to be 
spelt out, as penal provisions 
are different while dealing 
with the offences related to 
the two schedules.  
2 (26 -B)  Nil.  
 
A new term 
proposed 
for 
definition 
Nil  Schedule II animal - 
means an animal 
specified for the 
time being in Sch II 
and is considered 
threatened 
29  Proviso 
under 
Section 29 
Nil  Provided that…….. 
any commercial 
purpose excepting 
where disposal is 
meant for 
improvement and 
better 
management of 
wildlife therein by 
utilization of the 
revenue so 
generated  
In many wildlife sanctuaries 
(WLS) and National Parks 
(NP), there are monoculture 
plantations of exotic invasive 
species like Wattle in 
Kodaikanal WLS and it 
occupies more than 50% of 
the WLS, not allowing wild 
animals like Indian Gaur to 
utilize the habitat due to deep 
thickets, forcing Gaur to come 
to towns and cities. The 
removed wattle cannot be 
fully utilized to meet the 
personal bona fide  needs of 
the people living in and 
around the sanctuary because 
of expanse cover of wattle 
and therefore can only be 
sold as pulpwood/ firewood 
to the industries. The revenue 
so generated can very well be 
utilized for improvement/ 
restoration of the habitat for 
the wild animals in the area. 
39(1)(a)  Wild animal, 
other than 
vermin 
which is 
hunted u/s 
11 or 29 (1) 
or 35 (6) …. 
Nil  Wild animal which 
is hunted u/s 11 or 
29 (1) or 35 (6) or 
62  …… 
As s chedule V for vermin has 
been deleted and the animals 
now listed in Schedule II, 
which could be declared as 
vermin u/s 62, include species 
which have conservation 
significance and cannot be 
left at the mercy of the 
people for its disposal. This 
becomes more complicated 
when the notification u/s 62 
is for a limited specified area 
420

and the same species in non -
notified area attracts sec 39 
39(1)(d)  …..shall be 
the property 
of the State 
Govt…… 
Nil  …..shall be liable to  
be the property of 
the State Govt 
subject to 50(4) 
…….. 
Mere seizure of any vehicle, 
vessel, weapon, trap or tool 
under the provisions of the 
Act cannot make it as a Govt 
property without forfeiting or 
confiscating the same. Also, 
when compounding of the 
case is done u/s 54(4), no 
orders can be passed on the 
disposal of the seizures by the 
officer compounding the 
offence and same needs to be 
dealt as per Section 50 (4) 
and actual forfeiture by the 
Magistrate is dealt u/s 51(2) 
40 (1)  Declaration 
…..Schedule 
I or Part II of 
Schedule II .. 
Declaration  
…. “or Part II of 
Schedule II” 
wherever they 
occur shall be 
omitted) 
Declaration  
…. “ Part II of ” 
wherever they 
occur shall be 
omitted) 
As section 40 (1) deals with 
the declaration of Schedule I 
animals only and there is no 
clarity as to the possession of 
captive animals and animal 
articles specified in Sch II, 
where many persons are in 
the possession of the same 
through ancestral inheritance 
and in the absence of no 
provision for the issue of 
ownership certificates in such 
cases, there is always an 
apprehension of illegal 
possession from the wild. If 
we permit people to possess 
more threatened animals, 
animal articles etc then there 
is no justification for 
disallowing ownership 
certificates for Sch II animals. 
40 (2)  Declaration 
…..Schedule 
I or Part II of 
Schedule II .. 
Declaration  
…. “or Part II of 
Schedule II” 
wherever they 
occur shall be 
omitted) 
Declaration  
…. “ Part II of ” 
wherever they 
occur shall be 
omitted) 
40 (4)  Declaration 
…..Schedule 
I or Part II of 
Schedule II .. 
Declaration  
…. “or Part II of 
Schedule II” 
wherever they 
occur shall be 
omitted) 
Declaration  
…. “ Part II of ” 
wherever they 
occur shall be 
omitted) 
40 (2 -B)  Proviso….  
Provided 
that nothing 
in sub-
sections (2-
A) and (2-B) 
shall apply 
to the live 
elephants 
Nil  Proviso….  
Provided that 
nothing in sub-
sections (2-A) and 
(2-B) shall apply to 
the live elephants 
in possession of 
the Govt Depts or 
Govt Agencies/ 
Institutions  
As per the decision in the 
MoEF&CC, Govt of India 
minutes of the meeting in 
F.No. 13-3/2019-PE dated 4 th  
Nov 2019, no elephants can 
be gifted or sold and 
ownership can be by 
inheritance or acquisition by 
Govt agencies by captive 
transfer etc. The above 
decision was taken to ensure 
welfare of the captive 
elephants under the control 
421

of the Govt Dept / agencies/ 
institutions and to avoid any 
cruelty or misuse of the 
elephants under private 
ownership 
43(4)  New  This section shall 
not apply to the 
transfer or 
transport of any 
live elephant by a 
person having a 
certificate of 
ownership, 
where such 
person has 
obtained prior 
permission from 
the State Govt on 
fulfilment of such 
conditions as 
prescribed by the 
Central Govt 
 
This section shall 
not apply to the 
transfer or 
transport of any 
live elephant by 
Govt Dept or Govt 
Agencies to 
another Govt Dept 
of Govt Agency / 
Institution  
As per the decision in the 
MoEF&CC, Govt of India 
minutes of the meeting in 
F.No. 13-3/2019-PE dated 4 th  
Nov 2019, no elephants can 
be gifted or sold and 
ownership can be by 
inheritance or acquisition by 
Govt agencies by captive 
transfer etc in order to wean 
off any misuse or cruelty 
under the private ownership. 
The suggested amendment 
will also lead to rampant 
trade in captive elephants 
paving way for smuggling etc 
66(3)  For removal 
of the 
doubts……. 
….. and 
where any 
right in or 
over any 
land in any 
such 
National 
Park which 
had not 
been 
extinguished 
……….. with 
the 
provisions of 
this Act 
Nil  For removal of the 
doubts……. 
….. and where any 
right in or over any 
land in any such 
Sanctuary or  
National Park 
which had not 
been extinguished 
……….. with the 
provisions of this 
Act 
There are many Sanctuaries in 
the State/s, which were 
declared u/s 18 (1) prior to 
1991 amendment and final 
notification subsequently was 
not done u/s 26-A on account 
of no provision for the same 
u/s 66(3) in respect of 
Sanctuaries as the same was 
limited to National Parks. 
Prior to 1991 notification, 
section 18(1) dealt directly 
with constitution of any area 
as sanctuary than ‘intention 
to constitute as sanctuary’ 
after 1991 amendment; 
leading to non-completion of 
acquisition of rights after 
issue of proclamation 
 
 We request for consideration of the above suggesti ons in the amended Act. 
Yours faithfully, 
 
For SANJAY K SRIVASTAVA & A UDHAYAN 
422

 Comments and suggestions on  “The Wild Life ( Prot.)  Amendment Bill”  By  
                               R.S.Bhadauria Ex- PCCF (HoD U.P. 
 
 
To  
Shri Jai Ram Ramesh  
 Chairperson  Parliamentry Standing Committee  
MoEF & CC, Govt. of india 
Indira Paryavaran Bhawan , Jorbag Road, New Delhi 
 
Sub. Amendment of Wild Life (Prot.)Act 1972 
 
 Sir 
 
 I am  giving below, my comments and suggestions on proposed Wild Life (Prot.) Act 
1972 Bill, introduced in Lok Sabha, for committee members‟ perusal and 
consideration, to help amendments in the Act. 
 
  Regarding my interest and involvement in this important exercise,  and my 
experience in this subject, I would like to  give my brief introduction hereunder:-  
 
 I retired in 1996, as PCCF (H oD) U.P. Forest dept, where beside s doing many 
forestry related assignments, I spent about 20 yrs, exclusively in Wild Life Wing of 
the forest dept. working as Wild Life Warden, Found er  Director, Kanpur Zoological 
Park, Dy. Chief Wild Life Warden (H.Q), Additional Chief Wild Life Warden, U.P., 
and Chief Wild Life Warden, U.P., concurrently acting as Administrator Lucknow  
Zoological Park also.  In nutshell. I have managed Wild Life  in captivity as well as in  
forests, and Sanctuaries & National Parks, spread across length and breadth of  
undivided  U.P.  successfully implementing the said Act during  its initial phase and 
creating chain of Protected Areas (PAs) viz; 12 Bird sanctuaries, 2 River sanctuaries,  
8 Forest sanctuaries, 3 National Parks and 1 Biosphere reserve , covering about 26% 
forest area  under PAs  After retirement gave voluntary services to CZA. GOI (18 yrs) 
as Expert in Zoo  planning  and designing. 
 
 Before suggesting and commenting on  relevant sections,  proposed to be amended, I 
consider it necessary to suggest first general approach and guide lines to be followed 
to formulate  provisions of amended Bill, as under :- 
  It is well known fact that Forest as well as Wild Life ( being an open 
property),  can not be managed  effectively without cooperation from local 
public, beca use even laws do not work with hostile public. Therefore  while 
making laws  to manage wild life  ,this cardinal principle should be kept in 
mind and   laws should be such that they unnecessarily  do not  impinge upon 
Locals‟ day-to- day life.. 
 
  About 40 years closure of hunting, has turned the corner, reversing declining 
trend in animal  population of almost all spp. and in fact status of some spp. 
has become abundant also in certain areas, causing serious Human Wildlife 
Conflict (HWC). Glaring examples of H WC,  relate to Blue bulls, Monkeys 
(Rhesus macaque),  Wild boars,  wild Elephants in general and Leopards in 
Uttarakhand. This situation needs to be acknowledged and remedied in  the  
long term  interest of wild life conservation. 
423

 
  Since Chief Wild Life Ward en (CWW), according to  the Act, is the main 
executive authority to  implement the Act, he should be allowed to use his 
discretion to take appropriate  timely decisions, without his hands being tied 
with chains of unnecessary provisos, added by later amendmen ts, to various  
empowering sections of the  original Act. 
  Though Forest is  a concurrent listed subject. yet its day-to-day  functioning 
and management are being controlled by  state Govt, manned by staff under 
state Govt. Therefore powers given to state Go vt. and CWLWs  under the 
original Act, should also be restored, wherever usurped by Central Govt.  by 
way of  subsequent amendments,  which have been found to cause  delay in  
decision making , causing problem s for CWLW   and the people living near 
forests.. 
  
Wild life management is a dynamic process, hence  laws/rules governing it need to be 
flexible, enabling executive authority  to effect  changes, depending upon the 
dynamics of the animal population , ascertained through frequent censuses . Therefore 
Act sho uld provide opening windows to control  and manage excess/ surplus  
population by allowing culling as and when necessary,  then closing again to ensure 
sustainable population. Culling n extreme situations, may entail even shooting 
(generally called sport,), as it is for management purpose ) or capturing either for 
translocation/ rehabilitation or  augmenting zoo exhibits (internal or abroad), by 
reopening export , observing CITES rules. “ Wild life should not and can  not be 
managed on sentimental grounds, instead it should be managed on ground 
realities‖, was oft repeated advice by famed naturalist late shri  Salim Ali . 
  In view of aforesaid guidelines m y section- wise suggestions, on some 
seriously flawed  sections, are as under:- 
 Chapter 1,  
 Section 1- Title of the Act —The ultimate aim of the Act is to manage wild life on 
sustainable basis till perpetuity. This objective can best be achieved by managing it on 
the principle  of Conservation, ( not by mere protection ) because conservation 
encompasses “preservation, protection and exploitation  also if warranted, to maintain 
sustainability. of the species. Therefore ideally the title of the Act should be The Wild 
Life Conservation Act. Now how this changed  nomenclature can be dovetailed with 
amendment of  Act of 1972, can best be advised and worded by legal experts. 
 
.. Chapter II   
- Section 5A- Constitution of the National Board for Wild Life. 
  According to  existing composition of the Board, besides PM, Minister I/C Forest  
and Wild Life , GOI, and 3 MPs, out of  remaining 42 nominated members. there are 
only 4 professionally  trained & experienced subject specialist Foresters in the long 
list of members. It really looks ridiculous that a body expected to act as watch dog  
and formulate policies of a  Scientific Subjec t, requiring scientific & technical 
knowledge  and field experience , is almost devoid of such talent, when there is no 
dearth of such talent within senior IFS cadre,  serving as   Chief Wild Life Wardens in 
states and also  as  scores of retired  Chief  Wild Life. Wardens , who should form the 
backbone  of the body. as it is their field of activity .  If the body has to serve its real 
purpose, talented  and experienced senior Foresters should comprise min 50%  of the 
total strength of the board. This can ea sily be done by amending the format of 
constitution of the Board, by filling  all  posts provided under paras (e & v - in all 15 
posts)  and tweaking some posts from para( f). leaving some posts for scientists  & 
424

ecologists from  eminent research bodies like B NHS, WWF, Wild Life Institute of 
India and ICFRE Dehradun. Some farmers from neighborhood of HWC affected areas 
should also  be included on rotation basis,  recommended by State Govts. (to ensure 
wide representation) instead of NGOs and self-- proclaimed environmentalists,  who 
live in far off urban locales  and  are neither real stakeholders nor equipped with 
professional/ technical knowledge  of the subject. 
 
 Similarly composition of Standing committee of National Board and State Wild  Life 
Boards  may kindly be changed to make them more effective.  
 
 I may reiterate that Forestry and Wild Life management are Scientific subjects, which 
are taught during 2 years rigorous  training in  Govt. run Forestry institutes, after 
recruitment from Science Graduates or  mostly post graduates, to fill cadres of Forest 
Rangers, State Forest Service and Indian Forest Service.  Forest and Wild Life 
management go hand in hand and it is not anybody‟s foray to meddle in to it.  It is 
rather a pity that of late in our Country, this  exclusive domain of trained 
forestry professionals has been hijacked and derailed by  self seeking NGOs and 
self promoted environmentalists.  As a proof of this truth , composition of  existing  
policy making committee in MoEF , GOI may kindly be examined. 
 
 I sincerely hope that this distortion would be corrected by your high empowered 
committee  in the interest of forestry sector , through the undergoing exercise of 
amendment of the Act..   
 
Chapter- III 
Section 9 --Prohibition of Hunting 
 It is suggested to delete mention of sections 11 and12, at the end of provision, instead 
it should be worded as :”No person shall hunt any wild animal except as provided 
under this Act”. 
 
 Section 11—Hunting of Wild animals to be permitted in certain cases:-  
 This section i s very important  for wildlife management which empowers CWLW to 
wean off aberrant, troublesome animals, which become dangerous to human life and 
property.  If  delay occurs in weaning off such animals, particularly man-eating Tigers 
Leopards ,and wild elephants, due to some reason, innocent lives of mostly poor bread 
earning villagers is lost , it creates big  law and order  problem, sometimes even  
causing gherao  and manhandling  of forest staff on the spot.  Therefore CWLW has 
to take quick action to mitigat e the problem and to facilitate it, CWLW should have 
free hands to take decision and act.  This was possible under original Act of 1972, but 
with  addition of several unnecessary provisos  in this section by later amendments, 
CWLW has to take longer time in complying those provisos, to avoid  any mistake 
committed in  satisfying those provisos, resulting in to more deaths on one hand the 
uproar created by NGOs on shooting it. Recent   glaring examples of such situations 
are shooting orders of A vni man -eating tigress in Maharashtra  in Nov. 2018 which 
had to be shot after it killed 13 people during  long  period of tricky trials of capturing 
which failed. Even then irresponsible  NGOs‟ created outrage, and similar hue & cry 
was  raised against culling of crop rai der Blue bulls in Bihar and orchard raiding  
Monkeys in Himacahal Pradesh, after central  Ministry declaring them vermin , for 
some time, as per law. 
 
425

  In fact chain  of unnecessary  provisos, moving in circles, added to section 11 (1)  (a) 
of the Act, giv e chance to trouble makers to find some loopholes in execution of 
power  granted under section 11 (1) (a) , approaching even  Courts and this is why 
CWLWs are afraid of exercising  this mangled power and resort to safer recourse of  
capturing method, albeit time consuming, enabling more human killings, turning more 
and people enemies of  wild animals  on one hand and on the other piling  up, captured 
culprits in small transport cages, for want of proper housing space , inflicting cruelty 
worse than killing. and also spending sizable budget on their costly feed, accruing no 
conservation benefit. 
 
 For these reasons it is suggested that all provisos , added to section 11  (1) (a), 
should be deleted, enabling CWLWs to exercise this power with discretion and 
free mind,  like   in original  Act 1972. 
  
 Section 12- Grant of  permit for special  purposes 
 Section12(bb) Scientific management.  It is good that framers of the Act, provided 
management of animal population under this section, but while defining Wild Life 
Management. under clause 12(bb) (ii)  its effect has been  nullified by inserting 
condition “ WITHOUT KILLING)‟ In fact in practice, when there is no scope for 
translocation or for any other use,, number has to be reduced by killing some animals.  
 
It is therefore suggested that this clause should be amended by allowing (CULLING) - 
a more appropriate word as its dictionary meaning  (Google) is    
”to kill a number of animals in a group to prevent the group from becoming too 
large”. It will serve the intended purp ose of scientific management  without using harsh 
word “Killing”. As a matter of fact, word Culling is extensively used in wildlife 
management parlance. 
 
 Chapter   IV 
  Protected Areas , Section 29 –Destruction etc prohibited in a sanctuary without  
a permit ………………..(proviso) “Provided that where the  forest produce removed  
from a sanctuary………………..shall not be used for any commercial purpose”. 
 
 This proviso in practice poses great problem when it comes to removal of trees and 
the distribution  thereof amo ngst several villagers. , because making  equal share  in 
tress  is not possible without sawing them, with the result sanctuary staff avoids  
removal  of  trees , even though such removal becomes  necessary to improve habitat. 
This problem I am quoting  based on a similar difficulty,  encountered in a sanctuary 
in U.P.. Because of this problem in most of the protected areas (N Ps and Sanctuaries)  
habitat improvement works are not being carried out, which of course  go unreported 
for fear of  being reprimanded , resulting the provision of improving the Habitat, 
inoperative and  ineffective.. 
 
 Therefore it is suggested that for removal of trees, state Forest Corporation may 
be allowed to remove such trees , on the recommendation of CWLW,  and the 
received price the reof from Forest Corporation,  may be distributed equally 
amongst eligible  local villagers. However removed of grasses and any other 
distributable  forest produce may remain covered under the proviso as such.  
Similar amendment  should be done in similar pr oviso to section 35 (6) dealing 
with  National Parks.. 
  
 
426

Elephant Conservation 
 History and Background and Suggestion to amend the Act 
 
 Wild elephant is one such animal  which has dual existence since times immemorial. 
It exists in wild state in forests a nd also conversely  exists in total ly tame or 
domesticated state  under human care and possession. as a pet  and cattle . When 
original Act of 1972 was enacted, only wild elephant was kept in sight, rightly leaving 
tame elephant out of the preview of the Act a s it has been   defined as “cattle“ i n 
Indian Forest Act and also because of following reasons:-  
 Wild and Tame are not only diametrically opposite  words to ach other, but 
when referred to animals, are also indicative of  huge differences in habits , 
living condition, behaviour & psychology towards humans. Wild elephant is 
ferocious and does not tolerate even human presence near about while tame 
elephant is most human friendly , trustworthy, obedient to human command s 
and remains obediently in human service in many ways. 
  Because of these  inherent differences  and other  unique qualities, tame 
elephant attained semi --God status in  the world‟s oldest Vaidic religion 
(supposedly incarnation of Ganesh Ji) and got deeply ingrained in Hindu 
psyche, earning reverence an d respect. Therefore had it been treated as wild 
animal. in the  original  Act, then huge tame population   (around 4000 to 
5000), had to be seized from  the possession of Temples/Muths and private 
individuals, spread across the country, and  it would have cr eated 
unmanageable situation , first in seizure, hurting religious sentiments , 
generating resentment & legal problems and  thereafter creating problems of 
housing and feeding , needing  colossal amount of budget. Therefore very 
wisely tame elephants were kept  outside the preview of original  WLP Act 
1972. 
  Wild elephants were also  kept rightly under schedule III of the original Act 
as non- endangered category spp., facilitating their legal capture  for training., 
to augment tame population which remained in great demand internally and 
also externally in Foreign courtiers, as zoo exhibits , earning foreign exchange 
for state exchequer . Additionally such practice , helped control wild 
population maintaining sustainable populations in forest s, avoiding 
occurrence of HWC  .as of now. 
 This kind of  Status quo remained until early eighties, when arbitrarily and un 
--thoughtfully  its schedule was changed  by GOI,  from schedule III to I, 
treating it as endangered spp , prohibiting its legal capture from forest, 
shutting the door for managing its excess population in forest,  which over the 
years, has  resulted in  huge HWC problem. 
 .  Presently elephant population in wild state is more than 32,000 heads which 
is much beyond the carrying capacity of  entire elephant habitat , available in 
India‟s forests. For its habitat, i t requires  rich dense high forest (preferably 
mixed with bamboo crop) with abundant flowing water  availability. It is a 
mega feeder , mightiest & heaviest  herbivore, having no natural enemies to 
control its wild population, therefore it is inimical to its own habitat,  causing 
destruction of forests,  including new  forest plantations and forest 
establishments inside forests (staff quarters & rest houses etc) as well as  
invading  neighboring farm c rops along with h omes and hearths of  poor 
farmers. This is how today, its overpopulation ( still increasing) has 
become cause of maximum HWC in the country, (much more than that 
of dangerous carnivores like tigers  and  leopard etc) causing greatest 
427

headache for wild life m anagers across entire elephant bearing zones of 
the country . About 500 human casualties, happened and in retaliation 
100   elephants were done to death by poisoning in one year . 
 To add salt to injury , at the insistence and pressure created by self - seeking, 
cheap publicity hungry, novo wild life activists , the GOI without  carefully 
mulling over consequences , erroneously treated tame population as wild 
population by amending the Act in the year 2002, which until such 
amendment, were treated outside the purview of WLP Act . This fallacy, 
opened flood gates for some NGOs to start business of seizing tame elephants 
from individual owners, by opening  life time Rescue centres, seeking  huge 
foreign funding under FCRA provisions, maligning falsely private ownership, 
alleging ill keeping and  cruel treatment  to animals, tarnishing country‟s 
image also  before the world, but filling their  own coffers by misusing funds, 
received. 
 
 This kind of unlawful drive against private ownership of  tame elephants has 
not only angered a large section of elephant owners, religious heads in  
temples and Muth owners for hurting  religious sentiments  but is  also 
destroying & alienating age old mutually beneficial cordial bond between 
Elephant and Man, on one hand and on the other, putting an end to the 
age old art of elephant ca tching, training, and invaluable technique  of 
commanding them (Mahaut’s knowledge) . evolved by ou r ancestors, 
braving untold  dangers and  sacrificing innumerable lives. All these  
techniques and  age-old art are of  heritage value and  treasures worth 
preserving but cannot be preserved if tame elephants are treated as wild 
animals of endangered category ( Schedule-1 animal).  Besides this, if art 
of  capture and taming comes to an end  once, it can not be revived an d 
then it will be impossible to  control wild populations , to  maintain 
sustainable population. In forest. 
 
 My request to Hon‟bl members of Standing Committee is to take out 
domesticated/tame elephants from the purview of WLP Act, not only to be 
kept and us ed   by Forest depts., zoos, private  persons, Muths and temples 
and also permitting export, but also to serve a lager purpose of conserving this 
species, by  utilizing burgeoning surplus  population in forests by capturing 
and training to  feed human dema nd as before , instead of  letting them 
destroy forests digging their own grave.  I am sorry to point out that my 
brother officers, occupying important positions in Govt. are keeping their 
eyes closed and not reading the ominous signs on the wall, for earn ing 
accolades by letting the wild population increase year after year and 
unconsciously (perhaps) causing grounds for their ( Elephants‟) perforce mass 
butchering at some later date as done in Zimbaway to save forests. 
,  
  
Suggestions 
 
 In view of above, the Hon‟ble  members of the committee are requested to realize the 
gravity of the situation and recommend following steps to amend draft Bill., 
 There is no sensible logic behind  treating  domesticated/tame elephants as Wild 
animal as explained above. Hence this irrational  logic deserve to be erased legally 
428

also from the purview of the Act, by amending the definition of ―Animal ”, 
described in Chapter-1,under section 2 (1) of - Definitions, to be worded as under: 
 
1-:”animal “ includes mammals, birds, repti les, amphibians, fish, other chordates 
and invertebrates including their young ones and  eggs, excluding domesticated/ 
tame elephants and  their young ones.‖ 
.                                                  
2-   The  last unnecessary sentence below the  Section 40 (2) under sub -sections 
(2A and 2B) viz „‟ Provided that nothing in sub-sections (2A)  and (2B) shall apply 
to the live elephant.”. may also be deleated. 
 
3-  Wild elephants should be shifted from Schedule - I to Sch. II I of the amended 
Act, like original Act 1972 . Otherwise shifted to Schedule II of the Act (if the 
proposed Act is going to limit no of schedule to 2 only)  removing its endangered  
spp. status. enabling its culling wherever it is necessary. 
  
 Besides above steps,  wherever necessary,  the position of tame or domesticated 
elephant should  be made clear that it is not a  wild .animal, instead it is tame 
animal like cattle as defined in Indian Forest Act.  It will solve Elephantine 
Problem, unnecessarily created by over enthusiastic wild  life activists. 
 
  
 
 ( R.S.Bhadauria) 
 
Dated:  Lucknow  Jan. 24, 2022    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
429

 
                                                                                                   Dated Jan. 25-1-2022                                                                     
To  
Shri Jai Ram Ramesh  
 Chairperson  Parliamentry Standing Committee  
MoEF & CC 
Indira Paryavaran Bhawan ,  
Jorbag Road, New Delhi 
 
Sub. Revision of Wild Life (Protection) Act 1972 
 Ref – My email dt 24-1-2022 on the subject. 
Dear Sir  
 In continuation to my above referred letter, emailed yesterday, containing my 
suggestions for amending the Bill, I am sending  this letter , with the request that,  State 
Govts. and CWLWS may be allowed  to play wider role, enabling them to take quick 
decisions to deal with more politically aware  public. 
 
 Aaforesaid Act is being revised to update it according to the requirements of the present 
time. Ever since this Act was promulgated and implemented, status of several spp. has 
changed considerably. Human Wildlife Conflict (HWC) has increased in respect of some 
spp., and public attitude towards wild life has also undergone change from hostility to 
sympathy, but now conflict scenario is pushing it back to hostility and it does not auger 
well for future wild life management. All these factors do necessitate amendments in the 
Act and it is good that the Act is being revised timely. 
 
  Since CWLWs in states, are the executive authorities to implement this Act. they have 
by experience, identified its strengths & weaknesses, infirmities, angularities and public 
interface, encountered during its implementation. So far we have regulations applicable 
uniformly all over the country  but I feel that revised Act should address area specific 
problems also. For Instance a certain spp. may be abundant in some area/region, while it 
may be endangered elsewh ere. To deal with such varied management situations 
expeditiously, state Govts. may be authorized to change schedule for a specified period  
(under intimation to Central Govt.) , on the recommendation of CWLW.  It is therefore 
advisable to invite suggestio ns from CWLWs, giving them fixed time limit for 
compliance. The suggestions received from CWLWs should be scrutinized by the 
committee constituted for the purpose to arrive at appropriate amendment s. This wider 
consultation from the states is necessary eve n otherwise because this is concurrent  listed 
subject. 
Yours Sincerely 
 
 
(R.S.Bhadauria) 
Ex- PCCF U.P. 
Ex- CWLW U.P. 
430

Dear Sir, 
Greetings, 
The amendment 2021 to WLPA,1972 has come beautifully well for the benefit of the wl conservation n 
management except the following issues which require reconsideration. 
1. Permission for film shooting in PAs, 
2. Transportation of pvt elephants 
3. Empowerment to the Subject subcommittees in Satate/National WL Boards to clear the FCA... 
Project clearance files with out the sitting of the Boards.. . 
Rest I appreciate the amendment as hailed in news paper Deccan Herald. 
 
https://www.deccanherald.com/opinion/panorama/wildlife-conservation-gets-a-boost-with-timely-
amendment-1071754.html 
 
Regards 
Sincerely yours 
BMT Rajeev IFS (Retd) 
 
 
431

To,  
 
Shri Jairam Ramesh 
Chairperson 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment and Forests and 
Climate Change 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 110 001 
 
 
Subject: Article/Comments on the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 (Bill No 159 
of 2021 as introduced in the Rajya Sabha) to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act of 1972 
 
Dear Sir, 
Given below is an article authored by me on the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 
2021 to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act of 1972 , which was published in The 
Telegraph dated 24th, January, 2022. 
I have added additional comments, and this may be taken as my submission to the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment and Forests and 
Climate Change. 
I have also attached a pdf of The Telegraph in which the article ‘Read Between the Lines’ 
appears.  
 
Article (with additions) on the the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill  
On December 17, 2021, the Minister for Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
Bhupender Yadav introduced the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021 in the Lok 
Sabha. It seeks to amend the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, which has been the bedrock of 
conserving India’s wildlife and its habitat. Any changes, therefore, have tremendous import 
on the conservation of India’s diverse, rare and endemic fauna. 
The WLPA was glaringly silent on the smuggling of exotic wild animals–from chimpanzees to 
macaws—which has seen a steep rise in India. A welcome change is that the amendment 
regulates  international trade in line with international conventions such as the CITES to 
which India is party.  
However, many proposed changes are problematic, of which this column will focus on a few 
key ones. 
A chief concern is that the bill renders premier institutes like the State Board for Wildlife 
(SBWL), defunct. These expert, independent policy-making bodies are chaired by the Chief 
Minister and mandated to safeguard wildlife. Currently, most state boards are active, and 
for all their emphasis on clearing projects within PA’s, some like Karnataka and Maharashtra 
have been proactive in expanding the state’s Protected Area network.   
The amendment proposes to establish a ‘Standing Committee’ of the SBWL, to be headed by 
the Forest Minister, along the lines of the Standing Committee of the National Board for 
Wildlife (NBWL). This dilutes the gravitas of the SBWL, reducing it to a clearing body –
432

meeting with the sole purpose of allowing damaging projects within PAs, as is the case now 
with the NBWL’s Standing Committee. It is pertinent to note here that the National Board 
for Wildlife headed by the Prime Minister has not met even once since 2014, while its 
Standing Committee regular and frequent meetings primarily to clear development, 
infrastructure projects and other activities within Protected Areas and its Eco-Sensitive 
Zones. 
The NBWL is the only national-level statutory policy making body for the conservation of 
forests and wildlife. It has on board 47 members, which include top government officials 
and independent non-official members with expertise in wildlife conservation. The bill 
proposes to include the NITI Aayog in the NBWL. Ordinarily, this would be welcome.  It is 
vital that the premier think tank factor in wildlife concerns in the country’s development 
plans. The problem is that many of NITI Aayog’s development proposals are in direct conflict 
with the NBWL’s conservation mandate.  A case in point is NITI Aayog’s mega development 
plans for Great Nicobar which will destroy the island’s pristine forest and coast including the 
nesting habitat of the Giant Leatherback Turtle and the endemic Nicobar megapode.  Being 
on the board gives NITI Aayog an opportunity for undue influence on the NBWL’s decisions.  
Another major concern is that the bill allows for animals listed in Schedule II to be 
declared as vermin, virtually stripping them of legal protection. This will open the 
floodgates to hunt, trap and  trade many species including increasingly rare ones like 
Common Fox, Jackal, Martens, Hyena; potentially leading to population declines and grave 
ecological consequences. This move is problematic, and cannot be endorsed.   
This is especially concerning as till date, there is no systematic process or assessment to 
declare a species vermin. Allowing for a long list of wild animals that can potentially be 
declared as vermin may lead to catastrophic declines of increasingly threatened species.  
The declaration of a wild animal as vermin must be undertaken with the greatest caution 
and scientific rigour.  
I would also question the use of the term ‘vermin’ for wildlife in a law central to its 
conservation. The use of language communicates the government’s intent and such 
derogatory terminology sends the wrong message.  While recognising that species do cause 
tremendous damage to the life, and livelihoods,  especially of communities living in and 
around Protected Areas, and other wildlife-rich areas; what is needed is to control potential 
damage caused by the species through specified or permitted management measures.  
Similarly, the listing of species lack a robust scientific basis, with no comprehensive studies 
to assess which species need greater protection.  Consequently, a large number of species 
particularly reptiles, amphibians and bats have not been listed in Schedule I or II.  The need 
of the hour is a well-considered scientific, consultative process for evaluating, listing, and 
delisting species.  
 
Shockingly, the proposed bill also effectively allows for the commercial sale and purchase 
of live elephants – India’s national Heritage animal.   
433

Earlier, the WLPA explicitly disallowed commercial transactions of animals protected under 
Schedule I and II.  In the proposed bill, live captive elephants have been excluded from this 
general prohibition, leaving a gaping loophole for their commercial sale and purchase.  
The elephant is the only wild animal that can be legally owned by a private individual. The 
legal ownership of elephants must be banned as it encourages their illegal capture and 
trade. Besides, it presents the elephant, a protected wild animal, as a tradable commodity; 
and is therefore, at odds with the objective, and the spirit of The Wildlife (Protection) Act.  
This is a serious anomaly in law that must be corrected.  Instead, the proposed bill has 
suggested a retrograde step that will likely negatively impact wildlife elephant populations 
and captive elephant welfare. There is no explanation on why this regressive move  has 
been proposed. It is unwarranted, and it must be scrapped.  
Amendment Clause 39, Section 62A is a new section which introduces invasive alien species, 
which is a welcome development. Currently there is no policy to addresses invasive alien 
species, which are a major threat to wildlife and habitats in India. But a serious lacunae is 
the proposed clause is that it does not take into account invasive native species, which are 
native to certain parts of India, and are introduced in other regions that is not its home 
range. One glaring example is the chital Axis axis in Andamans. 
The definition of invasive alien species as proposed in the bill is not in sync with the existing 
definitions arrived at scientifically. As for example, the Convention on Biological Diversity, to 
which India is party, defines it as follows: 
Invasive alien species are plants, animals, pathogens and other organisms that are non-
native to an ecosystem, and which may cause economic or environmental harm or adversely 
affect human health. In particular, they impact adversely upon biodiversity, including decline 
or elimination of native species - through competition, predation, or transmission of 
pathogens - and the disruption of local ecosystems and ecosystem functions. 
The above definition lays emphasis on the ecosystem rather than the origin of the invasive 
species.   
The proposed bill allows for: ‘Bona fide use of drinking and household water by local 
communities, shall not be deemed to be an act prohibited under this Section’ (Section 29).  
While, in some ways this is a positive development, how does one define what is a bona 
fide use? The potential for misuse is enormous, and can be used to extract water for other, 
and commercial, purposes.   It must be noted that water holes, streams and other water 
sources are also use by wild animals, birds and reptiles as well as constitute a habitat for 
fish, waterfowl, and other aquatic wildlife.   
Most proposed amendments lack the careful consideration, scientific rigour and 
transparency the exercise demands. The preamble itself is problematic. Whereas earlier the 
emphasis was on the “protection of wild animals, birds and plants"; the amendment 
introduces the term ‘management’. While seemingly innocuous, this implies a shift in the 
mindset of the government from protection of wildlife to its management as a resource.  
434

The amended bill is a missed opportunity to fill critical gaps in conservation such as 
protection to wildlife corridors, and habitats outside the Protected Area network.  
The Protected Area network covers only 5 percent of terrestrial India. Many important 
ecosystems such as grasslands, semi-desert, wetlands, marshes, coasts, rivers and 
Himalayan high-altitude ecosystems are sparely represented in the PA network. These 
habitats are vital for conservation of species such as the Critically Endangered Great Indian 
Bustard, Lesser Florican, Gharials, Fishing Cats etc.  
Wildlife corridors between Protected Areas, and reserve forests  are another category of 
habitat that require protection. There needs to be some regulation of development and 
potentially damaging projects in such wildlife corridors and important wildlife habitats that 
fall outside PAs. One potential safeguard is to ensure that such projects need prior approval 
of the State Board for Wildlife, and then the National Board for Wildlife. 
The need of the hour is to expand the PA network, and to provide for a framework to 
protect habitats outside of this network. Here, there is a needs to incentivise and 
collaborate with farmers, local communities, landowners and other stakeholders in the 
protection of wildlife.   
The Wild Life (Protection )Act, 1972 was a landmark legislation, pivotal in the conservation 
of  megafauna like tigers, lions, elephants, giving India the status of a global conservation 
leader The Act in its new, diluted avatar threatens to destroy its legacy –and India’s natural 
heritage.  
I thank you for your kind consideration, and appeal to the honourable committee to ensure 
that the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 remains true to its mandate of the protection of 
wildlife and its habitat in letter, and spirit.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Sd/Prerna Singh Bindra  
Writer and Conservationist  
Former member, National Board for Wildlife 
Former member, State Board for Wildlife, Uttarakhand 
 
2nd February, 2022 
 
 
 
435

 
 
 
 
 
 
436

Dear Sir, 
  
Please find attached my comments on the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021, as 
introduced in the Rajya Sabha, for the consideration of the esteemed members of 
the  Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment and Forests 
and Climate Change. 
  
I write to you in hope that you will favourably consider my deep concerns regarding the 
proposed amendments to the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, which has been the bedrock 
of the conservation of India’s diverse wildlife, including many of its flagship charismatic 
species like the tiger, elephant to name a few. Our wildlife stands severely 
endangered today, and any (further) dilution of the law will only render it all the more 
vulnerable. 
 
I urge you to seriously consider and deliberate the proposed changes,  keeping in view the 
spirit, and intent, of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. 
  
Thank you for your time, and patience. 
  
Sincerely, 
  
  
sd/-Prerna Singh Bindra 
 
437

Page 1 of 3 
 
Dr.E.K.Easwaran 
B.V. Sc. & A.H., P.G.D.E.V.P., P.G.D.T.M.D., LL.B. 
Rtd. Chief Forest Veterinary Officer, Kerala State, India 
Member IUCN - SSC - AsESG., Member - Captive Elephant Healthcare and Welfare 
Committee (CEHWC) - MoEF&CC - Govt. of India  
"Edamana Matom"  No. AP 6/767, Aruvikkara P.O., Kerala, INDIA 695564 
Mob: +91 9447088212. Email: easwaranek@gmail.com 
 
To whom so ever it is concerned 
Kindly note my views on the WPA amendments. 
I have been working with the captive elephants of Kerala, India ever since 1995 as the Veterinarian of 
the Forest Dep. 
All wild animals except elephants which were in the hand of public like with the Bear charmers, Circus 
etc had been taken back by the govt. and were rehabilitated. Even the elephants in zoos were taken 
back and are in forest camps as part of welfare actions. 
Unfortunately, the captive elephants were allowed to be retained by the owners . I could not 
understand this at all.  
It is said that the captive elephants are part of customary and religious culture/functions. This is not 
completely true because many of such  functions are created in the recent past for creating job to 
captive elephants.  
We all know that the issues of captive elephants had scaled up after the ban on extracting wild timber 
making them job less especially in north east India, pushing then to other states through legal and 
illegal trade / sale. At the new destinations by and large they were considered as me ans for making 
money and the welfare aspects were greatly compromised. 
THE IDEAL ACTION TO BE TAKEN BY GOVT. ID TO TAKE BACK ALL THESE CAPTIVE ELEPHANTS AND 
REHABILITATE THEM APPROPRIATELY. I know this is a real though and near impossible task, but in the 
interest of the captive elephants this is the best thing to be done. 
There are good male -germplasm among the captive elephants and some mechanism has to be 
developed to use the for breeding with the wild population as it can contribute to great extend to 
retain the genetic diversity. At least the semen has to be collected and stored as frozen semen for long 
term conservation purpose. 
Also, the recommendations in the AsESG captive elephant musth management document, especially 
use of vaccines to prevent must h, has to be brought in to the act. As you know musth has no role in 
captivity and is actually creating lot of management issues, causing sever e injury and other health 
438

Page 2 of 3 
 
issues due to the continuous tethering during the entire musth period. Both human and e lephant 
causalities are also happening.  
Regarding allowing transfer of ownership:  this is a very sensitive point. 
Please make a thorough study and understanding of the real ground situation.  
Though transfer is legally banned, a lot of transfer is still taking place both locally and interstate.  
Many owners do this for good money and many do this since they cannot no longer afford to maintain the 
elephant. These elephants at some points of time were sold to the owners by the Govts. It self. It is against 
natural justice to prevent them from reselling the elephants. 
Huge money to the tune of tens of lakhs, is involved in these deals. Having an elephant is considered to be 
a symbol of one’s wealth and might. The ego, especially of the new millionaires, is exploited here. There 
money power and political clout protects them from the legal actions.  
What is be noted is that a person who can afford to spend half a crore or more money illegally / in the black, 
who can also afford to lose such a huge money if something happens to the elephant, is acquiring the 
elephant. Further he also has to spend a good amount to suppress the legal actions throughout the future.  
No need to say what interest he will have with respect to the welfare of the elephant and indeed of the 
keepers (mahouts) . My observation over the past several years is that these custodians neglect the  
elephants and try to make maximum money at the shortest period. Many young captive elephants had died 
due to improper management. 
SO, MY HUMBLE SUBMISSION IS THAT THE TRANSFER OF ELEPHANTS, IRRESPECTIVE OF THEIR PRESENT LEGAL 
OWNERSHIP STATUS, SHALL BE ALLOWED WITH THE STATE, UNDER STRINGENT CONDITIONS TO ALLOW GENUINE 
PERSONS TO ACQUIRE ELEPHANTS AT THE BEST INTEREST OF THE WELFARE OF THE CAPTIVE ELEPHANTS. THIS WILL 
ALSO PREVENT THE INVOLVEMENT OF HUGE BLACK MONEY AND CLANDESTINE PEOPLE.  
Further the state Animal Husbandry Departments shall be made responsible for extending necessary 
services for the health care of the captive elephants. They should have a panel of expert Elephant 
Veterinarians to attend these animals. The examination and treatments shall be done only by a team of 
such Veterinarians in every instances.  
My other suggestions are that  
The Act should address the necessary animal management including population management in the 
wild. This shall include continuous population monitoring, management including culling if required. 
439

Page 3 of 3 
 
Wildlife Veterinary Cadre has to be established and standards has to be prescribed  including the 
number of Vets according to animal population and terrain. 
More powers for p rotecting local biodiversity shall be given to the 3 tire Pancha yath Local Se lf 
Governments in the Act. 
The involvement of the Forest and Wildlife Depts. in One Health actions shall be made mandatory in 
the Act. 
Easwaran E K Dr. 
440

Respected Sir. 
Subject: - URGENT NEED TO AMEND THE WILDLIFE 
PROTECTION ACT, 1972. 
Reference: - 1. Bill No 159 of 2021 . The Wildlife                                     
(Protection) Amendment Bill 2021  
WILDLIFE PROTECTION ACT 1972 is a Central Act and came in to force 
with the aim of the protection of   Wild Animals, Birds, and Plants and for 
matters connected therewith or ancillary or incidental thereto with a view to 
ensuring the Ecological and Environmental security of the Country. 
This Act is uniformly applicable to the whole of the country.  
The procedure for registration, investigation, enquiry, and Trial of the 
offences arising out of the Act should be the same thorough out the country. 
But due to many Legal Technical problems and the ambiguity in the Act, 
different procedures have been followed by different States. There is no 
uniformity among Investigating Agencies. Even there is no uniformity in the 
procedure of Investigation, and Trial of cases within the States. The result of 
which, the Hunters of endangered and  threatened animals, poachers and 
violators of provisions of this Act are escaping from the clutches of Law, even 
before the trial on merit, due to Technical problems. 
PROPOSED AMENDMENT 
Chapter VI of the Act is regarding “PREVENTION AND DETECTION OF 
OFFENCES “ 
1.There is no mention in the Act as to whether the offences are 
cognizable or non-cognizable. 
2 
Proposal: - Amendment to Section 50.  
Section 50- A. To be inserted 
441

(To enable the Investigating Officers to take-up investigation without the 
orders of the Court, As in I P C cases.) 
 Notwithstanding anything contained in any other Law for the time being 
in force, all offences under this Act or any rules made thereunder shall be 
Cognizable.  
2. There is no specific mention as to the offences are bailable or non -
bailable.  
Proposal: - Section 50- B (To be inserted) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other Law for the time 
being in force, all offences under this Act or any rule s made 
thereunder, which are punishable with imprisonment for more than 
six months shall be non-bailable. 
 
3. Section 50 and 55 of the Act are contradictory to each other. Section 
50 empowers the officers mentioned therein, to enter, search, seize 
any materia ls and to arrest the accused, without warrant or the 
orders of the Magistrate. Section 55 says Court can take Cognizance 
only on Complaint. There is no specific provision under the act to 
register FIR 
Proposal: - Section 55 to be amended.  
Insertion of Section 55 -B 
Court can take cognizance of the offences under this Act or any 
rules made thereunder also on Police Report.  
Explanation: - All the officers authorised under section 50 of the 
Act are deemed to be police officers and can exercise all the 
powers as that of the officer in-charge of Police Station for the  
purpose of registration, investigation and submission of Final 
Report of the offences under this Act or Rules.  
Any report submitted by any of the officers authorised under 
Section 50 of the Act , after investigation,  be deemed to be a 
“police report “for the purpose of section 190 of Cr.P.C. 
 
3 
 
The Act is silent about the investigation of the offences.  
442

There is no provision to follow provisions laid down under Sec. 154 of 
Cr.P.C. to register case as regular F I R, and also to conduct Investigation and to 
submit final report under Sec. 173 of Cr.P.C 
Due to above mentioned technical issues, different procedures are being 
followed by the investigating agencies , and Courts are also following different 
procedures while receiving First Information Report and also for Trial of the 
offences.  
Some Courts insist for FIR and some other for  filing Complaint , 
immediately when the offences are detected.    
Every State Government has to appoint a CWLW and also authorise the 
officers to exercise the powers conferred under section 50. But who are the 
officers authorised in this behalf will not be  included in the particular Section  
of the Act.  For that matter we have to go through the Government order or 
the Gazette Notification, in each and every case registered. 
 Different Courts have taken different views on the same question of 
Law and that is why there is confusion in the mind of the Investigating 
Officers as to what procedure is to be followed. 
There is no mention in the Act as to the procedure to be followed by 
other than police officers who are empowered under Sec.50, when provisions 
of many other Acts, like Arms Act, IPC, Electricity Act, etc, are also violated 
along with WLP Act.  
Therefore to serve the purpose of the Constitution of India as per the 
stipulation under Article 48 -A & 51 - A ( g ), it is absolutely necessary to 
bringthe above -mentioned proposed amendments  also to The Wildlife 
Protection Act 1972 immediately.  
05-02-2022      Yours Faithfully 
Sirsi Karnataka                                            V G Bhandi. Public Prosecutor (Rtd) 
 
 
443

Sir, 
I have the following suggestion for kind consideration. 
  
Control of invasive alien species – regarding Caiman crocodiles held in captivity 
  
Some zoos in India have included Caiman crocodilians in their captive population. 
  
There are six different species of Caimans. These are Caiman crocodilus (Spectacled Caiman), Caiman 
yacare (Yacare caiman), Caiman latirostris (Broad-snouted caiman), Palaeosuchus 
palpebrosus (Cuvier’s dwarf caiman), Palaeosuchus trigonatus (Schneider’s dwarf caiman) 
and Melanosuchus niger (Black caiman). 
  
For normal staff of the Forest Department, it is not easy to distinguish these species.   The caimans 
can reproduce very fast. Therefore, they may pose danger to local species of crocodilians (Mugger 
crocodile - Crocodylus palustris and the Estuarine crocodile - Crocodylus porosus) by replacing them 
in the wild, and / or occupying habitats available in the wild. This is not in the interest of 
conservation of native crocodilian species. 
  
The law may be amended for: 
        Prevention of breeding of alien species of crocodilians, like the caimans, in zoos and 
other captive facilities under Government or private control. 
  
        Housings for such alien species of crocodilians must ensure that the alien species are 
not able to escape out to the wild habitats any time. 
  
        Interbreeding of alien species of crocodilians with Indian species should also be 
prevented. 
  
        Any new addition of alien crocodilians to the existing animals held in a captive facility, 
should have adequate justification and prior permission from CZA. 
  
  
Thank you. 
Best regards 
  
Dr L A K Singh, PhD 
 
444

Dear Sir, 
 
Many thanks for inviting memoranda from the public about the proposed amendments in the 
Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021. In this context, I would like to submit the 
following suggestions to the Honorable Committee; 
 
1. The Wildlife  (Protection) Act, 1972 is one of the robust Act that is highly appreciated in 
the world as it gives utmost care to wildlife  in India. So far, we could protect our wonderful 
wildlife most e fficiently using this Act though we are one of the most populated nations in 
the world. However, there are certain issues that need to be addressed in the existing Act. For 
example, the Act may be renamed as 'The Wild Life (Conservation) Act/Bill, 2021' so that we 
can take care of entire gamut of issues related to wildlife  conservation in the country that 
facilitate not only the protection  and also promote the integrated management of wildlife  and 
their habitats, sustainable use of wildlife resources to str engthen the livelihoods of local 
communities, restoration of endangered species and their habitats, etc.  
 
2. I was coordinating the listing of Schedule Species in the WLPA, 1972 in 2007 and 2008 
with help of experts from all over the country using whatev er data available during that time. 
Present proposed  Bill contains those lists. But, the conservation status of many species have 
changed now. Further, nomenclature of species due to recent development in taxonomy (in 
the past 14 years) have also been cha nged for some of the species listed that need to be 
rechecked with ZSI, WII, etc before finalizing the proposed scheduled species lists. Further, 
the Bill may include the necessity of 'Periodic Listing' of scheduled species every 4 -5 years 
using IUCN Red D ata Criteria with some modifications that suit Indian species. Therefore, 
addition/deletion/upgrade or downgrade of species in the Scheduled Lists can be undertaken 
with help of scientific data and experts for better conservation and protection of species that 
deserve most. 
 
3. We have to provide adequate power to the Chief Wildlife Warden to efficiently tackle the 
problematic animals that often get into conflict with humans. For example, wild pig, 
monkeys, nilgai, etc. Enough power needs to be given to th e State Level Authority to control 
the populations of problematic animals but with proper scientific data and technology. 
 
4. Providing more power to the CWLWs to approve the certain developmental projects 
without consensus of MoEF&CC may be detrimental t o wildlife and their habitats. In this 
context, I may request to avoid such amendments and retain the old rules. 
 
5. Invasive species are one of the most important threats to wildlife in India. We need a 
separate section in this proposed Bill, 2021 to eff iciently prevent the introduction of IAS and 
manage existing invasive alien species. If required, I may even suggest a separate  act 
titled  'Invasive Alien Species Act' to tackle these species. 
 
6. Further, I request the Honorable Committee to expand the scope of the Bill, 2021 upto 
EEZ of India so that we can take care of marine biodiversity and their habitats outside the 
territorial water with effective  management system. We are unable to declare Marine 
Protected Areas outside the Territorial Water as th e scope of existing Act is seems to be upto 
the Territorial Water of India. Expanding the  scope of the proposed Bill, 2021 would help us 
to promote the blue economy with sustainable spatial planning.  
 
Thank you. 
445

 
Regards, 
Sivakumar 
 
Prof. K. Sivakumar, MPhil., Ph.D., 
Department of Ecology and Environmental Sciences, 
School of Life Sciences, 
Pondicherry University, 
R.V. Nagar, Kalapet, 
Pudhucherry - 605014, India 
Tel: +91 413 2654322 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6938-7480 
(Former Scientist G, Wildlife Institute of India) 
 
446

Memoranda submitted by Hon’ble Members of Parliament 
 
1. Shrimati Hema Malini, Lok Sabha 
2. Shrimati Navneet Ravi Rana, Lok Sabha 
3. Shri K. Muraleedharan, Lok Sabha 
4. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan, Lok Sabha 
5. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze, Lok Sabha 
6. Shri Dhairyasheel S. Mane, Lok Sabha 
 
447

448

449

450

451

452

453

454

455

456

457

458

459

460

Memoranda submitted by Concerned Citizens 
 
1. Shri Manish Vaidya, Ahmedabad 
2. Shri Subir Mario Chowlin, Pauri 
3. Shri Dhiraj Umesh Mirajkar, Maharashtra  
4. Shri Arvind Jain, New Delhi 
5. Shri Bhaskar Asthana, Lucknow 
6. Smt. Jhinku Banerjee, Howrah, West Bengal 
7. Shri Milind Vaman Karkhanis, Panaji 
8. Shri Manan Mehta, Mumbai 
9. Shri Navneet Chahal, New Delhi 
10. Smt. Pankti Desai 
11. Shri Sanjay Kumar Singh, Rohini, Delhi 
12. Shri Yogesh Kumar 
13. Shri Mathen Mathew, Telangana 
14. Shri Sandeep Chakrabarti, Bengaluru 
 
 
 
461

 
 
Dear Sir 
I, Manish Vaidya, have been working for the last several years to teach nature 
education and prevent wildlife crime. For this, the laws of India, court orders, new 
notification are openly discussed through a social site at the national level. At the 
same time, we cover the unnatural death of Indian wildlife. The Wildlife Protection 
Act of India which is being amendment of 1972. Which has been referred to the 
Standing Committee of the Lok Sabha by the Minister of Forest, Environment and 
Climate Change, Government of India. As per my preliminary examination This 
law amendment mentions some positive and negative clauses. We will study and 
send our suggestions / feedback to the Additional Director of the Secretariat of 
Rajya Sabha of India. But it is important to note that people in India who are still 
living near forest or have direct contact with wildlife are not influenced by the 
English language and the Internet, meaning that they have difficulty understanding, 
reading and speaking English. For these reasons I make an appeal to the 
Government of India that .... 
  
(1) This Act of the Central Government shall be transmitted in the regional 
languages of India before publishing. 
  
(2) For the amendment bill for which the suggestions / feedback of the people has 
been sought within 15 days as advertised, its time should be given a maximum of 3 
months. 
  
(3) The IWPA either its amendment law is not yet understood by many citizens as 
there is no awareness in it, so at the divisional level the Forest Officer's office is 
advertised in the local daily newspaper and the people concerned are gathered and 
persuaded then their suggestions / feedback is taken which is documented in the 
amendment bill in Lok Sabha. Be sent. 
  
(4) This amendment bill should not be for the examiner only if the member of 
Rajya Sabha is not sufficient but it is necessary to discuss this in both the houses 
(Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha). 
  
(5) If we are given more time, we will understand this bill, discuss it with the 
people and we will also send it to you with the comments of the people to make 
this bill suitable. Thanks  
 
(Manish Vaidya) 
 
 
462

Dear Sir,  
 
The following suggestions and objections on the proposed amendments to the Wildlife 
(Protection) Act, 1972 may please be placed before the Hon’ble Parliamentary 
Standing Committee.  
 
 2 (16A) The definition for invasive alien species should be expanded to also 
include species that are historically found in certain regions of India but in 
recent times have spread or may have been introduced into other regions of India to 
which they are not historically known to occur, as a species which is native to a 
particular region or part of India may become invasive if it is introduced to 
another part of India. 
 
2 (24) "person" shall include any firm or company or any authority or association 
or body of individuals whether incorporated or not.  The definition of "person" 
should be expanded to include individuals and should be re-written as - "person" 
shall include any firm or company or any authority or association or body of 
individuals whether incorporated or not or any individual.  
  
2(39) Ex-situ conservation like rescue centres and conservation breeding centres 
should not be clubbed with circuses and zoos. Further, if a conservation breeding 
centre is required to be set-up as part of a conservation strategy for a particular 
species in a PA or wider landscape, permission for the such a centre should be 
under the preview and granted by the Chief Wildlife Warden of a State. 
  
4 (d) Member of Niti-Ayog should be omitted as  many of the Niti Aayog’s 
development proposals are in direct conflict with the conservation mandate of the 
NBWL. 
 
6A(1), 6A(2) and 6A(3) should be omitted as a Standing Committee will render the 
State Board for Wildlife defunct as a Standing Committee would be a body with the 
sole purpose of allowing damaging projects within PAs. 
  
In Section 11 (a) and 11 (b) of the Principal Act a scientific basis for 
identifying an individual animal which has become dangerous to human life should be 
included and permission for its removal by the Chief Wildlife Warden should be 
issued only after proper identification of such an individual. Such identification 
could include either photographs, videos, camera-trap images, DNA profiles or tags 
of the individual animal. Pug-marks should be excluded as they merely depict the 
presence of a species and are prone to error when discriminating between 
individuals of a species.  For example, before declaring a leopard or a tiger as a 
“man-eater” for removal from a particular area the individual animal should first 
be identified and then only after such identification has taken place should 
permission for the removal of only that particular individual be granted. 
 
In section 28 of the principal Act, "photography", "and film-making without making 
any change in the habitat or causing any adverse impact to the habitat or wild life 
for purposes of research shall be permitted without any fees” should be inserted. 
 
More impetus should be given for ecosystem, ecological and species research in PAs 
particularly for individuals which should also include financial allocations. 
 
Thanking You, 
 
 
463

Dhiraj Umesh Mirajkar B.Sc., LL.M 
Advocate 
Legal Advisor: Sanjay Gandhi National Park Division 
And 
Mangrove and Marine Biodiversity Foundation of Maharashtra 
  
29/1/2022 
To, 
Shri Rakesh Anand 
Additional Director 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
Parliamentary Standing Committee 
Science, Technology, Environment, 
Forests and Climate Change 
(rsc-st@sansad.nic.in) 
  
Dear Sir, 
  
The following suggestions and objections on the proposed amendments to 
the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 may please be placed before the 
Parliamentary Committee. 
  
Section proposed 
to be amended and 
subject 
Suggestion / Objection Reasons for the 
Suggestion / Objection 
2 (16A) – alien/ 
invasive species 
The definition should 
include species which are 
A species native to a 
certain area in India 
464

found in certain parts of 
India but historically have 
never been found in other 
parts. 
can be invasive & 
destructive if 
introduced to another 
area. E.G. Spotted deer 
(Chital/ Axis axis) 
introduced in the 
Andaman Islands have 
become invasive as 
there is no predator 
for this species there. 
2(34) –‘vermin’ 
along with the 
corresponding 
sec. 62 
The original definition of 
vermin should be retained; 
also the reference in Sch. V 
to ‘jackal’ should be 
omitted. 
Section 62 as it stands 
presently should be 
retained.      
The definition is 
worded too widely. 
Any animal can be 
declared as ‘vermin’ 
under section 62 for 
perpetuity. Also any 
person can then kill 
such animal which 
renders section 11 of 
the Act redundant.  
2 - clauses18A, 
19, 27, 36 
The Schedules should be re-
numbered – a Schedule 
should be retained which 
clearly mentions ‘vermin’ 
This will act as a 
guideline as to which 
creatures can be 
declared as ‘vermin’ on 
the ejusdem generis / 
noscitur a socis 
principle. Arbitrariness 
will be avoided.  
5A (1) (d) NBWL In 5A (1)(c), add: at least 
two of these Members of 
Parliament shall be from 
among the Opposition. 
Government already 
has a very heavy 
representation on the 
NBWL. The presence of 
the Opposition MPs 
should help in keeping 
the playing field level. 
5 B (3) Standing 
Committee NBWL 
The amendment should be 
dropped. 
The Standing 
Committee is of the 
NBWL whose functions 
are prescribed by the 
Act. There is no reason 
to circumscribe that 
functioning by ‘terms 
465

and conditions’. 
9 – mention of the 
Schedules 
Same as for sec. 2 - 
clauses18A, 19, 27, 
36 above. 
Same reasons as 
assigned above. 
33(a) 
Management of 
sanctuaries by 
CWLW 
The proposed additional 
words after “approved by 
him..” should be deleted in 
their entirety. 
Forests are a 
concurrent subject of 
legislation under the 
Constitution and the 
proposed 
provision(whose 
deletion is suggested) 
gives room to Central 
Government to 
interfere in the 
management of the 
sanctuary. 
Also, the references to 
the Forest Rights Act 
2006 unnecessarily 
restricts the powers of 
the State Government 
to declare a sanctuary 
or part thereof to be 
Critical Wildlife 
Habitat under the 
same Forest Rights Act, 
when the situation so 
demands.   
38Y(e) Wildlife 
Crime Control 
Bureau 
Proposed Clause (e) should 
be dropped and instead 
should read Clause (e) three 
persons who are recognized 
experts in the fields of 
criminal law and wildlife 
conservation, nominated by 
the Chief Wildlife Warden.   
The Proposed 
introduction of a 
person from the Goods 
and Service Tax 
Department does not 
bring anything of much 
use to the WCCB. 
Persons experienced in 
Criminal law and 
wildlife conservation, 
(especially 
knowledgeable in 
species being 
466

trafficked and allied 
subjects) would be 
more useful to the 
WCCB.  
39 proposed sub-
sec.(5) 
This should be dropped. 
Instead add: 
Any such animal article, 
trophy, uncured trophy or 
meat of any wild animal 
shall be destroyed upon the 
orders of the Chief Wildlife 
Warden or any officer 
authorized by him in 
writing, in such manner as 
may be directed and a 
proper electronic and video 
record of such destruction 
shall be preserved. Such 
destruction shall be ordered 
only after a scientific report 
of identification of the 
animal article, trophy, 
uncured trophy or meat has 
been obtained for use as 
evidence in any prosecution 
for an offence or any 
proceeding under this Act 
or any other law.   
Disposal of such 
articles takes time; 
storage till disposal is 
problematic as it takes 
up space and requires 
facilities not always 
available; it can lead to 
a host of undesirable 
activities. After 
seizure, and adequate 
sampling for scientific 
identification, this 
material can be 
destroyed with an 
electronic visual 
recording of the 
destruction to be 
preserved.   
40, 40A, 41, 48 
49A 
The Schedules need to be 
renumbered 
As mentioned above. 
42A surrender of 
animal article , 
trophy etc. 
Should read: shall 
surrender the said animal 
article (etc) to him along 
with the 
respective  certificate of 
ownership and the Chief 
Wildlife Warden shall then 
cause the same to be 
destroyed and preserve a 
proper record of such 
The “trophy culture” 
needs to be buried 
once and for all and 
the sooner the better. 
  
Keeping such articles a 
State property involves 
needless and non-
productive record 
467

surrender and destruction. 
  
The proposed provision 
making such article, trophy, 
etc., the property of Govt. 
should be dropped.       
keeping and storage 
and the risk of theft 
and misappropriation 
always looms large. 
Well documented 
destruction eliminates 
this.   
2(32) ‘uncured 
trophy’ - 
ambergris 
“ambergris” should be 
deleted from the definition 
of ‘uncured trophy”. 
Ambergris is the vomit 
of the Sperm Whale. 
  
It is found floating in 
the sea by fishermen. 
Whales are neither 
killed nor molested in 
any manner to obtain 
it. 
  
People who find it and 
are then found in 
possession of it are 
needlessly arrested 
and face harassment.  
  
Peacock feathers are 
not treated either as 
animal article or as 
uncured trophy under 
the Act. 
  
There is no rationale 
for treating ambergris 
any differently.   
Nomenclature in 
the Schedules 
The scientific names of the 
wild animals listed in the 
  
468

Schedule are printed 
incorrectly. 
e.g. 
Gee’s Golden Langur is 
correctly : Trachypithecus 
geii, separate words. 
  
Items 52 to 55 (foxes) the 
name of the sub-species 
should be separately 
written 
e.g. Vulpes vulpes montana 
  
Alternate common names 
should also be included as 
many a time there is 
confusion in Court over the 
species. 
  
Similarly peafowl (peacock) 
is not Pavocristatus, but 
Pavo cristatus. 
Plants in the 
Schedule 
Red Sanders tree – 
Pterocarpus santalinus, is 
endemic to a very few 
regions in India.  
  
It is regularly smuggled out 
of the country. 
Any detection of smuggling 
only results in actions 
under the Customs Act 
  
469

1962 and not under the 
Wildlife (Protection) Act 
1972. This is because the 
tree is not a Schedule 
species. 
Therefore, this needs 
rectification.  
  
I am forwarding these suggestions hoping that they will be seriously 
considered in the spirit in which they are sent, viz. the desire to preserve 
the rich and diverse natural heritage of India for ages to come. 
Yours sincerely, 
  
Dhiraj U Mirajkar 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
470

Dhiraj Umesh Mirajkar B.Sc., LL.M 
Advocate 
Legal Advisor: Sanjay Gandhi National Park Division 
And 
Mangrove and Marine Biodiversity Foundation of Maharashtra 
  
30/1/2022 
To, 
Shri Rakesh Anand 
Additional Director 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
Parliamentary Standing Committee 
Science, Technology, Environment, 
Forests and Climate Change 
(rsc-st@sansad.nic.in) 
  
Dear Sir, 
Sub: Addendum to suggestions (emailed yesterday) 
on the proposed amendments to 
the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 
  
In continuation of the suggestions mailed  yesterday, I also suggest the 
following amendments be incorporated in the Act. 
  
471

I]         Amendments in Section 50. 
(a) In  Sub-section (4) of section 50  the words “ or things 
seized” should be deleted. 
            (The reason for the deletion is that the things seized should be dealt 
with by the Forest Officer authorized under sub -section 6 which is also to 
be amended as indicated below)   
  
(b) In sub-section (6) of Section 50 , Firstly, renumber it as  Sub sec. 
6(i) then, after the opening words “ Where any ”, add/insert “wild animal, 
whether alive or dead, or meat of any wild animal”. 
            After the words “ or derivative thereof ” add: “or any snare, trap, tool, 
vehicle, vessel or weapon”. 
            After the words “as may be prescribed”  add: “or as generally directed 
by administrative orders of the Chief Wildlife Warden within 60 days from the 
date after the seizure is reported, after hearing the person if any likely to be 
affected by the order, and shall communicate the order in writing to such 
person within 15 days of the same being made”. 
Add after clause (i) : “ (ii) Any person aggrieved by any order or action of 
the authorized officer under clause(i) above, may file an appeal the Court of 
Sessions within 30 days of the date of the order and the Court of Sessions on 
appeal may make such order as appears to it to be reasonable in  the 
circumstances. The provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963 shall be 
applicable to such appeal.” 
            (The reason for this amendment is that in many States, the Indian 
Forest Act 1927 has empowered Forest Officers of a specified rank  to deal 
with the seized goods especially vehicles transporting contraband. The 
amendment brings the procedure to deal with seizures under this Act on 
par with those under the Indian Forest Act. An Appellate remedy with 
provisions for condonation of delay in filing of the appeal is also provided.) 
  
(c) After sub-section (6), add sub-section (6-A) as follows: 
472

“(i) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 56 of this Act or in any 
other law for the time being in force or any judgement  of any Court, all 
offences against any of the provisions of this Act shall be non-bailable. 
  (ii) Any person who is arrested for an offence against any of the provisions of 
this Act shall not be released on bail unless the Officer investigating the 
offence has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard on any 
application for bail”. 
            The reason for this amendment is that often Courts question whether 
offences under this Act are bailable or otherwise. The amendment seeks to 
clarify this. Also, as the offences are serious and affect the natural heritage 
of the country, it is necessary to provide that the Officer investigating the 
offence should be heard on whether bail should be granted or not in a 
particular case.    
  
       Yours sincerely 
  
    Dhiraj U Mirajkar            
                
  
 
473

Sub: Comments on The Wildlife Protection Amendment Bill 2021.  
  
Mr. Rakesh Anand  
Additional Director, 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat  
Dear Sir: 
The current amendments proposed to be introduced to Wildlife Protection Act are harmful to 
elephants as by these amendments you will allow trafficking and ownership of elephants 
and we oppose these proposed amendments .  
The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 specifically prohibits trade in Wild Animals including captive and wild 
elephants. Section 40 of the Act prohibits any person from acquiring, receiving, keeping in one‟s control, 
custody or possession, sell, offer for sale or otherwise transfer or transport any animal specified in Schedule I 
and Part II of Schedule II except with  the previous permission of the Chief Wildlife Warden. Thus not only is 
sale prohibited: even an offer for sale is prohibited without prior approval of the CWLW. The Chief Wildlife 
Warden‟s power are however restricted in view of proviso 2 (A) and 2 (B) wh ich states that that only way one 
can acquire, receive, keep in control, custody and possession is through the mode of inheritance. Thus one could 
inherit Ivory, Tiger Skin Rhino horn Antlers etc of scheduled species after prior approval of CWLW but cannot  
acquire or receive the same through any other manner other than inheritance. Thus inheritance is the sole 
method through which one can acquire Scheduled animal and animal article. However, the proviso to Sub 
Section 2 (A) and 2 (B) states that it the inheritance clause will not apply to elephants. This means that elephants 
could be acquired through mode other than inheritance.  
However, Section 43 of the Act however limits the power of the CWLW by stipulating that any such transfer, 
even if allowed cannot be of a commercial nature. Section 43 reads:  
No person having in his possession captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy in respect of which 
he has a certificate of ownership shall transfer by way of sale or offer for sale or by any other mode of 
consideration of commercial nature, such animal or article or trophy or uncured trophy.   
A combined reading of existing Section 40 and 43 leads to the following conclusion with respect to a live 
elephant:  
      Transfer, acquiring and receiving o f a live captive elephant is permissible under the existing legal 
provision with the prior approval of the Chief Wildlife Warden.  
      However, such transfer, acquisition and receiving of an elephant should not involve any 
commercial transaction. Thus s ale, purchase and offer for sale or purchase is explicitly prohibited 
under the provisions of the Act.  
The Amendment Bill however, inserts a new subsection (4) to section 43 which reads:  
“(4) This section (section 43) shall not apply to the transfer or t ransport of any live elephant by a person having 
a certificate of ownership, where such person has obtained prior permission from the State Government on 
fulfilment of such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government.”  
Thus an exception has been carved out by excluding „live elephant‟ from the general prohibition contained in 
Section 43. The implication of the same is that commercial sale and purchase is no longer prohibited, under the 
Act.  
The Amendment Bill therefore allows for commercial trade in elephants, therefore we oppose the 
proposed amendments .  
 
Regards, 
Arvind Jain 
 
474

व न्म जीव  अधध नन मभ संशोध न  भें वव चायणीम बफंद ुओं के संफंध  भें सुझाव  - ऻाऩन  
ससम्भान ननवेदन मह है कक , 
१-सृष्टि भें भान व  फष्तिमों के फसन े से ऩूव व सब ी जीव  व न्म जीव  ही यहे,भानव सभ्मिा  के 
ववकास साथ साथ भानव द्वाया अऩने लरए उऩमोगी वन्म जीवों को उनकी उऩमोधगिा  के 
आधाय ऩय अऩने साथ यखना /ऩार न ा शुरू  कक मा गमा व े जीव  ऩार िू मा घयेर ू कहराए।  
२-व िवभान  भें ब ी भान व  हेिु संब ावव ि उऩमोगी व न्म जीव ों क ो आव श्मक िान ुसाय उन के द्व ाया 
उत्ऩाददि ऩदाथों की प्राष्ति हेिु ष्जसभें उन के साथ क्रूयिा न  होिी हो,ऩशुऩार न  क ी दृ ष्टि से 
िैमाय कयने  हेिु न मे संशोध न  भें प्राव ध ान  कक मा जान ा उधचि यहेगा। 
३- अनेक वन्म जीवों से उनके ननजीव शयीय बागों जैसे सींग ,फार िथा ग्रंधथ स्राव  आदद की 
प्राष्ति हेिु व न्म जीव ों क ा ऩशुऩार न  कक मे जान े के आशम से नमे संशोधन भें प्रावधान ककमा 
जाना उधचि यहेगा।  
४- जन  तव ात्म क ल्माण हेिु क तिूयी भृगों से क तिूयी प्राति क यन े के आशम से (आध ुनन क  
क तिूयी नन टक षवण वव धध  द्व ाया जो कक  ऩूणविमा अदहंसक  है) उनका  व्मावसानमक तिय ऩय 
ऩशुऩार न  कक सी व्मष्ति /संतथा/सभाज द्वाया अंगीकाय ककमे  जा सक न े हेिु न मे संशोध न  भें 
प्रावधान ककमा जाना उधचि यहेगा।  
५- भृग श्रंग (हरयण मा सांबय के सींग ) क ा उऩमोग आमुव ेदद क  /ऩायंऩरयक  धचककत्सा भें आदद 
कार से होिा यहा है ,ऩयंिु व िवभान  भें भृग श्रंग के अब ाव  भें जन उऩमोगी औषधधमों का 
ननभावण प्रबाववि है। 
अि् भृग श्रंग क ी उऩर ब्ध िा हेिु ष्जस प्रक ाय से याजतथान  भें वव श्न ोई सभाज द्वाया श्रद्धा वश 
कारे दहयणों का ऩारन ककमा जािा है ,ऐसे ही भृग श्रंग के  व्मावसानमक उत्ऩादन की दृष्टि से 
उऩमुति भृग व ंश क ा ऩशुऩार न  के रू ऩ भें उऩमोग कक मे जा सक न े हेिु  प्रावधान नमे संशोधन 
भें ककमा जाना उधचि यहेगा।  
उऩर ब्ध  सूचन ा के अन ुसाय भृग श्रंग भृग क ा नन जीव  अंग होन े के साथ साथ िूिन े ऩय तव मं 
ऩुन ् फन  जािा है। 
६- विवभान भें ष्जस प्रकाय वन ऺेत्रों का आकाय ननयंिय घि यहा है उसे देखिे  हुए जैव  
वव वव ध िा क ो फचाए यखन ा एक  चुन ौिी साबफि हो यहा है,ऐसे भें वन्म  जीवों का उनकी जन 
आव श्मक िाओं के क्रभ भें उऩमोधगिा के आध ाय ऩय ऩशुऩार न  कक मे जाने से जैव ववववधिा भें 
फढ़ि का होना तवाबाववक है तमों कक उनसे आधथवक  राब होने की ष्तथनि भें ऩारक द्वाया 
उन के अन ुकूर  ऩरयव ेश व्मव ष्तथि कक मा जाना आवश्मक होगा ।  
७- विवभान ऩरयदृश्म भें वन्म  जीव ों से संब ावव ि जन  उऩमोगी ऩद ाथों क ी प्राष्ति हेिु 
संबावनाओं ऩय दृष्टि  फनामे यखने के आशम से याटरीम औषधीम ऩादऩ फोर्व की िजव ऩय 
याटरीम  वन्म जीव आधारयि औषधीम ऩदाथव फोर्व तथावऩि ककमा जाना सभम की भांग है जो  
कक  केन्र ीम जू अथोरयिी आप इंडर्मा िथा आमुष भंत्रार म ब ायि सयक ाय क ा संमुति उऩक्रभ 
हो।इसके हेिु आव श्मक िान ुसाय न मे संशोध न  भें प्राव ध ान  कक मा जाना उधचि यहेगा।  
475

८- विवभान भें भानव का औसि तवबाव  फडा ही तव ाथव ऩूणव होन ा प्रिीि होिा है व ह प्रत्मऺ 
र ाब  हेिु उन्भुख यहिा है औय ऩयोऺ राब के प्रनि उदासीनिा साभान्म सी फाि है।अि् ऐसे 
प्रमास ष्जनभें जैव ववववधिा का ववतिाय होिा हो औय भानव को अप्रत्मऺ के साथ साथ  
प्रत्मऺ राब बी होिा हो ,उन्हें प्राथलभकिा प्रदान कयनी होगी ,इससे ऩयतऩय दहि साध्म होंगे 
औय प्रक ृनि वव तिाय भें भान व ीम  तवैष्छिक सहमोग लभरना  तवाबाववक होगा।  
      श्रीभान जी ववचाय कयना चाहें ।  
बवदीम   
बातकय अतथाना   
९४५००९५७६७ 
 
 
476

Mr. Rakesh Anand  
Additional Director, 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat  
 
Dear Sir, 
The current amendments proposed to be introduced to the Wildlife Protection Act are harmful to elephants as by these 
amendments you will allow trafficking and ownership of elephants and we oppose these proposed amendments for the 
reasons as stated below.  
The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 specifically prohibits trade in Wild Animals including captive and wild elephants. 
Section 40 of the Act prohibits any person from acquiring, receiving, keeping in one‟s control, custody or possession, 
sell, offer for sa le or otherwise transfer or transport any animal specified in Schedule I and Part II of Schedule II 
except with the previous permission of the Chief Wildlife Warden. Thus not only is sale prohibited: even an offer for 
sale is prohibited without prior appro val of the CWLW. The Chief Wildlife Warden‟s power is however restricted in 
view of proviso 2 (A) and 2 (B) which states that the only way one can acquire, receive, keep in control, custody and 
possession is through the mode of inheritance. Thus one could inherit Ivory, Tiger Skin Rhino horn Antlers etc of 
scheduled species after prior approval of CWLW but cannot acquire or receive the same through any other manner 
other than inheritance. Thus inheritance is the sole method through which one can acquire Sch eduled animal and 
animal articles. However, the proviso to Sub Section 2 (A) and 2 (B) states that the inheritance clause will not apply to 
elephants. This means that elephants could be acquired through mode other than inheritance.  
However, Section 43 of the Act however limits the power of the CWLW by stipulating that any such transfer, even if 
allowed, cannot be of a commercial nature. Section 43 reads:  
No person having in his possession captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy in respect  of which he has 
a certificate of ownership shall transfer by way of sale or offer for sale or by any other mode of consideration of 
commercial nature, such animal or article or trophy or uncured trophy.  
A combined reading of existing Section 40 and 43 leads to the following conclusion with respect to a live elephant:  
· Transfer, acquiring and receiving of a live captive elephant is permissible under the existing legal provision with the 
prior approval of the Chief Wildlife Warden.  
· However, such transf er, acquisition and receiving of an elephant should not involve any commercial transaction. 
Thus sale, purchase and offer for sale or purchase is explicitly prohibited under the provisions of the Act.  
The Amendment Bill however, inserts a new subsection (4) to section 43 which reads:  
“(4) This section (section 43) shall not apply to the transfer or transport of any live elephant by a person having a 
certificate of ownership, where such person has obtained prior permission from the State Government on fulf ilment of 
such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government.”  
Thus an exception has been carved out by excluding „live elephant‟ from the general prohibition contained in Section 
43. The implication of the same is that commercial sale and purchase is no longer prohibited, under the Act.  
The Amendment Bill therefore allows for commercial trade in elephants under the garb of exception of “Live 
Elephant”, therefore we oppose the proposed amendments . 
 
 
Best 
 
Jhinku Banerjee                                             FOTOJAJS 
https://jhinkubanerjee.com/                                 www.fotojajs.com 
Phone: + 91  
9674433000 
 /  
9073979222 
 
477

To 
Shri Rakesh Anand ji,   
Additional Director, 
Rajyasabha Secretariat. 
 
Sub: Suggestion for amendment to the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 ..... 
 
Respected sir, 
Apro pos the following advertisement in respect of the Bill to amend the Wild Life 
(Protection) Act, 1972. - 
"davp 31202/11/0004/2122", in the newspapers, your kind self is requested to please give due 
consideration to the following -   
1.  In Goa, in most of the wildlife sanctuaries, the basic process of settlement of various rights 
in the areas declared u/s 18 of the wildlife Act are yet to be successfully completed since last 
up to 50 years. This has been causing many local residents to suffer enormously , without 
actually accruing any benefit to the concerned wildlife ! 
For example, in privately owned non -forest land holdings in the Section 18 area, the owners 
are denied permission by the concerned government authorities to erect residential 
constructions or to fell trees for meeting their essential expenses, under the pretext of it being 
part of the wildlife sanctuary (a forest land from point of view of the Forest Conservation 
Act, 1980). 
The local human beings who are residents of the Section 18 areas a re also part and parcel of 
that wilderness. It is they who have preserved that wilderness for generations without 
exploiting it to deterioration. Therefore the law should consider them as the most sensitive 
and precious resource of the forest and provide t o treat them accordingly with respect, 
without depriving them of the scope to enjoy their rights within their limits. 
In order to further this intention, following sub -section may be inserted in the Act after sub -
section 2 of Section 18-A - 
"(3)  Provisions of Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 shall not be applicable to the privately 
owned non-forest lands in Section 18 areas irrespective of whether the process of settlement 
of rights is completed or not". 
 
Kindly do the needful, sir. 
Yours sincerely, 
Milind Vaman Karkhanis, 
401, Atlantis-1, above SBI, Kerant, Caranzalem, Panaji, Tiswadi Taluka, North Goa District, 
PIN -  403002. 
       
 
478

To, 
 
Shri Rakesh Anandji, 
Additional Director, 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
 
 
Respected Sir, 
 
I am writing this email as an appeal to the respected Members of the Parliment. 
 
I am neither a qualified environmentalist nor an activist with domain expertise who brings 
about a positive social change. I am just an ordinary citizen born and brought up in India 
with Indian values in a Hindu religious household. 
 
I came across the attached ad about THe Wild life Protection Ammendment Bill 2021 and 
researched about it through all the details available on the internet with arguments for and 
against this bill. Specifically, Clause 27 that proposes to permit the commercial trade of the 
elephants.  
 
I am absolutely heartbroken to know that our respected members of the parliament have 
tabled the bill with clause 27 that permits the commercial trade of Elephants! 
 
How can we, in 2022, propose laws that are regressive in spirit and intend?  
How can the last biggest land mammals walking on earth, such intelligent beings, that 
survive completely on herbivorous diet, be treated with such cruelty and disrespect? 
How can we, a land where we worship them as god, addressing them as Aadidev - the one 
worshipped first before any other gods, treat their actual swaroop on earth as mere 
commodity for trade? 
 
I do understand that the respected Members of Parliments, despite their earnest efforts, 
cannot solve all and every problem in our country. But by passing this bill with Clause 27 
that allows commercial trading of elephants, you will lead these wild elephants, these pure 
and absolute children of mother nature, these magnificent beasts as they are into 
Extinction! Yes, they might just about survive in captivity and might live few years longer 
than in wild. However they will no longer be either wild or animals. They will merely be 
biological devices and tools existing to fulfill human greed and desires. 
 
We need to acknowledge that they are the souls of the jungles and lands they roam. 
They are the living embodiment, a testament of the power of mother nature who has 
nurtured all - us humans, a tiniest unicellular organism and these gentle giants together in 
her bosom. 
 
Researches point that we definitely have no blood relations with them and genetically we 
only share roughly 90 percent of our DNA with elephants apart from few other animals 
species, but we all are absolutely connected to each other in ways that we can only feel it 
deep inside us in our 'aNu' अणु  
479

 
Researches also show that elephants are not very different than us humans in their social 
and cognitive capacities. They too, like us, mourn their dead for days. They too honour their 
fallen friends and family. They display empathy. Have long lasting memories and are seen 
being self-aware. 
 
All of this understanding is available on a click of a button on the internet. I am sure many of 
our children already know these better than us by now. Imagine, later if they come to know 
that a law was passed by their own fathers, mothers and grand parents that robbed them of 
experienceing and knowing these beautiful beings of mother nature in their true form - 
living like elephants in the wild.  
 
As the native american proverb by the wise Chief Seattle goes, "We do not inherit the earth 
from our ancestors, we borrow it from our children" 
 
So would your collective conscious allow you to pass a law that treats these intelligent 
beings, these awe inspiring creatures, the swaroop of Vignaharta himself with cruelty and 
indignity? Because if this law passes then they will be treated as commodities and cruelty on 
them will have no bounds. We are not only seeing this happen in cattle trade but have seen 
its ugly side when human slavery was legal. 
 
I am confident that we the people of this country have chosen our representives who, 
sitting in the highest house, are like us - pragmatic, compasionate, and future forward in our 
thinking and human character. 
 
I understand that you all are responsible and respectable Members of the Parliment and the 
decision that you will take will be a holistic one and that will make every member of you 
own family and your extended family - India very proud of you. 
 
A humble citizen. 
 
Manan Mehta 
  
 
 
 
 
480

Sub: Comments on The Wildlife Protection Amendment Bill 2021.  
  
Mr. Rakesh Anand  
Additional Director, 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat  
Dear Sir: 
The current amendments proposed to be introduced to Wildlife Protection Act are 
harmful to elephants as by these amendments you will allow trafficking and 
ownership of elephants and we oppose these proposed amendments .  
The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 spe cifically prohibits trade in Wild Animals including captive and wild 
elephants. Section 40 of the Act prohibits any person from acquiring, receiving, keeping in one‟s control, 
custody or possession, sell, offer for sale or otherwise transfer or transport a ny animal specified in Schedule I 
and Part II of Schedule II except with the previous permission of the Chief Wildlife Warden. Thus not only is 
sale prohibited: even an offer for sale is prohibited without prior approval of the CWLW. The Chief Wildlife 
Warden‟s power are however restricted in view of proviso 2 (A) and 2 (B) which states that that only way one 
can acquire, receive, keep in control, custody and possession is through the mode of inheritance. Thus one could 
inherit Ivory, Tiger Skin Rhino horn Antlers etc of scheduled species after prior approval of CWLW but cannot 
acquire or receive the same through any other manner other than inheritance. Thus inheritance is the sole 
method through which one can acquire Scheduled animal and animal article. How ever, the proviso to Sub 
Section 2 (A) and 2 (B) states that it the inheritance clause will not apply to elephants. This means that elephants 
could be acquired through mode other than inheritance.  
However, Section 43 of the Act however limits the power of  the CWLW by stipulating that any such transfer, 
even if allowed cannot be of a commercial nature. Section 43 reads:  
No person having in his possession captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy in respect of which 
he has a certificate of ow nership shall transfer by way of sale or offer for sale or by any other mode of 
consideration of commercial nature, such animal or article or trophy or uncured trophy.   
A combined reading of existing Section 40 and 43 leads to the following conclusion with  respect to a live 
elephant:  
      Transfer, acquiring and receiving of a live captive elephant is permissible under the existing legal 
provision with the prior approval of the Chief Wildlife Warden.  
      However, such transfer, acquisition and receiv ing of an elephant should not involve any 
commercial transaction. Thus sale, purchase and offer for sale or purchase is explicitly prohibited 
under the provisions of the Act.  
The Amendment Bill however, inserts a new subsection (4) to section 43 which reads:  
“(4) This section (section 43) shall not apply to the transfer or transport of any live elephant by a person having 
a certificate of ownership, where such person has obtained prior permission from the State Government on 
fulfilment of such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government.”  
Thus an exception has been carved out by excluding „live elephant‟ from the general prohibition contained in 
Section 43. The implication of the same is that commercial sale and purchase is no longer prohibi ted, under the 
Act.  
The Amendment Bill therefore allows for commercial trade in elephants, therefore we oppose the 
proposed amendments .  
481

To, 
Sri Rakesh Anand,  
Additional Director,  
Rajya Sabha Secretariat. 
 
Dear Sir,  
 
Kindly find my objections to the Wildlife Protection (Amendment) Bill 2021:  
 
 India being a vast and diverse country with different habitats 
and ecosystems in different corners, the definition of “invasive 
alien species” in Section 2 (16A) of the Bill is incorrect and not 
the correct scientific definition. The definition in the Bill  is one 
“which is not native to India” whereas the focus of the definitions 
under the Convention on Bioliogical Diversity and as per the 
IUCN is that if a species is introduced outside its natural past or 
present distribution and is non-native to an ecosystem, resulting 
in adverse impact upon the native species, then it is termed as 
an invasive alien species. Thus, for example, an animal found in 
the Western Ghats of India when introduced to another habitat 
within India will not be deemed to be an invasive alien species 
despite its adverse effects on the local biodiversity. 
 
 There is no clear process or scientific criteria for the notification 
of species as “invasive alien species” by the Central Government 
under Section 62A of the Bill. 
 
 Section 62A(2) of  the Bill does not provide for any safeguards, 
processes and guidelines to govern the seizure and disposal, 
including through destruction, of the invasive alien species 
notified under 62A(1) of the Bill. Thus, there is no restriction 
preventing the Directo r or any other officer from monetizing the 
disposal of the invasive alien species and earn profits for himself 
or from causing pollution in the process of destruction. No 
safeguards have been provided to protect and not to disturb the 
local wildlife and ec osystems whilst seizing the invasive alien 
species. 
 
 The Bill does not provide for the amendment of Section 5 -B of 
the Act to ensure that the National Board for Wild Life is not 
defunct. As a result of Section 5 -B of the Act in its present form, 
the Natio nal Board for Wild Life headed by the Prime Minister 
has not met since 2014 and all its statutory functions are 
carried out by the Standing Committee headed by the 
Environment Minister without any accountability to the Board. 
The Standing Committee has ess entially been reduced to a 
482

clearing house including for linear projects and between 2015-16 
to 2019-20, a whopping 680 projects located in protected areas 
or wild life rich areas were cleared during just 23 meetings. 
Thus, all decisions of the Standing Com mittee should be 
mandatorily referred to the National Board for Wild Life for its 
ratification, whose final decision should not be bound by the 
decision of the Standing Committee. 
 
 Section 5A(1)(d) of the Bill proposes to include the NITI Aayog in 
the National Board for Wild Life although may of the NITI Aayog‟s 
development proposals are in direct conflict with the Board‟s 
conservation mandate. Being on the board gives the NITI Aayog 
undue influence on the decisions of the National Board for Wild 
Life. 
 
 The introduction of Section 6A of the Bill will render the existing 
State Boards for Wild Life defunct. The Bill intends to replicate 
the model of the National Board for Wild Life and its Standing 
Committee. The State Boards for Wild Life currently manage t he 
conservation and protection of wild life at the state level and a 
state‟s chief minister sits atop the board which consists of 
several members, including of the state legislature, NGOs, 
conservationists and representatives of the state forest 
departments and department of tribal welfare. Instead, if the Bill 
is passed, the Standing Committee will be able to function with 
just two members – the Minister in -charge of Forests and Wild 
Life and the Member -Secretary, if need be, which will dilute the 
very purpose of the State Boards for Wild Life and it will make it 
easier to clear “development projects”. 
 
 The condition of elephants in captivity is pathetic especially now 
during the pandemic with loss of income to their owners and 
most of them indicate tell -tale signs of depression and abuse 
with chains tied to them for long hours every day. Further, the 
anatomy of elephants is neither built nor evolved for carrying 
heavy weight on their backs such as howdahs, etc. Thus, the 
Proviso to Section 40(2-B) of the Act requires to be deleted. 
 
 A combined reading of Sections 40 and 43 of the Act leads to an 
inference that the transfer, acquisition and receiving of an 
elephant should not involve any commercial transaction and 
thus, the sale, purchase and offer for sale or purchase is 
explicitly prohibited under the provisions of the Act. Section 
43(4) of the Bill seek s to carve out an exception by excluding 
“live elephants” from the general prohibition contained in Section 
43 of the Act implying that their commercial sale and purchase 
483

is no longer prohibited. By taking away this layer of protection, it 
will cause the c ondition of captive elephants to deteriorate even 
further and lead to their commodification. Furthermore, it will 
promote the illegal capture of wild elephants as well as their 
calfs by illegal entry into protected areas and criminals will be 
able to sell them under the guise of captive born elephants after 
forging the requisite paper trail leading to increase in allied 
crimes. The elephant awnership and trade exception is an 
embarassment and at odds with the core objective of the Act and 
is a continuation of the derogatory colonial exploitative mindset. 
 
 A 2011 report by Chaturbhuja Behera of the Wildlife Crime 
Control Bureau warned of an active nexus of the illegal capture 
of wild elephants from Assam and their trade via the Sonepur 
Mela in Bihar to meet the temple demands of the southern 
states. In October 2020, a video went viral of an elephant trader 
in Kerala called Shaji claiming that he had traded over 200 
captive elephants to private owners in the past few years. 
Further there are several instances of temple elephants which 
are beaten and abused. Thus, it is the need of the hour that all 
private ownership and trade of elephants is outlawed to prevent 
its misuse. 
 
 In the Explanation to Section 29 of the Bill, the bonafide use of 
drinking and household water by local communities shall not be 
prohibited under this Section. It is pertinent to point out that 
water holes, streams and other water sources are also used by 
wild life for sustenance as well as their habitat. It is imperative 
to ensure that such  exercise of bonafide rights is done in a 
manner which harmonizes the need of local communities with 
that of wildlife with strict guidelines laid down for access and 
use. Furthermore, the wording in the Bill leaves ample scope for 
misuse so as to construct  dams and canals and lay pipelines in 
protected areas under the guise of drinking and household water 
projects, thereby submerging vast swathes of wild life habitats, 
diversion of rivers and disturbing the ecosystems of marine 
creatures and interdependent species. 
 
 Section 33 of the Bill seeks to introduce Management Plans for 
Sanctuaries for Sanctuaries which must be approved by the 
Chief Wild Life Warden. However, it is observed that the position 
of Chief Wild Life Warden is only an administrative post w ith no 
fixed tenure and there is no requirement for him to have any 
specialized training in wild life. Therefore, it is imperative that 
the Management Plan must be approved by a competent and 
scientifically trained body instead of the Chief Wild Life Warde n. 
484

Furthermore, public comments should be invited to the draft 
Management Plan and it must be placed before the State Board 
for Wild Life for its approval before being notified. 
 
 There is no transparent and accountable process under the Act 
or the Bill, b ased on ecological and social evidence, to identify 
species as “Vermin” and specify the duration and area in which 
they can be hunted and these species need to be regularly 
monitored lest they‟re over -hunted. There is no clear process or 
scientific criteri a for the notification of species as “Vermin” by 
the Central Government.  Once a wild animal is declared as 
“Vermin”, it enjoys no legal protection and has the same status 
as a domestic animal. It can be killed, traded and tamed. 
 
 As there is no systematic  process or assessment to declare a 
species as “Vermin”, it could lead to population declines and 
grave ecological consequences.  It is also important to highlight 
that declaration of one wild animal as “Vermin” has serious 
consequences on other species. Eg . Traps laid for wild boars 
leads to killing of leopard, tiger, elephants and other unintended 
species. Similarly, poison used for killing monkeys and other 
such animals invariably kills other species who eat the same. 
There is also no assessment as to how  such declaration of 
“Vermin” could lead to ecological imbalance and increase human 
animal conflict, Eg. Killing of wild boars would deplete prey base 
of leopards and tigers which in turn are likely to depend more on 
livestock. 
 
 The concept of “Vermin” under Section 62 of the Act and Bill also 
violates Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution, which guarantees 
equal protection before the law and extends the right of life to 
animals. Furthermore, the said Section is also ultra vires the 
Judgment of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India in Animal 
Welfare Board of India vs A. Nagaraja reported in (2014) 7 SCC 
547, wherein the Apex Court has categorically held that every 
species has the right to life and security with some intrinsic 
worth, honour and dignity. The well-being and welfare of animals 
has also been statutorily recognised under Sections 3 and 11 of 
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, which has been 
duly affirmed by the Apex Court. 
 
 The Bill amends Section  62 by stating that only species listed in 
Schedule I cannot be declared as “Vermin”, while species listed 
in Schedule II can be declared as such. T he Central government 
could potentially declare animals listed in Schedule II as 
“Vermin”, virtually stripping them of legal protection and opening 
485

the floodgates to hunt, trap and trade species including 
increasingly rare ones like Striped Hyena, Indian Fox, Andaman 
Wild Pig, Asiatic Jackal, Jungle Cat, Bengal Fox, Martens, 
Mongooses, Civets, Sparrows, Owls and Parakeets, which can 
pose a serious threat to their very existence in the wild. 
 
 The Schedules I and II to the Bill omit several rare species of 
amphibians, reptiles, crabs, fishes, bats and insects, which are 
severely underrepresented  thereby depriving t hem of the 
protection that they deserve. At least 446 bird species in India, 
including many endangered species and hundreds of other plant 
and animal species that deserve protection are absent from the 
Schedules to the Bill. Many endemic species found only  in the 
biodiversity hotspots such as the Western Ghats and the North 
East have been omitted without any explanation. 
 
 Similarly, the listing of species in Schedules I and II to the Bill 
lacks any robust scientific studies to assess which species need 
greater protection. 
 
 Many species that are currently in the Act are simply missing 
from the Schedules to the Bill, with no rationale for why they 
have been removed. For example, the Nicobar Imperial Pigeon is 
endemic to the Nicobar islands and is one of the atleast 446 bird 
species left out of the Bill. As a Schedule IV species under the 
Act, killing this bird for any reason, even by accident is illegal 
under the Act. However, the Bill excludes it from the Schedules 
entirely, leaving it vulnerable to mega -projects that the Centre 
may have planned for the islands. 
 
 There have been several instances of accused getting away scot -
free since the common names or scientific names of species have 
not been updated or are missing from the Schedules to the Act. 
The Bill also fails to provide for any safeguards in that regard or 
a mechanism for faster updation of the Schedules as a result of 
taxonomical changes or the discovery of new species. A systemic 
solution has to be provided to incorporate changes made in the 
dynamic scientific field. 
 
 The Bill is a missed opportunity to fill critical gaps in 
conservation such as giving statutory status to Project Elephant 
and protection to wildlife corridors, habitats outside the 
Protected Area network. 
 
 The amendment of the Preamble vide the Bill itself is 
problematic. Whereas earlier the emphasis was on the 
486

“protection of wild animals, birds and plants”, the Bill introduces 
the term „management‟ by seeking to incorporate “conservation, 
protection and man agement of wildlife” . While seemingly 
innocuous, this implies a shift in the mindset of the State from 
protection of wildlife to its management as a resource for human 
benefit. 
 
 
Hope you consider the same.  
 
Warm regards,  
Pankti Desai 
 
487

Mr. Rakesh Anand  
Additional Director, 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat  
Dear Sir: 
The current amendments proposed to be introduced to Wildlife Protection Act are harmful to 
elephants as by these amendments you will allow trafficking and ownership of elephants 
and we oppose these proposed amendments .  
The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 specifically prohibits trade in Wild Animals including captive and wild 
elephants. Section 40 of the Act prohibits any person from acquiring, receiving, keeping in one‟s control, 
custody or possession, sell, offer for sale or otherwise transfer or transport any animal specified in Schedule I 
and Part II of Schedule II except with the previous permission of the Chief Wildlife Warden. Thus not  only is 
sale prohibited: even an offer for sale is prohibited without prior approval of the CWLW. The Chief Wildlife 
Warden‟s power are however restricted in view of proviso 2 (A) and 2 (B) which states that that only way one 
can acquire, receive, keep in control, custody and possession is through the mode of inheritance. Thus one could 
inherit Ivory, Tiger Skin Rhino horn Antlers etc of scheduled species after prior approval of CWLW but cannot 
acquire or receive the same through any other manner other than inheritance. Thus inheritance is the sole 
method through which one can acquire Scheduled animal and animal article. However, the proviso to Sub 
Section 2 (A) and 2 (B) states that it the inheritance clause will not apply to elephants. This means that ele phants 
could be acquired through mode other than inheritance.  
However, Section 43 of the Act however limits the power of the CWLW by stipulating that any such transfer, 
even if allowed cannot be of a commercial nature. Section 43 reads:  
No person having in his possession captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy in respect of which 
he has a certificate of ownership shall transfer by way of sale or offer for sale or by any other mode of 
consideration of commercial nature, such animal or article or trophy or uncured trophy.  
A combined reading of existing Section 40 and 43 leads to the following conclusion with respect to a live 
elephant:  
      Transfer, acquiring and receiving of a live captive elephant is permissible under the existing leg al 
provision with the prior approval of the Chief Wildlife Warden.  
      However, such transfer, acquisition and receiving of an elephant should not involve any 
commercial transaction. Thus sale, purchase and offer for sale or purchase is explicitly proh ibited 
under the provisions of the Act.  
The Amendment Bill however, inserts a new subsection (4) to section 43 which reads:  
“(4) This section (section 43) shall not apply to the transfer or transport of any live elephant by a person having 
a certificate of ownership, where such person has obtained prior permission from the State Government on 
fulfilment of such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government.”  
Thus an exception has been carved out by excluding „live elephant‟ from the general p rohibition contained in 
Section 43. The implication of the same is that commercial sale and purchase is no longer prohibited, under the 
Act.  
The Amendment Bill therefore allows for commercial trade in elephants, therefore we oppose the 
proposed amendments .  
Regards, 
Sanjay Kr Singh 
 
 
488

489

490

491

492

493

494

Wild Life (Protection) Act (Amendments) – Mathen Mathew 
 
Short Title: Wild Life (Conservation) Act 
Section 2: Hunting as a conservation tool must be used to address Human-Wildlife 
Conflict (HWC).   
 [Hunters have over the years, played a major role in conservation of 
biodiversity worldwide. One of the biggest champions of conservation was 
big-game hunter Theodore Roosevelt, who preserved millions of acres of 
wildlife habitats to ensure the sustainability of hunting stocks and to 
preserve the beauty of America's natural heritage. Ducks Unlimited, was 
also born in the midst of the 1930s, when severe drought conditions 
threatened many North American waterfowl with extinction. A group of 
concerned sports hunters gathered to promote one primary mission: 
habitat conservation. And since its beginnings in 1937, Ducks Unlimited has 
succeeded in preserving over 12 million acres of natural habitat and 
continue with sustainable waterfowl hunting to fund conservation efforts. 
The South African Hunters and Game Conservation association was also 
established by a group of concerned hunters to promote responsible 
hunting and conservation of game species and their habitats.  
(CONSERVATION BENEFITS OF HUNTING – A FACT SHEET Compiled by E.J 
Nel – Manager Conservation July 2015)] 
Insertion of 
new Section 
6A 
The SBWL has very limited powers as all major decisions governing wildlife 
and wild spaces are taken by the central government. Hence, any 
committee/s formed will be as powerless. 
Section 9: The chapter III (Section 9) deals with hunting.  Hunting is a recognized tool 
for the management of wild life.  It should be incorporated with certain 
logical rules governing it.  Namibia and South Africa among other Southern 
African Development Community (SADC) countries have used hunting to 
successfully recover wildlife populations. 
Section 11 Hunting should be permitted.  Most herbivores and some carnivores should 
be allowed for hunting with seasons.  So too some game birds like duck, 
francolins etc.  
Section 29: In case of problem animals, the Chief Wild Life Warden (CWLW) or someone 
authorized should be able to give such permits to destroy such animals. 
Section 34: This is counterproductive to the conservation effort; people will resent it as 
well. 
Poaching rarely takes place with licenced weapons.  Most are by poisoning 
and snaring, and rarely with illegal firearms. 
Section 35: No comments, except that it a duplication of sec 18A. 
Section 36D: The Namibian Community Based Natural Resource Management (CBNRM) 
process should be followed, where the communities will be able to manage 
wild life, provide corridors and have a meaningful sustainable use model 
built in. 
Section 39: If hunting is going to be allowed (which it must) then this chapter needs to 
be recast with CITES Appendix as well as taking best practices from other 
SADC countries, Europe and North America. 
Section 48: If trade and hunting is allowed this will need an overhaul. 
495

Section 49A: As above 
Insertion of 
Chapter VB: 
CITES inclusion was overdue, but due caution must be exercised in 
embracing it.  Every country – especially India – has a lot to gain or lose, 
depending on how we place ourselves. 
Some of the guiding principles of the IUCN papers and Namibian CBNRM 
laws will be good guides. 
Section 61: All inclusions/deletions in the Schedules should be done in consultation of 
the state governments; including animals in Schedule 1. 
Section 62: The Schedule 1 animals should also be allowed to be proscribed as vermin.  
As stated above, the state governments should be allowed to make 
suggestions in declaration of animals as vermin. 
Schedules: Schedules should be rationalized.   
Sch1 should comprise of Dugong, River Dolphins, Wild Water Buffalo, Nilgiri 
Marten, Bustards (Bustards and floricans), Hoolok apes, Cranes – Sarus and 
Black-necked, Narkondam Hornbill and other endemic Andaman and 
Nicobar island animals and birds. 
 
All deer, antelope, wild sheep, wild goats, gaur, wild boar and elephant, all 
large carnivores should be placed in Sch 2 and allowed to be hunted under 
seasons or when they threaten life and property.  
 
Monkeys other than apes should be in schedule 2 with concurrence of the 
respective states.  Some like the wild boar, blue bull (neel gai), rhesus 
macaque and langoor may be declared as vermin to protect peoples’ 
livelihoods. 
 
Rats, mice and similar pests to agriculture should be transferred to the 
agricultural department. 
 
Blue Rock Pigeons, Norwegian rats – black and brown, invasive alien species 
of fish and plants should be allowed to be harvested/removed out of the 
system without let or hindrance.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
496

Game numbers in African countries that allow hunting. 
 
 
Population estimates of regions of Africa with hunting and non-hunting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
497

 
 
Hunting as a tool for conservation. 
 
 
Private protected areas – South Africa 
 
 
Hunting – (Trophy, Conservation etc.) – have huge benefits to both environment and for the 
people.  It addresses: 
 
1. Biological stability 
Trophy hunting as described in (Section II), can serve as a conservation tool when it: 
498

 Does not contribute to long-term population declines of the hunted species or of 
other species sharing its habitat, noting that a sustainably harvested population may 
be smaller than an unharvested one; 
 Does not substantially alter processes of natural selection and ecosystem function; 
that is, it maintains “wild populations of indigenous species with adaptive gene 
pools. This generally requires that hunting offtake produces only minor alterations to 
naturally occurring demographic structure. It also requires avoidance of breeding or 
culling to deliberately enhance population-genetic characteristics of species subject 
to hunting that are inconsistent with natural selection; 
 Does not inadvertently facilitate poaching or illegal trade of wildlife; 
 Does not artificially and/or substantially manipulate ecosystems or their component 
elements in ways that are incompatible with the objective of supporting the full 
range of native biodiversity. 
 
2. Net conservation benefit 
Trophy hunting can serve as a conservation tool when it: 
 Is linked to identifiable and specific parcels of land where habitat for wildlife is a 
priority (albeit not necessarily the sole priority or only legitimate use); and on which 
the “costs of management and conservation of biological diversity [are] internalized 
within the area of management and reflected in the distribution of the benefits from 
the use; 
 Produces income, employment, and/or other benefits that generate incentives for 
reduction in pressures on populations of target species, and/or help justify retention, 
enhancement, or rehabilitation of habitats in which native biodiversity is prioritized. 
Benefits may create incentives for local residents to co-exist with such problematic 
species as large carnivores, herbivores competing for grazing, or animals considered 
to be dangerous or a threat to the welfare of humans and their personal property; 
 Is part of a legally recognized governance system that supports conservation 
adequately and of a system of implementation and enforcement capable of 
achieving these governance objectives. 
 
3. Socio-economic-cultural benefits 
Trophy hunting can serve as a conservation tool when it: 
 Respects local cultural values and practices (where “local” is defined as sharing living 
space with the focal wildlife species), and is accepted by (and preferably, co-
managed and actively supported by) most members of the local community on 
whose land it occurs; 
 Involves and benefits local residents in an equitable manner, and in ways that meet 
their priorities; 
 Adopts business practices that promote long-term economic sustainability. 
 
Adaptive Management: Planning, Monitoring, and Reporting 
 
Trophy hunting can serve as a conservation tool when it: 
1. Is premised on appropriate resource assessments and/or monitoring of hunting indices, 
upon which specific quotas and hunting plans can be established through a collaborative 
process. Optimally, such a process should (where relevant) include local communities and 
499

draw on local/indigenous knowledge. Such resource assessments (examples might include 
counts or indices of population performance such as sighting frequencies, spoor counts) or 
hunting indices (examples might include trophy size, animal age, hunting success rates and 
catch per hunting effort) are objective, well documented, and use the best science and 
technology feasible and appropriate given the circumstances and available resources; 
2. Involves adaptive management of hunting quotas and plans in line with results of 
resource assessments and/or monitoring of indices, ensuring quotas are adjusted in line 
with changes in the resource base (caused by ecological changes, weather patterns, or 
anthropogenic impacts, including hunting offtake); 
3. Is based on laws, regulations, and quotas (preferably established with local input) that are 
transparent and clear, and are periodically reviewed and updated; 
4. Monitors hunting activities to verify that quotas and sex/age restrictions of harvested 
animals are being met;   
IUCN SSC (2012). IUCN SSC Guiding principles on trophy hunting as a tool for creating 
conservation incentives. Ver. 1.0. IUCN, Gland. 
 
 
References cited: 
1. Sustainable Resource Management in Namibia – Jessica Brown and Neil Bird 
2. A marketing and spending analysis of Trophy Hunters (2015-16 season) – Peet van 
der Merwe 
3. CONSERVATION BENEFITS OF HUNTING – A FACT SHEET Compiled by E.J Nel – 
Manager Conservation July 2015 
4. National Policy on Community Based Natural Resource Management (March 2013) 
Ministry of Environment and Tourism, Directorate of Parks and Wildlife 
Management, Republic of Namibia 
5. Guidelines for management of conservancies and Standard Operating Procedures 
(August 2013) Ministry of Environment and Tourism, Republic of Namibia 
6. National Policy on Human-Wildlife Conflict Management 2009 Ministry of 
Environment and Tourism, Republic of Namibia 
7. Draft 2 March 2021 WILDLIFE AND PROTECTED AREAS MANAGEMENT 
REGULATIONS: WILDLIFE AND PROTECTED AREAS MANAGEMENT ACT, 2020  
Ministry of Environment and Tourism, Republic of Namibia  
8. Citation: IUCN SSC (2012). IUCN SSC Guiding principles on trophy hunting as a tool 
for creating conservation incentives. Ver. 1.0. IUCN, Gland. 
9. The baby and the bathwater: trophy hunting, conservation and rural livelihoods 
(IUCN) 
R. Cooney, C. Freese, H. Dublin, D. Roe, D. Mallon, M. Knight, R. Emslie, M. Pani, V. 
Booth, S. Mahoney and C. Buyanaa 
 
 
 
 
Mathen Mathew 
+91-8008290221 
wleco.rm@gmail.com 
 
500

 The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Bill 2021  
The suggestions made in this note are primarily related to Mahseer Conservation, 
but does not preclude the conservation of other aquatic species of fish in Indian 
rivers or in other freshwater habitats which are IUCN Red Listed as, Critically 
Endangered, Endangered or Vulnerable. Rivers and other fresh water habitats, 
which harbour such aquatic species should be included in the proposed Amendment 
Bill, whether or not they flow through or are present in ‘protected areas’ as currently 
defined. Stretches of such rivers and other fresh water habitats should be clearly 
defined and declared “Important Aquatic Habitats”, and afforded protection under 
The Wildlife Protection Act. 
“Important Aquatic Habitats”, thus defined, should be conserved and protected as 
follows: 
 Harvesting of any Red Listed aquatic species, whether for commercial 
purpose or sustenance by local communities should be prohibited. 
 Use of dynamite, poison, gill nets, traps and snares, electrocution should be 
made cognisable offences and be punishable by Law. Punishment may be 
defined by competent legal authority.  
 Recreational Angling (using Rod & Line) strictly on a “Catch & Release” basis 
should be permitted. This ‘Eco-Tourism’ model of conservation is a proven 
success globally, and it benefits the local community financially, apart from 
promoting ‘community involvement in conservation’, critical to any 
conservation management plan. 
 Introduction of any aquatic species that could be harmful to the Red Listed 
species should be banned. Nature should not be tampered with such 
introductions. 
 Sand and gravel mining, removal of stones/ boulders, destruction of riverine 
trees and vegetation should be banned by law. 
 Non-native, introduced and invasive species of aquatic fauna should be 
defined for each “Important Aquatic Habitat”, and the removal of such species, 
if caught, by recreational anglers, should be made mandatory. 
 Local NGO’s should be identified and made partners, to help with the 
protection and conservation of habitats and identified crucial species, along 
with the Forest, Fisheries and Police departments. 
 The proposed amendment bill should mandate a bi-annual meeting of all 
defined stakeholders, the minutes of which should be submitted to the 
MoEF&CC. 
 Construction of any man made structure, abstraction or diversion of water, 
which could alter the habitat, should be approved by the National Green 
Tribunal.  
 Lakes, tanks and such other water bodies defined as “Important Aquatic 
Habitat” should be kept free of exotic aquatic weeds such as Eichhornia 
crassipes and Ipomoea cornea. 
501

 The current definition of 'hunting' in the WPA should be suitably qualified to 
state that this definition applies to terrestrial, avian and amphibious species 
and not to purely aquatic species.  
 'Catch & Release' recreational angling does not tantamount to 'hunting' as the 
animal is not killed. 
 The amendment bill should provide for revisions and modifications as deemed 
necessary, based on current and future scientific knowledge, insofar as the 
spirit of the law is not violated.  Protection and conservation of the Red Listed 
aquatic species should be the prime concern. 
 
Author: Mr.Sandeep Chakrabarti 
Date: 07/02/2022 
Place: Bengaluru 
Email: outrigor@gmail.com 
502

Memoranda submitted by Concerned Citizens with identical 
representations 
 
1. Shri Adnan Khan, Bengaluru 
2. Shri Dinesh Kallahalli 
3. Shri P. Vijayan, Salem 
4. Smt. S. Jayachandran, Ooty, Tamil Nadu 
5. Shri K.R. Purandara, Bengaluru  
6. Shri Rajendra Prasad, Mandya, Karnataka 
7. Shri Ratheesh Pisharody, Bangaluru 
8. Shri Sharada Ganesh, Bengaluru  
9. Shri Shreekumar, Udupi, Karnataka  
10. Shri K.J. Siddharth, Bengaluru 
11. Shri Srinathmba 
12. Shri S. Subbaiah, Bengaluru 
13. Shri Sumanas Koulagi, Mandya, Karnataka 
14. Shri Sundarmuthanna, Bengaluru 
15. Shri T. Vijayendra, Hyderabad, Telangana 
 
 
503

Dear Sir, 
 
This letter is in response to the invitation for memoranda published by the 
"Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, 
Environment, Forests & Climate Change", on the 28th of January 2022 towards the 
"Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021". 
 
As a responsible citizen, I consider it my fundamental duty to protect the natural 
resources of our country including wildlife in all its forms, which are a part of our 
ecological fabric. I thank you for the opportunity to provide feedback on this most 
important Bill. After careful study, I wish to express my strong objections to some of the 
changes proposed in the amendment. 
 
Below I am recording my feedback to the amendments proposed: 
 
1. The amendment seeks to change the preamble of the WPA itself in two areas. While 
the consolidation of "wild animals, birds and plants'' into the phrase "wild life" is simple, 
desirable and straight-forward, the decision to introduce the words "conservation" and 
"management" will de-focus the act and will open up future pathways for dilution. As the 
title of the Act suggests, it is about the "protection" of wildlife and should remain that 
way. While the word "conservation" sounds innocuously similar to "protection" it is in 
practice not the same. "Conservation" involves preservation or protection of 
species outside their natural habitats which essentially is not the same thing as 
protecting wildlife in-situ. In other words, conservation is a compromised mitigation 
that is a necessary action that follows when existing species of wildlife cannot be 
protected. Hence the introduction of this word into the preamble of the Act is self-
defeating. The word "management" on the other hand is completely unnecessary for the 
purposes of the said Act, and will go on to include all forms of intrusive micro-
management that comes with it. The intent of the Act to make an uncompromising 
attempt to protect all forms of wildlife in its natural state, and in its natural relations with 
its surroundings, is being violated by this attempt to introduce these words into the 
preamble. 
 
2. In Section-2, the introduction of the phrase "invasive alien species'', in addition to 
the term "vermin", now redefined to mean animals in Section-62 (i.e the section dealing 
with "invasive alien species") only furthers the artificial-divides that exist in the 
understanding of ecology. The term "alien", which only currently seems to consider the 
border between India and other countries, has varied meanings under practical 
conditions when one looks at the diversity of regions within India as well as the forested 
borders it shares with other countries where the eco-regions merge. The introduction of 
the term "alien" would be applicable to laws (perhaps unfair) that would entail from such 
a term, for creatures who know no such borders and naturally exist within the confines 
of such eco-regions. The term "invasive" itself is a temporal term that has a binding to 
certain circumstances. Hence no species of wildlife can be inherently called so. The 
current amendment does not seek to list anything explicitly under these descriptions but 
the introduction of such a phrase can lead to opportunities being opened for 
schedules and lists (just as what happened in case of "vermin'') that in the long 
run would turn out to be unwarranted. 
 
3. While it is a welcome change to see the removal of Schedule-V (for the so-called 
504

"vermin"), the aforementioned phrase "invasive alien species" only seems to 
replace it. Further, the changes to Section-62 makes it evident that this might not play 
out in the larger interest of wildlife. The amendment states explicitly that "disposing" and 
"including through destruction" is applicable to such species and that too for all the 
species listed in Schedule-II. By doing so, the Act has opened up a huge list of creatures 
to being unfairly treated on a case-to-case basis. In the worst case this treatment would 
be arbitrary and at the discretion of officers, experts and scientists who may or may not 
uphold the holistic case of protecting India's wildlife when they deal with locally 
fathomable circumstances. This is notwithstanding the issue that even a bare minimum 
process for a notification has not been described. Thus, it simply entails a smaller list 
of 4 - stigmatized - species being replaced by a larger list of - potentially 
stigmatized - 1000 species, undoing what the amendment set out to do by removing 
Schedule-V. Additionally, there is no clarity about the process involved in destruction of 
the said species (under the exceptional circumstances); for e.g "invasive species'' could 
be shrubs that have now interspersed among valuable green cover and there exists as 
many damaging ways to their removal as there are safe. A lack of process can result in 
loss of wildlife that we intend to protect or a disruption in the food chain for the species 
we are trying to protect. 
 
4. Zoos themselves are archaic and colonial vestiges that only transformed from circus-
like entertainment that included the human species at some point in history to what they 
have become today. While the existence of zoos itself needs to be questioned in a 
modern India with its strong laws that champion the causes for all wildlife, it is appalling 
to see that the amendment, in Section-2 now seeks to introduce the word 
"conservation" into the zoo-lingua-franca thereby going the way of western 
countries that have chosen to co-opt conservation into Zoos while continuing its 
commercial viability. This would only enable the act of putting immense pressure on 
animals for the recreational value of the masses without any benefit for the wildlife itself. 
By adding a "conservation" angle, future funding of zoos would be made possible via 
misrepresentation. In the ideal case of an amendment, provisions for having zoos itself 
need to be removed, the wild animals organically re-introduced to their natural 
environments and zoos closed eventually through a natural die-down. Specifically to this 
act, no further loopholes and provisions should be provided to Zoos so that they 
can continue the act of legalized emotional abuse that is endured by the wild 
creatures. 
 
5. The introduction of "film making" in Section 28 is shocking. While the 
amendment seems to suggest that a qualifying statement with what seems like a vague-
condition would sharpen this clause, it does not go all the way and indicate what 
"adverse impacts" could be expected thereby making the clause toothless. Moreover, 
"changes to habitat" and its "adverse impact" are all side effects of all the existing 
possibilities in the present Act itself; for e.g tourism which is in the same list and could 
do with the same qualifier. "Film making" at any scale involves a humongous amount of 
foot-fall in terms of supporting staff, vehicles, props, lighting and ultimately sound. None 
of these can be open to interpretation and discretion at officer levels when it comes to a 
permit. The permits in future might be regarded as a form of revenue and we will fail to 
protect the wildlife that need their space, comfort and quiet in their natural habitats. 
Further, such an introduction only gives a chance to human-animal conflict in the 
future. With the advent of technology such as computer generated graphics and 
other virtual possibilities there is no justification for allowing for an extremely 
505

intrusive, damage inducing and purely commercial venture such as film-making 
to occur in forests of all kinds. The history of film making itself is its own testament 
that it is a process that usually transformative to its environment and thus the only 
rational thing to do is to not introduce "film making" into the set of items for which 
permits can be obtained. Also important to note here is the fact that in 1978, film 
making in the wild was specifically banned to avoid accidents. 
 
6. Sections 40 and 43 of the amendment imply that "live elephants'' can now be 
traded. This is a shocking change that begs the question as to whose interest are we 
protecting with the act and its amendments? While an underground market continues to 
exist and enables wild elephants to be captured and traded between poachers, 
middlemen, individuals and the temples in India, making an explicit provision for actually 
trading live elephants will undo all the good work that has happened towards regulation 
of handling wildlife such as the elephants. Elephants are an endangered species overall 
and the Indian Elephant, technically the Asian Elephant (Elephas Maximus) is a part of 
the Appendix-I of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of 
Wild Fauna and Flora) which ironically this very amendment seems to adhere to. The 
very fact that the amendment claims to implement CITES but opens up an 
unnecessary floodgate via the permission to trade live elephants should be 
seen as contradictory and cancelling; so contradictory, in fact, that this pushes 
Elephant conservation back by years. 
 
7. The amendments to Section 29 includes the provisions for "bona fide use of drinking 
water and household water by local communities” which upholds the principles of the 
Forest Rights Act, and is a commendable change. At the same time an unqualified 
provision like this can lead to unfair usage of the common resources that more often 
than not physically exist in boundaries between human and wild habitats. The 
existence of a liberal clause can lead to projects that will develop under th e 
guise of drinking and household water but eventually transform into extraction for 
other purposes as well as over-extraction. Untimely extraction of water can also occur as 
water resources and their quantity is seasonal with animals venturing closer to such 
sources that are in the peripheries especially during times of scarcity. Thus, unclear 
wording in the act can lead to human animal conflict. What is suggested here is a 
comprehensive and updated section that lists out the exact share that the human 
species has in these resources and clarity on what are the conditions for non-extraction. 
 
8. In Section 5A (1) (d), the removal of "Member, Planning Commission'' is a welcome 
change but the substitution with "Member, NITI Aayog" undoes the whole 
purpose of the Act. Having a member from any kind of department, executive-body or 
office whose primary concerns are directly in conflict with the Board for Wildlife will only 
result in the furthering of developmental interests instead of the interests of the 
protection of Wildlife and their habitats. Hence, it is recommended that instead of the 
proposed change, clause (d) be completely removed along with the clauses (h), 
(i), (j) and (n) that represent Army, Defence, I&B and Tourism respectively. 
 
9. The rationalization of the Schedules is a welcome change when in comparison 
to what existed in the present Act. It will certainly help for an easy understanding of the 
two levels of protection assured for the wildlife. However, there are many concerns when 
it comes to these new schedules. The rationale for why certain animals are in 
Schedule-I and the others made it only to Schedule-II is unclear. There are 
506

several species from the original act missing in this amendment. Also missing are 
species that were absent during the lifetime of the present Act, but which have been 
documented in India by well reputed organizations hence. Apart from that, within the 
newly provided schedules there exist cases of incorrect spellings and/or incorrect 
scientific names. All these errors can lead to situations where wildlife would go 
unprotected since sometimes - in cases such as spelling errors - criminals can get away 
due to the incorrectly spelt species names. 
 
10. The "FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM" has made explicit that the funds for salaries 
and operations for all the newly described officers and their departments which are part 
of the adherence to CITES, comes from the budget allocated for "Integrated 
Development of Wildlife Habitats''. The 2022 Budget has also allocated a slightly 
higher amount to the aforementioned scheme. However, in effect, the increase in budget 
for this scheme and the proposal of an amendment of this scale and budgetary 
requirements cancel each other out. It is well known that one of the biggest hurdles for 
protection even under the current Act is the amount of finances we “can-be” and “have-
been” spending on the foot-soldiers (guards, wardens etc); this includes the 
integrated scheme of activities involving local communities. Instead of making a palpable 
change in the wages and conditions of these foot-soldiers and thereby strengthening the 
ground-base for protection, the amendment's investment in a new hierarchy tree 
is rather untimely. 
 
11. It has to be noted here that the listing of explicit species for all protection levels 
is not a methodology that can be sustained as can be seen from the history of the 
Act itself. Considering this past learning and a potential future flux in the list, a 
pragmatic approach would be the following. (a) List the wildlife (i.e mammals, birds, 
plants et al) that need to enjoy the highest level of protection in a single Schedule, 
namely Schedule-I. (b) Come up with a much smaller list for the domestic animals, birds 
and plants named Schedule-II; a list, that, due to its sheer number would be easier to 
maintain (c) Come up with a clause that explicitly states that the highest protection is for 
Schedule-I and the second level of protection would be for all wild life that is NOT in 
Schedule-II. A simple non-enumerated version such as this will ensure many 
species can be protected that are currently at various stages of understanding and 
research. This would also reduce the need to update the Schedules of the Act very often 
and is as easy to understand and implement as at the rationalized versions presented in 
the amendment. 
 
In the light of the above concerns, I request that the proposed amendments to the Wild 
Life (Protection) Act, 1972 should be withdrawn, reconsidered and fortified with 
better provisions for the Wild Life it aims to protect. I hereby would like to register my 
opposition to the amendment proposed. 
 
Yours Sincerely, 
Adnan Khan 
507

Dear Sir, 
 
This letter is in response to the invitation for memoranda published by the "Department -Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment, Forests & Climate 
Change", on the 28th of January 2022 towards the "Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021". 
 
As a responsible citizen, I consider it my fundamental duty to protect the natural resources of our 
country including the wildlife in all its forms, which are a part of our ecological fabric . I thank you for 
the opportunity to provide feedback on this most important Bill. After careful study, I wish to express 
my strong objections to some of the changes proposed in the amendment. 
 
Below I am recording my feedback to the amendments proposed: 
 
1. The amendment seeks to change the preamble of the WPA itself in two areas. While the 
consolidation of "wild animals, birds and plants'' into the phrase "wild life" is simple, desirable and 
straight-forward, the decision to introduce the words "conservation" and "management" will de-focus 
the act and will open up future pathways for dilution. As the title of the Act suggests, it is about the 
"protection" of wildlife and should remain that way. While the word "conservation" sounds 
innocuously similar to "protection" it is in practice not the same. "Conservation" involves preservation 
or protection of species outside their natural habitats which essentially is not the same thing as 
protecting wildlife in-situ. In other words, conservation is a compromised mitigation that is a 
necessary action that follows when existing species of wildlife cannot be protected. Hence the 
introduction of this word into the preamble of the Act is self-defeating. The word "management" on 
the other hand is completely unnecessary for the purposes of the said Act, and will go on to include 
all forms of intrusive micro-management that comes with it. The intent of the Act to make an 
uncompromising attempt to protect all forms of wildlife in its natural state, and in its natural relati ons 
with its surroundings, is being violated by this attempt to introduce these words into the preamble.  
 
2. In Section-2, the introduction of the phrase "invasive alien species'', in addition to the term 
"vermin", now redefined to mean animals in Section-62 (i.e the section dealing with "invasive alien 
species") only furthers the artificial-divides that exist in the understanding of ecology. The term "alien", 
which only currently seems to consider the border between India and other countries, has varied 
meanings under practical conditions when one looks at the diversity of regions within India as well as 
the forested borders it shares with other countries where the eco-regions merge. The introduction of 
the term "alien" would be applicable to laws (perhaps unfair) that would entail from such a term, for 
creatures who know no such borders and naturally exist within the confines of such eco -regions. The 
term "invasive" itself is a temporal term that has a binding to certain circumstances. Hence no species 
of wildlife can be inherently called so. The current amendment does not seek to list anything explicitly 
under these descriptions but the introduction of such a phrase can lead to opportunities being 
opened for schedules and lists (just as what happened in case of "vermin'') that in the long run would 
turn out to be unwarranted. 
 
3. While it is a welcome change to see the removal of Schedule-V (for the so-called "vermin"), the 
aforementioned phrase "invasive alien species" only seems to replace it. Further, t he changes to 
Section-62 makes it evident that this might not play out in the larger interest of wildlife. The 
amendment states explicitly that "disposing" and "including through destruction" is applicable to such 
species and that too for all the species listed in Schedule-II. By doing so, the Act has opened up a 
huge list of creatures to being unfairly treated on a case-to-case basis. In the worst case this treatment 
would be arbitrary and at the discretion of officers, experts and scientists who may or ma y not uphold 
the holistic case of protecting India's wildlife when they deal with locally fathomable circumstances. 
This is notwithstanding the issue that even a bare minimum process for a notification has not been 
described. Thus, it simply entails a smaller list of 4 - stigmatized - species being replaced by a larger 
508

list of - potentially stigmatized - 1000 species, undoing what the amendment set out to do by 
removing Schedule-V. Additionally, there is no clarity about the process involved in destruction of the 
said species (under the exceptional circumstances); for e.g "invasive species'' could be shrubs that 
have now interspersed among valuable green cover and there exists as many damaging ways to their 
removal as there are safe. A lack of process can result in loss of wildlife that we intend to protect or a 
disruption in the food chain for the species we are trying to protect. 
 
4. Zoos themselves are archaic and colonial vestiges that only transformed from circus -like 
entertainment that included the human species at some point in history to what they have 
become today. While the existence of zoos itself needs to be questioned in a modern India with its 
strong laws that champion the causes for all wildlife, it is appalling to see that the amendment, in 
Section-2 now seeks to introduce the word "conservation" into the zoo -lingua-franca thereby going 
the way of western countries that have chosen to co-opt conservation into Zoos while continuing its 
commercial viability. This would only enable the act of putting immense pressure on animals for the 
recreational value of the masses without any benefit for the wildlife itself. By adding a "conservation" 
angle, future funding of zoos would be made possible via misrepresentation. In the ideal case of an 
amendment, provisions for having zoos itself need to be removed, the wild animals organically re -
introduced to their natural environments and zoos closed eventually through a natural die -down. 
Specifically to this act, no further loopholes and provisions should be provided to Zoos so that they 
can continue the act of legalized emotional abuse that is endured by the wild creatures.  
 
5. The introduction of "film making" in Section 28 is shocking. While the amendment seems to 
suggest that a qualifying statement with what seems like a vague-condition would sharpen this clause, 
it does not go all the way and indicate what "adverse impacts" could be expected thereby making the 
clause toothless. Moreover, "changes to habitat" and its "adverse impact" are all side effects of all the 
existing possibilities in the present Act itself; for e.g tourism which is in the same list and could do with 
the same qualifier. "Film making" at any scale involves a humongous amount of foot -fall in terms of 
supporting staff, vehicles, props, lighting and ultimately sound. None of these can be open to 
interpretation and discretion at officer levels when it comes to a permit. The permits in future might 
be regarded as a form of revenue and we will fail to protect the wildlife that need their space,  comfort 
and quiet in their natural habitats. Further, such an introduction only gives a chance to human -animal 
conflict in the future. With the advent of technology such as computer generated graphics and other 
virtual possibilities there is no justification for allowing for an extremely intrusive, damage inducing 
and purely commercial venture such as film-making to occur in forests of all kinds. The history of film 
making itself is its own testament that it is a process that usually transformative to its environment 
and thus the only rational thing to do is to not introduce "film making" into the set of items for which 
permits can be obtained. Also important to note here is the fact that in 1978, film making in the wild 
was specifically banned to avoid accidents. 
 
6. Sections 40 and 43 of the amendment imply that "live elephants'' can now be traded. This is a 
shocking change that begs the question as to whose interest are we protecting with the act and its 
amendments? While an underground market continues to exist and enables wild elephants to be 
captured and traded between poachers, middlemen, individuals and the temples in India, making an 
explicit provision for actually trading live elephants will undo all the good work that has happened 
towards regulation of handling wildlife such as the elephants. Elephants are an endangered species 
overall and the Indian Elephant, technically the Asian Elephant (Elephas Maximus) is a part of the 
Appendix-I of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora) which ironically this very amendment seems to adhere to. The very fact that the amendment 
claims to implement CITES but opens up an unnecessary floodgate via the permission to trade live 
elephants should be seen as contradictory and cancelling; so contradictory, in fact, that this pushes 
Elephant conservation back by years. 
 
509

7. The amendments to Section 29 includes the provisions for "bona fide use of drinking water and 
household water by local communities” which upholds the principles of the Forest Rights Act, and is a 
commendable change. At the same time an unqualified provision like this can lead to unfair usage of 
the common resources that more often than not physically exist in boundaries between human and 
wild habitats. The existence of a liberal clause can lead to projects that will develop under the guise of 
drinking and household water but eventually transform into extraction for other purposes as well as 
over-extraction. Untimely extraction of water can also occur as water resources and their quantity is 
seasonal with animals venturing closer to such sources that are in the peripheries especially during 
times of scarcity. Thus, unclear wording in the act can lead to human animal conflict. What is 
suggested here is a comprehensive and updated section that lists out the exact share that the human 
species has in these resources and clarity on what are the conditions for non-extraction. 
 
8. In Section 5A (1) (d), the removal of "Member, Planning Commission'' is a welcome chan ge but the 
substitution with "Member, NITI Aayog" undoes the whole purpose of the Act. Having a member from 
any kind of department, executive-body or office whose primary concerns are directly in conflict with 
the Board for Wildlife will only result in the furthering of developmental interests instead of the 
interests of the protection of Wildlife and their habitats. Hence, it is recommended that instead of the 
proposed change, clause (d) be completely removed along with the clauses (h), (i), (j) and (n) th at 
represent Army, Defence, I&B and Tourism respectively. 
 
9. The rationalization of the Schedules is a welcome change when in comparison to what existed in the 
present Act. It will certainly help for an easy understanding of the two levels of protection assured for 
the wildlife. However, there are many concerns when it comes to these new schedules. The rationale 
for why certain animals are in Schedule-I and the others made it only to Schedule-II is unclear. There 
are several species from the original act missing in this amendment. Also missing are species that were 
absent during the lifetime of the present Act, but which have been documented in India by well 
reputed organizations hence. Apart from that, within the newly provided schedules there exist cases  of 
incorrect spellings and/or incorrect scientific names. All these errors can lead to situations where 
wildlife would go unprotected since sometimes - in cases such as spelling errors - criminals can get 
away due to the incorrectly spelt species names. 
 
10. The "FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM" has made explicit that the funds for salaries and operations for 
all the newly described officers and their departments which are part of the adherence to CITES, 
comes from the budget allocated for "Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats''. The 2022 Budget 
has also allocated a slightly higher amount to the aforementioned scheme. However, in effect, the 
increase in budget for this scheme and the proposal of an amendment of this scale and budgetary 
requirements cancel each other out. It is well known that one of the biggest hurdles for protection 
even under the current Act is the amount of finances we “can-be” and “have-been” spending on the 
foot-soldiers (guards, wardens etc); this includes the integrated scheme of activities involving local 
communities. Instead of making a palpable change in the wages and conditions of these foot -soldiers 
and thereby strengthening the ground-base for protection, the amendment's investment in a new 
hierarchy tree is rather untimely. 
 
11. It has to be noted here that the listing of explicit species for all protection levels is not a 
methodology that can be sustained as can be seen from the history of the Act itself. Considering this 
past learning and a potential future flux in the list, a pragmatic approach would be the following. (a) 
List the wildlife (i.e mammals, birds, plants et al) that need to enjoy the highest level of protection in a 
single Schedule, namely Schedule-I. (b) Come up with a much smaller list for the domestic animals, 
birds and plants named Schedule-II; a list, that, due to its sheer number would be easier to maintain 
(c) Come up with a clause that explicitly states that the highest protection is for Schedule -I and the 
second level of protection would be for all wild life that is NOT in Schedule-II. A simple non-
enumerated version such as this will ensure many species can be protected that are currently at 
510

various stages of understanding and research. This would also reduce the need to update the 
Schedules of the Act very often and is as easy to understand and implement as at the rationalized 
versions presented in the amendment. 
 
In the light of the above concerns, I request that the proposed amendments to the Wild Life 
(Protection) Act, 1972 should be withdrawn, reconsidered and fortified with better provisions for the 
Wild Life it aims to protect. I hereby would request you to kindly register my opposition to the 
amendment proposed. 
 
Thanking you, 
 
yours sincerely, 
         Sd/- 
Dinesh Kallahalli  
 
511

Dear Sir, 
 
This letter is in response to the invitation for memoranda published by the "Department -Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment, Forests & Climate 
Change", on the 28th of January 2022 towards the "Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021". 
 
As a responsible citizen, I consider it my fundamental duty to protect the natural resources of our 
country including the wildlife in all its forms, which are a part of our ecological fabric . I thank you for 
the opportunity to provide feedback on this most important Bill. After careful study, I wish to express 
my strong objections to some of the changes proposed in the amendment. 
 
Below I am recording my feedback to the amendments proposed: 
 
1. The amendment seeks to change the preamble of the WPA itself in two areas. While the 
consolidation of "wild animals, birds and plants'' into the phrase "wild life" is simple, desirable and 
straight-forward, the decision to introduce the words "conservation" and "management" will de-focus 
the act and will open up future pathways for dilution. As the title of the Act suggests, it is about the 
"protection" of wildlife and should remain that way. While the word "conservation" sounds 
innocuously similar to "protection" it is in practice not the same. "Conservation" involves preservation 
or protection of species outside their natural habitats which essentially is not the same thing as 
protecting wildlife in-situ. In other words, conservation is a compromised mitigation that is a 
necessary action that follows when existing species of wildlife cannot be protected. Hence the 
introduction of this word into the preamble of the Act is self-defeating. The word "management" on 
the other hand is completely unnecessary for the purposes of the said Act, and will go on to include 
all forms of intrusive micro-management that comes with it. The intent of the Act to make an 
uncompromising attempt to protect all forms of wildlife in its natural state, and in its natural relati ons 
with its surroundings, is being violated by this attempt to introduce these words into the preamble.  
 
2. In Section-2, the introduction of the phrase "invasive alien species'', in addition to the term 
"vermin", now redefined to mean animals in Section-62 (i.e the section dealing with "invasive alien 
species") only furthers the artificial-divides that exist in the understanding of ecology. The term "alien", 
which only currently seems to consider the border between India and other countries, has varied 
meanings under practical conditions when one looks at the diversity of regions within India as well as 
the forested borders it shares with other countries where the eco-regions merge. The introduction of 
the term "alien" would be applicable to laws (perhaps unfair) that would entail from such a term, for 
creatures who know no such borders and naturally exist within the confines of such eco -regions. The 
term "invasive" itself is a temporal term that has a binding to certain circumstances. Hence no species 
of wildlife can be inherently called so. The current amendment does not seek to list anything explicitly 
under these descriptions but the introduction of such a phrase can lead to opportunities being 
opened for schedules and lists (just as what happened in case of "vermin'') that in the long run would 
turn out to be unwarranted. 
 
3. While it is a welcome change to see the removal of Schedule-V (for the so-called "vermin"), the 
aforementioned phrase "invasive alien species" only seems to replace it. Further, t he changes to 
Section-62 makes it evident that this might not play out in the larger interest of wildlife. The 
amendment states explicitly that "disposing" and "including through destruction" is applicable to such 
species and that too for all the species listed in Schedule-II. By doing so, the Act has opened up a 
huge list of creatures to being unfairly treated on a case-to-case basis. In the worst case this treatment 
would be arbitrary and at the discretion of officers, experts and scientists who may or ma y not uphold 
the holistic case of protecting India's wildlife when they deal with locally fathomable circumstances. 
This is notwithstanding the issue that even a bare minimum process for a notification has not been 
described. Thus, it simply entails a smaller list of 4 - stigmatized - species being replaced by a larger 
512

list of - potentially stigmatized - 1000 species, undoing what the amendment set out to do by 
removing Schedule-V. Additionally, there is no clarity about the process involved in destruction of the 
said species (under the exceptional circumstances); for e.g "invasive species'' could be shrubs that 
have now interspersed among valuable green cover and there exists as many damaging ways to their 
removal as there are safe. A lack of process can result in loss of wildlife that we intend to protect or a 
disruption in the food chain for the species we are trying to protect. 
 
4. Zoos themselves are archaic and colonial vestiges that only transformed from circus -like 
entertainment that included the human species at some point in history to what they have 
become today. While the existence of zoos itself needs to be questioned in a modern India with its 
strong laws that champion the causes for all wildlife, it is appalling to see that the amendment, in 
Section-2 now seeks to introduce the word "conservation" into the zoo -lingua-franca thereby going 
the way of western countries that have chosen to co-opt conservation into Zoos while continuing its 
commercial viability. This would only enable the act of putting immense pressure on animals for the 
recreational value of the masses without any benefit for the wildlife itself. By adding a "conservation" 
angle, future funding of zoos would be made possible via misrepresentation. In the ideal case of an 
amendment, provisions for having zoos itself need to be removed, the wild animals organically re -
introduced to their natural environments and zoos closed eventually through a natural die -down. 
Specifically to this act, no further loopholes and provisions should be provided to Zoos so that they 
can continue the act of legalized emotional abuse that is endured by the wild creatures.  
 
5. The introduction of "film making" in Section 28 is shocking. While the amendment seems to 
suggest that a qualifying statement with what seems like a vague-condition would sharpen this clause, 
it does not go all the way and indicate what "adverse impacts" could be expected thereby making the 
clause toothless. Moreover, "changes to habitat" and its "adverse impact" are all side effects of all the 
existing possibilities in the present Act itself; for e.g tourism which is in the same list and could do with 
the same qualifier. "Film making" at any scale involves a humongous amount of foot -fall in terms of 
supporting staff, vehicles, props, lighting and ultimately sound. None of these can be open to 
interpretation and discretion at officer levels when it comes to a permit. The permits in future might 
be regarded as a form of revenue and we will fail to protect the wildlife that need their space,  comfort 
and quiet in their natural habitats. Further, such an introduction only gives a chance to human -animal 
conflict in the future. With the advent of technology such as computer generated graphics and other 
virtual possibilities there is no justification for allowing for an extremely intrusive, damage inducing 
and purely commercial venture such as film-making to occur in forests of all kinds. The history of film 
making itself is its own testament that it is a process that usually transformative to its environment 
and thus the only rational thing to do is to not introduce "film making" into the set of items for which 
permits can be obtained. Also important to note here is the fact that in 1978, film making in the wild 
was specifically banned to avoid accidents. 
 
6. Sections 40 and 43 of the amendment imply that "live elephants'' can now be traded. This is a 
shocking change that begs the question as to whose interest are we protecting with the act and its 
amendments? While an underground market continues to exist and enables wild elephants to be 
captured and traded between poachers, middlemen, individuals and the temples in India, making an 
explicit provision for actually trading live elephants will undo all the good work that has happened 
towards regulation of handling wildlife such as the elephants. Elephants are an endangered species 
overall and the Indian Elephant, technically the Asian Elephant (Elephas Maximus) is a part of the 
Appendix-I of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora) which ironically this very amendment seems to adhere to. The very fact that the amendment 
claims to implement CITES but opens up an unnecessary floodgate via the permission to trade live 
elephants should be seen as contradictory and cancelling; so contradictory, in fact, that this pushes 
Elephant conservation back by years. 
 
513

7. The amendments to Section 29 includes the provisions for "bona fide use of drinking water and 
household water by local communities” which upholds the principles of the Forest Rights Act, and is a 
commendable change. At the same time an unqualified provision like this can lead to unfair usage of 
the common resources that more often than not physically exist in boundaries between human and 
wild habitats. The existence of a liberal clause can lead to projects that will develop under the guise of 
drinking and household water but eventually transform into extraction for other purposes as well as 
over-extraction. Untimely extraction of water can also occur as water resources and their quantity is 
seasonal with animals venturing closer to such sources that are in the peripheries especially during 
times of scarcity. Thus, unclear wording in the act can lead to human animal conflict. What is 
suggested here is a comprehensive and updated section that lists out the exact share that the human 
species has in these resources and clarity on what are the conditions for non-extraction. 
 
8. In Section 5A (1) (d), the removal of "Member, Planning Commission'' is a welcome chan ge but the 
substitution with "Member, NITI Aayog" undoes the whole purpose of the Act. Having a member from 
any kind of department, executive-body or office whose primary concerns are directly in conflict with 
the Board for Wildlife will only result in the furthering of developmental interests instead of the 
interests of the protection of Wildlife and their habitats. Hence, it is recommended that instead of the 
proposed change, clause (d) be completely removed along with the clauses (h), (i), (j) and (n) th at 
represent Army, Defence, I&B and Tourism respectively. 
 
9. The rationalization of the Schedules is a welcome change when in comparison to what existed in the 
present Act. It will certainly help for an easy understanding of the two levels of protection assured for 
the wildlife. However, there are many concerns when it comes to these new schedules. The rationale 
for why certain animals are in Schedule-I and the others made it only to Schedule-II is unclear. There 
are several species from the original act missing in this amendment. Also missing are species that were 
absent during the lifetime of the present Act, but which have been documented in India by well 
reputed organizations hence. Apart from that, within the newly provided schedules there exist cases  of 
incorrect spellings and/or incorrect scientific names. All these errors can lead to situations where 
wildlife would go unprotected since sometimes - in cases such as spelling errors - criminals can get 
away due to the incorrectly spelt species names. 
 
10. The "FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM" has made explicit that the funds for salaries and operations for 
all the newly described officers and their departments which are part of the adherence to CITES, 
comes from the budget allocated for "Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats''. The 2022 Budget 
has also allocated a slightly higher amount to the aforementioned scheme. However, in effect, the 
increase in budget for this scheme and the proposal of an amendment of this scale and budgetary 
requirements cancel each other out. It is well known that one of the biggest hurdles for protection 
even under the current Act is the amount of finances we “can-be” and “have-been” spending on the 
foot-soldiers (guards, wardens etc); this includes the integrated scheme of activities involving local 
communities. Instead of making a palpable change in the wages and conditions of these foot -soldiers 
and thereby strengthening the ground-base for protection, the amendment's investment in a new 
hierarchy tree is rather untimely. 
 
11. It has to be noted here that the listing of explicit species for all protection levels is not a 
methodology that can be sustained as can be seen from the history of the Act itself. Considering this 
past learning and a potential future flux in the list, a pragmatic approach would be the following. (a) 
List the wildlife (i.e mammals, birds, plants et al) that need to enjoy the highest level of protection in a 
single Schedule, namely Schedule-I. (b) Come up with a much smaller list for the domestic animals, 
birds and plants named Schedule-II; a list, that, due to its sheer number would be easier to maintain 
(c) Come up with a clause that explicitly states that the highest protection is for Schedule -I and the 
second level of protection would be for all wild life that is NOT in Schedule-II. A simple non-
enumerated version such as this will ensure many species can be protected that are currently at 
514

various stages of understanding and research. This would also reduce the need to update the 
Schedules of the Act very often and is as easy to understand and implement as at the rationalized 
versions presented in the amendment. 
 
In the light of the above concerns, I request that the proposed amendments to the Wild Life 
(Protection) Act, 1972 should be withdrawn, reconsidered and fortified with better provisions for the 
Wild Life it aims to protect. I hereby would request you to kindly register my opposition to the 
amendment proposed. 
 
Thanking you, 
yours sincerely, 
Dr.P. Vijayan  
 
515

Dear Sir, 
 
This letter is in response to the invitation for memoranda published by the "Department -Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment, Forests & Climate 
Change", on the 28th of January 2022 towards the "Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021". 
 
As a responsible citizen, I consider it my fundamental duty to protect the natural resources of our 
country including the wildlife in all its forms, which are a part of our ecological fabric . I thank you for 
the opportunity to provide feedback on this most important Bill. After careful study, I wish to express 
my strong objections to some of the changes proposed in the amendment. 
 
Below I am recording my feedback to the amendments proposed: 
 
1. The amendment seeks to change the preamble of the WPA itself in two areas. While the 
consolidation of "wild animals, birds and plants'' into the phrase "wild life" is simple, desirable and 
straight-forward, the decision to introduce the words "conservation" and "management" will de-focus 
the act and will open up future pathways for dilution. As the title of the Act suggests, it is about the 
"protection" of wildlife and should remain that way. While the word "conservation" sounds 
innocuously similar to "protection" it is in practice not the same. "Conservation" involves preservation 
or protection of species outside their natural habitats which essentially is not the same thing as 
protecting wildlife in-situ. In other words, conservation is a compromised mitigation that is a 
necessary action that follows when existing species of wildlife cannot be protected. Hence the 
introduction of this word into the preamble of the Act is self-defeating. The word "management" on 
the other hand is completely unnecessary for the purposes of the said Act, and will go on to include 
all forms of intrusive micro-management that comes with it. The intent of the Act to make an 
uncompromising attempt to protect all forms of wildlife in its natural state, and in its natural relati ons 
with its surroundings, is being violated by this attempt to introduce these words into the preamble.  
 
2. In Section-2, the introduction of the phrase "invasive alien species'', in addition to the term 
"vermin", now redefined to mean animals in Section-62 (i.e the section dealing with "invasive alien 
species") only furthers the artificial-divides that exist in the understanding of ecology. The term "alien", 
which only currently seems to consider the border between India and other countries, has varied 
meanings under practical conditions when one looks at the diversity of regions within India as well as 
the forested borders it shares with other countries where the eco-regions merge. The introduction of 
the term "alien" would be applicable to laws (perhaps unfair) that would entail from such a term, for 
creatures who know no such borders and naturally exist within the confines of such eco -regions. The 
term "invasive" itself is a temporal term that has a binding to certain circumstances. Hence no species 
of wildlife can be inherently called so. The current amendment does not seek to list anything explicitly 
under these descriptions but the introduction of such a phrase can lead to opportunities being 
opened for schedules and lists (just as what happened in case of "vermin'') that in the long run would 
turn out to be unwarranted. 
 
3. While it is a welcome change to see the removal of Schedule-V (for the so-called "vermin"), the 
aforementioned phrase "invasive alien species" only seems to replace it. Further, t he changes to 
Section-62 makes it evident that this might not play out in the larger interest of wildlife. The 
amendment states explicitly that "disposing" and "including through destruction" is applicable to such 
species and that too for all the species listed in Schedule-II. By doing so, the Act has opened up a 
huge list of creatures to being unfairly treated on a case-to-case basis. In the worst case this treatment 
would be arbitrary and at the discretion of officers, experts and scientists who may or ma y not uphold 
the holistic case of protecting India's wildlife when they deal with locally fathomable circumstances. 
This is notwithstanding the issue that even a bare minimum process for a notification has not been 
described. Thus, it simply entails a smaller list of 4 - stigmatized - species being replaced by a larger 
516

list of - potentially stigmatized - 1000 species, undoing what the amendment set out to do by 
removing Schedule-V. Additionally, there is no clarity about the process involved in destruction of the 
said species (under the exceptional circumstances); for e.g "invasive species'' could be shrubs that 
have now interspersed among valuable green cover and there exists as many damaging ways to their 
removal as there are safe. A lack of process can result in loss of wildlife that we intend to protect or a 
disruption in the food chain for the species we are trying to protect. 
 
4. Zoos themselves are archaic and colonial vestiges that only transformed from circus -like 
entertainment that included the human species at some point in history to what they have 
become today. While the existence of zoos itself needs to be questioned in a modern India with its 
strong laws that champion the causes for all wildlife, it is appalling to see that the amendment, in 
Section-2 now seeks to introduce the word "conservation" into the zoo -lingua-franca thereby going 
the way of western countries that have chosen to co-opt conservation into Zoos while continuing its 
commercial viability. This would only enable the act of putting immense pressure on animals for the 
recreational value of the masses without any benefit for the wildlife itself. By adding a "conservation" 
angle, future funding of zoos would be made possible via misrepresentation. In the ideal case of an 
amendment, provisions for having zoos itself need to be removed, the wild animals organically re -
introduced to their natural environments and zoos closed eventually through a natural die -down. 
Specifically to this act, no further loopholes and provisions should be provided to Zoos so that they 
can continue the act of legalized emotional abuse that is endured by the wild creatures.  
 
5. The introduction of "film making" in Section 28 is shocking. While the amendment seems to 
suggest that a qualifying statement with what seems like a vague-condition would sharpen this clause, 
it does not go all the way and indicate what "adverse impacts" could be expected thereby making the 
clause toothless. Moreover, "changes to habitat" and its "adverse impact" are all side effects of all the 
existing possibilities in the present Act itself; for e.g tourism which is in the same list and could do with 
the same qualifier. "Film making" at any scale involves a humongous amount of foot -fall in terms of 
supporting staff, vehicles, props, lighting and ultimately sound. None of these can be open to 
interpretation and discretion at officer levels when it comes to a permit. The permits in future might 
be regarded as a form of revenue and we will fail to protect the wildlife that need their space,  comfort 
and quiet in their natural habitats. Further, such an introduction only gives a chance to human -animal 
conflict in the future. With the advent of technology such as computer generated graphics and other 
virtual possibilities there is no justification for allowing for an extremely intrusive, damage inducing 
and purely commercial venture such as film-making to occur in forests of all kinds. The history of film 
making itself is its own testament that it is a process that usually transformative to its environment 
and thus the only rational thing to do is to not introduce "film making" into the set of items for which 
permits can be obtained. Also important to note here is the fact that in 1978, film making in the wild 
was specifically banned to avoid accidents. 
 
6. Sections 40 and 43 of the amendment imply that "live elephants'' can now be traded. This is a 
shocking change that begs the question as to whose interest are we protecting with the act and its 
amendments? While an underground market continues to exist and enables wild elephants to be 
captured and traded between poachers, middlemen, individuals and the temples in India, making an 
explicit provision for actually trading live elephants will undo all the good work that has happened 
towards regulation of handling wildlife such as the elephants. Elephants are an endangered species 
overall and the Indian Elephant, technically the Asian Elephant (Elephas Maximus) is a part of the 
Appendix-I of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora) which ironically this very amendment seems to adhere to. The very fact that the amendment 
claims to implement CITES but opens up an unnecessary floodgate via the permission to trade live 
elephants should be seen as contradictory and cancelling; so contradictory, in fact, that this pushes 
Elephant conservation back by years. 
 
517

7. The amendments to Section 29 includes the provisions for "bona fide use of drinking water and 
household water by local communities” which upholds the principles of the Forest Rights Act, and is a 
commendable change. At the same time an unqualified provision like this can lead to unfair usage of 
the common resources that more often than not physically exist in boundaries between human and 
wild habitats. The existence of a liberal clause can lead to projects that will develop under the guise of 
drinking and household water but eventually transform into extraction for other purposes as well as 
over-extraction. Untimely extraction of water can also occur as water resources and their quantity is 
seasonal with animals venturing closer to such sources that are in the peripheries especially during 
times of scarcity. Thus, unclear wording in the act can lead to human animal conflict. What is 
suggested here is a comprehensive and updated section that lists out the exact share that the human 
species has in these resources and clarity on what are the conditions for non-extraction. 
 
8. In Section 5A (1) (d), the removal of "Member, Planning Commission'' is a welcome chan ge but the 
substitution with "Member, NITI Aayog" undoes the whole purpose of the Act. Having a member from 
any kind of department, executive-body or office whose primary concerns are directly in conflict with 
the Board for Wildlife will only result in the furthering of developmental interests instead of the 
interests of the protection of Wildlife and their habitats. Hence, it is recommended that instead of the 
proposed change, clause (d) be completely removed along with the clauses (h), (i), (j) and (n) th at 
represent Army, Defence, I&B and Tourism respectively. 
 
9. The rationalization of the Schedules is a welcome change when in comparison to what existed in the 
present Act. It will certainly help for an easy understanding of the two levels of protection assured for 
the wildlife. However, there are many concerns when it comes to these new schedules. The rationale 
for why certain animals are in Schedule-I and the others made it only to Schedule-II is unclear. There 
are several species from the original act missing in this amendment. Also missing are species that were 
absent during the lifetime of the present Act, but which have been documented in India by well 
reputed organizations hence. Apart from that, within the newly provided schedules there exist cases  of 
incorrect spellings and/or incorrect scientific names. All these errors can lead to situations where 
wildlife would go unprotected since sometimes - in cases such as spelling errors - criminals can get 
away due to the incorrectly spelt species names. 
 
10. The "FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM" has made explicit that the funds for salaries and operations for 
all the newly described officers and their departments which are part of the adherence to CITES, 
comes from the budget allocated for "Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats''. The 2022 Budget 
has also allocated a slightly higher amount to the aforementioned scheme. However, in effect, the 
increase in budget for this scheme and the proposal of an amendment of this scale and budgetary 
requirements cancel each other out. It is well known that one of the biggest hurdles for protection 
even under the current Act is the amount of finances we “can-be” and “have-been” spending on the 
foot-soldiers (guards, wardens etc); this includes the integrated scheme of activities involving local 
communities. Instead of making a palpable change in the wages and conditions of these foot -soldiers 
and thereby strengthening the ground-base for protection, the amendment's investment in a new 
hierarchy tree is rather untimely. 
 
11. It has to be noted here that the listing of explicit species for all protection levels is not a 
methodology that can be sustained as can be seen from the history of the Act itself. Considering this 
past learning and a potential future flux in the list, a pragmatic approach would be the following. (a) 
List the wildlife (i.e mammals, birds, plants et al) that need to enjoy the highest level of protection in a 
single Schedule, namely Schedule-I. (b) Come up with a much smaller list for the domestic animals, 
birds and plants named Schedule-II; a list, that, due to its sheer number would be easier to maintain 
(c) Come up with a clause that explicitly states that the highest protection is for Schedule -I and the 
second level of protection would be for all wild life that is NOT in Schedule-II. A simple non-
enumerated version such as this will ensure many species can be protected that are currently at 
518

various stages of understanding and research. This would also reduce the need to update the 
Schedules of the Act very often and is as easy to understand and implement as at the rationalized 
versions presented in the amendment. 
 
In the light of the above concerns, I request that the proposed amendments to the Wild Life 
(Protection) Act, 1972 should be withdrawn, reconsidered and fortified with better provisions for the 
Wild Life it aims to protect. I hereby would request you to kindly register my opposition to the 
amendment proposed. 
 
Thanking you, 
 
yours sincerely, 
 
Jayachandran.S. 
 
519

Dear Sir, 
 
This letter is in response to the invitation for memoranda published by the "Department -Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment, Forests & Climate 
Change", on the 28th of January 2022 towards the "Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021". 
 
As a responsible citizen, I consider it my fundamental duty to protect the natural resources of our 
country including the wildlife in all its forms, which are a part of our ecological fabric. I thank you for 
the opportunity to provide feedback on this most important Bill. After careful study, I wish to express 
my strong objections to some of the changes proposed in the amendment. 
 
Below I am recording my feedback to the amendments proposed: 
 
1. The amendment seeks to change the preamble of the WPA itself in two areas. While the 
consolidation of "wild animals, birds and plants'' into the phrase "wild life" is simple, desirable and 
straight-forward, the decision to introduce the words "conservation" and "management" will d e-focus 
the act and will open up future pathways for dilution. As the title of the Act suggests, it is about the 
"protection" of wildlife and should remain that way. While the word "conservation" sounds 
innocuously similar to "protection" it is in practice not the same. "Conservation" involves preservation 
or protection of species outside their natural habitats which essentially is not the same thing as 
protecting wildlife in-situ. In other words, conservation is a compromised mitigation that is a 
necessary action that follows when existing species of wildlife cannot be protected. Hence the 
introduction of this word into the preamble of the Act is self-defeating. The word "management" on 
the other hand is completely unnecessary for the purposes of the said Act, and will go on to include 
all forms of intrusive micro-management that comes with it. The intent of the Act to make an 
uncompromising attempt to protect all forms of wildlife in its natural state, and in its natural relations 
with its surroundings, is being violated by this attempt to introduce these words into the preamble.  
 
2. In Section-2, the introduction of the phrase "invasive alien species'', in addition to the term 
"vermin", now redefined to mean animals in Section-62 (i.e the section dealing with "invasive alien 
species") only furthers the artificial-divides that exist in the understanding of ecology. The term "alien", 
which only currently seems to consider the border between India and other countries, has varied 
meanings under practical conditions when one looks at the diversity of regions within India as well as 
the forested borders it shares with other countries where the eco-regions merge. The introduction of 
the term "alien" would be applicable to laws (perhaps unfair) that would entail from  such a term, for 
creatures who know no such borders and naturally exist within the confines of such eco -regions. The 
term "invasive" itself is a temporal term that has a binding to certain circumstances. Hence no species 
of wildlife can be inherently called so. The current amendment does not seek to list anything explicitly 
under these descriptions but the introduction of such a phrase can lead to opportunities being 
opened for schedules and lists (just as what happened in case of "vermin'') that in the lo ng run would 
turn out to be unwarranted. 
 
3. While it is a welcome change to see the removal of Schedule-V (for the so-called "vermin"), the 
aforementioned phrase "invasive alien species" only seems to replace it. Further, the changes to 
Section-62 makes it evident that this might not play out in the larger interest of wildlife. The 
amendment states explicitly that "disposing" and "including through destruction" is applicable to such 
species and that too for all the species listed in Schedule-II. By doing so, the Act has opened up a 
huge list of creatures to being unfairly treated on a case-to-case basis. In the worst case this treatment 
would be arbitrary and at the discretion of officers, experts and scientists who may or may not uphold 
the holistic case of protecting India's wildlife when they deal with locally fathomable circumstances. 
This is notwithstanding the issue that even a bare minimum process for a notification has not been 
described. Thus, it simply entails a smaller list of 4 - stigmatized - species being replaced by a larger 
520

list of - potentially stigmatized - 1000 species, undoing what the amendment set out to do by 
removing Schedule-V. Additionally, there is no clarity about the process involved in destruction of the 
said species (under the exceptional circumstances); for e.g "invasive species'' could be shrubs that 
have now interspersed among valuable green cover and there exists as many damaging ways to their 
removal as there are safe. A lack of process can result in loss of wildlife that we  intend to protect or a 
disruption in the food chain for the species we are trying to protect. 
 
4. Zoos themselves are archaic and colonial vestiges that only transformed from circus -like 
entertainment that included the human species at some point in history to what they have 
become today. While the existence of zoos itself needs to be questioned in a modern India with its 
strong laws that champion the causes for all wildlife, it is appalling to see that the amendment, in 
Section-2 now seeks to introduce the word "conservation" into the zoo-lingua-franca thereby going 
the way of western countries that have chosen to co-opt conservation into Zoos while continuing its 
commercial viability. This would only enable the act of putting immense pressure on animals f or the 
recreational value of the masses without any benefit for the wildlife itself. By adding a "conservation" 
angle, future funding of zoos would be made possible via misrepresentation. In the ideal case of an 
amendment, provisions for having zoos itself need to be removed, the wild animals organically re-
introduced to their natural environments and zoos closed eventually through a natural die -down. 
Specifically to this act, no further loopholes and provisions should be provided to Zoos so that they 
can continue the act of legalized emotional abuse that is endured by the wild creatures.  
 
5. The introduction of "film making" in Section 28 is shocking. While the amendment seems to 
suggest that a qualifying statement with what seems like a vague-condition would sharpen this clause, 
it does not go all the way and indicate what "adverse impacts" could be expected thereby making the 
clause toothless. Moreover, "changes to habitat" and its "adverse impact" are all side effects of all the 
existing possibilities in the present Act itself; for e.g tourism which is in the same list and could do with 
the same qualifier. "Film making" at any scale involves a humongous amount of foot -fall in terms of 
supporting staff, vehicles, props, lighting and ultimately sound. None of these can be open to 
interpretation and discretion at officer levels when it comes to a permit. The permits in future might 
be regarded as a form of revenue and we will fail to protect the wildlife that need their space, comfort 
and quiet in their natural habitats. Further, such an introduction only gives a chance to human-animal 
conflict in the future. With the advent of technology such as computer generated graphics and other 
virtual possibilities there is no justification for allowing for an extremely intrusive, damage inducing 
and purely commercial venture such as film-making to occur in forests of all kinds. The history of film 
making itself is its own testament that it is a process that usually transformative to its environment 
and thus the only rational thing to do is to not introduce "film making" into the set of items for which 
permits can be obtained. Also important to note here is the fact that in 1978, film making in the wild 
was specifically banned to avoid accidents. 
 
6. Sections 40 and 43 of the amendment imply that "live elephants'' can now be traded. This is a 
shocking change that begs the question as to whose interest are we protecting with the act and its 
amendments? While an underground market continues to exist and enables wild elephants  to be 
captured and traded between poachers, middlemen, individuals and the temples in India, making an 
explicit provision for actually trading live elephants will undo all the good work that has happened 
towards regulation of handling wildlife such as the elephants. Elephants are an endangered species 
overall and the Indian Elephant, technically the Asian Elephant (Elephas Maximus) is a part of the 
Appendix-I of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora) which ironically this very amendment seems to adhere to. The very fact that the amendment 
claims to implement CITES but opens up an unnecessary floodgate via the permission to trade live 
elephants should be seen as contradictory and cancelling; so contradictory, in fact, that this pushes 
Elephant conservation back by years. 
 
521

7. The amendments to Section 29 includes the provisions for "bona fide use of drinking water and 
household water by local communities” which upholds the principles of the Forest Rights Act, an d is a 
commendable change. At the same time an unqualified provision like this can lead to unfair usage of 
the common resources that more often than not physically exist in boundaries between human and 
wild habitats. The existence of a liberal clause can lead to projects that will develop under the guise of 
drinking and household water but eventually transform into extraction for other purposes as well as 
over-extraction. Untimely extraction of water can also occur as water resources and their quantity is 
seasonal with animals venturing closer to such sources that are in the peripheries especially during 
times of scarcity. Thus, unclear wording in the act can lead to human animal conflict. What is 
suggested here is a comprehensive and updated section that lists out the exact share that the human 
species has in these resources and clarity on what are the conditions for non-extraction. 
 
8. In Section 5A (1) (d), the removal of "Member, Planning Commission'' is a welcome change but the 
substitution with "Member, NITI Aayog" undoes the whole purpose of the Act. Having a member from 
any kind of department, executive-body or office whose primary concerns are directly in conflict with 
the Board for Wildlife will only result in the furthering of developmental interest s instead of the 
interests of the protection of Wildlife and their habitats. Hence, it is recommended that instead of the 
proposed change, clause (d) be completely removed along with the clauses (h), (i), (j) and (n) that 
represent Army, Defence, I&B and Tourism respectively. 
 
9. The rationalization of the Schedules is a welcome change when in comparison to what existed in the 
present Act. It will certainly help for an easy understanding of the two levels of protection assured for 
the wildlife. However, there are many concerns when it comes to these new schedules. The rationale 
for why certain animals are in Schedule-I and the others made it only to Schedule-II is unclear. There 
are several species from the original act missing in this amendment. Also missin g are species that were 
absent during the lifetime of the present Act, but which have been documented in India by well 
reputed organizations hence. Apart from that, within the newly provided schedules there exist cases of 
incorrect spellings and/or incorrect scientific names. All these errors can lead to situations where 
wildlife would go unprotected since sometimes - in cases such as spelling errors - criminals can get 
away due to the incorrectly spelt species names. 
 
10. The "FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM" has made explicit that the funds for salaries and operations for 
all the newly described officers and their departments which are part of the adherence to CITES, 
comes from the budget allocated for "Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats''. The 2022 Budget 
has also allocated a slightly higher amount to the aforementioned scheme. However, in effect, the 
increase in budget for this scheme and the proposal of an amendment of this scale and budgetary 
requirements cancel each other out. It is well known that one of the biggest hurdles for protection 
even under the current Act is the amount of finances we “can-be” and “have-been” spending on the 
foot-soldiers (guards, wardens etc); this includes the integrated scheme of activities involving local 
communities. Instead of making a palpable change in the wages and conditions of these foot -soldiers 
and thereby strengthening the ground-base for protection, the amendment's investment in a new 
hierarchy tree is rather untimely. 
 
11. It has to be noted here that the listing of explicit species for all protection levels is not a 
methodology that can be sustained as can be seen from the history of the Act itself. Considering this 
past learning and a potential future flux in the list, a pragmatic approach would be the following.  (a) 
List the wildlife (i.e mammals, birds, plants et al) that need to enjoy the highest level of protection in a 
single Schedule, namely Schedule-I. (b) Come up with a much smaller list for the domestic animals, 
birds and plants named Schedule-II; a list, that, due to its sheer number would be easier to maintain 
(c) Come up with a clause that explicitly states that the highest protection is for Schedule -I and the 
second level of protection would be for all wild life that is NOT in Schedule-II. A simple non-
enumerated version such as this will ensure many species can be protected that are currently at 
522

various stages of understanding and research. This would also reduce the need to update the 
Schedules of the Act very often and is as easy to understand and implement as at the rationalized 
versions presented in the amendment. 
 
In the light of the above concerns, I request that the proposed amendments to the Wild Life 
(Protection) Act, 1972 should be withdrawn, reconsidered and fortified with better provisions f or the 
Wild Life it aims to protect. I hereby would request you to kindly register my opposition to the 
amendment proposed. 
 
Thanking you, 
yours sincerely, 
Purandara K R 
 
523

Dear Sir, 
 
This letter is in response to the invitation for memoranda published by the "Department -Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment, Forests & Climate 
Change", on the 28th of January 2022 towards the "Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021". 
 
As a responsible citizen, I consider it my fundamental duty to protect the natural resources of our 
country including the wildlife in all its forms, which are a part of our ecological fabric. I thank you for 
the opportunity to provide feedback on this most important Bill. After careful study, I wish to express 
my strong objections to some of the changes proposed in the amendment. 
 
Below I am recording my feedback to the amendments proposed: 
 
1. The amendment seeks to change the preamble of the WPA itself in two areas. While the 
consolidation of "wild animals, birds and plants'' into the phrase "wild life" is simple, desirable and 
straight-forward, the decision to introduce the words "conservation" and "management" will de-focus 
the act and will open up future pathways for dilution. As the title of the Act suggests, it is about the 
"protection" of wildlife and should remain that way. While the word "conservation" s ounds 
innocuously similar to "protection" it is in practice not the same. "Conservation" involves preservation 
or protection of species outside their natural habitats which essentially is not the same thing as 
protecting wildlife in-situ. In other words, conservation is a compromised mitigation that is a 
necessary action that follows when existing species of wildlife cannot be protected. Hence the 
introduction of this word into the preamble of the Act is self-defeating. The word "management" on 
the other hand is completely unnecessary for the purposes of the said Act, and will go on to include 
all forms of intrusive micro-management that comes with it. The intent of the Act to make an 
uncompromising attempt to protect all forms of wildlife in its natural state, and in its natural relations 
with its surroundings, is being violated by this attempt to introduce these words into the preamble.  
 
2. In Section-2, the introduction of the phrase "invasive alien species'', in addition to the term 
"vermin", now redefined to mean animals in Section-62 (i.e the section dealing with "invasive alien 
species") only furthers the artificial-divides that exist in the understanding of ecology. The term "alien", 
which only currently seems to consider the border between India and other countries, has varied 
meanings under practical conditions when one looks at the diversity of regions within India as well as 
the forested borders it shares with other countries where the eco-regions merge. The introduction of 
the term "alien" would be applicable to laws (perhaps unfair) that would entail from such a term, for 
creatures who know no such borders and naturally exist within the confines of such eco -regions. The 
term "invasive" itself is a temporal term that has a binding to certain circum stances. Hence no species 
of wildlife can be inherently called so. The current amendment does not seek to list anything explicitly 
under these descriptions but the introduction of such a phrase can lead to opportunities being 
opened for schedules and lists (just as what happened in case of "vermin'') that in the long run would 
turn out to be unwarranted. 
 
3. While it is a welcome change to see the removal of Schedule-V (for the so-called "vermin"), the 
aforementioned phrase "invasive alien species" only seems to replace it. Further, the changes to 
Section-62 makes it evident that this might not play out in the larger interest of wildlife. The 
amendment states explicitly that "disposing" and "including through destruction" is applicable to such 
species and that too for all the species listed in Schedule-II. By doing so, the Act has opened up a 
huge list of creatures to being unfairly treated on a case-to-case basis. In the worst case this treatment 
would be arbitrary and at the discretion of officers, experts and scientists who may or may not uphold 
the holistic case of protecting India's wildlife when they deal with locally fathomable circumstances. 
This is notwithstanding the issue that even a bare minimum process for a notification has not been 
described. Thus, it simply entails a smaller list of 4 - stigmatized - species being replaced by a larger 
524

list of - potentially stigmatized - 1000 species, undoing what the amendment set out to do by 
removing Schedule-V. Additionally, there is no clarity about the process involved in destruction of the 
said species (under the exceptional circumstances); for e.g "invasive species'' could be shrubs that 
have now interspersed among valuable green cover and there exists as many damaging ways to their 
removal as there are safe. A lack of process can result in loss of wildlife that we intend to protect or a 
disruption in the food chain for the species we are trying to protect. 
 
4. Zoos themselves are archaic and colonial vestiges that only transformed from circus -like 
entertainment that included the human species at some point in history to what they have 
become today. While the existence of zoos itself needs to be questioned in a modern India with its 
strong laws that champion the causes for all wildlife, it is appalling to see that the amendment, in 
Section-2 now seeks to introduce the word "conservation" into the zoo -lingua-franca thereby going 
the way of western countries that have chosen to co-opt conservation into Zoos while continuing its 
commercial viability. This would only enable the act of putting immense pressure on animals for the 
recreational value of the masses without any benefit for the wildlife itself. By adding a "conservation" 
angle, future funding of zoos would be made possible via misrepresentation. In the  ideal case of an 
amendment, provisions for having zoos itself need to be removed, the wild animals organically re -
introduced to their natural environments and zoos closed eventually through a natural die -down. 
Specifically to this act, no further loopholes and provisions should be provided to Zoos so that they 
can continue the act of legalized emotional abuse that is endured by the wild creatures.  
 
5. The introduction of "film making" in Section 28 is shocking. While the amendment seems to 
suggest that a qualifying statement with what seems like a vague-condition would sharpen this clause, 
it does not go all the way and indicate what "adverse impacts" could be expected thereby making the 
clause toothless. Moreover, "changes to habitat" and its "adverse impact" are all side effects of all the 
existing possibilities in the present Act itself; for e.g tourism which is in the same list and could do with 
the same qualifier. "Film making" at any scale involves a humongous amount of foot -fall in terms of 
supporting staff, vehicles, props, lighting and ultimately sound. None of these can be open to 
interpretation and discretion at officer levels when it comes to a permit. The permits in future might 
be regarded as a form of revenue and we will fail to protect the wildlife that need their space, comfort 
and quiet in their natural habitats. Further, such an introduction only gives a chance to human -animal 
conflict in the future. With the advent of technology such as computer generated graphics and other 
virtual possibilities there is no justification for allowing for an extremely intrusive, damage inducing 
and purely commercial venture such as film-making to occur in forests of all kinds. The history of film 
making itself is its own testament that it is a process that usually transformative to its environment 
and thus the only rational thing to do is to not introduce "film making" into the set of items for which 
permits can be obtained. Also important to note here is the fact that in 1978, film making in the wild 
was specifically banned to avoid accidents. 
 
6. Sections 40 and 43 of the amendment imply that "live elephants'' can now be traded. This is a 
shocking change that begs the question as to whose interest are we protecting with the act and its 
amendments? While an underground market continues to exist and enables wild elephants to be 
captured and traded between poachers, middlemen, individuals and the temples in India, making an 
explicit provision for actually trading live elephants will undo all the good work that has happened 
towards regulation of handling wildlife such as the elephants. Elephants are an endangered species 
overall and the Indian Elephant, technically the Asian Elephant (Elephas Maximus) is a part of the 
Appendix-I of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild  Fauna and 
Flora) which ironically this very amendment seems to adhere to. The very fact that the amendment 
claims to implement CITES but opens up an unnecessary floodgate via the permission to trade live 
elephants should be seen as contradictory and cancelling; so contradictory, in fact, that this pushes 
Elephant conservation back by years. 
 
525

7. The amendments to Section 29 includes the provisions for "bona fide use of drinking water and 
household water by local communities” which upholds the principles of the Forest Rights Act, and is a 
commendable change. At the same time an unqualified provision like this can lead to unfair usage of 
the common resources that more often than not physically exist in boundaries between human and 
wild habitats. The existence of a liberal clause can lead to projects that will develop under the guise of 
drinking and household water but eventually transform into extraction for other purposes as well as 
over-extraction. Untimely extraction of water can also occur as water resources and their quantity is 
seasonal with animals venturing closer to such sources that are in the peripheries especially during 
times of scarcity. Thus, unclear wording in the act can lead to human animal conflict. What is 
suggested here is a comprehensive and updated section that lists out the exact share that the human 
species has in these resources and clarity on what are the conditions for non-extraction. 
 
8. In Section 5A (1) (d), the removal of "Member, Planning Commission'' is a welcome change but the  
substitution with "Member, NITI Aayog" undoes the whole purpose of the Act. Having a member from 
any kind of department, executive-body or office whose primary concerns are directly in conflict with 
the Board for Wildlife will only result in the furthering of developmental interests instead of the 
interests of the protection of Wildlife and their habitats. Hence, it is recommended that instead of the 
proposed change, clause (d) be completely removed along with the clauses (h), (i), (j) and (n) that 
represent Army, Defence, I&B and Tourism respectively. 
 
9. The rationalization of the Schedules is a welcome change when in comparison to what existed in the 
present Act. It will certainly help for an easy understanding of the two levels of protection assured fo r 
the wildlife. However, there are many concerns when it comes to these new schedules. The rationale 
for why certain animals are in Schedule-I and the others made it only to Schedule-II is unclear. There 
are several species from the original act missing in this amendment. Also missing are species that were 
absent during the lifetime of the present Act, but which have been documented in India by well 
reputed organizations hence. Apart from that, within the newly provided schedules there exist cases of 
incorrect spellings and/or incorrect scientific names. All these errors can lead to situations where 
wildlife would go unprotected since sometimes - in cases such as spelling errors - criminals can get 
away due to the incorrectly spelt species names. 
 
10. The "FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM" has made explicit that the funds for salaries and operations for 
all the newly described officers and their departments which are part of the adherence to CITES, 
comes from the budget allocated for "Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats''. The 2022 Budget 
has also allocated a slightly higher amount to the aforementioned scheme. However, in effect, the 
increase in budget for this scheme and the proposal of an amendment of this scale and budgetary 
requirements cancel each other out. It is well known that one of the biggest hurdles for protection 
even under the current Act is the amount of finances we “can-be” and “have-been” spending on the 
foot-soldiers (guards, wardens etc); this includes the integrated scheme of activities involv ing local 
communities. Instead of making a palpable change in the wages and conditions of these foot -soldiers 
and thereby strengthening the ground-base for protection, the amendment's investment in a new 
hierarchy tree is rather untimely. 
 
11. It has to be noted here that the listing of explicit species for all protection levels is not a 
methodology that can be sustained as can be seen from the history of the Act itself. Considering this 
past learning and a potential future flux in the list, a pragmatic approach would be the following. (a) 
List the wildlife (i.e mammals, birds, plants et al) that need to enjoy the highest level of protection in a 
single Schedule, namely Schedule-I. (b) Come up with a much smaller list for the domestic animals, 
birds and plants named Schedule-II; a list, that, due to its sheer number would be easier to maintain 
(c) Come up with a clause that explicitly states that the highest protection is for Schedule -I and the 
second level of protection would be for all wild life that is NOT in Schedule-II. A simple non-
enumerated version such as this will ensure many species can be protected that are currently at 
526

various stages of understanding and research. This would also reduce the need to update the 
Schedules of the Act very often and is as easy to understand and implement as at the rationalized 
versions presented in the amendment. 
 
In the light of the above concerns, I request that the proposed amendments to the Wild Life 
(Protection) Act, 1972 should be withdrawn, reconsidered and fortified with better provisions for the 
Wild Life it aims to protect. I hereby would request you to kindly register my opposition to the 
amendment proposed. 
 
Thanking you, 
yours sincerely, 
 
Rajendra Prasad  
 
527

Dear Sir, 
 
This letter is in response to the invitation for memoranda published by the 
"Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & 
Technology, Environment, Forests & Climate Change", on the 28th of 
January 2022 towards the "Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021". 
 
As a responsible citizen, I consider it my fundamental duty to protect the natural 
resources of our country including the wildlife in all its forms, which are a part of 
our ecological fabric. I thank you for the opportunity to provide feedback on this 
most important Bill. After careful study, I wish to express my strong objections 
to some of the changes proposed in the amendment. 
 
Below I am recording my feedback to the amendments proposed: 
 
1. The amendment seeks to change the preamble of the WPA itself in two 
areas. While the consolidation of "wild animals, birds and plants'' into the phrase 
"wild life" is simple, desirable and straight-forward, the decision to introduce the 
words "conservation" and "management" will de-focus the act and will open up 
future pathways for dilution. As the title of the Act suggests, it is about the 
"protection" of wildlife and should remain that way. While the word 
"conservation" sounds innocuously similar to "protection" it is in practice not the 
same. "Conservation" involves preservation or protection of species 
outside their natural habitats which essentially is not the same thing as 
protecting wildlife in-situ. In other words, conservation is a compromised 
mitigation that is a necessary action that follows when existing species of wildlife 
cannot be protected. Hence the introduction of this word into the preamble of 
the Act is self-defeating. The word "management" on the other hand is 
completely unnecessary for the purposes of the said Act, and will go on to 
include all forms of intrusive micro-management that comes with it. The intent 
of the Act to make an uncompromising attempt to protect all forms of wildlife in 
its natural state, and in its natural relations with its surroundings, is being 
violated by this attempt to introduce these words into the preamble. 
 
2. In Section-2, the introduction of the phrase "invasive alien species'', in 
addition to the term "vermin", now redefined to mean animals in Section-62 (i.e 
the section dealing with "invasive alien species") only furthers the artificial-
divides that exist in the understanding of ecology. The term "alien", which only 
currently seems to consider the border between India and other countries, has 
varied meanings under practical conditions when one looks at the diversity of 
regions within India as well as the forested borders it shares with other countries 
where the eco-regions merge. The introduction of the term "alien" would be 
applicable to laws (perhaps unfair) that would entail from such a term, for 
creatures who know no such borders and naturally exist within the confines of 
such eco-regions. The term "invasive" itself is a temporal term that has a 
528

binding to certain circumstances. Hence no species of wildlife can be inherently 
called so. The current amendment does not seek to list anything explicitly under 
these descriptions but the introduction of such a phrase can lead to 
opportunities being opened for schedules and lists (just as what 
happened in case of "vermin'') that in the long run would turn out to be 
unwarranted. 
 
3. While it is a welcome change to see the removal of Schedule-V (for the so-
called "vermin"), the aforementioned phrase "invasive alien species" only 
seems to replace it. Further, the changes to Section-62 makes it evident that 
this might not play out in the larger interest of wildlife. The amendment states 
explicitly that "disposing" and "including through destruction" is applicable to 
such species and that too for all the species listed in Schedule-II. By doing so, 
the Act has opened up a huge list of creatures to being unfairly treated on a 
case-to-case basis. In the worst case this treatment would be arbitrary and at 
the discretion of officers, experts and scientists who may or may not uphold the 
holistic case of protecting India's wildlife when they deal with locally fathomable 
circumstances. This is notwithstanding the issue that even a bare minimum 
process for a notification has not been described. Thus, it simply entails a 
smaller list of 4 - stigmatized - species being replaced by a larger list of 
- potentially stigmatized - 1000 species, undoing what the amendment set 
out to do by removing Schedule-V. Additionally, there is no clarity about the 
process involved in destruction of the said species (under the exceptional 
circumstances); for e.g "invasive species'' could be shrubs that have now 
interspersed among valuable green cover and there exists as many damaging 
ways to their removal as there are safe. A lack of process can result in loss of 
wildlife that we intend to protect or a disruption in the food chain for the species 
we are trying to protect. 
 
4. Zoos themselves are archaic and colonial vestiges that only transformed from 
circus-like entertainment that included the human species at some point in 
history to what they have become today. While the existence of zoos itself needs 
to be questioned in a modern India with its strong laws that champion the 
causes for all wildlife, it is appalling to see that the amendment, in Section-2 
now seeks to introduce the word "conservation" into the zoo-lingua-
franca thereby going the way of western countries that have chosen to co-
opt conservation into Zoos while continuing its commercial viability. This would 
only enable the act of putting immense pressure on animals for the recreational 
value of the masses without any benefit for the wildlife itself. By adding a 
"conservation" angle, future funding of zoos would be made possible via 
misrepresentation. In the ideal case of an amendment, provisions for having 
zoos itself need to be removed, the wild animals organically re-introduced to 
their natural environments and zoos closed eventually through a natural die-
down. Specifically to this act, no further loopholes and provisions should be 
provided to Zoos so that they can continue the act of legalized emotional 
529

abuse that is endured by the wild creatures. 
 
5. The introduction of "film making" in Section 28 is shocking. While the 
amendment seems to suggest that a qualifying statement with what seems like 
a vague-condition would sharpen this clause, it does not go all the way and 
indicate what "adverse impacts" could be expected thereby making the clause 
toothless. Moreover, "changes to habitat" and its "adverse impact" are all side 
effects of all the existing possibilities in the present Act itself; for e.g tourism 
which is in the same list and could do with the same qualifier. "Film making" at 
any scale involves a humongous amount of foot-fall in terms of supporting staff, 
vehicles, props, lighting and ultimately sound. None of these can be open to 
interpretation and discretion at officer levels when it comes to a permit. The 
permits in future might be regarded as a form of revenue and we will fail to 
protect the wildlife that need their space, comfort and quiet in their natural 
habitats. Further, such an introduction only gives a chance to human-animal 
conflict in the future. With the advent of technology such as computer 
generated graphics and other virtual possibilities there is no 
justification for allowing for an extremely intrusive, damage inducing 
and purely commercial venture such as film-making to occur in 
forests of all kinds. The history of film making itself is its own testament that it 
is a process that usually transformative to its environment and thus the only 
rational thing to do is to not introduce "film making" into the set of items for 
which permits can be obtained. Also important to note here is the fact that in 
1978, film making in the wild was specifically banned to avoid accidents. 
 
6. Sections 40 and 43 of the amendment imply that "live elephants'' can 
now be traded. This is a shocking change that begs the question as to whose 
interest are we protecting with the act and its amendments? While an 
underground market continues to exist and enables wild elephants to be 
captured and traded between poachers, middlemen, individuals and the temples 
in India, making an explicit provision for actually trading live elephants will undo 
all the good work that has happened towards regulation of handling wildlife such 
as the elephants. Elephants are an endangered species overall and the Indian 
Elephant, technically the Asian Elephant (Elephas Maximus) is a part of the 
Appendix-I of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species 
of Wild Fauna and Flora) which ironically this very amendment seems to adhere 
to. The very fact that the amendment claims to implement CITES but 
opens up an unnecessary floodgate via the permission to trade live 
elephants should be seen as contradictory and cancelling; so 
contradictory, in fact, that this pushes Elephant conservation back by years. 
 
7. The amendments to Section 29 includes the provisions for "bona fide use of 
drinking water and household water by local communities” which upholds the 
principles of the Forest Rights Act, and is a commendable change. At the same 
time an unqualified provision like this can lead to unfair usage of the common 
530

resources that more often than not physically exist in boundaries between 
human and wild habitats. The existence of a liberal clause can lead to 
projects that will develop under the guise of drinking and household 
water but eventually transform into extraction for other purposes as well as 
over-extraction. Untimely extraction of water can also occur as water resources 
and their quantity is seasonal with animals venturing closer to such sources that 
are in the peripheries especially during times of scarcity. Thus, unclear 
wording in the act can lead to human animal conflict. What is suggested 
here is a comprehensive and updated section that lists out the exact share that 
the human species has in these resources and clarity on what are the conditions 
for non-extraction. 
 
8. In Section 5A (1) (d), the removal of "Member, Planning Commission'' is a 
welcome change but the substitution with "Member, NITI Aayog" undoes 
the whole purpose of the Act. Having a member from any kind of 
department, executive-body or office whose primary concerns are directly in 
conflict with the Board for Wildlife will only result in the furthering of 
developmental interests instead of the interests of the protection of Wildlife and 
their habitats. Hence, it is recommended that instead of the proposed 
change, clause (d) be completely removed along with the clauses (h), 
(i), (j) and (n) that represent Army, Defence, I&B and Tourism respectively. 
 
9. The rationalization of the Schedules is a welcome change when in 
comparison to what existed in the present Act. It will certainly help for an easy 
understanding of the two levels of protection assured for the wildlife. However, 
there are many concerns when it comes to these new schedules. The rationale 
for why certain animals are in Schedule-I and the others made it only to 
Schedule-II is unclear. There are several species from the original act missing 
in this amendment. Also missing are species that were absent during the lifetime 
of the present Act, but which have been documented in India by well reputed 
organizations hence. Apart from that, within the newly provided schedules there 
exist cases of incorrect spellings and/or incorrect scientific names. All these 
errors can lead to situations where wildlife would go unprotected since 
sometimes - in cases such as spelling errors - criminals can get away due to the 
incorrectly spelt species names. 
 
10. The "FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM" has made explicit that the funds for 
salaries and operations for all the newly described officers and their departments 
which are part of the adherence to CITES, comes from the budget allocated 
for "Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats''. The 2022 Budget has 
also allocated a slightly higher amount to the aforementioned scheme. However, 
in effect, the increase in budget for this scheme and the proposal of an 
amendment of this scale and budgetary requirements cancel each other out. It is 
well known that one of the biggest hurdles for protection even under the current 
Act is the amount of finances we “can-be” and “have-been” spending on the 
531

foot-soldiers (guards, wardens etc); this includes the integrated scheme of 
activities involving local communities. Instead of making a palpable change in 
the wages and conditions of these foot-soldiers and thereby strengthening the 
ground-base for protection, the amendment's investment in a new 
hierarchy tree is rather untimely. 
 
11. It has to be noted here that the listing of explicit species for all protection 
levels is not a methodology that can be sustained as can be seen from the 
history of the Act itself. Considering this past learning and a potential future flux 
in the list, a pragmatic approach would be the following. (a) List the wildlife (i.e 
mammals, birds, plants et al) that need to enjoy the highest level of protection 
in a single Schedule, namely Schedule-I. (b) Come up with a much smaller list 
for the domestic animals, birds and plants named Schedule-II; a list, that, due 
to its sheer number would be easier to maintain (c) Come up with a clause that 
explicitly states that the highest protection is for Schedule-I and the second level 
of protection would be for all wild life that is NOT in Schedule-II. A simple non-
enumerated version such as this will ensure many species can be 
protected that are currently at various stages of understanding and research. 
This would also reduce the need to update the Schedules of the Act very often 
and is as easy to understand and implement as at the rationalized versions 
presented in the amendment. 
 
In the light of the above concerns, I request that the proposed amendments to 
the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 should be withdrawn, reconsidered and 
fortified with better provisions for the Wild Life it aims to protect. I hereby 
would like to register my opposition to the amendment proposed. 
 
Yours Sincerely, 
Ratheesh Pisharody 
532

Dear Sir, 
 
This letter is in response to the invitation for memoranda published by the "Department-Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment, Forests & Climate 
Change", on the 28th of January 2022 towards the "Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021". 
 
As a responsible citizen, I consider it my fundamental duty to protect the natural resources of our 
country including the wildlife in all its forms, which are a part of our ecological fabric. I thank you for 
the opportunity to provide feedback on this most important Bill. After careful study, I wish to express 
my strong objections to some of the changes proposed in the amendment. 
 
Below I am recording my feedback to the amendments proposed:  
 
1. The amendment seeks to change the preamble of the WPA itself in two areas. While the 
consolidation of "wild animals, birds and plants'' into the phrase "wild life" is simple, desirable and 
straight-forward, the decision to introduce the words "conservation" and "management" will de -focus 
the act and will open up future pathways for dilution. As the title of the Act suggests, it is about the 
"protection" of wildlife and should remain that way. While the word "conservation" sounds 
innocuously similar to "protection" it is in practice not the same. "Conservation" involves 
preservation or protection of species outside their natural habitats which essentially is not the 
same thing as protecting wildlife in-situ. In other words, conservation is a compromised mitigation 
that is a necessary action that follows when existing species of wildlife cannot be protected. Hence the 
introduction of this word into the preamble of the Act is self-defeating. The word "management" on 
the other hand is completely unnecessary for the purposes of the said Act, and will go on to include 
all forms of intrusive micro-management that comes with it. The intent of the Act to make an 
uncompromising attempt to protect all forms of wildlife in its natural state, and in its natural relations 
with its surroundings, is being violated by this attempt to introduce these words into the preamble.  
 
2. In Section-2, the introduction of the phrase "invasive alien species'', in addition to the term 
"vermin", now redefined to mean animals in Section-62 (i.e the section dealing with "invasive alien 
species") only furthers the artificial-divides that exist in the understanding of ecology. The term "alien", 
which only currently seems to consider the border between India and other countries, has varied 
meanings under practical conditions when one looks at the diversity of regions within India as well as 
the forested borders it shares with other countries where the eco-regions merge. The introduction of 
the term "alien" would be applicable to laws (perhaps unfair) that would entail from such a term, for 
creatures who know no such borders and naturally exist within the confines of such eco -regions. The 
term "invasive" itself is a temporal term that has a binding to certain circumstances. Hence  no species 
of wildlife can be inherently called so. The current amendment does not seek to list anything 
explicitly under these descriptions but the introduction of such a phrase can lead to opportunities 
being opened for schedules and lists (just as what happened in case of "vermin'') that in the long run 
would turn out to be unwarranted. 
 
3. While it is a welcome change to see the removal of Schedule-V (for the so-called "vermin"), the 
aforementioned phrase "invasive alien species" only seems to replace it. Further, the changes to 
Section-62 makes it evident that this might not play out in the larger interest of wildlife. The 
amendment states explicitly that "disposing" and "including through destruction" is applicable to such 
species and that too for all the species listed in Schedule-II. By doing so, the Act has opened up a 
huge list of creatures to being unfairly treated on a case-to-case basis. In the worst case this treatment 
would be arbitrary and at the discretion of officers, experts and scientists who may or may not uphold 
the holistic case of protecting India's wildlife when they deal with locally fathomable circumstances. 
This is notwithstanding the issue that even a bare minimum process for a notification has not been 
described. Thus, it simply entails a smaller list of 4 - stigmatized - species being replaced by a 
533

larger list of - potentially stigmatized - 1000 species, undoing what the amendment set out to do 
by removing Schedule-V. Additionally, there is no clarity about the process involved in destruction of 
the said species (under the exceptional circumstances); for e.g "invasive species'' could be shrubs that 
have now interspersed among valuable green cover and there exists as many damaging ways to their 
removal as there are safe. A lack of process can result in loss of wildlife that we intend to protect or a 
disruption in the food chain for the species we are trying to protect. 
 
4. Zoos themselves are archaic and colonial vestiges that only transformed from circus -like 
entertainment that included the human species at some point in history to what they have 
become today. While the existence of zoos itself needs to be questioned in a modern India with its 
strong laws that champion the causes for all wildlife, it is appalling to see that the amendment, 
in Section-2 now seeks to introduce the word "conservation" into the zoo-lingua-franca thereby 
going the way of western countries that have chosen to co-opt conservation into Zoos while 
continuing its commercial viability. This would only enable the act of putting immense pressure on 
animals for the recreational value of the masses without any benefit for the wildlife itself. By adding a  
"conservation" angle, future funding of zoos would be made possible via misrepresentation. In the 
ideal case of an amendment, provisions for having zoos itself need to be removed, the wild animals 
organically re-introduced to their natural environments and zoos closed eventually through a natural 
die-down. Specifically to this act, no further loopholes and provisions should be provided to Zoos 
so that they can continue the act of legalized emotional abuse that is endured by the wild 
creatures. 
 
5. The introduction of "film making" in Section 28 is shocking. While the amendment seems to 
suggest that a qualifying statement with what seems like a vague-condition would sharpen this clause, 
it does not go all the way and indicate what "adverse impacts" could be expected thereby making the 
clause toothless. Moreover, "changes to habitat" and its "adverse impact" are all side effects of all the 
existing possibilities in the present Act itself; for e.g tourism which is in the same list and could do with 
the same qualifier. "Film making" at any scale involves a humongous amount of foot -fall in terms of 
supporting staff, vehicles, props, lighting and ultimately sound. None of these can be open to 
interpretation and discretion at officer levels when it comes to a permit. The permits in future might 
be regarded as a form of revenue and we will fail to protect the wildlife that need their space, comfort 
and quiet in their natural habitats. Further, such an introduction only gives a chance to human -animal 
conflict in the future. With the advent of technology such as computer generated graphics and 
other virtual possibilities there is no justification for allowing for an extremely intrusive, 
damage inducing and purely commercial venture such as film-making to occur in forests of all 
kinds. The history of film making itself is its own testament that it is a process that usually 
transformative to its environment and thus the only rational thing to do is to not introduce "film 
making" into the set of items for which permits can be obtained. Also important to note here is the 
fact that in 1978, film making in the wild was specifically banned to avoid accidents.  
 
6. Sections 40 and 43 of the amendment imply that "live elephants'' can now be traded . This is a 
shocking change that begs the question as to whose interest are we protecting with the act and its 
amendments? While an underground market continues to exist and enables wild elephants to be 
captured and traded between poachers, middlemen, individuals and the temples in India, ma king an 
explicit provision for actually trading live elephants will undo all the good work that has happened 
towards regulation of handling wildlife such as the elephants. Elephants are an endangered species 
overall and the Indian Elephant, technically the Asian Elephant (Elephas Maximus) is a part of the 
Appendix-I of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora) which ironically this very amendment seems to adhere to. The very fact that the amendment 
claims to implement CITES but opens up an unnecessary floodgate via the permission to trade 
live elephants should be seen as contradictory and cancelling; so contradictory, in fact, that this 
pushes Elephant conservation back by years. 
534

 
7. The amendments to Section 29 includes the provisions for "bona fide use of drinking water and 
household water by local communities” which upholds the principles of the Forest Rights Act, and is a 
commendable change. At the same time an unqualified provision like this can lead to unfai r usage of 
the common resources that more often than not physically exist in boundaries between human and 
wild habitats. The existence of a liberal clause can lead to projects that will develop under the 
guise of drinking and household water but eventually transform into extraction for other purposes 
as well as over-extraction. Untimely extraction of water can also occur as water resources and their 
quantity is seasonal with animals venturing closer to such sources that are in the peripheries especially 
during times of scarcity. Thus, unclear wording in the act can lead to human animal conflict . What 
is suggested here is a comprehensive and updated section that lists out the exact share that the 
human species has in these resources and clarity on what are the conditions for non-extraction. 
 
8. In Section 5A (1) (d), the removal of "Member, Planning Commission'' is a welcome change but 
the substitution with "Member, NITI Aayog" undoes the whole purpose of the Act . Having a 
member from any kind of department, executive-body or office whose primary concerns are directly in 
conflict with the Board for Wildlife will only result in the furthering of developmental interests instead 
of the interests of the protection of Wildlife and their habitats. Hence, it is recomm ended that instead 
of the proposed change, clause (d) be completely removed along with the clauses (h), (i), (j) and 
(n) that represent Army, Defence, I&B and Tourism respectively. 
 
9. The rationalization of the Schedules is a welcome change when in comparison to what existed in 
the present Act. It will certainly help for an easy understanding of the two levels of protection assured 
for the wildlife. However, there are many concerns when it comes to these new schedules. 
The rationale for why certain animals are in Schedule-I and the others made it only to Schedule-
II is unclear. There are several species from the original act missing in this amendment. Also missing 
are species that were absent during the lifetime of the present Act, but which have been docum ented 
in India by well reputed organizations hence. Apart from that, within the newly provided schedules 
there exist cases of incorrect spellings and/or incorrect scientific names. All these errors can lead to 
situations where wildlife would go unprotected since sometimes - in cases such as spelling errors - 
criminals can get away due to the incorrectly spelt species names. 
 
10. The "FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM" has made explicit that the funds for salaries and operations 
for all the newly described officers and their departments which are part of the adherence to 
CITES, comes from the budget allocated for "Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats'' . The 
2022 Budget has also allocated a slightly higher amount to the aforementioned scheme. However, in 
effect, the increase in budget for this scheme and the proposal of an amendment of this scale and 
budgetary requirements cancel each other out. It is well known that one of the biggest hurdles for 
protection even under the current Act is the amount of finances we “can-be” and “have-been” 
spending on the foot-soldiers (guards, wardens etc); this includes the integrated scheme of activities 
involving local communities. Instead of making a palpable change in the wages and conditions of 
these foot-soldiers and thereby strengthening the ground-base for protection, the amendment's 
investment in a new hierarchy tree is rather untimely. 
 
11. It has to be noted here that the listing of explicit species for all protection levels is not a 
methodology that can be sustained as can be seen from the history of the Act itself. Considering 
this past learning and a potential future flux in the list, a pragmatic approach would be the following. 
(a) List the wildlife (i.e mammals, birds, plants et al) that need to enjoy the highest level o f protection 
in a single Schedule, namely Schedule-I. (b) Come up with a much smaller list for the domestic 
animals, birds and plants named Schedule-II; a list, that, due to its sheer number would be easier to 
maintain (c) Come up with a clause that explicitly states that the highest protection is for Schedule-I 
and the second level of protection would be for all wild life that is NOT in Schedule -II. A simple non-
535

enumerated version such as this will ensure many species can be protected  that are currently at 
various stages of understanding and research. This would also reduce the need to update the 
Schedules of the Act very often and is as easy to understand and implement as at the rationalized 
versions presented in the amendment. 
 
In the light of the above concerns, I request that the proposed amendments to the Wild Life 
(Protection) Act, 1972 should be withdrawn, reconsidered and fortified with better provisions  for 
the Wild Life it aims to protect. I hereby would request you to kindly register my opposition  to the 
amendment proposed. 
 
Thanking you, 
yours sincerely, 
Sharada Ganesh 
 
536

Dear Sir, 
 
This letter is in response to the invitation for memoranda published 
by the "Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science & Technology, Environment, Forests & Climate Change", on 
the 28th of January 2022 towards the "Wild Life (Protection) 
Amendment Bill, 2021". 
 
As a responsible citizen, I consider it my fundamental duty to protect the 
natural resources of our country including wildlife in all its forms, which 
are a part of our ecological fabric. I thank you for the opportunity to 
provide feedback on this most important Bill. After careful study, I wish to 
express my strong objections to some of the changes proposed in the 
amendment. 
 
Below I am recording my feedback to the amendments proposed: 
 
1. The amendment seeks to change the preamble of the WPA itself in 
two areas. While the consolidation of "wild animals, birds and plants'' into 
the phrase "wild life" is simple, desirable and straight-forward, the 
decision to introduce the words "conservation" and "management" will de-
focus the act and will open up future pathways for dilution. As the title of 
the Act suggests, it is about the "protection" of wildlife and should remain 
that way. While the word "conservation" sounds innocuously similar to 
"protection" it is in practice not the same. "Conservation" involves 
preservation or protection of species outside their natural habitats 
which essentially is not the same thing as protecting wildlife in-
situ. In other words, conservation is a compromised mitigation that is a 
necessary action that follows when existing species of wildlife cannot be 
protected. Hence the introduction of this word into the preamble of the 
Act is self-defeating. The word "management" on the other hand is 
completely unnecessary for the purposes of the said Act, and will go on to 
include all forms of intrusive micro-management that comes with it. The 
intent of the Act to make an uncompromising attempt to protect all forms 
of wildlife in its natural state, and in its natural relations with its 
surroundings, is being violated by this attempt to introduce these words 
into the preamble. 
 
2. In Section-2, the introduction of the phrase "invasive alien species'', 
in addition to the term "vermin", now redefined to mean animals in 
Section-62 (i.e the section dealing with "invasive alien species") only 
furthers the artificial-divides that exist in the understanding of ecology. 
The term "alien", which only currently seems to consider the border 
between India and other countries, has varied meanings under practical 
conditions when one looks at the diversity of regions within India as well 
as the forested borders it shares with other countries where the eco-
regions merge. The introduction of the term "alien" would be applicable to 
537

laws (perhaps unfair) that would entail from such a term, for creatures 
who know no such borders and naturally exist within the confines of such 
eco-regions. The term "invasive" itself is a temporal term that has a 
binding to certain circumstances. Hence no species of wildlife can be 
inherently called so. The current amendment does not seek to list 
anything explicitly under these descriptions but the introduction of such 
a phrase can lead to opportunities being opened for schedules and 
lists (just as what happened in case of "vermin'') that in the long 
run would turn out to be unwarranted. 
 
3. While it is a welcome change to see the removal of Schedule-V (for 
the so-called "vermin"), the aforementioned phrase "invasive alien 
species" only seems to replace it. Further, the changes to Section-62 
makes it evident that this might not play out in the larger interest of 
wildlife. The amendment states explicitly that "disposing" and "including 
through destruction" is applicable to such species and that too for all the 
species listed in Schedule-II. By doing so, the Act has opened up a huge 
list of creatures to being unfairly treated on a case-to-case basis. In the 
worst case this treatment would be arbitrary and at the discretion of 
officers, experts and scientists who may or may not uphold the holistic 
case of protecting India's wildlife when they deal with locally fathomable 
circumstances. This is notwithstanding the issue that even a bare 
minimum process for a notification has not been described. Thus, it 
simply entails a smaller list of 4 - stigmatized - species being 
replaced by a larger list of - potentially stigmatized - 1000 
species, undoing what the amendment set out to do by removing 
Schedule-V. Additionally, there is no clarity about the process involved in 
destruction of the said species (under the exceptional circumstances); for 
e.g "invasive species'' could be shrubs that have now interspersed among 
valuable green cover and there exists as many damaging ways to their 
removal as there are safe. A lack of process can result in loss of wildlife 
that we intend to protect or a disruption in the food chain for the species 
we are trying to protect. 
 
4. Zoos themselves are archaic and colonial vestiges that only 
transformed from circus-like entertainment that included the human 
species at some point in history to what they have become today. While 
the existence of zoos itself needs to be questioned in a modern India with 
its strong laws that champion the causes for all wildlife, it is appalling to 
see that the amendment, in Section-2 now seeks to introduce the 
word "conservation" into the zoo-lingua-franca thereby going the 
way of western countries that have chosen to co-opt conservation into 
Zoos while continuing its commercial viability. This would only enable the 
act of putting immense pressure on animals for the recreational value of 
the masses without any benefit for the wildlife itself. By adding a 
"conservation" angle, future funding of zoos would be made possible via 
misrepresentation. In the ideal case of an amendment, provisions for 
538

having zoos itself need to be removed, the wild animals organically re-
introduced to their natural environments and zoos closed eventually 
through a natural die-down. Specifically to this act, no further 
loopholes and provisions should be provided to Zoos so that they 
can continue the act of legalized emotional abuse that is endured by 
the wild creatures. 
 
5. The introduction of "film making" in Section 28 is shocking. While 
the amendment seems to suggest that a qualifying statement with what 
seems like a vague-condition would sharpen this clause, it does not go all 
the way and indicate what "adverse impacts" could be expected thereby 
making the clause toothless. Moreover, "changes to habitat" and its 
"adverse impact" are all side effects of all the existing possibilities in the 
present Act itself; for e.g tourism which is in the same list and could do 
with the same qualifier. "Film making" at any scale involves a humongous 
amount of foot-fall in terms of supporting staff, vehicles, props, lighting 
and ultimately sound. None of these can be open to interpretation and 
discretion at officer levels when it comes to a permit. The permits in 
future might be regarded as a form of revenue and we will fail to protect 
the wildlife that need their space, comfort and quiet in their natural 
habitats. Further, such an introduction only gives a chance to human-
animal conflict in the future. With the advent of technology such as 
computer generated graphics and other virtual possibilities there 
is no justification for allowing for an extremely intrusive, damage 
inducing and purely commercial venture such as film-making to 
occur in forests of all kinds. The history of film making itself is its own 
testament that it is a process that usually transformative to its 
environment and thus the only rational thing to do is to not introduce 
"film making" into the set of items for which permits can be obtained. 
Also important to note here is the fact that in 1978, film making in the 
wild was specifically banned to avoid accidents. 
 
6. Sections 40 and 43 of the amendment imply that "live 
elephants'' can now be traded. This is a shocking change that begs the 
question as to whose interest are we protecting with the act and its 
amendments? While an underground market continues to exist and 
enables wild elephants to be captured and traded between poachers, 
middlemen, individuals and the temples in India, making an explicit 
provision for actually trading live elephants will undo all the good work 
that has happened towards regulation of handling wildlife such as the 
elephants. Elephants are an endangered species overall and the Indian 
Elephant, technically the Asian Elephant (Elephas Maximus) is a part of 
the Appendix-I of CITES (Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora) which ironically this very 
amendment seems to adhere to. The very fact that the amendment 
claims to implement CITES but opens up an unnecessary floodgate 
via the permission to trade live elephants should be seen as 
539

contradictory and cancelling; so contradictory, in fact, that this pushes 
Elephant conservation back by years. 
 
7. The amendments to Section 29 includes the provisions for "bona fide 
use of drinking water and household water by local communities” which 
upholds the principles of the Forest Rights Act, and is a commendable 
change. At the same time an unqualified provision like this can lead to 
unfair usage of the common resources that more often than not physically 
exist in boundaries between human and wild habitats. The existence of 
a liberal clause can lead to projects that will develop under the 
guise of drinking and household water but eventually transform into 
extraction for other purposes as well as over-extraction. Untimely 
extraction of water can also occur as water resources and their quantity is 
seasonal with animals venturing closer to such sources that are in the 
peripheries especially during times of scarcity. Thus, unclear wording in 
the act can lead to human animal conflict. What is suggested here is 
a comprehensive and updated section that lists out the exact share that 
the human species has in these resources and clarity on what are the 
conditions for non-extraction. 
 
8. In Section 5A (1) (d), the removal of "Member, Planning Commission'' 
is a welcome change but the substitution with "Member, NITI Aayog" 
undoes the whole purpose of the Act. Having a member from any 
kind of department, executive-body or office whose primary concerns are 
directly in conflict with the Board for Wildlife will only result in the 
furthering of developmental interests instead of the interests of the 
protection of Wildlife and their habitats. Hence, it is recommended that 
instead of the proposed change, clause (d) be completely removed 
along with the clauses (h), (i), (j) and (n) that represent Army, 
Defence, I&B and Tourism respectively. 
 
9. The rationalization of the Schedules is a welcome change when 
in comparison to what existed in the present Act. It will certainly help for 
an easy understanding of the two levels of protection assured for the 
wildlife. However, there are many concerns when it comes to these new 
schedules. The rationale for why certain animals are in Schedule-I 
and the others made it only to Schedule-II is unclear. There are 
several species from the original act missing in this amendment. Also 
missing are species that were absent during the lifetime of the present 
Act, but which have been documented in India by well reputed 
organizations hence. Apart from that, within the newly provided schedules 
there exist cases of incorrect spellings and/or incorrect scientific names. 
All these errors can lead to situations where wildlife would go unprotected 
since sometimes - in cases such as spelling errors - criminals can get 
away due to the incorrectly spelt species names. 
 
10. The "FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM" has made explicit that the funds 
540

for salaries and operations for all the newly described officers and their 
departments which are part of the adherence to CITES, comes from the 
budget allocated for "Integrated Development of Wildlife 
Habitats''. The 2022 Budget has also allocated a slightly higher amount 
to the aforementioned scheme. However, in effect, the increase in budget 
for this scheme and the proposal of an amendment of this scale and 
budgetary requirements cancel each other out. It is well known that one 
of the biggest hurdles for protection even under the current Act is the 
amount of finances we “can-be” and “have-been” spending on the foot-
soldiers (guards, wardens etc); this includes the integrated scheme of 
activities involving local communities. Instead of making a palpable 
change in the wages and conditions of these foot-soldiers and thereby 
strengthening the ground-base for protection, the amendment's 
investment in a new hierarchy tree is rather untimely. 
 
11. It has to be noted here that the listing of explicit species for all 
protection levels is not a methodology that can be sustained as can 
be seen from the history of the Act itself. Considering this past learning 
and a potential future flux in the list, a pragmatic approach would be the 
following. (a) List the wildlife (i.e mammals, birds, plants et al) that need 
to enjoy the highest level of protection in a single Schedule, namely 
Schedule-I. (b) Come up with a much smaller list for the domestic 
animals, birds and plants named Schedule-II; a list, that, due to its sheer 
number would be easier to maintain (c) Come up with a clause that 
explicitly states that the highest protection is for Schedule-I and the 
second level of protection would be for all wild life that is NOT in 
Schedule-II. A simple non-enumerated version such as this will 
ensure many species can be protected that are currently at various 
stages of understanding and research. This would also reduce the need to 
update the Schedules of the Act very often and is as easy to understand 
and implement as at the rationalized versions presented in the 
amendment. 
 
In the light of the above concerns, I request that the proposed 
amendments to the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 should 
be withdrawn, reconsidered and fortified with better provisions for 
the Wild Life it aims to protect. I hereby would like to register my 
opposition to the amendment proposed. 
Yours Sincerely, 
Shreekumar 
 
541

Dear Sir, 
 
This letter is in response to the invitation for memoranda published by the 
"Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, 
Environment, Forests & Climate Change", on the 28th of January 2022 towards the 
"Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021". 
 
As a responsible citizen, I consider it my fundamental duty to protect the natural 
resources of our country including wildlife in all its forms, which are a part of our 
ecological fabric. I thank you for the opportunity to provide feedback on this most 
important Bill. After careful study, I wish to express my strong objections to some of the 
changes proposed in the amendment. 
 
Below I am recording my feedback to the amendments proposed: 
 
1. The amendment seeks to change the preamble of the WPA itself in two areas. While 
the consolidation of "wild animals, birds and plants'' into the phrase "wild life" is simple, 
desirable and straight-forward, the decision to introduce the words "conservation" and 
"management" will de-focus the act and will open up future pathways for dilution. As the 
title of the Act suggests, it is about the "protection" of wildlife and should remain that 
way. While the word "conservation" sounds innocuously similar to "protection" it is in 
practice not the same. "Conservation" involves preservation or protection of 
species outside their natural habitats which essentially is not the same thing as 
protecting wildlife in-situ. In other words, conservation is a compromised mitigation 
that is a necessary action that follows when existing species of wildlife cannot be 
protected. Hence the introduction of this word into the preamble of the Act is self-
defeating. The word "management" on the other hand is completely unnecessary for the 
purposes of the said Act, and will go on to include all forms of intrusive micro-
management that comes with it. The intent of the Act to make an uncompromising 
attempt to protect all forms of wildlife in its natural state, and in its natural relations with 
its surroundings, is being violated by this attempt to introduce these words into the 
preamble. 
 
2. In Section-2, the introduction of the phrase "invasive alien species'', in addition to 
the term "vermin", now redefined to mean animals in Section-62 (i.e the section dealing 
with "invasive alien species") only furthers the artificial-divides that exist in the 
understanding of ecology. The term "alien", which only currently seems to consider the 
border between India and other countries, has varied meanings under practical 
conditions when one looks at the diversity of regions within India as well as the forested 
borders it shares with other countries where the eco-regions merge. The introduction of 
the term "alien" would be applicable to laws (perhaps unfair) that would entail from such 
a term, for creatures who know no such borders and naturally exist within the confines 
of such eco-regions. The term "invasive" itself is a temporal term that has a binding to 
certain circumstances. Hence no species of wildlife can be inherently called so. The 
current amendment does not seek to list anything explicitly under these descriptions but 
the introduction of such a phrase can lead to opportunities being opened for 
schedules and lists (just as what happened in case of "vermin'') that in the long 
run would turn out to be unwarranted. 
 
3. While it is a welcome change to see the removal of Schedule-V (for the so-called 
542

"vermin"), the aforementioned phrase "invasive alien species" only seems to 
replace it. Further, the changes to Section-62 makes it evident that this might not play 
out in the larger interest of wildlife. The amendment states explicitly that "disposing" and 
"including through destruction" is applicable to such species and that too for all the 
species listed in Schedule-II. By doing so, the Act has opened up a huge list of creatures 
to being unfairly treated on a case-to-case basis. In the worst case this treatment would 
be arbitrary and at the discretion of officers, experts and scientists who may or may not 
uphold the holistic case of protecting India's wildlife when they deal with locally 
fathomable circumstances. This is notwithstanding the issue that even a bare minimum 
process for a notification has not been described. Thus, it simply entails a smaller list 
of 4 - stigmatized - species being replaced by a larger list of - potentially 
stigmatized - 1000 species, undoing what the amendment set out to do by removing 
Schedule-V. Additionally, there is no clarity about the process involved in destruction of 
the said species (under the exceptional circumstances); for e.g "invasive species'' could 
be shrubs that have now interspersed among valuable green cover and there exists as 
many damaging ways to their removal as there are safe. A lack of process can result in 
loss of wildlife that we intend to protect or a disruption in the food chain for the species 
we are trying to protect. 
 
4. Zoos themselves are archaic and colonial vestiges that only transformed from circus-
like entertainment that included the human species at some point in history to what they 
have become today. While the existence of zoos itself needs to be questioned in a 
modern India with its strong laws that champion the causes for all wildlife, it is appalling 
to see that the amendment, in Section-2 now seeks to introduce the word 
"conservation" into the zoo-lingua-franca thereby going the way of western 
countries that have chosen to co-opt conservation into Zoos while continuing its 
commercial viability. This would only enable the act of putting immense pressure on 
animals for the recreational value of the masses without any benefit for the wildlife itself. 
By adding a "conservation" angle, future funding of zoos would be made possible via 
misrepresentation. In the ideal case of an amendment, provisions for having zoos itself 
need to be removed, the wild animals organically re-introduced to their natural 
environments and zoos closed eventually through a natural die-down. Specifically to this 
act, no further loopholes and provisions should be provided to Zoos so that they 
can continue the act of legalized emotional abuse that is endured by the wild 
creatures. 
 
5. The introduction of "film making" in Section 28 is shocking. While the 
amendment seems to suggest that a qualifying statement with what seems like a vague-
condition would sharpen this clause, it does not go all the way and indicate what 
"adverse impacts" could be expected thereby making the clause toothless. Moreover, 
"changes to habitat" and its "adverse impact" are all side effects of all the existing  
possibilities in the present Act itself; for e.g tourism which is in the same list and could 
do with the same qualifier. "Film making" at any scale involves a humongous amount of 
foot-fall in terms of supporting staff, vehicles, props, lighting and ultimately sound. None 
of these can be open to interpretation and discretion at officer levels when it comes to a 
permit. The permits in future might be regarded as a form of revenue and we will fail to 
protect the wildlife that need their space, comfort and quiet in their natural habitats. 
Further, such an introduction only gives a chance to human-animal conflict in the 
future. With the advent of technology such as computer generated graphics and 
other virtual possibilities there is no justification for allowing for an extremely 
543

intrusive, damage inducing and purely commercial venture such as film-making 
to occur in forests of all kinds. The history of film making itself is its own testament 
that it is a process that usually transformative to its environment and thus the only 
rational thing to do is to not introduce "film making" into the set of items for which 
permits can be obtained. Also important to note here is the fact that in 1978, film 
making in the wild was specifically banned to avoid accidents. 
 
6. Sections 40 and 43 of the amendment imply that "live elephants'' can now be 
traded. This is a shocking change that begs the question as to whose interest are we 
protecting with the act and its amendments? While an underground market continues to 
exist and enables wild elephants to be captured and traded between poachers, 
middlemen, individuals and the temples in India, making an explicit provision for actually 
trading live elephants will undo all the good work that has happened towards regulation 
of handling wildlife such as the elephants. Elephants are an endangered species overall 
and the Indian Elephant, technically the Asian Elephant (Elephas Maximus) is a part of 
the Appendix-I of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of 
Wild Fauna and Flora) which ironically this very amendment seems to adhere to. The 
very fact that the amendment claims to implement CITES but opens up an 
unnecessary floodgate via the permission to trade live elephants should be 
seen as contradictory and cancelling; so contradictory, in fact, that this pushes 
Elephant conservation back by years. 
 
7. The amendments to Section 29 includes the provisions for "bona fide use of drinking 
water and household water by local communities” which upholds the principles of the 
Forest Rights Act, and is a commendable change. At the same time an unqualified 
provision like this can lead to unfair usage of the common resources that more often 
than not physically exist in boundaries between human and wild habitats. The 
existence of a liberal clause can lead to projects that will develop under the 
guise of drinking and household water but eventually transform into extraction for 
other purposes as well as over-extraction. Untimely extraction of water can also occur as 
water resources and their quantity is seasonal with animals venturing closer to such 
sources that are in the peripheries especially during times of scarcity. Thus, unclear 
wording in the act can lead to human animal conflict. What is suggested here is a 
comprehensive and updated section that lists out the exact share that the human 
species has in these resources and clarity on what are the conditions for non-extraction. 
 
8. In Section 5A (1) (d), the removal of "Member, Planning Commission'' is a welcome 
change but the substitution with "Member, NITI Aayog" undoes the whole 
purpose of the Act. Having a member from any kind of department, executive-body or 
office whose primary concerns are directly in conflict with the Board for Wildlife will only 
result in the furthering of developmental interests instead of the interests of the 
protection of Wildlife and their habitats. Hence, it is recommended that instead of the 
proposed change, clause (d) be completely removed along with the clauses (h), 
(i), (j) and (n) that represent Army, Defence, I&B and Tourism respectively. 
 
9. The rationalization of the Schedules is a welcome change when in comparison 
to what existed in the present Act. It will certainly help for an easy understanding of the 
two levels of protection assured for the wildlife. However, there are many concerns when 
it comes to these new schedules. The rationale for why certain animals are in 
Schedule-I and the others made it only to Schedule-II is unclear. There are 
544

several species from the original act missing in this amendment. Also missing are 
species that were absent during the lifetime of the present Act, but which have been 
documented in India by well reputed organizations hence. Apart from that, within the 
newly provided schedules there exist cases of incorrect spellings and/or incorrect 
scientific names. All these errors can lead to situations where wildlife would go 
unprotected since sometimes - in cases such as spelling errors - criminals can get away 
due to the incorrectly spelt species names. 
 
10. The "FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM" has made explicit that the funds for salaries 
and operations for all the newly described officers and their departments which are part 
of the adherence to CITES, comes from the budget allocated for "Integrated 
Development of Wildlife Habitats''. The 2022 Budget has also allocated a slightly 
higher amount to the aforementioned scheme. However, in effect, the increase in budget 
for this scheme and the proposal of an amendment of this scale and budgetary 
requirements cancel each other out. It is well known that one of the biggest hurdles for 
protection even under the current Act is the amount of finances we “can-be” and “have-
been” spending on the foot-soldiers (guards, wardens etc); this includes the 
integrated scheme of activities involving local communities. Instead of making a palpable 
change in the wages and conditions of these foot-soldiers and thereby strengthening the 
ground-base for protection, the amendment's investment in a new hierarchy tree 
is rather untimely. 
 
11. It has to be noted here that the listing of explicit species for all protection levels 
is not a methodology that can be sustained as can be seen from the history of the 
Act itself. Considering this past learning and a potential future flux in the list, a 
pragmatic approach would be the following. (a) List the wildlife (i.e mammals, birds, 
plants et al) that need to enjoy the highest level of protection in a single Schedule, 
namely Schedule-I. (b) Come up with a much smaller list for the domestic animals, birds 
and plants named Schedule-II; a list, that, due to its sheer number would be easier to 
maintain (c) Come up with a clause that explicitly states that the highest protection is for 
Schedule-I and the second level of protection would be for all wild life that is NOT in 
Schedule-II. A simple non-enumerated version such as this will ensure many 
species can be protected that are currently at various stages of understanding and 
research. This would also reduce the need to update the Schedules of the Act very often 
and is as easy to understand and implement as at the rationalized versions presented in 
the amendment. 
 
In the light of the above concerns, I request that the proposed amendments to the Wild 
Life (Protection) Act, 1972 should be withdrawn, reconsidered and fortified with 
better provisions for the Wild Life it aims to protect. I hereby would like to register my 
opposition to the amendment proposed. 
 
Yours Sincerely, 
Siddharth K J, Bangalore 
545

Dear Sir, 
 
This letter is in response to the invitation for memoranda published by the "Department -Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment, Forests & Climate 
Change", on the 28th of January 2022 towards the "Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021". 
 
As a responsible citizen, I consider it my fundamental duty to protect the natural resources of our 
country including the wildlife in all its forms, which are a part of our ecological fabric. I thank you for 
the opportunity to provide feedback on this most important Bill. After careful study, I wish to express 
my strong objections to some of the changes proposed in the amendment. 
 
Below I am recording my feedback to the amendments proposed: 
 
1. The amendment seeks to change the preamble of the WPA itself in two areas. While the 
consolidation of "wild animals, birds and plants'' into the phrase "wild life" is simple, desirable and 
straight-forward, the decision to introduce the words "conservation" and "management" will de -focus 
the act and will open up future pathways for dilution. As the title of the Act suggests, it is about the 
"protection" of wildlife and should remain that way. While the word "conservation" sounds 
innocuously similar to "protection" it is in practice not the same. "Conservation" involves preservation 
or protection of species outside their natural habitats which essentially is not the same thing as 
protecting wildlife in-situ. In other words, conservation is a compromised mitigation that is a 
necessary action that follows when existing species of wildlife cannot be protected. Hence the 
introduction of this word into the preamble of the Act is self-defeating. The word "management" on 
the other hand is completely unnecessary for the purposes of the said Act, and will go on to include 
all forms of intrusive micro-management that comes with it. The intent of the Act to make an 
uncompromising attempt to protect all forms of wildlife in its natural state, and in its natural relations 
with its surroundings, is being violated by this attempt to introduce these words into the preamble.  
 
2. In Section-2, the introduction of the phrase "invasive alien species'', in addition to the term 
"vermin", now redefined to mean animals in Section-62 (i.e the section dealing with "invasive alien 
species") only furthers the artificial-divides that exist in the understanding of ecology. The term "alien", 
which only currently seems to consider the border between India and other countries, has varied 
meanings under practical conditions when one looks at the diversity of regions within India as well as 
the forested borders it shares with other countries where the eco-regions merge. The introduction of 
the term "alien" would be applicable to laws (perhaps unfair) that would entail from such a term, for 
creatures who know no such borders and naturally exist within the confines of such eco -regions. The 
term "invasive" itself is a temporal term that has a binding to certain circumstances. Hence no species 
of wildlife can be inherently called so. The current amendment does not seek to list anything explicitly 
under these descriptions but the introduction of such a phrase can lead to opportunities being 
opened for schedules and lists (just as what happened in case of "vermin'') that in the long run would 
turn out to be unwarranted. 
 
3. While it is a welcome change to see the removal of Schedule-V (for the so-called "vermin"), the 
aforementioned phrase "invasive alien species" only seems to replace it. Further, the changes to 
Section-62 makes it evident that this might not play out in the larger interest of wildlife. The 
amendment states explicitly that "disposing" and "including through destruction" is applicable to such 
species and that too for all the species listed in Schedule-II. By doing so, the Act has opened up a 
huge list of creatures to being unfairly treated on a case-to-case basis. In the worst case this treatment 
would be arbitrary and at the discretion of officers, experts and scientists who may or may not uphold 
the holistic case of protecting India's wildlife when they deal with locally fathomable circumstances. 
This is notwithstanding the issue that even a bare minimum process for a notification has not been 
described. Thus, it simply entails a smaller list of 4 - stigmatized - species being replaced by a larger 
546

list of - potentially stigmatized - 1000 species, undoing what the amendment set out to do by 
removing Schedule-V. Additionally, there is no clarity about the process involved in destruction of the 
said species (under the exceptional circumstances); for e.g "invasive species'' could be shrubs that 
have now interspersed among valuable green cover and there exists as many damaging ways to their 
removal as there are safe. A lack of process can result in loss of wildlife that we intend to protect or a 
disruption in the food chain for the species we are trying to protect. 
 
4. Zoos themselves are archaic and colonial vestiges that only transformed from circus -like 
entertainment that included the human species at some point in history to what they have 
become today. While the existence of zoos itself needs to be questioned in a modern India with its 
strong laws that champion the causes for all wildlife, it is appalling to see that the amendment, in 
Section-2 now seeks to introduce the word "conservation" into the zoo -lingua-franca thereby going 
the way of western countries that have chosen to co-opt conservation into Zoos while continuing its 
commercial viability. This would only enable the act of putting immense pressure on animals for the 
recreational value of the masses without any benefit for the wildlife itself. By adding a "conservation" 
angle, future funding of zoos would be made possible via misrepresentation. In the ideal case of an 
amendment, provisions for having zoos itself need to be removed, the wild animals organically re -
introduced to their natural environments and zoos closed eventually through a natural die -down. 
Specifically to this act, no further loopholes and provisions should be provided to Zoos so that they 
can continue the act of legalized emotional abuse that is endured by the wild creatures.  
 
5. The introduction of "film making" in Section 28 is shocking. While the amendment seems to 
suggest that a qualifying statement with what seems like a vague-condition would sharpen this clause, 
it does not go all the way and indicate what "adverse impacts" could be expected thereby making the 
clause toothless. Moreover, "changes to habitat" and its "adverse impact" are all side effects of all the 
existing possibilities in the present Act itself; for e.g tourism which is in the same list and could do with 
the same qualifier. "Film making" at any scale involves a humongous amount of foot -fall in terms of 
supporting staff, vehicles, props, lighting and ultimately sound. None of these can be open to 
interpretation and discretion at officer levels when it comes to a permit. The permits in future might 
be regarded as a form of revenue and we will fail to protect the wildlife that need their space, comfort 
and quiet in their natural habitats. Further, such an introduction only gives a chance to human -animal 
conflict in the future. With the advent of technology such as computer generated graphics and other 
virtual possibilities there is no justification for allowing for an extremely intrusive, damage inducing 
and purely commercial venture such as film-making to occur in forests of all kinds. The history of film 
making itself is its own testament that it is a process that usually transformative to its environment 
and thus the only rational thing to do is to not introduce "film making" into the set of items for which 
permits can be obtained. Also important to note here is the fact that in 1978, film making in the w ild 
was specifically banned to avoid accidents. 
 
6. Sections 40 and 43 of the amendment imply that "live elephants'' can now be traded. This is a 
shocking change that begs the question as to whose interest are we protecting with the act and its 
amendments? While an underground market continues to exist and enables wild elephants to be 
captured and traded between poachers, middlemen, individuals and the temples in India, making an 
explicit provision for actually trading live elephants will undo all the good work that has happened 
towards regulation of handling wildlife such as the elephants. Elephants are an endangered species 
overall and the Indian Elephant, technically the Asian Elephant (Elephas Maximus) is a part of the 
Appendix-I of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora) which ironically this very amendment seems to adhere to. The very fact that the amendment 
claims to implement CITES but opens up an unnecessary floodgate via the permission to trade live 
elephants should be seen as contradictory and cancelling; so contradictory, in fact, that this pushes 
Elephant conservation back by years. 
 
547

7. The amendments to Section 29 includes the provisions for "bona fide use of drinking water and 
household water by local communities” which upholds the principles of the Forest Rights Act, and is a 
commendable change. At the same time an unqualified provision like this can lead to unfair usage of 
the common resources that more often than not physically exist in boundaries between human and 
wild habitats. The existence of a liberal clause can lead to projects that will develop under the guise of 
drinking and household water but eventually transform into extraction for other purposes as well as 
over-extraction. Untimely extraction of water can also occur as water resources and their quantity is 
seasonal with animals venturing closer to such sources that are in the peripheries especially during 
times of scarcity. Thus, unclear wording in the act can lead to human animal conflict. What is 
suggested here is a comprehensive and updated section that lists out the exact share that the human 
species has in these resources and clarity on what are the conditions for non-extraction. 
 
8. In Section 5A (1) (d), the removal of "Member, Planning Commission'' is a welcome change but the 
substitution with "Member, NITI Aayog" undoes the whole purpose of the Act. Having a member from 
any kind of department, executive-body or office whose primary concerns are directly in conflict with 
the Board for Wildlife will only result in the furthering of developmental interests instead of the 
interests of the protection of Wildlife and their habitats. Hence, it is recommended that instead of the 
proposed change, clause (d) be completely removed along with the clauses (h), (i), (j) and (n) that 
represent Army, Defence, I&B and Tourism respectively. 
 
9. The rationalization of the Schedules is a welcome change when in comparison to what existed in the 
present Act. It will certainly help for an easy understanding of the two levels of protection assured for 
the wildlife. However, there are many concerns when it comes to these new schedules. The rationale 
for why certain animals are in Schedule-I and the others made it only to Schedule-II is unclear. There 
are several species from the original act missing in this amendment. Also missing are species that wer e 
absent during the lifetime of the present Act, but which have been documented in India by well 
reputed organizations hence. Apart from that, within the newly provided schedules there exist cases of 
incorrect spellings and/or incorrect scientific names. All these errors can lead to situations where 
wildlife would go unprotected since sometimes - in cases such as spelling errors - criminals can get 
away due to the incorrectly spelt species names. 
 
10. The "FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM" has made explicit that the funds for salaries and operations for 
all the newly described officers and their departments which are part of the adherence to CITES, 
comes from the budget allocated for "Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats''. The 2022 Budget 
has also allocated a slightly higher amount to the aforementioned scheme. However, in effect, the 
increase in budget for this scheme and the proposal of an amendment of this scale and budgetary 
requirements cancel each other out. It is well known that one of the biggest hurdles  for protection 
even under the current Act is the amount of finances we “can-be” and “have-been” spending on the 
foot-soldiers (guards, wardens etc); this includes the integrated scheme of activities involving local 
communities. Instead of making a palpable change in the wages and conditions of these foot-soldiers 
and thereby strengthening the ground-base for protection, the amendment's investment in a new 
hierarchy tree is rather untimely. 
 
11. It has to be noted here that the listing of explicit species for all protection levels is not a 
methodology that can be sustained as can be seen from the history of the Act itself. Considering this 
past learning and a potential future flux in the list, a pragmatic approach would be the following. (a) 
List the wildlife (i.e mammals, birds, plants et al) that need to enjoy the highest level of protection in a 
single Schedule, namely Schedule-I. (b) Come up with a much smaller list for the domestic animals, 
birds and plants named Schedule-II; a list, that, due to its sheer number would be easier to maintain 
(c) Come up with a clause that explicitly states that the highest protection is for Schedule -I and the 
second level of protection would be for all wild life that is NOT in Schedule-II. A simple non-
enumerated version such as this will ensure many species can be protected that are currently at 
548

various stages of understanding and research. This would also reduce the need to update the 
Schedules of the Act very often and is as easy to understand and implement as at the ra tionalized 
versions presented in the amendment. 
 
In the light of the above concerns, I request that the proposed amendments to the Wild Life 
(Protection) Act, 1972 should be withdrawn, reconsidered and fortified with better provisions for the 
Wild Life it aims to protect. I hereby would request you to kindly register my opposition to the 
amendment proposed. 
 
Thanking you, 
yours sincerely, 
Sd/- 
 
549

Dear Sir, 
 
This letter is in response to the invitation for memoranda published by the "Department -Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment, Forests & Climate 
Change", on the 28th of January 2022 towards the "Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021". 
 
As a responsible citizen,  It is my fundamental duty to protect the natural resources of our country 
including the wildlife in all its forms, which are a part of our ecology .After careful study, I have strong 
objections to some of the changes proposed in the amendment. 
 
1. The amendment seeks to change the preamble of the WPA itself in two areas. While the 
consolidation of "wild animals, birds and plants'' into the phrase "wild life" is simple, desirable and 
straight-forward, the decision to introduce the words "conservation" and "management" will de -focus 
the act and will open up future pathways for dilution. As the title of the Act suggests, it is about the 
"protection" of wildlife and should remain that way. While the word "conservation" sounds 
innocuously similar to "protection" it is in practice not the same. "Conservation" involves preservation 
or protection of species outside their natural habitats which essentially is not the same thing as 
protecting wildlife in-situ. In other words, conservation is a compromised mitigation that is a 
necessary action that follows when existing species of wildlife cannot be protected. Hence the 
introduction of this word into the preamble of the Act is self-defeating. The word "management" on 
the other hand is completely unnecessary for the purposes of the said Act, and will go on to include 
all forms of intrusive micro-management that comes with it. The intent of the Act to make an 
uncompromising attempt to protect all forms of wildlife in its natural state, and in its natural relations 
with its surroundings, is being violated by this attempt to introduce these words into the prea mble. 
 
2. In Section-2, the introduction of the phrase "invasive alien species'', in addition to the term 
"vermin", now redefined to mean animals in Section-62 (i.e the section dealing with "invasive alien 
species") only furthers the artificial-divides that exist in the understanding of ecology. The term "alien", 
which only currently seems to consider the border between India and other countries, has varied 
meanings under practical conditions when one looks at the diversity of regions within India as well as 
the forested borders it shares with other countries where the eco-regions merge. The introduction of 
the term "alien" would be applicable to laws (perhaps unfair) that would entail from such a term, for 
creatures who know no such borders and naturally exist within the confines of such eco-regions. The 
term "invasive" itself is a temporal term that has a binding to certain circumstances. Hence no species 
of wildlife can be inherently called so. The current amendment does not seek to list anything explicit ly 
under these descriptions but the introduction of such a phrase can lead to opportunities being 
opened for schedules and lists (just as what happened in case of "vermin'') that in the long run would 
turn out to be unwarranted. 
 
3. While it is a welcome change to see the removal of Schedule-V (for the so-called "vermin"), the 
aforementioned phrase "invasive alien species" only seems to replace it. Further, the changes to 
Section-62 makes it evident that this might not play out in the larger interest of wi ldlife. The 
amendment states explicitly that "disposing" and "including through destruction" is applicable to such 
species and that too for all the species listed in Schedule-II. By doing so, the Act has opened up a 
huge list of creatures to being unfairly treated on a case-to-case basis. In the worst case this treatment 
would be arbitrary and at the discretion of officers, experts and scientists who may or may not uphold 
the holistic case of protecting India's wildlife when they deal with locally fathomabl e circumstances. 
This is notwithstanding the issue that even a bare minimum process for a notification has not been 
described. Thus, it simply entails a smaller list of 4 - stigmatized - species being replaced by a larger 
list of - potentially stigmatized - 1000 species, undoing what the amendment set out to do by 
removing Schedule-V. Additionally, there is no clarity about the process involved in destruction of the 
said species (under the exceptional circumstances); for e.g "invasive species'' could be shr ubs that 
550

have now interspersed among valuable green cover and there exists as many damaging ways to their 
removal as there are safe. A lack of process can result in loss of wildlife that we intend to protect or a 
disruption in the food chain for the species we are trying to protect. 
 
4. Zoos themselves are archaic and colonial vestiges that only transformed from circus -like 
entertainment that included the human species at some point in history to what they have 
become today. While the existence of zoos itself needs to be questioned in a modern India with its 
strong laws that champion the causes for all wildlife, it is appalling to see that the amendment, in 
Section-2 now seeks to introduce the word "conservation" into the zoo -lingua-franca thereby going 
the way of western countries that have chosen to co-opt conservation into Zoos while continuing its 
commercial viability. This would only enable the act of putting immense pressure on animals for the 
recreational value of the masses without any benefit for the wildlife itself. By adding a "conservation" 
angle, future funding of zoos would be made possible via misrepresentation. In the ideal case of an 
amendment, provisions for having zoos itself need to be removed, the wild animals organically re -
introduced to their natural environments and zoos closed eventually through a natural die -down. 
Specifically to this act, no further loopholes and provisions should be provided to Zoos so that they 
can continue the act of legalized emotional abuse that is endured by the wild creatures. 
 
5. The introduction of "film making" in Section 28 is shocking. While the amendment seems to 
suggest that a qualifying statement with what seems like a vague-condition would sharpen this clause, 
it does not go all the way and indicate what "adverse impacts" could be expected thereby making the 
clause toothless. Moreover, "changes to habitat" and its "adverse impact" are all side effects of all the 
existing possibilities in the present Act itself; for e.g tourism which is in the same list  and could do with 
the same qualifier. "Film making" at any scale involves a humongous amount of foot -fall in terms of 
supporting staff, vehicles, props, lighting and ultimately sound. None of these can be open to 
interpretation and discretion at officer levels when it comes to a permit. The permits in future might 
be regarded as a form of revenue and we will fail to protect the wildlife that need their space, comfort 
and quiet in their natural habitats. Further, such an introduction only gives a chance to human-animal 
conflict in the future. With the advent of technology such as computer generated graphics and other 
virtual possibilities there is no justification for allowing for an extremely intrusive, damage inducing 
and purely commercial venture such as film-making to occur in forests of all kinds. The history of film 
making itself is its own testament that it is a process that usually transformative to its environment 
and thus the only rational thing to do is to not introduce "film making" into the set o f items for which 
permits can be obtained. Also important to note here is the fact that in 1978, film making in the wild 
was specifically banned to avoid accidents. 
 
6. Sections 40 and 43 of the amendment imply that "live elephants'' can now be traded. Th is is a 
shocking change that begs the question as to whose interest are we protecting with the act and its 
amendments? While an underground market continues to exist and enables wild elephants to be 
captured and traded between poachers, middlemen, individuals and the temples in India, making an 
explicit provision for actually trading live elephants will undo all the good work that has happened 
towards regulation of handling wildlife such as the elephants. Elephants are an endangered species 
overall and the Indian Elephant, technically the Asian Elephant (Elephas Maximus) is a part of the 
Appendix-I of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora) which ironically this very amendment seems to adhere to. The very fact that the amendment 
claims to implement CITES but opens up an unnecessary floodgate via the permission to trade live 
elephants should be seen as contradictory and cancelling; so contradictory, in fact, that this pushes 
Elephant conservation back by years. 
 
7. The amendments to Section 29 includes the provisions for "bona fide use of drinking water and 
household water by local communities” which upholds the principles of the Forest Rights Act, and is a 
commendable change. At the same time an unqualified provision like this can lead to unfair usage of 
551

the common resources that more often than not physically exist in boundaries between human and 
wild habitats. The existence of a liberal clause can lead to projects that will develop under the guise of 
drinking and household water but eventually transform into extraction for other purposes as well as 
over-extraction. Untimely extraction of water can also occur as water resources and their quantity is 
seasonal with animals venturing closer to such sources that are in the peripheries especially during 
times of scarcity. Thus, unclear wording in the act can lead to human animal conflict. What is 
suggested here is a comprehensive and updated section that lists out the exact share that the human 
species has in these resources and clarity on what are the conditions for non-extraction. 
 
8. In Section 5A (1) (d), the removal of "Member, Planning Commission'' is a welcome change but the 
substitution with "Member, NITI Aayog" undoes the whole purpose of the Act. Having a mem ber from 
any kind of department, executive-body or office whose primary concerns are directly in conflict with 
the Board for Wildlife will only result in the furthering of developmental interests instead of the 
interests of the protection of Wildlife and their habitats. Hence, it is recommended that instead of the 
proposed change, clause (d) be completely removed along with the clauses (h), (i), (j) and (n) that 
represent Army, Defence, I&B and Tourism respectively. 
 
9. The rationalization of the Schedules is a welcome change when in comparison to what existed in the 
present Act. It will certainly help for an easy understanding of the two levels of protection assured for 
the wildlife. However, there are many concerns when it comes to these new schedules. The rationale 
for why certain animals are in Schedule-I and the others made it only to Schedule-II is unclear. There 
are several species from the original act missing in this amendment. Also missing are species that wer e 
absent during the lifetime of the present Act, but which have been documented in India by well 
reputed organizations hence. Apart from that, within the newly provided schedules there exist cases of 
incorrect spellings and/or incorrect scientific names. All these errors can lead to situations where 
wildlife would go unprotected since sometimes - in cases such as spelling errors - criminals can get 
away due to the incorrectly spelt species names. 
 
10. The "FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM" has made explicit that the funds for salaries and operations for 
all the newly described officers and their departments which are part of the adherence to CITES, 
comes from the budget allocated for "Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats''. The 2022 Budget 
has also allocated a slightly higher amount to the aforementioned scheme. However, in effect, the 
increase in budget for this scheme and the proposal of an amendment of this scale and budgetary 
requirements cancel each other out. It is well known that one of the biggest hurdles  for protection 
even under the current Act is the amount of finances we “can-be” and “have-been” spending on the 
foot-soldiers (guards, wardens etc); this includes the integrated scheme of activities involving local 
communities. Instead of making a palpable change in the wages and conditions of these foot-soldiers 
and thereby strengthening the ground-base for protection, the amendment's investment in a new 
hierarchy tree is rather untimely. 
 
11. It has to be noted here that the listing of explicit species for all protection levels is not a 
methodology that can be sustained as can be seen from the history of the Act itself. Considering this 
past learning and a potential future flux in the list, a pragmatic approach would be the following. (a) 
List the wildlife (i.e mammals, birds, plants et al) that need to enjoy the highest level of protection in a 
single Schedule, namely Schedule-I. (b) Come up with a much smaller list for the domestic animals, 
birds and plants named Schedule-II; a list, that, due to its sheer number would be easier to maintain 
(c) Come up with a clause that explicitly states that the highest protection is for Schedule -I and the 
second level of protection would be for all wild life that is NOT in Schedule-II. A simple non-
enumerated version such as this will ensure many species can be protected that are currently at 
various stages of understanding and research. This would also reduce the need to update the 
Schedules of the Act very often and is as easy to understand and implement as at the ra tionalized 
versions presented in the amendment. 
552

 
In the light of the above concerns, I request that the proposed amendments to the Wild Life 
(Protection) Act, 1972 should be withdrawn, reconsidered and fortified with better provisions for the 
Wild Life it aims to protect. I hereby would request you to kindly register my opposition to the 
amendment proposed. 
 
Thanking you, 
yours sincerely, 
Sd/- 
 
553

Dear Sir, 
 
This letter is in response to the invitation for memoranda published by the 
"Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, 
Environment, Forests & Climate Change", on the 28th of January 2022 towards the 
"Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021". 
 
As a responsible citizen, I consider it my fundamental duty to protect the natural 
resources of our country including wildlife in all its forms, which are a part of our 
ecological fabric. I thank you for the opportunity to provide feedback on this most 
important Bill. After careful study, I wish to express my strong objections to some of the 
changes proposed in the amendment. 
 
Below I am recording my feedback to the amendments proposed: 
 
1. The amendment seeks to change the preamble of the WPA itself in two areas. While 
the consolidation of "wild animals, birds and plants'' into the phrase "wild life" is simple, 
desirable and straight-forward, the decision to introduce the words "conservation" and 
"management" will de-focus the act and will open up future pathways for dilution. As the 
title of the Act suggests, it is about the "protection" of wildlife and should remain that 
way. While the word "conservation" sounds innocuously similar to "protection" it is in 
practice not the same. "Conservation" involves preservation or protection of 
species outside their natural habitats which essentially is not the same thing as 
protecting wildlife in-situ. In other words, conservation is a compromised mitigation 
that is a necessary action that follows when existing species of wildlife cannot be 
protected. Hence the introduction of this word into the preamble of the Act is self-
defeating. The word "management" on the other hand is completely unnecessary for the 
purposes of the said Act, and will go on to include all forms of intrusive micro-
management that comes with it. The intent of the Act to make an uncompromising 
attempt to protect all forms of wildlife in its natural state, and in its natural relations with 
its surroundings, is being violated by this attempt to introduce these words into the 
preamble. 
 
2. In Section-2, the introduction of the phrase "invasive alien species'', in addition to 
the term "vermin", now redefined to mean animals in Section-62 (i.e the section dealing 
with "invasive alien species") only furthers the artificial-divides that exist in the 
understanding of ecology. The term "alien", which only currently seems to consider the 
border between India and other countries, has varied meanings under practical 
conditions when one looks at the diversity of regions within India as well as the forested 
borders it shares with other countries where the eco-regions merge. The introduction of 
the term "alien" would be applicable to laws (perhaps unfair) that would entail from such 
a term, for creatures who know no such borders and naturally exist within the confines 
of such eco-regions. The term "invasive" itself is a temporal term that has a binding to 
certain circumstances. Hence no species of wildlife can be inherently called so. The 
current amendment does not seek to list anything explicitly under these descriptions but 
the introduction of such a phrase can lead to opportunities being opened for 
schedules and lists (just as what happened in case of "vermin'') that in the long 
run would turn out to be unwarranted. 
 
3. While it is a welcome change to see the removal of Schedule-V (for the so-called 
554

"vermin"), the aforementioned phrase "invasive alien species" only seems to 
replace it. Further, the changes to Section-62 makes it evident that this might not play 
out in the larger interest of wildlife. The amendment states explicitly that "disposing" and 
"including through destruction" is applicable to such species and that too for all the 
species listed in Schedule-II. By doing so, the Act has opened up a huge list of creatures 
to being unfairly treated on a case-to-case basis. In the worst case this treatment would 
be arbitrary and at the discretion of officers, experts and scientists who may or may not 
uphold the holistic case of protecting India's wildlife when they deal with locally 
fathomable circumstances. This is notwithstanding the issue that even a bare minimum 
process for a notification has not been described. Thus, it simply entails a smaller list 
of 4 - stigmatized - species being replaced by a larger list of - potentially 
stigmatized - 1000 species, undoing what the amendment set out to do by removing 
Schedule-V. Additionally, there is no clarity about the process involved in destruction of 
the said species (under the exceptional circumstances); for e.g "invasive species'' could 
be shrubs that have now interspersed among valuable green cover and there exists as 
many damaging ways to their removal as there are safe. A lack of process can result in 
loss of wildlife that we intend to protect or a disruption in the food chain for the species 
we are trying to protect. 
 
4. Zoos themselves are archaic and colonial vestiges that only transformed from circus-
like entertainment that included the human species at some point in history to what they 
have become today. While the existence of zoos itself needs to be questioned in a 
modern India with its strong laws that champion the causes for all wildlife, it is appalling 
to see that the amendment, in Section-2 now seeks to introduce the word 
"conservation" into the zoo-lingua-franca thereby going the way of western 
countries that have chosen to co-opt conservation into Zoos while continuing its 
commercial viability. This would only enable the act of putting immense pressure on 
animals for the recreational value of the masses without any benefit for the wildlife itself. 
By adding a "conservation" angle, future funding of zoos would be made possible via 
misrepresentation. In the ideal case of an amendment, provisions for having zoos itself 
need to be removed, the wild animals organically re-introduced to their natural 
environments and zoos closed eventually through a natural die-down. Specifically to this 
act, no further loopholes and provisions should be provided to Zoos so that they 
can continue the act of legalized emotional abuse that is endured by the wild 
creatures. 
 
5. The introduction of "film making" in Section 28 is shocking. While the 
amendment seems to suggest that a qualifying statement with what seems like a vague-
condition would sharpen this clause, it does not go all the way and indicate what 
"adverse impacts" could be expected thereby making the clause toothless. Moreover, 
"changes to habitat" and its "adverse impact" are all side effects of all the existing  
possibilities in the present Act itself; for e.g tourism which is in the same list and could 
do with the same qualifier. "Film making" at any scale involves a humongous amount of 
foot-fall in terms of supporting staff, vehicles, props, lighting and ultimately sound. None 
of these can be open to interpretation and discretion at officer levels when it comes to a 
permit. The permits in future might be regarded as a form of revenue and we will fail to 
protect the wildlife that need their space, comfort and quiet in their natural habitats. 
Further, such an introduction only gives a chance to human-animal conflict in the 
future. With the advent of technology such as computer generated graphics and 
other virtual possibilities there is no justification for allowing for an extremely 
555

intrusive, damage inducing and purely commercial venture such as film-making 
to occur in forests of all kinds. The history of film making itself is its own testament 
that it is a process that usually transformative to its environment and thus the only 
rational thing to do is to not introduce "film making" into the set of items for which 
permits can be obtained. Also important to note here is the fact that in 1978, film 
making in the wild was specifically banned to avoid accidents. 
 
6. Sections 40 and 43 of the amendment imply that "live elephants'' can now be 
traded. This is a shocking change that begs the question as to whose interest are we 
protecting with the act and its amendments? While an underground market continues to 
exist and enables wild elephants to be captured and traded between poachers, 
middlemen, individuals and the temples in India, making an explicit provision for actually 
trading live elephants will undo all the good work that has happened towards regulation 
of handling wildlife such as the elephants. Elephants are an endangered species overall 
and the Indian Elephant, technically the Asian Elephant (Elephas Maximus) is a part of 
the Appendix-I of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of 
Wild Fauna and Flora) which ironically this very amendment seems to adhere to. The 
very fact that the amendment claims to implement CITES but opens up an 
unnecessary floodgate via the permission to trade live elephants should be 
seen as contradictory and cancelling; so contradictory, in fact, that this pushes 
Elephant conservation back by years. 
 
7. The amendments to Section 29 includes the provisions for "bona fide use of drinking 
water and household water by local communities” which upholds the principles of the 
Forest Rights Act, and is a commendable change. At the same time an unqualified 
provision like this can lead to unfair usage of the common resources that more often 
than not physically exist in boundaries between human and wild habitats. The 
existence of a liberal clause can lead to projects that will develop under the 
guise of drinking and household water but eventually transform into extraction for 
other purposes as well as over-extraction. Untimely extraction of water can also occur as 
water resources and their quantity is seasonal with animals venturing closer to such 
sources that are in the peripheries especially during times of scarcity. Thus, unclear 
wording in the act can lead to human animal conflict. What is suggested here is a 
comprehensive and updated section that lists out the exact share that the human 
species has in these resources and clarity on what are the conditions for non-extraction. 
 
8. In Section 5A (1) (d), the removal of "Member, Planning Commission'' is a welcome 
change but the substitution with "Member, NITI Aayog" undoes the whole 
purpose of the Act. Having a member from any kind of department, executive-body or 
office whose primary concerns are directly in conflict with the Board for Wildlife will only 
result in the furthering of developmental interests instead of the interests of the 
protection of Wildlife and their habitats. Hence, it is recommended that instead of the 
proposed change, clause (d) be completely removed along with the clauses (h), 
(i), (j) and (n) that represent Army, Defence, I&B and Tourism respectively. 
 
9. The rationalization of the Schedules is a welcome change when in comparison 
to what existed in the present Act. It will certainly help for an easy understanding of the 
two levels of protection assured for the wildlife. However, there are many concerns when 
it comes to these new schedules. The rationale for why certain animals are in 
Schedule-I and the others made it only to Schedule-II is unclear. There are 
556

several species from the original act missing in this amendment. Also missing are 
species that were absent during the lifetime of the present Act, but which have been 
documented in India by well reputed organizations hence. Apart from that, within the 
newly provided schedules there exist cases of incorrect spellings and/or incorrect 
scientific names. All these errors can lead to situations where wildlife would go 
unprotected since sometimes - in cases such as spelling errors - criminals can get away 
due to the incorrectly spelt species names. 
 
10. The "FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM" has made explicit that the funds for salaries 
and operations for all the newly described officers and their departments which are part 
of the adherence to CITES, comes from the budget allocated for "Integrated 
Development of Wildlife Habitats''. The 2022 Budget has also allocated a slightly 
higher amount to the aforementioned scheme. However, in effect, the increase in budget 
for this scheme and the proposal of an amendment of this scale and budgetary 
requirements cancel each other out. It is well known that one of the biggest hurdles for 
protection even under the current Act is the amount of finances we “can-be” and “have-
been” spending on the foot-soldiers (guards, wardens etc); this includes the 
integrated scheme of activities involving local communities. Instead of making a palpable 
change in the wages and conditions of these foot-soldiers and thereby strengthening the 
ground-base for protection, the amendment's investment in a new hierarchy tree 
is rather untimely. 
 
11. It has to be noted here that the listing of explicit species for all protection levels 
is not a methodology that can be sustained as can be seen from the history of the 
Act itself. Considering this past learning and a potential future flux in the list, a 
pragmatic approach would be the following. (a) List the wildlife (i.e mammals, birds, 
plants et al) that need to enjoy the highest level of protection in a single Schedule, 
namely Schedule-I. (b) Come up with a much smaller list for the domestic animals, birds 
and plants named Schedule-II; a list, that, due to its sheer number would be easier to 
maintain (c) Come up with a clause that explicitly states that the highest protection is for 
Schedule-I and the second level of protection would be for all wild life that is NOT in 
Schedule-II. A simple non-enumerated version such as this will ensure many 
species can be protected that are currently at various stages of understanding and 
research. This would also reduce the need to update the Schedules of the Act very often 
and is as easy to understand and implement as at the rationalized versions presented in 
the amendment. 
 
In the light of the above concerns, I request that the proposed amendments to the Wild 
Life (Protection) Act, 1972 should be withdrawn, reconsidered and fortified with 
better provisions for the Wild Life it aims to protect. I hereby would like to register my 
opposition to the amendment proposed. 
 
Yours Sincerely, 
Sumanas Koulagi 
557

Dear Sir, 
 
This letter is in response to the invitation for memoranda published by the "Department -Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment, Forests & Climate  
Change", on the 28th of January 2022 towards the "Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021". 
 
As a responsible citizen, I consider it my fundamental duty to protect the natural resources of our 
country including the wildlife in all its forms, which are a part of our ecological fabric. I thank you for 
the opportunity to provide feedback on this most important Bill. After careful study, I wish to express 
my strong objections to some of the changes proposed in the amendment. 
 
Below I am recording my feedback to the amendments proposed: 
 
1. The amendment seeks to change the preamble of the WPA itself in two areas. While the 
consolidation of "wild animals, birds and plants'' into the phrase "wild life" is simple, desirable and 
straight-forward, the decision to introduce the words "conservation" and "management" will de -focus 
the act and will open up future pathways for dilution. As the title of the Act suggests, it is about the 
"protection" of wildlife and should remain that way. While the word "conservation" sounds 
innocuously similar to "protection" it is in practice not the same. "Conservation" involves preservation 
or protection of species outside their natural habitats which essentially is not the same thing as 
protecting wildlife in-situ. In other words, conservation is a compromised mitigation that is a 
necessary action that follows when existing species of wildlife cannot be protected. Hence the 
introduction of this word into the preamble of the Act is self-defeating. The word "management" on 
the other hand is completely unnecessary for the purposes of the said Act, and will go on to include 
all forms of intrusive micro-management that comes with it. The intent of the Act to make an 
uncompromising attempt to protect all forms of wildlife in its natural state, and in its natural relations 
with its surroundings, is being violated by this attempt to introduce these words into the preamble.  
 
2. In Section-2, the introduction of the phrase "invasive alien species'', in addition t o the term 
"vermin", now redefined to mean animals in Section-62 (i.e the section dealing with "invasive alien 
species") only furthers the artificial-divides that exist in the understanding of ecology. The term "alien", 
which only currently seems to consider the border between India and other countries, has varied 
meanings under practical conditions when one looks at the diversity of regions within India as well as 
the forested borders it shares with other countries where the eco-regions merge. The introduction of 
the term "alien" would be applicable to laws (perhaps unfair) that would entail from such a term, for 
creatures who know no such borders and naturally exist within the confines of such eco -regions. The 
term "invasive" itself is a temporal term that has a binding to certain circumstances. Hence no species 
of wildlife can be inherently called so. The current amendment does not seek to list anything explicitly 
under these descriptions but the introduction of such a phrase can lead to opportunities bein g 
opened for schedules and lists (just as what happened in case of "vermin'') that in the long run would 
turn out to be unwarranted. 
 
3. While it is a welcome change to see the removal of Schedule-V (for the so-called "vermin"), the 
aforementioned phrase "invasive alien species" only seems to replace it. Further, the changes to 
Section-62 makes it evident that this might not play out in the larger interest of wildlife. The 
amendment states explicitly that "disposing" and "including through destruction" is applicable to such 
species and that too for all the species listed in Schedule-II. By doing so, the Act has opened up a 
huge list of creatures to being unfairly treated on a case-to-case basis. In the worst case this treatment 
would be arbitrary and at the discretion of officers, experts and scientists who may or may not uphold 
the holistic case of protecting India's wildlife when they deal with locally fathomable circumstances. 
This is notwithstanding the issue that even a bare minimum process for a notifi cation has not been 
described. Thus, it simply entails a smaller list of 4 - stigmatized - species being replaced by a larger 
558

list of - potentially stigmatized - 1000 species, undoing what the amendment set out to do by 
removing Schedule-V. Additionally, there is no clarity about the process involved in destruction of the 
said species (under the exceptional circumstances); for e.g "invasive species'' could be shrubs that 
have now interspersed among valuable green cover and there exists as many damaging ways  to their 
removal as there are safe. A lack of process can result in loss of wildlife that we intend to protect or a 
disruption in the food chain for the species we are trying to protect. 
 
4. Zoos themselves are archaic and colonial vestiges that only transformed from circus-like 
entertainment that included the human species at some point in history to what they have 
become today. While the existence of zoos itself needs to be questioned in a modern India with its 
strong laws that champion the causes for all wildlife, it is appalling to see that the amendment, in 
Section-2 now seeks to introduce the word "conservation" into the zoo -lingua-franca thereby going 
the way of western countries that have chosen to co-opt conservation into Zoos while continuing its 
commercial viability. This would only enable the act of putting immense pressure on animals for the 
recreational value of the masses without any benefit for the wildlife itself. By adding a "conservation" 
angle, future funding of zoos would be made possible via misrepresentation. In the ideal case of an 
amendment, provisions for having zoos itself need to be removed, the wild animals organically re -
introduced to their natural environments and zoos closed eventually through a natural die -down. 
Specifically to this act, no further loopholes and provisions should be provided to Zoos so that they 
can continue the act of legalized emotional abuse that is endured by the wild creatures.  
 
5. The introduction of "film making" in Section 28 is shocking. While the amendment seems to 
suggest that a qualifying statement with what seems like a vague-condition would sharpen this clause, 
it does not go all the way and indicate what "adverse impacts" could be expected thereby making the 
clause toothless. Moreover, "changes to habitat" and its "adverse impact" are all side effects of all the 
existing possibilities in the present Act itself; for e.g tourism which is in the same list and could do with 
the same qualifier. "Film making" at any scale involves a humongous amount of  foot-fall in terms of 
supporting staff, vehicles, props, lighting and ultimately sound. None of these can be open to 
interpretation and discretion at officer levels when it comes to a permit. The permits in future might 
be regarded as a form of revenue and we will fail to protect the wildlife that need their space, comfort 
and quiet in their natural habitats. Further, such an introduction only gives a chance to human -animal 
conflict in the future. With the advent of technology such as computer generated gr aphics and other 
virtual possibilities there is no justification for allowing for an extremely intrusive, damage inducing 
and purely commercial venture such as film-making to occur in forests of all kinds. The history of film 
making itself is its own testament that it is a process that usually transformative to its environment 
and thus the only rational thing to do is to not introduce "film making" into the set of items for which 
permits can be obtained. Also important to note here is the fact that in 1978,  film making in the wild 
was specifically banned to avoid accidents. 
 
6. Sections 40 and 43 of the amendment imply that "live elephants'' can now be traded. This is a 
shocking change that begs the question as to whose interest are we protecting with the a ct and its 
amendments? While an underground market continues to exist and enables wild elephants to be 
captured and traded between poachers, middlemen, individuals and the temples in India, making an 
explicit provision for actually trading live elephants will undo all the good work that has happened 
towards regulation of handling wildlife such as the elephants. Elephants are an endangered species 
overall and the Indian Elephant, technically the Asian Elephant (Elephas Maximus) is a part of the 
Appendix-I of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora) which ironically this very amendment seems to adhere to. The very fact that the amendment 
claims to implement CITES but opens up an unnecessary floodgate via the permi ssion to trade live 
elephants should be seen as contradictory and cancelling; so contradictory, in fact, that this pushes 
Elephant conservation back by years. 
 
559

7. The amendments to Section 29 includes the provisions for "bona fide use of drinking water an d 
household water by local communities” which upholds the principles of the Forest Rights Act, and is a 
commendable change. At the same time an unqualified provision like this can lead to unfair usage of 
the common resources that more often than not physically exist in boundaries between human and 
wild habitats. The existence of a liberal clause can lead to projects that will develop under the guise of 
drinking and household water but eventually transform into extraction for other purposes as well as 
over-extraction. Untimely extraction of water can also occur as water resources and their quantity is 
seasonal with animals venturing closer to such sources that are in the peripheries especially during 
times of scarcity. Thus, unclear wording in the act can lead to human animal conflict. What is 
suggested here is a comprehensive and updated section that lists out the exact share that the human 
species has in these resources and clarity on what are the conditions for non-extraction. 
 
8. In Section 5A (1) (d), the removal of "Member, Planning Commission'' is a welcome change but the 
substitution with "Member, NITI Aayog" undoes the whole purpose of the Act. Having a member from 
any kind of department, executive-body or office whose primary concerns are directly in conflict with 
the Board for Wildlife will only result in the furthering of developmental interests instead of the 
interests of the protection of Wildlife and their habitats. Hence, it is recommended that instead of the 
proposed change, clause (d) be completely removed along with the clauses (h), (i), (j) and (n) that 
represent Army, Defence, I&B and Tourism respectively. 
 
9. The rationalization of the Schedules is a welcome change when in comparison to what existed in the 
present Act. It will certainly help for an easy understanding of the two levels of protection assured for 
the wildlife. However, there are many concerns when it comes to these new schedules. The rationale 
for why certain animals are in Schedule-I and the others made it only to Schedule-II is unclear. There 
are several species from the original act missing in this amendment. Also missing are species that were 
absent during the lifetime of the present Act, but which have been documented in India by well 
reputed organizations hence. Apart from that, within the newly provided schedules there exist cases of 
incorrect spellings and/or incorrect scientific names. All these errors can lead to situations where 
wildlife would go unprotected since sometimes - in cases such as spelling errors - criminals can get 
away due to the incorrectly spelt species names. 
 
10. The "FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM" has made explicit that the funds for salaries and operations for 
all the newly described officers and their departments which are part of the adherence to CITES, 
comes from the budget allocated for "Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats''. The 2022 Budget 
has also allocated a slightly higher amount to the aforementioned scheme. However, in effect, the 
increase in budget for this scheme and the proposal of an amendment of this scale and budgetary 
requirements cancel each other out. It is well known that one of the biggest hurdles for protection 
even under the current Act is the amount of finances we “can-be” and “have-been” spending on the 
foot-soldiers (guards, wardens etc); this includes the integrated scheme of activities involving local 
communities. Instead of making a palpable change in the wages and conditions of these foot -soldiers 
and thereby strengthening the ground-base for protection, the amendment's investment in a new 
hierarchy tree is rather untimely. 
 
11. It has to be noted here that the listing of explicit species for all protection levels is not a 
methodology that can be sustained as can be seen from the history of the Act itself. Considering thi s 
past learning and a potential future flux in the list, a pragmatic approach would be the following. (a) 
List the wildlife (i.e mammals, birds, plants et al) that need to enjoy the highest level of protection in a 
single Schedule, namely Schedule-I. (b) Come up with a much smaller list for the domestic animals, 
birds and plants named Schedule-II; a list, that, due to its sheer number would be easier to maintain 
(c) Come up with a clause that explicitly states that the highest protection is for Schedule -I and the 
second level of protection would be for all wild life that is NOT in Schedule-II. A simple non-
enumerated version such as this will ensure many species can be protected that are currently at 
560

various stages of understanding and research. This would also reduce the need to update the 
Schedules of the Act very often and is as easy to understand and implement as at the rationalized 
versions presented in the amendment. 
 
In the light of the above concerns, I request that the proposed amendments to the Wil d Life 
(Protection) Act, 1972 should be withdrawn, reconsidered and fortified with better provisions for the 
Wild Life it aims to protect. I hereby would request you to kindly register my opposition to the 
amendment proposed. 
 
Thanking you, 
yours sincerely, 
Sd/- 
 
561

Dear Sir, 
 
This letter is in response to the invitation for memoranda published by the 
"Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & 
Technology, Environment, Forests & Climate Change", on the 28th of 
January 2022 towards the "Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2021". 
 
As a responsible citizen, I consider it my fundamental duty to protect the natural 
resources of our country including wildlife in all its forms, which are a part of our 
ecological fabric. I thank you for the opportunity to provide feedback on this 
most important Bill. After careful study, I wish to express my strong objections 
to some of the changes proposed in the amendment. 
 
Below I am recording my feedback to the amendments proposed: 
 
1. The amendment seeks to change the preamble of the WPA itself in two 
areas. While the consolidation of "wild animals, birds and plants'' into the phrase 
"wild life" is simple, desirable and straight-forward, the decision to introduce the 
words "conservation" and "management" will de-focus the act and will open up 
future pathways for dilution. As the title of the Act suggests, it is about the 
"protection" of wildlife and should remain that way. While the word 
"conservation" sounds innocuously similar to "protection" it is in practice not the 
same. "Conservation" involves preservation or protection of species 
outside their natural habitats which essentially is not the same thing as 
protecting wildlife in-situ. In other words, conservation is a compromised 
mitigation that is a necessary action that follows when existing species of wildlife 
cannot be protected. Hence the introduction of this word into the preamble of 
the Act is self-defeating. The word "management" on the other hand is 
completely unnecessary for the purposes of the said Act, and will go on to 
include all forms of intrusive micro-management that comes with it. The intent 
of the Act to make an uncompromising attempt to protect all forms of wildlife in 
its natural state, and in its natural relations with its surroundings, is being 
violated by this attempt to introduce these words into the preamble. 
 
2. In Section-2, the introduction of the phrase "invasive alien species'', in 
addition to the term "vermin", now redefined to mean animals in Section-62 (i.e 
the section dealing with "invasive alien species") only furthers the artificial-
divides that exist in the understanding of ecology. The term "alien", which only 
currently seems to consider the border between India and other countries, has 
varied meanings under practical conditions when one looks at the diversity of 
regions within India as well as the forested borders it shares with other countries 
where the eco-regions merge. The introduction of the term "alien" would be 
applicable to laws (perhaps unfair) that would entail from such a term, for 
creatures who know no such borders and naturally exist within the confines of 
such eco-regions. The term "invasive" itself is a temporal term that has a 
562

binding to certain circumstances. Hence no species of wildlife can be inherently 
called so. The current amendment does not seek to list anything explicitly under 
these descriptions but the introduction of such a phrase can lead to 
opportunities being opened for schedules and lists (just as what 
happened in case of "vermin'') that in the long run would turn out to be 
unwarranted. 
 
3. While it is a welcome change to see the removal of Schedule-V (for the so-
called "vermin"), the aforementioned phrase "invasive alien species" only 
seems to replace it. Further, the changes to Section-62 makes it evident that 
this might not play out in the larger interest of wildlife. The amendment states 
explicitly that "disposing" and "including through destruction" is applicable to 
such species and that too for all the species listed in Schedule-II. By doing so, 
the Act has opened up a huge list of creatures to being unfairly treated on a 
case-to-case basis. In the worst case this treatment would be arbitrary and at 
the discretion of officers, experts and scientists who may or may not uphold the 
holistic case of protecting India's wildlife when they deal with locally fathomable 
circumstances. This is notwithstanding the issue that even a bare minimum 
process for a notification has not been described. Thus, it simply entails a 
smaller list of 4 - stigmatized - species being replaced by a larger list of 
- potentially stigmatized - 1000 species, undoing what the amendment set 
out to do by removing Schedule-V. Additionally, there is no clarity about the 
process involved in destruction of the said species (under the exceptional 
circumstances); for e.g "invasive species'' could be shrubs that have now 
interspersed among valuable green cover and there exists as many damaging 
ways to their removal as there are safe. A lack of process can result in loss of 
wildlife that we intend to protect or a disruption in the food chain for the species 
we are trying to protect. 
 
4. Zoos themselves are archaic and colonial vestiges that only transformed from 
circus-like entertainment that included the human species at some point in 
history to what they have become today. While the existence of zoos itself needs 
to be questioned in a modern India with its strong laws that champion the 
causes for all wildlife, it is appalling to see that the amendment, in Section-2 
now seeks to introduce the word "conservation" into the zoo-lingua-
franca thereby going the way of western countries that have chosen to co-
opt conservation into Zoos while continuing its commercial viability. This would 
only enable the act of putting immense pressure on animals for the recreational 
value of the masses without any benefit for the wildlife itself. By adding a 
"conservation" angle, future funding of zoos would be made possible via 
misrepresentation. In the ideal case of an amendment, provisions for having 
zoos itself need to be removed, the wild animals organically re-introduced to 
their natural environments and zoos closed eventually through a natural die-
down. Specifically to this act, no further loopholes and provisions should be 
provided to Zoos so that they can continue the act of legalized emotional 
563

abuse that is endured by the wild creatures. 
 
5. The introduction of "film making" in Section 28 is shocking. While the 
amendment seems to suggest that a qualifying statement with what seems like 
a vague-condition would sharpen this clause, it does not go all the way and 
indicate what "adverse impacts" could be expected thereby making the clause 
toothless. Moreover, "changes to habitat" and its "adverse impact" are all side 
effects of all the existing possibilities in the present Act itself; for e.g tourism 
which is in the same list and could do with the same qualifier. "Film making" at 
any scale involves a humongous amount of foot-fall in terms of supporting staff, 
vehicles, props, lighting and ultimately sound. None of these can be open to 
interpretation and discretion at officer levels when it comes to a permit. The 
permits in future might be regarded as a form of revenue and we will fail to 
protect the wildlife that need their space, comfort and quiet in their natural 
habitats. Further, such an introduction only gives a chance to human-animal 
conflict in the future. With the advent of technology such as computer 
generated graphics and other virtual possibilities there is no 
justification for allowing for an extremely intrusive, damage inducing 
and purely commercial venture such as film-making to occur in 
forests of all kinds. The history of film making itself is its own testament that it 
is a process that usually transformative to its environment and thus the only 
rational thing to do is to not introduce "film making" into the set of items for 
which permits can be obtained. Also important to note here is the fact that in 
1978, film making in the wild was specifically banned to avoid accidents. 
 
6. Sections 40 and 43 of the amendment imply that "live elephants'' can 
now be traded. This is a shocking change that begs the question as to whose 
interest are we protecting with the act and its amendments? While an 
underground market continues to exist and enables wild elephants to be 
captured and traded between poachers, middlemen, individuals and the temples 
in India, making an explicit provision for actually trading live elephants will undo 
all the good work that has happened towards regulation of handling wildlife such 
as the elephants. Elephants are an endangered species overall and the Indian 
Elephant, technically the Asian Elephant (Elephas Maximus) is a part of the 
Appendix-I of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species 
of Wild Fauna and Flora) which ironically this very amendment seems to adhere 
to. The very fact that the amendment claims to implement CITES but 
opens up an unnecessary floodgate via the permission to trade live 
elephants should be seen as contradictory and cancelling; so 
contradictory, in fact, that this pushes Elephant conservation back by years. 
 
7. The amendments to Section 29 includes the provisions for "bona fide use of 
drinking water and household water by local communities” which upholds the 
principles of the Forest Rights Act, and is a commendable change. At the same 
time an unqualified provision like this can lead to unfair usage of the common 
564

resources that more often than not physically exist in boundaries between 
human and wild habitats. The existence of a liberal clause can lead to 
projects that will develop under the guise of drinking and household 
water but eventually transform into extraction for other purposes as well as 
over-extraction. Untimely extraction of water can also occur as water resources 
and their quantity is seasonal with animals venturing closer to such sources that 
are in the peripheries especially during times of scarcity. Thus, unclear 
wording in the act can lead to human animal conflict. What is suggested 
here is a comprehensive and updated section that lists out the exact share that 
the human species has in these resources and clarity on what are the conditions 
for non-extraction. 
 
8. In Section 5A (1) (d), the removal of "Member, Planning Commission'' is a 
welcome change but the substitution with "Member, NITI Aayog" undoes 
the whole purpose of the Act. Having a member from any kind of 
department, executive-body or office whose primary concerns are directly in 
conflict with the Board for Wildlife will only result in the furthering of 
developmental interests instead of the interests of the protection of Wildlife and 
their habitats. Hence, it is recommended that instead of the proposed 
change, clause (d) be completely removed along with the clauses (h), 
(i), (j) and (n) that represent Army, Defence, I&B and Tourism respectively. 
 
9. The rationalization of the Schedules is a welcome change when in 
comparison to what existed in the present Act. It will certainly help for an easy 
understanding of the two levels of protection assured for the wildlife. However, 
there are many concerns when it comes to these new schedules. The rationale 
for why certain animals are in Schedule-I and the others made it only to 
Schedule-II is unclear. There are several species from the original act missing 
in this amendment. Also missing are species that were absent during the lifetime 
of the present Act, but which have been documented in India by well reputed 
organizations hence. Apart from that, within the newly provided schedules there 
exist cases of incorrect spellings and/or incorrect scientific names. All these 
errors can lead to situations where wildlife would go unprotected since 
sometimes - in cases such as spelling errors - criminals can get away due to the 
incorrectly spelt species names. 
 
10. The "FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM" has made explicit that the funds for 
salaries and operations for all the newly described officers and their departments 
which are part of the adherence to CITES, comes from the budget allocated 
for "Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats''. The 2022 Budget has 
also allocated a slightly higher amount to the aforementioned scheme. However, 
in effect, the increase in budget for this scheme and the proposal of an 
amendment of this scale and budgetary requirements cancel each other out. It is 
well known that one of the biggest hurdles for protection even under the current 
Act is the amount of finances we “can-be” and “have-been” spending on the 
565

foot-soldiers (guards, wardens etc); this includes the integrated scheme of 
activities involving local communities. Instead of making a palpable change in 
the wages and conditions of these foot-soldiers and thereby strengthening the 
ground-base for protection, the amendment's investment in a new 
hierarchy tree is rather untimely. 
 
11. It has to be noted here that the listing of explicit species for all protection 
levels is not a methodology that can be sustained as can be seen from the 
history of the Act itself. Considering this past learning and a potential future flux 
in the list, a pragmatic approach would be the following. (a) List the wildlife (i.e 
mammals, birds, plants et al) that need to enjoy the highest level of protection 
in a single Schedule, namely Schedule-I. (b) Come up with a much smaller list 
for the domestic animals, birds and plants named Schedule-II; a list, that, due 
to its sheer number would be easier to maintain (c) Come up with a clause that 
explicitly states that the highest protection is for Schedule-I and the second level 
of protection would be for all wild life that is NOT in Schedule-II. A simple non-
enumerated version such as this will ensure many species can be 
protected that are currently at various stages of understanding and research. 
This would also reduce the need to update the Schedules of the Act very often 
and is as easy to understand and implement as at the rationalized versions 
presented in the amendment. 
 
In the light of the above concerns, I request that the proposed amendments to 
the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 should be withdrawn, reconsidered and 
fortified with better provisions for the Wild Life it aims to protect. I hereby 
would like to register my opposition to the amendment proposed. 
 
Yours Sincerely, 
T. Vijayendra 
566