 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2023/ Magha, 1944 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained 
in the Three Hundred Sixty Third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary    
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment,  Forests and Climate 
Change on the Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2023) 
REPORT NO. 
371 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained     
in the Three Sixty Third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change on 
the Demands For Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2023/ Magha, 1944 (Saka) 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
   
     
  PAGES 
   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………… (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………… (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS ……………………………………………………………… (iii) 
  4. REPORT …………………………………………………………………... 1-15 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been  
                       accepted by the Government………………………………... 
 
2-12 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee     
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
replies……………………………………………………….. 
 
13 
 Chapter III.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted  by the     
Committee…………………………………………………… 
 
14 
 Chapter IV.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
                       Replies of the Government are still awaited………………… 
 
15 
5. MINUTES …………………………………………………………………. 16-17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
                              
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2022-23) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022)  
 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh -    Chairman 
 
         RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Shri Niranjan Bishi  
4. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
6. Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
7. Shri Jose K. Mani 
8. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
9. Shri Nabam Rebia   
10. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  
         LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
12. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
13. Shri Jashwantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
14. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
15. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16. Shri Sunny Deol 
17. Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
18. Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
19. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
20. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
21. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
22. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
23. Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
24. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
25. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha  
26. Shri Anurag Sharma 
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
28. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
29. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava  
30. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
31. *Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
      Dr. Vandana Kumar, Additional Secretary 
      Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
      Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
       Shri Thangzasiam Paite, Committee Officer 
      Shri Rama Nand, Committee Officer   
 
 
  _____________________________________________________________ 
* Shri S. Jagathrakshakan ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 8th December, 2022 
 
 
 
 (i) 

 
             INTRODUCTION  
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Three 
Hundred Seventy First Report on Action Taken by the Government on th e  
recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Sixty Third Report  of the 
Committee on  Demands for Grants (202 2-2023) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change, which was presented/laid in both the Houses of Parliament on           
15th March, 2022.  
2.   There were 16 recommendations/observations in the Three Hundred Sixty Third 
Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of 
the Committee were received from the Ministry on 13th June, 2022.   
3.   In the meeting held on 13th January, 2023, the Committee considered the draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 (JAIRAM RAMESH) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
13th January, 2023 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Pausha 23, 1944 (Saka)                                         Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

ACRONYMS 
 
APOs Annual Plan of Operation 
ATN  Action Taken Note 
ATR Action Taken Report 
BE Budget Estimates 
CA Compensatory Afforestation 
CAF Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
CAMPA Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority 
CPCB Central Pollution Control Board 
DWH Development of Wildlife Habitat 
ETF Eco Task Force 
FDAs Forest  Development  Agency 
GIM Green India Mission 
IFD Integrated Finance Division 
JFMCs Joint Forest Management Committees 
MoEF&CC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
NAP National Afforestation Programme 
NCAP National Clean Air Programme 
PCC Pollution Control Committee 
R&D Research and Development 
RE Revised Estimates 
SFDAs State Forest Development Agency 
SPCB State Pollution Control Board 
UT’S Union Territory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1  
REPORT 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations of the contained in its 
‘Three Hundred Sixty Third Report ’ on ‘Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change ’. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and la id on 
the Table of Lok Sabha on the 15th March, 2022.  
2. Action Taken Notes (ATN s) have been received from the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change in respect of all the sixteen recommendations/observations contained 
in the ‘Three Hundred Sixty Third Report’. The replies of the Ministry of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change have been categorized as follows:-  
Chapter I:  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
  Para Nos. 4.3, 4.6, 5.2, 6.5, 7.4, 7.6, 8.2, 9.5, 10.2, 11.2, 11.3, 12.3,    
13.2 and 13.3 
 Total recommendations – 14. Accepted. 
 The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its 
fourteen recommendations/observations as mentioned in Chapter -I of the 
Report.  
Chapter II:   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
Para Nos. 7.8  
Total recommendation – 01. Not to be pursued further. 
The Committee is convinced with the explanation furnished by the 
Ministry and, therefore, does not want to pursue the recommendation  
further. 
Chapter III:   Recommendations/Observations in respect of w hich replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: ‘NIL’ 
Chapter IV: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Para Nos. 6.3  
Total recommendation – 01. To be pursued further 
 The Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed 
Action Taken Notes i n respect of the recommendation/observation  made in 
Chapter IV of the Report. 
2. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters.  
 
 
 

2  
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2021-22 AND ALLOCATION 
FOR 2022-23 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.1 The Committee notes the adverse effect of COVID -19 pandemic on the budgetary 
allocation of the Ministry due to which the  BE allocation of the Ministry for 2021 -22 was 
substantially reduced by Rs. 349.93 crore, a decrease of  12.9% at RE stage, thus resulting in 
non-release of funds for all proposed activities mentioned in the Annual Plan of Operations 
(APOs) of various schemes.  The Ministry has been able to spend 71% of the RE allocation up to 
31st January, 2022.  The Committee is satisfied with the utilisation of funds and recommends the 
Ministry to ensure its full utilisation by the end of the financial year.  
                                                                                                             (Para 4.3 of the363rd Report)   
Action Taken 
1.2 As on 31.03.2022, the Actual Expen diture (A.E) was Rs. 2444.62 crore  against R.E of 
Rs. 2520.00 crore  which is 97.01% with respect to R.E. Major non -utilization of funds i.e.       
Rs. 75.38 crore  is mainly due to non -utilization of funds (Rs. 70.00 crore ) under the National 
Coastal Mission (NCM) Scheme as the proposed activities of the Scheme could not b e 
undertaken due to delay in approval of the ENCORE Project. 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.3 The Committee notes that the reduction in funds of the Ministry at RE 2021 -22 was 
mainly due to the situation caused by the COVID -19 pandemic.  However, the BE 20 22-23 of 
the Ministry is still less than the BE 2020-21 (Rs.3100 crore). The Committee is of the view that 
the programmes for which the Ministry has sought additional funding are of utmost importance 
in the present day context, and must be given the topmos t priority. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry must be provided the requisite allocation for timely and efficient 
implementation of the programmes. At the same time, the Ministry should also review the 
capital requirement of the programmes/schemes and explore internal budgetary reallocations to 
ensure availability of funds for the projects. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry 
should make proactive efforts to ensure that the physical targets of the Ministry in respect of its 
various schemes/programmes are on schedule and the allocation made at BE is utilised 
optimally so that it is on a firm ground to seek additional funds at the Supplementary/ RE stage 
to achieve its physical and financial objectives during the financial year.          (Para 4.6 ibid)           
Action Taken 
1.4 The suggestions of the Committee have been noted for due compliance.  Apart from 
ensuring sufficient allocation towards various schemes of the Ministry, achievement of physical 
targets is ensured through various monitoring and evaluation mechanisms.   Key Performance 
Indicators are also being devised to achieve physical and financial objectives. 
 
 
 

3  
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION AND ACTUAL UTILISATION DURING THE LAST 
THREE YEARS 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.5 The Committee notes the pattern of utilisation of allocated amount by the Ministry during 
the last three financial years and finds the same satisfactory.  The Committee acknowledges the 
fact that there was drastic reduction of 35% at RE Stage for the year 2020 -21 due to the adverse 
effect of COVID-19 pandemic which resulted in non -release of funds for its proposed activities,  
even then the Ministry was able to utilise the allocation to the maximum during that year.  The 
Committee also notes that the Ministry has been able to utilise 71% of the RE 2021-22 allocation 
up to 31 st January 2022. The Committee recommends that the Minis try should take necessary 
measures to ensure proper utilisation of these funds by end of the financial year so that the 
targeted outcomes linked to the initiatives of the Ministry are not adversely impacted.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised about th e comprehensive details of the utilisation made 
during the last two months of Financial Year 2021-22.                                            (Para 5.2 ibid)                                                                                             
Action Taken 
1.6 Comprehensive details of the utilisation made during the last two months of Financial 
Year 2021-22 are as follows: 
 
Rs. in Crore 
Expenditure 
(Month and Year) 
B.E R.E A.E Shortfall 
w.r.t R.E 
A.E. as 
%age of 
R.E. 
 As on 31.01.2022 
2869.93 2520.00 1794.34 725.66 71.20 
Expenditure in February and March, 
2022  2869.93 2520.00 650.28 -- 25.81 
As on 31.03.2022 2869.93 2520.00 2444.62 75.38 97.01 
  
1.8 Major non-utilization of funds i.e. Rs. 75.38 crore is mainly due to non-utilization of funds 
(Rs. 70.00 crore) under the National Coastal Mission (NCM) Scheme as the proposed activities of 
the Scheme could not be undertaken due to delay in approval of the ENCORE Project.  
Recommendations/Observations 
1.9 The Committee notes with concern the poor utilisation of funds under the ‘National 
Coastal Mission’ (NCM). The Committee while acknowledging the impact of COVID -19 
pandemic which led to delay in activities envisaged under the programme during the financial  
year 2021-22, however urges upon the Ministry to streamline the activities/ projects which are to 
be undertaken in the current Financial Year 2022 -23 and also to impress upon the coastal States, 
which are involved in the Mission about the urgency of imple mentation of the Mission. In this 
regard, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should monitor the status of Project 
Monitoring Units set  up by the State Governments/UTs on regular basis and defaulters may be 
dealt with firmly.                                                                                                        (Para 6.5 ibid) 
    
                                                                                                                      

4  
Action Taken 
1.10 Ministry of Environment, Forest &  Climate Change will closely monitor the 
projects/activities with State /Union Territories Governments and other executing agencies on 
regular basis.        
NATIONAL CLEAN AIR PROGRAMME 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.11 The Committee no tes that the Ministry has not categorically mentioned the actual 
utilisation made under the sub - component National Clean Air Programme (NCAP) during the 
year 2021 -22.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should invariably furnish the 
information to the Committee to facilitate a more detailed analysis of Demand for Grants. Funds 
allocated to NCAP and its utilisation thereof in future, needs a transparent elucidation.  The 
Committee feels that the Ministry should make more efforts to get increased budgetary allocation 
for the NCAP considering the impact of increase in air pollution on climate change. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that concerted efforts should be made by the Ministry for 
optimum utilisation of funds under NCAP.  The Committee exp resses its satisfaction over the 
initiatives of the Ministry in extending incentives and motivating the agencies at municipal level 
towards the target of city-wise reduction of PM 10 concentration.                         (Para 7.4 ibid)                                                                                             
 
Action Taken 
1.12 It is submitted that an amount of Rs.290 cr ore was allocated for 82 cities in F.Y. 2021 -22 
from budget allocation of Control of Pollution Scheme. The same allocation has been made for 
F.Y. 2022 -23. However, the release of funds in a given financial year is totally based on the 
utilisation of funds released in the previous financial years. Following the guidelines of 
expenditure con trol in the General Financial Rules, 2017,   Rs. 98.75 cr ore has been released 
under the sub-component-"National Clean Air Programme" of the Control of Pollution Scheme in 
the FY 2021 -22 (covering 46 non -attainment cities). The Committee's remarks regarding  
transparent elucidation of funds allocated to NCAP and utilization thereof in the future have been 
noted. It may please be noted that under NCAP, Rs 497.94 crore have been released under the 
sub-component-"National Clean Air Programme" of the Control of P ollution Scheme up to 
31st March, 2022. 
 
1.13 With regard to Committee's concern on efforts to get the budgetary allocation for NCAP 
increased, Ministry has provisioned the same in the Expenditure Finance Committee ( EFC) 
Memo of the Control of Pollution Scheme for appraisal by the competent forum 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.14 On the basis of information furnis hed above, the Committee observes that the details 
furnished by the Ministry in respect of physical targets set and actually achieved during 2021 -22 
appear to be incomplete and incoherent. Further, it can be inferred from the above table that the 
Ministry has failed to provide quantifiable details of physical and financial targets and their 
achievements under NCAP during 2021 -22.  The Committee is constrained to note this casual 
approach of the Ministry in furnishing the data and strongly recommends the Ministry to en sure 
that such data is maintained in a proper format, updated regularly and provided to the 
Committee in a manner which is convenient and insightful for the Committee to examine so as to 
get a clear picture of the actual physical and financial targets achieved.                (Para 7.6 ibid) 

5  
Action Taken 
1.15 Committee's observations have been duly noted. Ministry is pleased to inform Committee 
that Ministry has launched PRANA  (Portal for Regulation of Air -pollution in Non -Attainment 
cities), a portal for monitoring implementation of NCAP on 7 th September 2021. In this portal, 
action plans of cities, States and line ministries will be reflected and monitored pertaining to 
implementation status thereon. 
CONSERVATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND ECOSYSTEMS 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.16 The Committee is concerned about the impact of the reduction in budgetary allocation on 
the outcomes and physical targets of this Central Sector Scheme. The Committee notes with 
concern the poor utilisation of funds and attitude  of the State Governments/Union  Territories in 
non-submission of Utilisation Certificates and Project Progress Reports. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to optimally utilise the funds and urges upon the State 
Governments/UTs to adhere to the guidelines of the Department of Expenditure for timely release 
of funds under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS). At the same time the Ministry should also 
develop a mechanaism for regular monitoring of the progress of the projects as well as utilisation 
of funds by the States/UTs so as to ensure timely achievements of set targets, both physical and 
financial.                                                                                                                     (Para 8.2 ibid)                                                                                                   
Action Taken 
(i) Biosphere Reserves are located in extremely hostile and interior places and the Management 
Action Plans (MAP) are received in variably at a very late stage, which hinders timely 
disbursement of funds. 
2.18 In addition, due to COVID -19 situation, there has been inordinate delay by the State 
Governments in taking timely action for implementation of the MAP. There has been also a de lay 
on the part of the B iosphere Reserves in subsequent submission for request for financial 
assistance in the form of MAP. 
1.19 From FY 2022 -2023 onwards, it has been decided with the approval of competent 
authority that financial assistance will be provi ded to the Biosphere Reserves only on submission 
of Five Year Integrated Management Action Plan, which shall have an in -built monitoring 
mechanism for set targets. This exercise is based on recommendation by NITI Aayog. 
1.20 Ministry is in the process of o btaining approval of the competent authority on draft Five 
Year Integrated Management Plan for Biosphere Reserve, which will be shared with all State 
Governments for implementation shortly. The process of fund disbursement under the scheme 
will also be initiated once duly filled in proposals are received from the States. 
 1.21  All the State Governments are requested from time to time for compliance of the 
guidelines of Department of Expenditure for timely submission of Utilisation Certificate/ 
Expenditure Statements and Progress Report for timely release of funds. 
(ii) The following is the monitoring framework for wetlands supported under National Plan for 
Conservation of Aquatic Ecosystems (NPCA): 
1.22 The Guidelines for NPCA Scheme of April, 2019 includes Guidelines for Preparation of 
Integrated Management Plans (IMPs) and also developing a monitoring and evaluation plan. This 
is appraised by the Ministry through its independent Appraisal Institutes bef ore sanctioning the 

6  
IMP. This monitoring and evaluation plan  is the basis of monitoring the IMP during and post 
implementation.  
1.23 A tripartite MoU between Government of India, State Government/ UT Administration 
and agency identified for implementation of IMP is also signed containing agreements on sharing 
of costs, timely implementation of IMPs, post project sustainability etc.  
Further, the following Monitoring Committees have also been set up  
 
 Inter-Departmental Monitoring Committee at the State/UT and Divisional/District levels.  
State level Committee is chaired by Principal Secretary of the Department concerned and 
a balanced and representative composition of representatives of all Departments and 
agencies concerned for ensuring time limits and qualitative sound execution of activities. 
 City Level Monitoring Committee (CLMC) is constituted under the chairmanship of 
District Collector to enhance accountability, transparency and to ensure effective 
implementation and timely completion of the IMP. 
 
GREEN INDIA MISSION- NATIONAL AFFORESTATION PROGRAMME 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.24  The Committee expresses dismay on the drastic reduction in budgetary allocation for the 
year 2022-23 vis-à-vis the demand made by the Ministry.  The Committee is concerne d about the 
impact of this reduction in budgetary allocation on the outcomes and physical targets of the 
Central Sector Scheme. The Committee is also concerned about the impact of reduction of 
budgetary allocation on wage employment in rural areas under Gr een India Mission – National 
Afforestation Programme (GIM -NAP), for which budgetary support is a must. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should prioritise the available resources and ensure full 
utilisation of funds. The Committee, fur ther, recommends that the Ministry must be provided the 
requisite allocation with respect to Green India Mission at RE Stage.                  (Para 9.5 ibid)                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
Action Taken 
 
1.25 Regarding the recommendation on ensuring full utilization of funds, it may be noted that 
under Green India Mission (GIM), 99.53% was utilised against R.E. during 2021 -22. 
Afforestation is critical for Ecological restoration of the degraded areas and also to meet various 
national and international commitments. Recognizing the fact that around 60% percent of the 
allocation under GIM -NAP goes for wage employment in rural sector, the budgetary support is 
essential to implement these schemes. BE 2022 -23 for GIM has increased from RE 2021 -22 i.e., 
Rs. 220 crore to Rs. 317.50 crore  However, the Ministry will also take up appropriate measures 
in addition to the demand for increase in the budgetary allocation. Further, suitable policy 
measures will be initiated to leverage private investments in afforestation and tree planting 
activities. Besides that, GIM will seek convergence with CAMPA to meet the shortfall in budget 
allocation and physical targets for implementing the various activities under various Missions. 
FOREST COVER IN THE COUNTRY 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.26 The Committee expresses satisfaction over the efforts of the Ministry towa rds expansion 
of forest cover area in the country and generation of employment through various forest 
activities. The Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry should take proactive steps to 
further strengthen the existing mechanism through new and effective innovations and strive 
towards further expansion of forest cover with a holistic approach towards maintaining a 

7  
balanced ecosystem. The Committee urges the Ministry to have better coordination with State 
Governments/UTs in implementation of forest activities and for expansion of forest cover. 
                   (Para 10.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.28 India’s National Forest Policy, 1988 aims at bringing one -third of geographical area of 
the country under forest or tree cover, and two -third in hills and  mountainous areas. Increasing 
sustainability in the forest/tree cover in the country through massive afforestation and social 
forestry programmes, especially on all denuded, degraded and unproductive lands is one of the 
basic objectives of the National Forest Policy (NFB), 1988.  The policy also encourages planting 
of trees on private lands under State/Corporate, institutional or private ownership along with 
raising of green belts in urban/ industrial areas including plantation of trees alongside roads, 
railway lines, rivers, streams, canals etc. under social forestry. Currently country’s 24.62% area 
is under forest and tree cover. 
1.29  Afforestation and tree plantation activities in the country are undertaken as a cross -
sectoral and multi departmental act ivity in the country under various centrally sponsored 
schemes of different ministries such as National Afforestation Programme (NAP), Green India 
Mission (GIM) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest  and Climate Change     (MoEF&CC);  
National Bamboo Mi ssion, Ministry of Agriculture;  Integrated Watershed Management 
Programme and Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee  Scheme of the 
Ministry of Rural Development , etc. Besides, such activities are also undertaken through a 
number of State Plan and Non Plan Schemes. 
1.30 The collective targets of afforestation for the State(s) are fixed under 20 Point 
Programme and achievement there -under is monitored. The average annual afforestation targets 
and achievements during the last five years have been abou t 1.8 million hectares.   
 
FOREST FIRE PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
1.31 While the Committee acknowledges the use of satellite technology for detecting forest 
fires, the Committee feels that there is need to strengthen the ground mechanism and develop a 
well equipped and trained workforce to fight forest fires. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
strengthening post -fire assessments, inter -state knowledge sharing and research to understand 
the longer-term impacts of forest fire whi ch will enable to identify gaps in implementation of the 
existing management system and finding solutions thereon.                                  (Para 11.2 ibid)                                                                                                                                                                       
 
Action Taken 
 
1.32 The number of incidences of forest fire in the country varies from year to year and occurs 
during fire season from November to May every year due to various natural and anthropogenic 
reasons including accumulation of inflammable materials such as dry leaves, twigs, pine needles 
etc. Most of the forest fires in the country are ground fires in which ground vegetation, etc. get 
burnt. 
 
1.33 Ministry prepared a National Action Plan on Forest  Fire in April 2018  after several 
rounds of consultations with all the States and Union Territories. The objective of this Plan is to 
minimize forest fires by informing, enabling and empowering forest fring e communities and 
incentivizing them to work in tandem with the State Forest Departments. The Plan also intends to 
substantially reduce the vulnerability of forests across the diverse forest ecosystems in the 

8  
country against  fire hazards, enhance the capab ilities of forest personnel and institutions in 
fighting fires and speed up recovery after a fire event. 
 
1.34 The Ministry issues advisories to all State and UT Governments before the start 
of fire season for adequate preparedness for effective prevention and management of forest fire. 
 
1.35 Forest Survey of India (FSI), Dehradun, an organization under the Ministry disseminates 
the satellite-based forest fire alerts to the State Forest Departments and other registered mobile 
users whenever forest fires are detected. Till date, around 1.30 lakh users have been registered to 
receive the fire alerts from FSI. 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.36 Tackling  forest fires is important for improving the sustainability of the country’s forests. 
The Committee is happy a t the increased allocation of Rs. 44.19 crore, for the Financial Year 
2022-23 for efficient utilisation and sufficient funding to the Ministry for implementation of its 
initiatives/ programmes for forest fire prevention and management at the central and St ate level. 
The Committee also urges upon the Ministry to promote awareness programmes in regions 
around forest areas for sensitising the concerned stakeholders to prevent accidental cases of 
forest fires. Proper fencing of forest areas,  real time monitorin g of illegal activities in forest 
areas and punitive action against the miscreants would further help the agencies in preventing 
forest fires. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take into 
consideration national and international best practices for forest fire management.  
          (Para 11.3 ibid)                                                                                            
Action Taken 
 
1.38 FSI is currently working on a system similar to Canadian Forest Fire Danger  Rating 
System (CFFDRS), based on Fire Weather Index (FWI) for fire danger rating in India. 
Additionally, Forest Type Layer information and Forest Fire Archival information are also being 
used to generate Forest Fire Danger Rating. The parameters are quant ified and overlaid on grids 
of 5 km x 5 km. 
1.39 FWI consists of six components that account for the effects of fuel, moisture and weather 
conditions on fire behaviour. The first three components are fuel moisture codes, which are 
numeric ratings of the mo isture content of the forest floor and other dead organic matter. Their 
values rise as the moisture content decreases. The remaining three components are fire behaviour 
indices, which represent the rate of fire spread, the fuel available for combustion, an d the frontal 
fire intensity; these three values rise as the fire danger increases.  
1.40 All information regarding FWI is downloadable from GEOS-5 (Goddard Earth Observing 
System Model, Version -5) daily data from NASA’s GFWED database  (Global Fire Weather  
Database), which is satellite calibrated weather data. The FWI values from GEOS -5  daily 
database from NASA’s GFWED database are downloaded and thresholds are customized for 
different physiographic zones of the country using past archive data on a weekly basis. The Fire 
Danger Rating is categorized into five classes, which are Extreme Risk, Very High Risk, High 
Risk, Moderate Risk and Low Risk and uploaded as Web Map Service (WMS) in the Van Agni 
Geo-portal of FSI. 
1.41 During Fire season, the Extreme Risk  and Very High Risk categories of Forest Fire 
Danger Rating based on FWI values are disseminated as Pre -Fire Alerts (PFA) on every 
Thursday of the week to State Forest Departments ( SFDs). PFA’s are disseminated through e -
mail as KML (Keyhole Markup Languag e) file, which is Google Earth compatible file, to 

9  
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Head of Forest Force) and Forest Fire Nodal Officer of 
the State Forest Departments. 
1.42 The Ministry supports the efforts of State Governments/Union Territory Admi nistration 
in prevention and control of forest  fire by providing financial assistance for various 
forest fire prevention and management measures such as creation and maintenance of fire lines in 
forest areas, engagement of  fire watchers, creation of water storage structures in forest areas, 
strengthening of forest infrastructure, procurement of firefighting equipment, soil and moisture 
conservation works in high risk areas, awareness creation, incentivizing villages/communities for 
protection against forest  fire etc. During the curr ent financial year Rs. 44.19 crore  has been 
allocated to all the States /UTs under Forest  Fire Prevention and Management Scheme.    A sum 
of about Rs.113.1322 cr ore have been released to the States in last year (2019 -20 to 2021 -22) 
under this scheme. 
MAN-ANIMAL CONFLICT 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.43 The Committee is of the view that the cases of man -animal conflict are on the rise and it 
still remains an area of concern.  As such, there is an urgent need to minimize the instances of 
man-animal conflict that was resulting in both human and animal killi ngs. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take proactive steps to sustainably manage and 
minimise man-animal conflict in a balanced manner, whereby the wildlife habitat is improved. 
The Committee urges upon the Ministry to evolve a  mechanism at the national level for uniform 
compensation, early settlement of compensation and rehabilitation of the victims of man -animal 
conflict. The Committee recommends that efforts should be made by the Ministry at local level 
and especially among the communities living in peripheral forest areas to sensitise them towards 
ecological balance through co -existence with wild life. The Committee urges for creation of 
grasslands for grazing of cattle outside the forest area to minimise man-animal conflict. Further, 
State Forest Departments should also be advised to improve availability of fodder and adequate 
water sources in the forests, especially during summers, which would reduce the chances of the 
wildlife venturing out of their habitat in search of these basic needs.                  (Para 12.3 ibid)                                                                      
Action Taken 
 
1.44 To minimize the instances of man -animal conflict, following procedure/advisory/SOPs 
are followed by the Ministry: 
 
I   Project Tiger 
 
1.45 The Government of India, through the National Tiger Conservation Authority, has 
advocated a three pronged strategy to manage human-tiger negative interactions as follows: 
 
(i)  Material and logistical support:  Funding support through the ongoing Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme of Project Tiger, is provided to tiger reserves for acquiring capacity in terms of 
infrastructure and material, to deal with tigers dispersing out of source areas. These are solicited 
by tiger reserves through an Annual Plan of Operation (APO) every year which stems out from an 
overarching Tiger Conservation Plan (TCP), mandated under Section 38 V of the Wildlife 
(Protection) Act, 1972.  Inter alia,  activities such as payment of ex -gratia and compensation, 
periodic awareness campaigns to sensitize, guide and advise the general populace on man -animal 
conflict, dissemination of information through various forms of media, procurement of 
immobilization equipment, drugs, training and capacity building of forest staff to deal with 
conflict events are generally solicited. 

10  
 (ii) Restricting habitat interventions:  Based on the carrying capacity of tigers in a tiger 
reserve, habitat interventions are restricted through an overarching TCP. In case tiger numbers are 
at carrying capacity levels, it is advised that habitat interventions should be limited so that there is 
no excessive spill over of wildlife including tigers thereby minimizing man -animal conflict. 
Further, in buffer areas around tiger reserves, habitat interventions are r estricted such that they 
are sub -optimal vis -à-vis the core/critical tiger habitat areas, judicious enough to facilitate 
dispersal to other rich habitat areas only. 
 
 (iii)  Standard Operating Procedure (SOPs):  The National Tiger Conservation Authority has  
also issued three SOPs to deal with human -animal conflict which are available in public domain. 
These are as under: 
 
i        To deal with emergency arising due to straying of tigers in human dominated landscapes 
ii       To deal with tiger depredation on livestock 
iii     For active management towards rehabilitation of tigers from source areas at the landscape  
level 
 
II Project Elephant 
 
(i) To address issue of human elephant conflict, the states have resorted to capture of 
problematic elephants and the  funds needs to be augmented for the establishment of 
rescue/rehabilitation centres for permanent or temporary housing of wild elephants. 
 
(ii)  Critical elephant habitats are notified as ‘Elephant Reserve’ (ER) for focus and synergy in 
elephant conservation and to reduce conflict. The notification is carried out with the approval of 
Steering Committee formed in the Ministry. So far 31 ERs have been established in 14 major 
elephant States in which 10 ER's are from North Eastern States such as Assa m, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Meghalaya and Nagaland. 
 
 (iii)  A guideline for Management of Human Elephant Conflict has been issued by the 
Ministry on 6.10.2017 and elephant range States have been requested for implementation of the 
same. 
 
III Development of Wildlife Habitats 
 
1.46 The Ministry is implementing CSS -Development of Wildlife Habitats under which 
financial assistance is provided to State/UTs for the protection and conservation of Wildlife 
including implementation of mitigation measures to avoid human -wildlife conflict. The funds are 
also provided under the scheme for making fodder and adequate water sources available in the 
protected areas, awareness programme and development of grasslands and payment of ex-gratia 
relief for loss of life or property caused by wild animals.  The Ministry has revised the rates of ex-
gratia payment vide letter dated 09.02.2018, which is as follows:  
 
Nature of damage caused by wild animals Amount of ex-gratia relief 
a) Death or permanent incapacitation to human 
beings  
Rs.5 lakh 
(b) Grievous injury  Rs 2 lakh 
(c) Minor injury Cost of treatment up to  Rs 25000/- 
(d) Loss of property/crops  States /UTs may adhere to the cost 
norms prescribed by them 
State Governments also provide ex -gratia relief for depredation by wild animals from their own 

11  
funds. The rate of ex- gratia payment varies from State to State. 
 
 (ii) Guidelines on eco-friendly measures to mitigate the impact of linear infrastructure have  been 
published by the Wildlife Institute of India to assist project agencies in designing linear 
infrastructure. 
 (iii) An advisory on dealing with human -wildlife conflict has been issued by the Ministry in 
February 2021, which also envisages that a suita ble portion of ex -gratia relief should be paid 
within 24 hours to the affected persons in the case of death and injury to persons.  
 The recommendation of the Committee, with respect to man -animal conflict, is noted and 
appropriate action will be taken by Ministry of Environment Forest & Climate Change. 
PLASTIC WASTE MANAGEMENT 
Recommendation/Observations 
1.47 The Committee recognizes the importance of plastic waste management and elimination 
of single -use plastics. Single -use plastics being a bio hazard no t only impact wild life and 
ecosystems but also pollute the environment. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to run awareness programmes on regular basis, to educate the people about the ill 
effects of single-use plastics and encourage them to use other sources as a replacement to plastic 
products in day to day usage. The Committee also recommends bringing  stricter norms and 
regulations to discourage the use of single -use plastics and also lay down clear allocation of 
roles and responsibilities.                                                                                      (Para 13.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
(i) The Plastic Waste Management (PWMR) Rules, 2016, provides the statutory 
framework for plastic waste management in an environmentally sound  manner 
throughout the country. Thirty Four States/UTs have issued notifications/orders 
introducing regulations pertaining to complete or partial ban on plastic carry bags 
and/or identified single -use plastic items, over and above the Plastic Waste 
Management (PWM) Rules, 2016, as amended. 
(ii)    As per the Plastic Waste Management (PWM) Rules, 2016, there is complete ban on   
sachets using plastic material used for storing, packing or selling gutkha, tobacco and 
pan masala. 
(iii) Based on high littering p otential and low utility, the MoEFCC notified the Plastic 
Waste Management Amendment Rules, 2021, on 12th August 2021, 
prohibiting manufacture, import, stocking, distribution, sale and use of 
the following identified single use plastic items, which have lo w utility and high 
littering potential with effect from the 1st July, 2022: 
(a)    ear buds with plastic sticks, plastic sticks for balloons, plastic flags, candy 
sticks,  ice-cream sticks, polystyrene [Thermocol] for decoration; 
(b)    plates, cups, glass es, cutlery such as forks, spoons, knives, straw, trays, 
wrapping or packing films around sweet boxes, invitation cards,   and 
cigarette packets, plastic or PVC banners less than 100 micron, stirrers. 
(iv) The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Cha nge has notified the Guidelines 
on the Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) for plastic packaging vide Plastic 
Waste Management Amendment Rules, 2022, on 16th February, 2022. 
(v) The enforceable prescription of minimum level of recycling of plastic packaging waste 
collected under EPR by producer, importers & brand -owners will strengthen circular 

12  
economy of plastic packaging waste. 
(vi) The guidelines on EPR mandate use of recycled plastic content in plastic packaging by 
the industry. This step will generate demand for recycled plastic material. 
(vii) Food Safety and Standards Authority of India has laid down guidelines for use of 
recycled plastic content in food contact applications, after the notification of Plastic 
Waste Management Second Amendment Rules, 2021 on 17th September 2021. 
(viii) The EPR guidelines will strengthen circular economy of plastic packaging waste, and 
promote development of new alternatives to plastics and move towards sustainable 
plastic packaging. 
(ix) Steps have been taken for undertaking large scale awareness generation activities at 
national level, State and UT level and local authority/district level with respect to the 
upcoming ban and alternatives available. 
Recommendation/Observations 
1.48 The Committee yet again expresses  its deep concern on the issue of non -cooperative and 
unresponsive behavior of the officials dealing with environmental matters towards the public 
representatives.  The Committee reiterates its previous recommendation in this matter that the 
Ministry of En vironment, Forest and Climate Change, being the nodal central Ministry dealing 
with these matters, must impress upon the State Governments as well as their own officers to 
sensitize all the concerned authorities to accord due courtesy to the public represe ntatives, 
attend to their grievances, respond to their communications and make available the information 
sought by them.                                                                                                      (Para 13.3 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
(i) States/UTs have been requested to constitute a Special Task Force under Chairpersonship 
of Chief Secretary/Administrator for elimination of single use plastics and effective 
implementation of PWMR, 2016.  Thirty four States/UTs have constituted the Special 
Task Force till date. 
(ii) A National Level Taskforce has been constituted by the Ministry for monitoring and 
reviewing action plans of States/UTs and Union Ministries for elimination of single use 
plastic. 
(iii) The State /UT Governments and concerned Central Ministries/Departments have been 
requested to develop a comprehensive action plan and implement it in a time bound 
manner. 
(iv) Committees have been established at the National, State and District/City level. These 
Committees are requested to consider the publi c representations and address the 
issues/concerns raised by them. 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2021-22 AND ALLOCATION 
FOR 2022-23 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.1 The Committee acknowledges the steps taken by the Ministry towards improvement in 
Air Quality Index and urges upon the Ministry to take proactive steps in coordination with the 
state machinery towards controlling air pollution. The Committee recommends tha t there 
should be transparency in the funding mechanism of the Ministry with the States/UTs, 
Municipalities, State Pollution Control Boards ( SPCBs) for better coordination and 
implementation of varied schemes under the Head ‘Control of Pollution’. 
               (Para 7.8 of the 363rd Report)                                                                                                                                                                     
Action Taken 
2.2 Ministry is pleased to inform the Committee that transaction of funds is being done 
under the  Public Financial Management System  (PFMS) after taking due concurrence of  
Integrated Finance Division  (IFD) of the Ministry on each and every proposal of release of 
funds to any entity i.e. CPCB/S PCBs/PCCs on the basis of utilization of funds by the 
concerned SPCBs/PCCs as indicated in the Utilization Certificate furnished by them in the 
prescribed format (i.e. GFR -12A). Regular Expenditure Review meetings are also being 
envisaged. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
14 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
NATIONAL COASTAL MISSION 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
3.1 The Committee understands under this programme, annual Management Action Plan 
(MAP) for conservation and management of mangroves are formulated and implemented in 
all the coastal States and Union Territories. In view of the same the Committee recommends  
that the approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs ( CCEA) may be sought at the 
earliest to avoid further delay in activities to be taken up under the ENCORE Project.  
               (Para 6.3 of the 363rd Report)                                                                                                                
Action Taken 
3.2 Comment is noted.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
3.3 The Committee observes that due to climate change coastal belt is now highly 
vulnerable to frequent super cyclones and mangroves provide protection to a great 
extent against the same.  Apart from it, mangroves also stabilize the soil and save coastal 
region from rapid erosion. In view of the same, the Committee feels that activities taken 
up under EN CORE Project are vital for the conservation and management of 
mangroves in all Coastal States/Union Territories and given its critical importance it 
should be taken up on priority.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the matter 
must be placed before the CCEA at the earliest and follow up steps taken by the 
Ministry thereon be intimated to the Committee.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________ 
 
MINUTES 
 
___________________________________________________________________ 
  

 
 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Friday, the 13th January, 2023 in Committee 
Room No. 4, First Floor, ‘A’ Block, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
 
             MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh - Chairman 
              RAJYA SABHA 
2.   Shri Anil Baluni 
3.   Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
              LOK SABHA 
4.  Shri Jaswantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor 
5.  Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
6.  Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
7.  Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
8.  Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
9.  Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
10.  Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
11.  Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
12.  Shri Anurag Sharma 
13.  Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi 
14. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
            SECRETARIAT 
 Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
 Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
            Shri Thangzasiam Paite, Committee Officer 
            Shri Rama Nand, Committee Officer 
             Shri Ankit Chansoria, Assistant Committee Officer   
2. *   *   *    * 
3. *   *   *    * 
4. *   *   *    * 
5. *   *   *    * 
6. *   *   *    * 
7. *   *   *    * 
8. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 366 th, 367 th, 368 th, 369 th, 370 th, 371 st 
and 372 nd Reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in Reports of the Committee on Demands 
for Grants (2022 -23) of the Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy; Biotechnology; Scientific & 
Industrial Research; Science & Technology; Space; Environment, Forest & Climate Change; and Earth 
Sciences, respectively and adopted the same. 
9. Verbatim record of the meeting was kept. 
10. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 12.50 p.m. 
 
__________________________________________________________ 
****Relate to other matters. 