157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED-FIFTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-2007)
OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
(DEMAND NO. 83)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 18TH MAY, 2006)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE   18TH MAY, 2006
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2006/VAISAKHA, 1928 (SAKA)
E-Mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Web site: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                            
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                                        
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                               
4.SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                                                                             
5.MINUTES  OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                        
                            
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2004)
 
1.         Shri P.G. Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Dr.Prabha Thakur
3.         Shri Dilip Singh Judev
4.         Shri Nand Kishore Yadav
5.         Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
     #
6.               Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
     $7.               Vacant
    &8.  Vacant
    *9.                Vacant
   §10.               Vacant
 
LOK  SABHA
 

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
11.       Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
12.       Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad            
13.       Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
14.       Shri Pankaj Choudhary
15.       Shri Mohan S. Delkar  
16.       Shri Francis Fanthome 
17.       Shri Anantrao Gudhe
18.       Shri Babubhai K. Katara
19.       Shri A. Venkatesh Naik           
20.       Shri Brahmananda Panda
21.       Smt. Neeta Pateriya
22.       Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil        
23.       Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
24.       Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
25.       Shri Rakesh Singh
26.       Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh                                              
27.       Dr. Ramlakhan Singh   
28.       Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar                     
29.       Shri D. Venugopal
30.       Shri Sita Ram Yadav
31.       Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
 Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One
 Hundred-Fifty Seventh Report of the Committee. This Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of
 the Department of Biotechnology (Demand No.83).
 
2.         In the meeting of the Committee held on the 3
rd  April, 2006 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of
 Biotechnology gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on
 various aspects of the performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
 
3.         The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by
 the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of
 the Department of Biotechnology.
 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 15
th May, 2006.
NEW DELHI;  
May 15, 2006  
P.G.NARAYANAN,
 Chairman,
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
 on
 Science & Technology, Environment & Forests.
 
R E P O R T
Bio-technology is the application of Scientific and Engineering principles to the processing of materials by biological
 agents to produce goods and services.  It is one of  the fastest  growing branches of modern science. The present day life
 has transformed a lot because of the application of biotechnology principles which had wide application in every industry
 including agriculture, food processing, pharmaceuticals, environmental cleaning, forensics etc.  It has become a prominent
 technology in every field like enhancing food productivity, nutritional status, sustainable utilization of biological
 resources, development of new vaccines, diagnostics and development of new drugs, etc.
2.         India is well poised to embark upon biotechnology-based national development. The underlying assumption of the
 policy framework is that the developments in the field of biotechnology will have the greatest impact on food, nutrition,
 health, environment and livelihood security. The recent advances in many areas of biological research, notably genomics,
 cell biology, structural biology and molecular approaches to biological function hold great promise for future
 developments in biotechnology. 

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
3.         The Department of Biotechnology was set up as an Independent Board in 1982 and thereafter became a full fledged
 Department under Ministry of Science & Technology in 1986. Activities and programmes of the department are being
 pursued to fulfill the targets set out for the 10th plan and set the pace for development during the 11th plan. The thrust is
 on process and product development, impact of which would be felt at the grass root level, with low cost,
 technologies/products being made available in the health care, agriculture & environment sectors.
            4.         The main mandate of the Department is:
(i)         To evolve policies and integrated programmes in biotechnology and ensure their implementation and monitoring.
(ii)        To identify specific programmes of Research and Development and manufacturing in biologicals and
 biotechnology and oversee the initiation and pursuit of related research and manufacturing activities.
(iii)       To identify, set up and support Centres of Excellence for Research and Development in biotechnology and ensure
 proper dovetailing of their activities as per national priorities and objectives.
(iv)       To act as a screening, advising and approving agent of the Government with regard to import and transfer of new
 technologies for the manufacture of biologicals, biotechnological products and their intermediates.
(v)        Evolve safety guidelines for biotechnology Research and Development and manufacturing in India.
(vi)       To act as the central agency for the import of genetically manipulated materials, culture, cells, specimens, tissues
 and biotech products including DNA and RNA of any type or size and for promoting their production in the country.
(vii)      Serve as the interministerial and interagency nodal point for all specific international bilaterial and multilateral
 Research and Development collaborations and agreements in the area of biotechnology; act as the nodal point for all
 technology transfers in the area of biotechnology.
(viii)      Manufacture and ensure application of recombinant, cell-based and DNA vaccines, diagnostics and other
 biotechnological products.
(ix)       To evolve programmes for Human Resource Development in the area of biotechnology.
(x)        Serve as an administrative and implementing Department of agencies, commissions, boards, etc. specifically
 formed by the Government for fulfilling the national objectives in biotechnology and also to serve as the nodal point for
 Bio-informatics including training and creation of infrastructure, collection, dissemination and exchange of information
 relating to biotechnology.
(xi)       Matters relating to:
International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), New Delhi;
National Institute of Immunology (NII), New Delhi;
National Centre for Cell Sciences (NCCS), Pune;
Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad;
National Centre for Plant Genome Research (NCPGR), New Delhi;
National Brain Research Centre (NBRC), Gurgaon;
Institute for Bioresource and Sustainable Development (IBSD), Imphal
Institute of Life Sciences, Bhubaneswar
(xii)      Matters relating to:
Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals Corporation Limited (BIBCOL), Bulandshahr, Uttar Pradesh;
Indian Vaccines Corporation Limited (IVCOL), Manesar, Gurgaon.
5.         The Committee was informed by the Department that long-term support would be provided for basic biology
 research in areas related to infectious diseases, metabolic engineering, biomaterials, stem cell research, chemical ecology
 etc. by providing the necessary infrastructure and instrumentation facilities. Some important areas for research would be
 food and nutritional security; optimal utilisation of biological resources through biotechnological interventions; genomics;
 cost effective, easy-to-administer and affordable healthcare regime, especially molecular medicine; biotechnological
 solutions for environmental issues like biodiversity conservation, and waste recycling and pollution abatement.
 Conversion of indigenous research leads into biotech products and processes would continue to be a major endeavour.
 This will be facilitated by instituting new academia-industry and private-public partnerships. Human resources needed for
 biology research and biotech development would be generated through specific programmes. The Department of
 Biotechnology’s mission is to develop biotechnology as an intellectual enterprise, to provide the impetus to help utilise
 this knowledge for the benefit of mankind and to launch well-directed efforts for harnessing biotechnological tools for
 generation of products, processes and technologies that will enhance the efficiency and productivity of agriculture and
 forestry improve nutritional security, development of molecular medicine and environmentally safe technologies for
 pollution abatement, biodiversity conservation and bio-industrial development and creation of a strong infrastructure both
 for research and commercialisation of bio-products, bioprocesses and biotechnologies.
6.         It was further informed that concerted and long-term support would have to be provided to basic research in the
 new areas of modern biology and biotechnology and mechanisms to identify creative talents among the youth need to be
 established. Commercialisation of the knowledge base should be facilitated through simplification of procedures and

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 policies. These include single window clearance mechanism for the biotech industry, especially based on recombinant
 DNA technology; venture capital funding to encourage large-scale production of biotech products, incubators or pilot
 plants through the joint efforts of the public and private sectors and tax holidays to publicly supported indigenous R&D.
 Bioscience enterprises will be identified and encouraged in three major areas: agriculture, health-care and the
 environment. The commercialisation of bio-products will be encouraged by developing innovative policies in conjunction
 with other government departments and agencies. Besides the ongoing programmes on genetic counselling, emphasis
 would also be placed on genomics of humans, animals, plants and microbes, human genome diversity studies, molecular
 epidemiology; setting up of network facilities in at least four to five centres for high throughput screening, functional
 genomics, microarray and structural genomics, etc. The major funding for this would come from industry, with the
 Government providing only a nominal support. Major mission mode programmes would be initiated in the areas of
 genomics, new drugs and molecules from important medicinal plants, bio-resources characterisation, bio-fuels, new
 generation vaccines, food and nutritional security.
7.         In the field of agriculture, biotechnology research will be used mainly in crop improvements for high export-value
 products through genetic modification of other crops or through in-vitro techniques. Other approaches in this field are:
 fine mapping of genome regions harbouring useful genes; developing transgenic biofertilisers; creating an awareness
 among farmers on the benefits of bio-pesticides and integrated pest management (IPM) technologies etc.
8.         Research on plant biotechnology would be directed towards molecular and genetic phenomena associated with the
 process of infection, progression of disease (infectious and systemic) and the underlying pathology; metabolic engineering
 using recombinant DNA technology; characterisation of enzymes involved in carbon and nitrogen assimilation; plant
 tissue culture; bio-prospecting of wild plants; generation of a network programme on bioengineering of crops for Bio-
fuels and Bioenergy; development of medicinal and aromatic plant crops with value addition in terms of proteins,
 minerals, vitamins and bio-molecules of therapeutic value and industrial use, genomics of selected medicinal and aromatic
 plants etc. In animal biotechnology, the focus will be on large animals and employment of newer techniques like cloning
 and stem cell derived animals (transformed and non-transformed).
9.         In the area of aquaculture and marine biotechnology, a Marine Biotechnology Centre would be set-up for research
 on novel enzymes, bioremediation, extremophilic organisms, bio-medicals, genomics and proteomics of various marine
 organisms. The areas of focus for medical biotechnology research are: tuberculosis, HIV, malaria, cholera, Japanese
 encephalitis, edible vaccines, helicobactor pylori, rabies, cancer and drug delivery systems. The programmes will be
 prioritised taking into consideration criteria like disease burden, cost effectiveness of technologies and the potential utility
 of these technologies for community needs.
10.       In the field of environment and biodiversity, the projects to be initiated relate to: collection, conservation and
 sustainable use of bio-diversity; bio-remediation, waste recycling and wasteland reclamation; development of biosensors,
 bioindicators; phyto-remediation; and engineering of microbes for pesticide degradation, production of industrial and
 specialty chemicals, resource recovery and waste recycling etc.
11.       Major new initiatives are also planned in the expanding area of bioinformatics. These include: dedicated high speed
 network for the BTIS-net to achieve near-instantaneous access to the biological databases; setting up of teraflop
 supercomputer facilities for bioinformatics; establishment of a National Bioinformatics Institute for carrying out various
 activities like policy making; establishment of a Centre for Genome Informatics for carrying out research related to
 genomics and proteomics that include database mining, computational gene discovery, sequence similarity searching,
 gene expression analysis, etc.
12.       Besides continuing the existing biotech facilities and repositories at various places, the new facilities to be set-up
 pertain to high field nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) imaging facility, mass spectrometry and microarray facilities at
 two to three centres; pilot plant facilities and biotech incubators for diagnostics; good manufacturing practices (GMP),
 facilities in collaboration with private industry participation etc. Biotechnology parks and biotechnology incubators will
 be set-up in a few states in collaboration with the concerned State Governments. A few centres of excellence will also be
 set up in emerging areas such as: marine biology, high altitude biology, medical molecular biology, molecular ecology,
 invertebrate neurobiology and computational biology. To address biotechnologyrelated intellectual property rights (IPR)
 issues in a holistic manner, a Biotechnology–IPR Centre will be set up as an autonomous society under the DBT for
 organising training programmes and setting up of a Patent Information Networking System.
13.       In the area of human resource development, support would be provided to 20 additional institutions and between
 100 and 150 fellowships, besides instituting distinguished biotechnology professorships, biotechnology chairs and
 national bio-sciences career awards. Popularisation of biotechnology will be intensified through the mass media and co-
curricular programmes. In order to attract a large number of small and medium scale biotech entrepreneurs, a Biotech
 Venture Capital Fund will be initiated in collaboration with organisations like the Small Industries Development Board
 (SIDBI), Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI) etc.
14.       While the existing programmes of international collaborations will continue, the focus for the initiatives will be on

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 basic research in new biology for understanding molecular and genetic phenomena of pathogenesis in plants, animals and
 human beings; plant molecular biology; biosensor development; metabolic and tissue engineering; and product and
 process-oriented research involving scale up/ field trials and validations through technology transfer of both techniques
 and materials.
15.       The autonomous institutes under the jurisdiction of DBT — NII, NCCS, CDFD, NBRC, NCPGR and the Institute
 for Bioresources and Sustainable Development (IBSD) — will continue to conduct research within the framework of the
 policy guidelines laid down for the Tenth Plan. Each of institutes will implement one or more Mission Mode programmes.
16.       Mission Mode Programmes would be launched in the areas of genomics, development of new drugs and molecules
 from important medicinal plants with special emphasis on validation and standardisation of the active constituents already
 identified and bioresource characterisation and inventorisation and documentation of the endangered eco-system. They
 would also cover production, demonstration and testing of biofuels, development of new generation vaccines, and food
 and nutritional security through enhancement of crop productivity, value-addition and genetic engineering for enhanced
 nutritional status.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
17.       The total budgetary allocation (Plan & Non-Plan) for the Department for the year 2006-2007 is Rs. 534.60 crores at
 the B.E. stage against Rs.458.60 crores in B.E. and Rs.402.60 crores R.E. in  2005-2006. The plan component Rs. 521.00
 crores (for the year 2006-2007) represents an increase of  Rs. 132.00 crores over the Plan component of Rs.389.00 crores
 in R.E. of last year. The details of the financial  summary for the  year 2005-06 (Plan) are given at Annexure-I.
18.       The  Department has informed that the enhanced budgetary allocation during 2006-2007 is mainly for programmes
 on infrastructure strengthening; new initiatives in human resource, Centre for Excellence, R&D, and Public Private
 Partnership.
19.       The headwise quarterly statement of expenditure as well as total expenditure of the Department till February, 2006
 is given  at annexure-I.
The Tenth Plan outlay is Rs.1450 crores. Details of expenditure during the first four years of Plan period are as follows:
YEAR B.E. R.E. ACTUAL EXPENDITURE
2002-2003 225.00 205.00 203.25
2003-2004 260.00 250.00 249.56
2004-2005 310.00 320.00 319.76
2005-2006 445.00 389.00 348.04
As on 28.02.2006
20.       The Committee  has been informed that there is an increase of about 17% over last year B.E. No new major
 schemes are proposed.  On being asked whether the projected demand of the Department is sufficient for carrying out  its
 activities, the Committee was informed that the projected  plan demand for B.E. was Rs.521.00 crores which has been
 allocated.  Therefore, this amount would be sufficient to carry out the proposed programmes of the Department.
21.       The Committee notes that the Department has been able to make optimum use of the funds allocation is carrying
 out its various programmes/activities.  It also notes the assurance of the Secretary of the Department that the remaining
 amount of the last quarter of 2005-2006 will be fully utilized by March, 2006.
NATIONAL BRAIN RESEARCH INSTITUTE (NBRI), GURGAON
22        The National Brain Research Centre (NBRC), an autonomous body of the Department, was registered as a society
 in June 1999. The mandate of the Centre is to undertake basic research to understand brain function in health and disease
 and establish linkages with national/international organizations involved in neuroscience research. It would not only have
 infrastructure facilities and a coordinated multi-disciplinary team of scientists working in the frontier area of neuroscience
 but also to support and network the existing groups in the country. Thus, the centre would act as National Apex Centre for
 Brain Research to promote neuroscience research. NBRC has been recently recognized by UGC as deemed university for
 postgraduate education in neurosciences.
23.       During the year 2006-07 the NBRI has identified that major area for research which include computational
 neuroscience, system and cognitive neuroscience, stem cell research, developmental neurobiology and basic research
 towards understanding of neurological and psychiatric disorders and these would be strengthened and expanded.  As per
 the mandate NBRC has recruited faculty whose research interests span multiple levels of brain organization ranging from
 molecular genetic to systems and cognitive to computation. At all levels of brain organization efforts will be directed at
 both understanding fundamental issues of brain function as well as understanding disease processes that have a huge
 effect on disease burden in developing societies.  It is proposed to strengthen and expand the NBRC network and facilitate
 interdisciplinary research, both nationally and internationally across the country.      
24.       On being asked about increase in allocations which were increased to Rs.18.38 crores at the RE stage in 2005-06

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 from Rs.13.80 crores at B.E. stage, the Committee has been apprised by the Department that the increase was for building
 additional hostel facility for students.
25.       The Committee notes the efforts made by the Institute  in the areas of stem cell biology, molecular neuroscience
 etc. The Committee is hopeful that the Institute will do its best to develop human embryonic stem cell lines and further
 translational research by transplanting embryonic stem cell lines in animal models of spinal cord and brain injury.  The
 knowledge derived from the above is extremely important considering its impact on clinical situations.
26.       The Committee further notes the importance of research in areas of computational neuroscience, system and
 cognitive neuroscience, developmental neurobiology and basic research towards understanding of neurological and
 psychiatric disorders, as such cases are on the rise in the country owing to the stressful demands of the modern civilization
 which take heavy toll of psychological well-being.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF IMMUNOLOGY (NII),  NEW DELHI
27.       The Committee was informed that the mandate of the Institute is to undertake, aid, promote, guide and coordinate
 research of a high caliber in basic and applied immunology; to carry out research for development of new vaccines,
 immunodiagnostic kits, immunological reagents; to interact with industry for manufacture of products developed from the
 research leads; to organize post-graduate courses leading to Ph.D. degree; to organize workshops, seminars, symposia,
 training, programmes of specialized nature in immunological methods and related areas. It also serves as a national
 reference centre for immunology and provides consultancy services. It promotes linkages between various scientific
 research agencies/ laboratories in the field of immunology, vaccine development and related areas; to collaborate with
 foreign research institutions, laboratories and other international organizations in the field relevant to the objectives
 mentioned above.  
28.       Allocation to National Institute of Immunology has been increased to Rs.36.70 crores BE as against Rs.32.80crores
 and Rs.31.82 crores at BE and RE stages respectively in 2005-2006. The Committee has been informed that the
 enhancement would take care of 10% inflation as also new programmes on tuberculosis, aerosol challenge facility,
 expansion of transgenic/knock out facility etc.
 29.      The major achievements of the Institute during the year 2005-06 are as follows:
(i)         Infrastructure development
Expansion of physical laboratory facilities and their furnishing carried out for new groups established in the Institute.
(ii)        Immune physiology : Developmental approaches
(a)        Studies were conducted to examine the role of JAK/STAT pathway in neurons in response to TNF and IGF-1 and
 their effect on expression of suppressors of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3), belonging to the novel family of feedback
 regulators of cytokine and growth factor activities. We have demonstrated the importance of JAK/STAT pathway and the
 role of SOCS3 in survival of neurons in response to IGF-1.
(b)        A new member of c-Jun NH2 -terminal kinase (JNK) interacting protein exclusively expressed in testis, sperm
 associated antigen 9 (SPAG9) was characterized.
(c)        Molecular cloning and characterization was achieved in case of an orthologue of human sperm associated antigen
 9 (SPAG9) gene in macaque.
(iii)       Host-pathogen approaches: viral strategies
(a)        The Nef protein of the human immunodeficiency virus HIV-1 has novel costimulation-modifying role which may
 be of potential importance in explaining the correlations of macrophage-tropism and Nef with HIV-1 pathogenicity and
 immune evasion.
(b)        Development of adenovirus recombinants that synthesize JEV E protein as potential vaccine candidate against
 Japanese encephalitis. The results indicated that JEV E protein delivered orally to mice together with ODN generated both
 humoral and cellular immune responses to JEV and these were of the Th1 kind.
(c)        Relevance of the trans-membrane domain of the surface glycoprotein in generating an antibody response was
 investigated towards development of DNA vaccine for rabies.
(iv)       Host-pathogen approaches: prokaryote and eukaryote pathogens
(a)        Studies revealed that Vi antigen of S.typhi can employ the molecule to downregulate inflammatory responses
 during infection of intestinal epithelial cells.
(b)        Studies on biosynthetic pathways in M tuberculosis demonstrate that pps cluster catalyzes PDIM biosynthesis by
 using long chain fatty acid precursors.
(c)        Mechanisms of Ca
2+ homeostasis in L.donovani has lead to the identification of Na+/Ca2+ exchanger like activity
 in the parasite and evidence of reduced infectivity when the pump function is compromised.
(d)        Data with respect to the clinical field trials with a follow up of 8-10 years have provided understanding of the
 immunoprophylactic effects of the anti-leprosy Mw vaccine in household contacts of leprosy patients.
(v)        Immune molecular design: structural strategies
Mapping the conformational changes on lactose binding, interacting surfaces, and supramolecular aggregations in the

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 context of porphyrin-related aggregation diseases achieved after determining the crystal structures of the PNA-porphyrin
 complex in the presence and absence of lactose.
(vi)       Human resource development
Fifty-five short-term trainees for 1-2 months provided with extensive laboratory experience and hands-on training in
 advanced biological approaches.
Ten long-term trainees accepted for extensive project-based training in advanced biomedical research.
Papers published during this year
20 original peer reviewed articles published alongwith 10 other reviews/proceedings.
30.       The Committee was informed about the proposed programmes for 2006-07 which include continuation of the
 research against the various major areas of interest, Following research projects are to be taken up after approval of the
 Scientific Advisory Committee of NII.
(i)         Initiation of work on Incubator laboratory facility to be taken up in the second campus of the Institute.
(ii)        Development of Campus II at Faridabad.
(iii)       To build minimum essential staff quarters on the plot of land allotted by the Delhi Development Authority in
 Dwarka, New Delhi and construction of additional research scholar home/guest house in the main campus.
31.       The Committee feels that the development of new vaccines is extremely important. New vaccines and 
 immunodiagnostic kits will be required by the country to check spread of bacterial and viral diseases which either have
 become immune  to  old vaccines or are still un-tackled.
32.       The Committee also feels that in this age of market economics, fundamental high-end research being a high-risk
 venture requires participation from industry for distribution of risks between the research institute and the industry.
 Interaction with industry for manufacture of products developed from the research leads is extremely important to become
 commercially viable. The Committee hopes effective participation from the industry, which is also in long-term interest of
 quality research , will be encouraged  by the Department as far as possible.
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR CELL SCIENCE (NCCS), PUNE
33.       The Centre has the mandate of research and development, teaching and training and to act as a national repository
 for cell lines /hybridomas etc. It has expanded its scientific base to strengthen research in the areas of cancer biology, cell
 biology, immunology, gene therapy and proteomics. The ongoing as well as new projects are in the field of cell
 repository, human resource development, cancer biology, cell biology, molecular biology, diabetes, infection and
 immunity, drug discovery, tissue engineering, genomics & proteomics and support facility
34.       In reply to a question regarding increased budgetary allocation for the Centre, the Committee was informed that for
 the financial year 2006-07, allocation has been enhanced to Rs. 30.35 crores from Rs. 25.40 Crores in BE and RE stages
 respectively in 2005-2006. This is  to give thrust  to programmes on stem cell research , cancer, diabetes , HIV/Aids and
 microbicides. Ongoing phase-II building construction activities expenses would also be met.
Achievements 2005-06:
35.       The National Cell Repository continues to supply cell lines comprising different cell types to scientific institutions
 in India.  It has initiated a project on banking of human genetic mutant samples that will be useful in mutational studies.
36.       The Committee takes note of Studies that have been initiated to understand the process of differentiation of
 embryonic stem cells into cardiomyocytes and also into dopaminergic neurons which could be utilized for replacement of
 damaged neurons in neurological disorders such as Parkinson’s. The Committee feels that new discovery about bone
 marrow stem cells is of therapeutic importance and can prove important in finding better cure for diabetes.
37.     The Committee would also like the Institute to make more efforts for understanding the molecular basis of cancer
 using cell line and animal models as this can help understand this deadly disease better. The Committee would also like to
 emphasize the importance of studies on sequencing of the midgut cDNA library of Anopheles Stephensii, the mosquito
 responsible for spread of malaria in India as malaria is still prevalent in backward areas of the country and still require a
 lot of effort for total eradication  
CENTRE FOR DNA FINGERPRINTING AND DIAGNOSTICS (CDFD), HYDERABAD
38.       The Centre has been providing services for DNA fingerprinting, diagnostics in addition to basic research in related
 areas. DNA fingerprinting services are being provided to various government and law enforcement agencies for which
 MoUs have been signed with state/central forensic science laboratories.  In the diagnostics areas, CDFD has increased the
 range of services provided, encompassing psychogenetic, biochemical, molecular diagnosis and molecular cytogenetics.
 CDFD has been designated as the Indian node for the European Molecular Biology Network and it also hosts an unusually
 large number of software and databases for genome analysis with browsable databases at its website. 
39.       CDFD has been imparting training to personnel for providing state-of-the-art services in DNA fingerprinting. An
 active summer training and project training programme attracts and enables young scholars to enter the Ph.D. programme
 in different institutions in the country.  The students are enrolled at CDFD register for their Ph.D. Degrees at the
 University of Hyderabad.  A National level Statutory Body (D-PAC) has been set up to draft a legislation on DNA, which

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 will be introduced in Parliament for enactment as a law.  
40.       The research areas being pursued in frontier area of modern biology include genetics, epidemiology and
 diagnostics of childhood blindness; cancer biology and metastasis of HPV induced cervical cancer; structural & functional
 genomics of Mycobacterium tuberculosis; silkworm genome sequencing partnership at the global level; sequencing of the
 Mycobacterium W.; computational biology etc.
41.       The Budgetary allocations for the Centre For DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics , Hyderabad is Rs.28.00crores
 for the year 2006-2007, which is an increase of Rs.8.00 crores  over the allocation of  Rs. 20.00 crores at BE and RE
 stages for the year 2005-06.The Committee has been informed that the enhanced budget allocation will be utilized for the
 following purposes:
Establishment and shifting to new campus of CDFD at Gandhipet near  Hyderabad.
Increase in office overheads/maintenance/furnishing/upkeep of the new Campus.
Purchase of equipment for diagnostic and fingerprinting laboratory.
42.       The major Achievements  of the Centre during the year 2005-06 are as follows:
(i)         Testing of genetically modified food and organisms (GM/GMO)
(ii)        Technology transfer of DNA fingerprinting to State Forensic Laboratory
(iii)       Data base of genetic disorders prevalent in India
(iv)       Data base of the pathogen that causes TB
(v)        Research on genetics of spontaneous mutation in bacteria
(vi)       Structure function and drug development efforts against TB
(vii)      Silk worm sequencing of its genome.
(viii)      Bioinformatics partnership with global leaders.
(ix)       Approval of DNA profiling Bill – 2005
(x)        Sun Centre of Excellence 
43.       The Department has informed that the new activities which are going to be reinforced/initiated during the 2006-07
 are as follows:
(i)         Improvised methodologies for high throughput STR based DNA fingerprinting.
(ii)        New diagnostics tools development.
(iii)       DNA fingerprinting of ethnic populations in India of particular interest in forensics and analysis of human genome
 diversity.
(iv)       Computational biology of pathogenic mutations.
(v)        Host-parasite interactions during cellular signaling.
(vi)       Setting up a Centre for molecular ecology and biodiversity.
(vii)      Laboratory for plant genetic fingerprinting.
(viii)      Sequencing of the Mycobacterium W.
(ix)       Systematic analyses of the structure-sequence information in known protein families in order to formulate
 knowledge-based rules useful for similarity detection and structure prediction and modeling of distantly related proteins.
(x)        Development of fast and fully automated computer programs keeping in view the great necessity of such programs
 for high-throughput structure determination initiated worldwide.
(xi)       Creation and maintenance of databases for the protein models resulting from (c) annotated with functional
 information and hyper-linked to the other databases such as, HOMSTRAD and CAMPASS.
(xii)      World class Bioinformatics facility by partnering with the SUN microsystem.
Integrated approach to understand the biology of M.tuberculosis using genetic immunological and structural aspects.
Genetics and epidemiology of Leptospirosis
HRD and manpower development
DNA Training Academy
Infrastructure in Nano-Biology
High throughput genetic screening
Genomics and proteomics of infectious pathogens: dissecting the host-pathogen interplay
Promote decentralization of state DNA Labs
Disaster victim identification cell
Non-human DNA Profiling
DNA Play Center 
44.       The Committee is of the opinion that automated DNA sequencing, comprehensive in silico modeling studies and
 microarray based approaches ,which have already been initiated, should be brought to their logical conclusion. The
 Committee also feels that Data bases of genetic disorders prevalent in India and  of the pathogen that causes TB should be
 completed as soon as possible as they can serve  as an  important referential  source for further studies and research.

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR PLANT GENOME RESEARCH (NCPGR), NEW DELHI
45.       The NCPGR was established in 1998 with the mandate to primarily develop research on identified aspects of plant
 genome and undertake, aid promote guide and coordinate research of high caliber in basic and applied 
 molecular/genomic plant biology.  The projects initiated at the Centre are:
Genomics for nutrition and quality improvement of crops;
Structural and functional genomics of the food grain crops chickpea;
The secondary metabolism in the medicinal plant “carharanthus reseus”; and   arabidopsis and rice functional genomics in
 complementation of work on chickpea and catharanthus.  These analyses will include research on genomics of plant
 pathogen interaction and drought tolerance together with transgenic analysis.
46.       The research programme of NCPGR aims to contribute to the understanding of the structure, expression and
 function of genes and arrangement of genes on plant genomes and manipulation of plant genes/genomes to breed
 improved varieties of food and industrial crops for high yields of better quality products. In addition, the Centre aims to
 aid, promote, guide and coordinate research of high caliber in basic and applied molecular/genomic plant biology. The
 Centre is also a given mandate to impart training at pre-and post-doctoral levels for developing human resource in the
 core-areas of plant molecular biology, genetic engineering and genome analysis.
47.       The major achievements of the Centre during 2005-06 are as follows:
Technical
A. Nutritional Genomics
(i)         The selected AmA1 lines are expected to be entered into large-scale trials.
(ii)        Field trials on OXDC-tomato will be extended.
(iii)       Work on AmA1 overexpression in rice, sweet potato and cassava and OXDC in Lathyrus and groundnut will be
 intensified.
B. Structural Genomics
New DNA-based markers developed in chickpea and other legumes, Catharanthus roseus and cereals and millets to
 develop/extend the respective maps, for positional cloning of genes, to place newly identified/defined markers on the
 maps, for transfer of markers between plants of same and different families, to pyramid genes of interest and for relating
 proteins, genes and their map positions.
C. Functional Genomics
(i)         Progress is being made in the use of differential expression between control and variously stressed chickpea
 cultivars to identify new genes and relate them with their functions in the promotion/arrest of Fusarium and Ascochyta
 caused diseases, growth during dark and determination of drought tolerance in chickpea.
(ii)        Mutants accessions and hairy root lines of C. roseus are being investigated for their genetic differences to uncover
 genetic regulation elements governing expression of alkaloid traits.
(iii)       Work on fruit ripening genes has been extended.
(iv)       MAPK signaling pathway of rice is being investigated in detail.
(v)        Functions of ZBF1 and ZBF2 factors are being revealed.
(vi)       The roles of mfp and lld in leaf development of pea are being investigated with progress.
D. Transgenic Analysis
Transgenics for ZBF1 gene were developed in tomato and carrot and for genes involved in disease and drought tolerance
 in tobacco.
E. Comparative Genomics
Comparative genomics is being pursued in chickpea, pea, C. roseus, cereals and millets and tomato to discover new genes
 and corresponding promoters for their characterization, manipulation and use.
F. Other activities
(i)         Educational, training, workshop, seminar/symposium, inter-institutional collaborations are being pursued with
 vigor.
(ii)        New R&D programmes have been developed for obtaining extramural funding, with some success.
48.       The Committee was informed about the Proposed Programme  of the Centre for 2006-2007, which are as follows:
Physical
It is proposed to take up construction of a hostel to accommodate 85 students comprising, 40 Ph.D. scholars 10
 JRF/SRF/RA Projects, 20 Trainee students & 15 Scientist / Trainee in workshop cum training programme.
Technical
A. Nutritional Genomics
(i)         Detailed yield, quality, molecular and safety analysis of AmA1
+ potato; Development of regeneration and
 transformation protocols in rice, sweet potato and cassava for transfer of Ama1+ gene.

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
(ii)        Molecular analysis of OXDC+ tomato transgenics will be carried out and trial will be initiated; Lathyrus OXDC+
 transformants will be isolated; A regeneration protocol for spinach will be developed.
B. Genome Structure
(i)         Development of EST-SSR markers to differentiate chickpea genetic resources and legume species related to
 chickpea; cloning and sequencing of size variant alleles of genes from different chickpea strains and legumes.
(ii)        Heritability and effects of deficiency in DNA methylation in lli mutant will be investigated.
C. Functional Genomics in chickpea
(i)         Construction of chickpea cDNA array and transcript profiling of compatible and incompatible chickpea.
(ii)        Fusarium interactions; construction and screening of large insert chickpea genomic library.
(iii)       Generation and characterization of tobacco transgenics for WRKY transcription factor, Ser-Thr protein kinase and
 nsLTP genes of chickpea that are induced upon Ascochyta infection.
Cloning and functional analysis of a novel drought-responsive genes of chickpea.
Identification and characterization of genes that determine drought tolerance in chickpea; cloning, sequencing and
 functional analysis of CaDREB2 and CaCIPK6 genes of chickpea; Expression analysis of drought inducible ESTs by
 Northern blots.
Light induced gene LINI of chickpea will be characterized in homologous and heterologous plant systems.
D. Functional genomics in other plant systems
(i)         The structural and regulatory genes concerned with the alkaloid biosynthesis will be examined for expression in
 variants of Catharanthus roseus.
(ii)        Construction and characterization of zbf1, zbf2 double mutants, study of effect of overexpression of ZBF1 on
 tomato.
(iii)       Isolation, cloning and characterization of a candidate gene a-mannosidase;
Molecular analysis of fungal tolerance in OXDC
+ tomatoes and their field trial;
(iv)       Investigation of lld and mfp phenotypes in af, tl and tac backgrounds;
(v)        The functions of various MAPK genes will be worked out in rice via their cloning, overexpression and silencing in
 rice and heterologous systems.
E. Comparative Genomics
Comparative genomic analysis in wheat, rice, legumes, foxtail millet and tomato.
F. Transgenic Analysis
Production of transgenics in crop plants using the genes of agricultural interest.
49.       The Committee observes that the research programme of NCPGR aims at contributing to the understanding of the
 structure, expression and function of genes and arrangement of genes on plant genomes and manipulation of plant
 genes/genomes to breed improved varieties of food and industrial crops for high yields of better quality products. The
 mandate of the Department becomes extremely crucial in the light of the fact the India is on the threshold of second Green
 revolution. The technological advances made in the field of agriculture bio-technology should, in the ultimate analysis,
 translate into increased farm productions which can raise per-capita income in the farm sector.
BIOTECH FACILITIES, CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE AND PROGRAMME SUPPORT
50.       The main objective of the Biotech facilities Scheme is to promote establishment of repositories for
 conservation/preservation of living organisms including microbes both useful and harmful in agriculture, human health,
 animal husbandry and bio-industries as well as establish sophisticated biotech facilities for research, training, services
 including supply of reagents/materials. While the main thrust of the ‘Centre of excellence and programme support’ is to
 support various Centres in the areas of Biotechnology and undertaking basic research in modern biology where the end
 user of the research outcome is the scientific community.
51.       The allocation under the programme Biotech Facilities, Centres of Excellence and programme support has
 increased considerably from Rs.45.00 crores in B.E. and Rs.27.00 crores in R.E. during the year 2005-2006 to Rs.62.00
 crores in 2006-2007 aat B.E. stage. When the Committee enquired about the plan of action of the Department for the
 utilization of the increased allocation the Committee has been informed that during the year, Centres of Excellence have
 been supported in indentified thrust areas.  New proposals were invited based on the redefined objectives and structure.  A
 new apex committee was constituted for these programmes. Accordingly, since these projects were received only in
 September, 2005, the R.E. was reduced.  For the next year, however, a larger number of programmes are expected to be
 generated.  The increased allocation is to meet ongoing expenses and for new projects.
52.       The major achievements of the Biotech facilities scheme during the year 2005-06 are as follows:
 (i)        Specialized programme support will be initiated in areas of marine and environmental biotechnology, stem cell
 and tissue engineering, clinical proteomics, RNAi, diagnostics based on quantum dot and biomembrane, etc. Centres of
 excellence in areas of biotechnology for public health would be supported for vaccines and diagnostics scale up and

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 optimization. Special emphasis will also be laid on strengthening of agriculture universities through programme support.
 An effort would be made to network these to national laboratories for validation and extension of technologies in the
 field. 
(ii)        It is proposed to set up clinical research centres to facilitate product evaluation, including neurological and
 psychiatric disorders. The point of emphasis would be to correlate the therapeutic outcome and pharmacological and
 cognitive therapies using magnetic resonance imaging and fMRI. The objective of the centre would also be to develop
 better diagnostic tools and rational therapies for brain disorders under programme support. In the coming years there
 would be great demand for toxicological evaluation of drugs, vaccines, and other pharmaceutical and GM products and
 there would be need of laboratories for undertaking such work. Currently there are only a few laboratories having GLP
 facility to undertake such evaluation. Therefore, it is proposed to support a certain number of laboratories to develop
 Animal Houses with GLP compliant, State-of –the-Art facilities fulfilling international standards. Such laboratories
 besides helping academia and industry in the country will also be able to attract international costumers for contractual
 service.
(iii)       International Depository Authority (IDA) certified centers for maintaining viruses, parasites, and certain
 pathogenic bacteria are necessary for the purpose of patenting. Currently, the only International Depository Authority
 (IDA) certified centers for maintaining microbial culture is situated at IMTECH, Chandigarh. It is necessary that the
 country should have more such centers either independently or as separate centers in different institutes for maintaining
 these facilities.
(iv)       The following five projects have been supported by the DBT so far during the year 2005-06 in ‘Programme
 Support’ mode: (i) Research on Cancer Biology and Therapeutics at Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore; (ii) Research
 on industrially important non-conventional yeasts at Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore; (iii) Development of drought
 tolerant crop varieties by biotechnological approaches at University of Agricultural Sciences, Bangalore and International
 Centre for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, New Delhi; (iv) Characterization and validation of the mangrove genes
 in transgenic rice systems for abiotic stress tolerance at M.S. Swaminathan Research Foundation, Chennai, and (v)
 Development of technologies for therapeutic proteins at Institute of Microbial Technology, Chandigarh.
53.       The Committee was informed that the new projects/programmes in the area of Repositories, Biotech Facilities,
 Programme Support and Centres of Excellence would be taken up during 2006-2007  based on the recommendations of
 various  Expert Committees. The Committee was also informed that the following areas needed to be strengthened by
 identifying appropriate institutions and provide programme based support with focussed objectives:
Structural and computational biology
(ii)        Nanobiotechnology
(iii)       Animal biotechnology
(iv)       Medical Biotechnology
(v)        Agriculture biotechnology
(vi)       Molecular medicine: infectious and non-infectious diseases
(vii)      Other programmes in modern biology as per current needs.
54.       The Committee is of the opinion that the Department has taken steps to carry toxicological evaluation of
 genetically engineered products and development of protocols/guidelines to evaluate various GM products for its
 toxicological aspects.  A state of the art facility for generating toxicological data necessary for the certification and bio-
safety approval of all GM products and to aid research labs and Industry in evaluating the biotech products in the country
 has been created. The Committee feels issues of genetically modified seeds and their impact on agriculture in general and
 on farmers in particular are profound and have to be taken seriously. Environmental issues and other externalities have to
 be taken into account before agriculture bio-technology is allowed fully in the field. Beside this, the frequency of 
 toxicological evaluation of drugs, vaccines, and other pharmaceutical and GM products  will increase in the future and
 will require optimum utilization of these facilities .
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT      
55.       The Department has informed that it pursued programmes to generate required specialized/trained human resource
 at Post-graduate level in multi-disciplinary and application oriented field of Biotechnology (i.e. General biotechnology,
 Agriculture Biotechnology, Medical biotechnology, Marine Biotechnology, Neurosciences, Biochemical Engineering and
 Biotechnology) and to offer scholarships/fellowships at PG level, Ph.D. level and at post-doctoral level. A new
 programme for Junior Research Fellowship has been launched to generate human resource at doctorate level. Post
 doctoral Fellowship programme, Short-term training courses, Biotech, Industrial Training Programme have been well
 received.  Biotechnology Overseas Associateship programme was quite popular and most of the 27 mid-career and senior
 scientists selected for the award have availed the same.  Visiting scientists from abroad programme is being availed by
 more and more institutions.
Achievements  2005-06:

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
(i)         All ongoing PG teaching, DBT-JRF and Post-Doctoral Fellowship programmes continued.  6 new PG teaching
 courses in specialized subject areas in different regions of the country have been supported.  Financial support is provided
 to one University for strengthening their ongoing post-graduate course which is being run without DBT support. 
(ii)        Steps have been initiated to prepare schemes for teachers’ training courses in about 10-15 academic institutions to
 provide hands on training to the college/university teachers and technicians’ training in about 10 academic institutions to
 fulfill the need of industry for technician level scientists.
(iii)       174 PG students are placed for six months industrial training in different biotech industries. 
(iv)       10 short term training courses in biotechnology have been supported.
(v)        64 national/international seminars/conferences/symposia in multi disciplinary areas of biotechnology have been
 supported throughout the country.
(vi)       3 exhibitions/Trade fairs have been participated in the country and 2 International exhibitions/trade fairs have been
 participated in China & Malaysia  to showcase the biotechnology strength of India.
(vii)      6 popular lecture series in different R&D institution/universities are supported for biotechnology popularization.
(viii)      25 universities/ R&D institutions are considered for national science day celebrations on 28
th February.
(ix)       56 scientists have been provided air-fare (travel support) for presenting papers in the international conferences
 abroad.
Proposed programme for 2006-07:
(i)         All ongoing PG teaching courses, DBT–JRF and post doctoral fellowship programmes will be continued.  It is
 proposed to support about 5-6 new PG teaching courses in specialized subject areas.  One time financial support will also
 be provided to Universities/Institutes for strengthening their ongoing Post Graduate courses in Biotechnology. 
(ii)        It is proposed to start implementing the Teachers’ Training and technicians’ training courses initiated in the year
 2005-2006.
(iii)       About 200 PG students will be placed for six month’s industrial training in different Biotech industries. 
(iv)       More number of short term training courses in biotech will be supported.
(v)        More number of national / international seminars/conferences / symposia in multi disciplinary areas of
 biotechnology will be supported throughout the country.
(vi)       About 10-12 exhibitions / trade fairs will be participated in the country and about 4-5 international exhibitions /
 trade fairs will be participated to showcase the biotechnology strength of India in different countries.
(vii)      10 popular lectures series in different colleges / R&D institution / universities will be supported for biotechnology
 popularization.
(viii)      About 30 universities / R&D institutions will be considered for national science day celebrations on 28
th
 February. Biology scholarship will be awarded to 25 top students at 10+2 level in CBSE.
(ix)       About 125 scientists will be provided air-fare (travel support) for presenting papers in the international
 conferences abroad.
56.       In its interaction with the Secretary of the Department, the Committee expressed concern regarding updating of
 curriculum especially of inter-disciplinary courses like those of biotechnology in various central universities. The courses
 have not kept pace with the recent developments in the discipline. The Committee feels that there is a gap between the
 target fixed and goals achieved due to  non-availability of qualified scientists.  To cope with the technological innovation
 and achieving major break through, there is a need to develop a new strategy which can meet the international standards
 by way of quality training and education.  The Committee is of the opinion that the Department should moot an idea of
 creating a pool of scientists in various fields by encouraging scientists not only from various parts of the country but also
 attracting Indian Scientists working abroad by way of special incentives and creating good working environment. It also
 recommends improvement in syllabi of universities to keep tune with times along with improvement in teaching
 standards.
57.       The problem of inadequate supply of quality researchers for scientific research is dangerously growing to a level
 where it can severely hit scientific progress. Given the fact that metropolitan centres are no longer happy hunting grounds
 to enroll science students, as business studies and information technology provide more lucrative careers, potential
 scientists are to be found in small centres and then appropriately groomed. The Committee strongly recommends
 improved quality of science teaching in small centres and exposing talented students from such centres to the bigger world
 of innovation and discovery.
Bioprocess and Product Development
       58.            The Department has sought an enhanced allocation for Bio-process and      Product Development,
 amounting to Rs.20.00 crores for the year 2006-2007 as compared to Rs.16.00 crores in B.E. and R.E. during the year
 2005-2006.  The Committee has been informed that food Biotechnology, being a major identified thrust area, activities in
 the area would be expanded during the year.  In addition to this, during the year 2006-07 new projects in different areas of

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 industrial biotechnology will be generated and supported. 
Food Biotechnology
Achievements 2005-06:
Multi-Institutional network projects have been generated in the area of Nutraceuticals & Probiotics through Brain
 Storming sessions, which were sanctioned. Initiatives would be taken for technology diffusion of micronutrient fortified
 “Ultra-Rice” and to study their biological impact in addressing nutrition deficiencies. Taking into account the beneficial
 role of Zinc supplementation in child health, particularly for the treatment of diarrhea in developing countries, a dialogue
 with W.H.O for technology diffusion of dispersible Zinc tablets would be initiated.
Proposed programmes for 2006-07
 The programme would continue with its core activities concerning major on going and new initiatives on the projects in
 the area of food biotechnology.   Programmes will be generated on food safety issues; Nutraceuticals: process
 development to obtain health foods from herbal plants and traditional foods. Biofortification issues would be addressed.
 The projects, which have been initiated, would be pursued for their logical conclusion and development of
 product/processes.  The technologies developed at the laboratory scale would be brought to the level of pilot plant scale
 and transfer to the industry.
Microbial and Industrial Biotechnology
Achievements 2005-06:
The on-going projects in the area of microbial and industrial biotechnology would be continued with emphasis on
 development of novel molecules having industrial importance and environmental friendly techniques for social welfare.
 There would be an effort to develop projects in the identified areas. Research leads will be taken up for the pilot scale
 level demonstration. The technology for production of urokinase, the enzyme useful in dissolution of blood clots in
 myocardial system under haemorrhagic conditions, in hollow fiber bioreactor by nutrient manipulation using cell culture
 engineering is standardized.  Cholestrol biosensor has been developed. Some selected projects in the area of
 bioinstrumentation would be considered.
Proposed programmes for 2006-2007:
The projects which have been initiated during the previous year(s) would be pursued for their logical conclusion and
 development of product/processes.  Emphasis would be laid on perfection and scaling-up of the research leads obtained in
 various projects supported under this scheme. The technologies developed will be supported for patenting purposes so as
 to give full protection to the process developed under Patent Act. Some new projects in the area of microbial and
 industrial biotechnology and downstream processing would be developed with emphasis on development of novel
 molecules having industrial importance and environmental friendly techniques for social welfare. Funding of R&D
 projects in the identified areas by the expert group would be continued. Gap areas especially of national importance will  
 be identified and steps would be taken to initiate programmes in these areas.
IPR & Biosafety
Achievements 2005-06:
(i)         One-week course on IPR in biotechnology for officers and scientists at the National Law School of India
 University, Bangalore was conducted from 14
th November 2005 to 19th November 2005 to promote basic understanding
 of patents and other IPR-related issues, and to analyze issues in the area of patenting in Biotechnology.  34 scientists from
 various institutions attended the training course.  This course will be continued to build capacity in the area of IP.
(ii)        A one-day roving seminar was held at Himachal Pradesh University, Shimla on the patents on 21st November
 2005, which was attended by 125 participants.
(iii)       During the year, DBT has filed 15 no. of patents in India and in other countries through NRDC.  The total number
 of patent applications filed by DBT with PCT, USPTO and other countries, which are potential commercial successes
 presently, stand at 144.
Proposed programme for 2006-07:
Keeping in view the rapid changes due to globalization and proliferation of technology, implications of the changing laws
 on industries, commercial challenges and opportunities, it has been decided that 5 national roving seminars be conducted
 at different places for the awareness of concerned people. 
Biosafety:
Achievements 2005-06:
For making available transgenic crops and recombinant DNA therapeutics to the society at the earliest and at the same
 time not compromising on the safety of the products, the rationalized Biosafety guidelines and procedures would be
 followed. A dedicated website on Biosafety reflecting National and International Guidelines, National Rules &
 Procedures with dynamic interaction with Institutional Biosafety Committees (IBSC) is being developed. A website on
 Indian GMO Research Information System (IGMORIS) is being prepared. 

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
Proposed programme for 2006-07:
Implementation of Rules 1989 of Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 of Government of India to ensure safety from the
 use of Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) and products thereof in research and release in the environment as per
 the procedures & guidelines of Government of India. Efforts would be made to involve several Government agencies in
 evaluation of transgenic crops and r-DNA therapeutics. Programmes would be generated for assessment of several
 transgenic plants from environmental safety angle, taking also into consideration their implications in human food safety
 issues, wherever required.
            Aspect of Bio-safety and Genetically Modified Organism (GMOs)
 The advent of new molecular and cellular  techniques of genetic modifications of micro organisms  has led to the
 continuing emergence of products including organisms of bio-technology that promises substantial benefits and
 importance to the quality of life. These techniques are available but to be safely and effectively used, they must be applied
 according to a number of priniciples and with the support of a National Bio-safety Information Network and Advisory
 Service. The Committee is of the opinion that since newly introduced organisms have the potential for trans-frontier
 impacts, there is an urgent need to develop national code of conduct/practice to establish a general frame work and
 guidelines to ensure safety in research, development, production, trade and use of these Genetically Modified Organisms
 (GMOs). The Committee feels that with the development of  Comprehensive Code of Conduct and  Guidelines for Bio-
safety, the safe application of bio-technology in orderly manner would  be possible.
 
Assistance for Technology Incubators, Pilot Level Facilities, Biotechnology Parks and Biotech Development Fund
The scheme of providing financial/logistical support for establishment of biotechnology parks, biotechnology incubators,
 training and pilot projects in various States and organization has been designed to help small and medium enterprises and
 specially the young entrepreneurs who are not in a position to incur high capital expenditure in the biotech industry but
 have the capabilities to develop, design and perfect new biotech products and processes by utilizing the biotech incubators
 and pilot level facilities
While the allocations stood at Rs. 25.00 crore at B.E. in 2005-2006,  it was substantially reduced to 7.00 crore in R.E. the
 same year.  It now stands at Rs. 15.00 crore in B.E. 2006-2007.  According to the Department this budget is for Biotech
 Parks & incubators.  Since, the Biotech Parks were supported during 2005-06, there was not a high budget requirement for
 current year.  Next year, however, new parks would be supported and grant would also be required for ongoing park
 activities.
During the year 2005-06 six major projects were funded for the establishment of Biotechnology Parks & other related
 facilities in the cities/states of Lucknow, Hyderabd, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Punjab, Kerala.
The proposed Programme for 2006-07 includes:
More projects from State Governments and other organizations will be evaluated and suitable actions would be taken for
 establishment of technology incubators, pilot projects etc. based on the recommendations of the Expert Committee.
59.       The Committee has observed fluctuations in allocation to Assistance for Technology Incubators, Pilot Projects,
 Biotechnology Parks and Biotechnology Development Fund.
However, the Department has assured that the present allocation is for Biotech Parks Incubators.  The Committee hopes
 that the full action in the budgetary allocation would not hamper the growth of biotech parks where programmes were
 already initiated.  
60.       Small Business Innovation Research Initiative (SBIRI)
Achievements 2005-06:
The new scheme “Small Business Innovation Research Initiative (SBIRI)” launched by Department of Biotechnology to
 boost public-private-partnership effort in the country was approved during the year. The funding is provided for highly
 innovative, early stage, pre-proof-of-concept research. The scheme is being operated through a high level “Apex
 Committee SBIRI” and “Technical Screening Committee” constituted by the department. An agreement has been by the
 Department with Biotech Consortia India Lt., New Delhi on 1
st December 2005 for engaging the company as the Special
 Purpose Vehicle (SPV) / Fund Managers for smooth running of the scheme.
Proposed programme for 2006-2007:
The projects which have been initiated during the previous year(s) would be pursued for directive progress and
 development of product/processes.  Emphasis would be laid on perfection and scaling-up of the proof-of-concepts
 obtained in various projects supported under this scheme. The IPR developed will be supported for patenting purposes so
 as to give full protection to the process developed under Patent Act. Some new ideas and concepts in different areas of
 biotechnology would be generated with emphasis on development of novel molecules having industrial importance and
 environmental friendly techniques for social welfare. National consultations would be held for the purpose. Funding of
 projects to the eligible private firms in collaboration with institutions or independently in the identified areas by the Apex
 Committee would be continued. Gap areas especially of national importance will be identified and steps would be taken to

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 initiate programmes in these areas.
Public Private Partnership
61.       A major success during the current year has been the launch of public/private partnership scheme - Small Business
 Innovation Research Initiative (SBIRI), which promotes highly innovative early stage, pre proof-of-concept and late stage
 development research emphasizing on important national needs. Under the SBIRI Scheme, the projects which have been
 initiated during the current year would be pursued for directive progress and development of product/processes. 
 Emphasis would be laid on perfection and scaling-up of the proof-of-concepts obtained in various projects supported
 under this scheme. The IPR developed will be supported for patenting purposes so as to give full protection to the process
 developed under Patent Act.
62.       Allocation to Public Private Partnership has been increased from Rs.20.00 cores in B.E. and Rs.16.54 crores in
 R.E. in 2005-2006 to Rs.30.00 crores in B.E.  2006-2007. The Committee has been informed that the increased grants are
 for a new Public-Private partnership scheme SBIRI that  has been launched during September, 2005.  The Committee
 observes that the private companies in different sectors of Biotechnology have shown a good response.  Since the scheme
 has been initiated only in the second half of the year 2005-06, it hopes to expect a much better response during the year
 2006-07.  It appreciates the new initiative taken by the Department in this regard and in view of its importance to promote
 innovation for product development, this schemes need to expand in a big way.
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
1.         The Committee notes that the Department has been able to make optimum use of the funds allocation is carrying
 out its various programmes/activities.  It also notes the assurance of the Secretary of the Department that the remaining
 amount of the last quarter of 2005-2006 will be fully utilized by March, 2006.
(Para 21)
2.         The Committee notes the efforts made by the Institute  in the areas of stem cell biology, molecular neuroscience
 etc. The Committee is hopeful that the Institute will do its best to develop human embryonic stem cell lines and further
 translational research by transplanting embryonic stem cell lines in animal models of spinal cord and brain injury.  The
 knowledge derived from the above is extremely important considering its impact on clinical situations. (Para 25)
3.         The Committee further notes the importance of research in areas of computational neuroscience, system and
 cognitive neuroscience, developmental neurobiology and basic research towards understanding of neurological and
 psychiatric disorders, as such cases are on the rise in the country owing to the stressful demands of the modern civilization
 which take heavy toll of psychological well-being.(Para 26)
4.         The Committee feels that the development of new vaccines is extremely important. New vaccines and 
 immunodiagnostic kits will be required by the country to check spread of bacterial and viral diseases which either have
 become immune  to  old vaccines or are still un-tackled. (Para 31)
5.         The Committee also feels that in this age of market economics, fundamental high-end research being a high-risk
 venture requires participation from industry for distribution of risks between the research institute and the industry.
 Interaction with industry for manufacture of products developed from the research leads is extremely important to become
 commercially viable. The Committee hopes effective participation from the industry, which is also in long-term interest of
 quality research , will be encouraged  by the Department as far as possible.(Para 32)
6.         The Committee takes note of Studies that have been initiated to understand the process of differentiation of
 embryonic stem cells into cardiomyocytes and also into dopaminergic neurons which could be utilized for replacement of
 damaged neurons in neurological disorders such as Parkinson’s. The Committee feels that new discovery about bone
 marrow stem cells is of therapeutic importance and can prove important in finding better cure for diabetes.(Para 36)
7.       The Committee would also like the Institute to make more efforts for understanding the molecular basis of cancer
 using cell line and animal models as this can help understand this deadly disease better. The Committee would also like to
 emphasize the importance of studies on sequencing of the midgut cDNA library of Anopheles Stephensii, the mosquito
 responsible for spread of malaria in India as malaria is still prevalent in backward areas of the country and still require a
 lot of effort for total eradication(Para 37)                                                                
 8.        The Committee is of the opinion that automated DNA sequencing, comprehensive in silico modeling studies and
 microarray based approaches ,which have already been initiated, should be brought to their logical conclusion. The
 Committee also feels that Data bases of genetic disorders prevalent in India and  of the pathogen that causes TB should be
 completed as soon as possible as they can serve  as an  important referential  source for further studies and research.(Para
 44)
9.         The Committee observes that the research programme of NCPGR aims at contributing to the understanding of the
 structure, expression and function of genes and arrangement of genes on plant genomes and manipulation of plant
 genes/genomes to breed improved varieties of food and industrial crops for high yields of better quality products. The
 mandate of the Department becomes extremely crucial in the light of the fact the India is on the threshold of second Green
 revolution. The technological advances made in the field of agriculture bio-technology should, in the ultimate analysis,

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 translate into increased farm productions which can raise per-capita income in the farm sector. (Para 49)
10.       The Committee is of the opinion that the Department has taken steps to carry toxicological evaluation of
 genetically engineered products and development of protocols/guidelines to evaluate various GM products for its
 toxicological aspects.  A state of the art facility for generating toxicological data necessary for the certification and bio-
safety approval of all GM products and to aid research labs and Industry in evaluating the biotech products in the country
 has been created. The Committee feels issues of genetically modified seeds and their impact on agriculture in general and
 on farmers in particular are profound and have to be taken seriously. Environmental issues and other externalities have to
 be taken into account before agriculture bio-technology is allowed fully in the field. Beside this, the frequency of 
 toxicological evaluation of drugs, vaccines, and other pharmaceutical and GM products  will increase in the future and
 will require optimum utilization of these facilities .
(Para 54)
11.       In its interaction with the Secretary of the Department, the Committee expressed concern regarding updating of
 curriculum especially of inter-disciplinary courses like those of biotechnology in various central universities. The courses
 have not kept pace with the recent developments in the discipline. The Committee feels that there is a gap between the
 target fixed and goals achieved due to  non-availability of qualified scientists.  To cope with the technological innovation
 and achieving major break through, there is a need to develop a new strategy which can meet the international standards
 by way of quality training and education.  The Committee is of the opinion that the Department should moot an idea of
 creating a pool of scientists in various fields by encouraging scientists not only from various parts of the country but also
 attracting Indian Scientists working abroad by way of special incentives and creating good working environment. It also
 recommends improvement in syllabi of universities to keep tune with times along with improvement in teaching
 standards.(Para 56)
12.       The problem of inadequate supply of quality researchers for scientific research is dangerously growing to a level
 where it can severely hit scientific progress. Given the fact that metropolitan centres are no longer happy hunting grounds
 to enroll science students, as business studies and information technology provide more lucrative careers, potential
 scientists are to be found in small centres and then appropriately groomed. The Committee strongly recommends
 improved quality of science teaching in small centres and exposing talented students from such centres to the bigger world
 of innovation and discovery.(Para 57)
13.       The advent of new molecular and cellular  techniques of genetic modifications of micro organisms  has led to the
 continuing emergence of products including organisms of bio-technology that promises substantial benefits and
 importance to the quality of life. These techniques are available but to be safely and effectively used, they must be applied
 according to a number of priniciples and with the support of a National Bio-safety Information Network and Advisory
 Service. The Committee is of the opinion that since newly introduced organisms have the potential for trans-frontier
 impacts, there is an urgent need to develop national code of conduct/practice to establish a general frame work and
 guidelines to ensure safety in research, development, production, trade and use of these Genetically Modified Organisms
 (GMOs). The Committee feels that with the development of  Comprehensive Code of Conduct and  Guidelines for Bio-
safety, the safe application of bio-technology in orderly manner would  be possible.(Para 58)
14.       Allocation to Public Private Partnership has been increased from Rs.20.00 cores in B.E. and Rs.16.54 crores in
 R.E. in 2005-2006 to Rs.30.00 crores in B.E.  2006-2007. The Committee has been informed that the increased grants are
 for a new Public-Private partnership scheme SBIRI that  has been launched during September, 2005.  The Committee
 observes that the private companies in different sectors of Biotechnology have shown a good response.  Since the scheme
 has been initiated only in the second half of the year 2005-06, it hopes to expect a much better response during the year
 2006-07.  It appreciates the new initiative taken by the Department in this regard and in view of its importance to promote
 innovation for product development, this schemes need to expand in a big way. (Para 62)
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
XXIII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.30 a.m. on Monday, the 3
rd April, 2006 in Main Committee Room Ground Floor, Parliament
 House Annexe , New Delhi.
                       
PRESENT
 
1.         Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
 
LOK  SABHA
 
5.         Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
6.         Shri Francis Fanthome
7.         Shri Anant Gudhe
8.         Shri Brahmananda Panda
9.         Smt. Neeta Pateriya
10.       Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
      Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty                 
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Department of Biotechnology
Dr. M.K. Bhan, Secretary
Shri K.P. Pandian, JS&FA
Dr. S.N> Natesh, Scientist ‘H’
Dr. V.P. Gupta, Scientist ‘G’
Dr. K.K. Tripathi, Scientist ‘G’
Dr.(Mrs.) Seema Wahab, Scientist ‘G’
Dr. Renu Swarup, Director
Dr. T.S. Rao, Scientist ‘G’
Shri S.L. Govindwar, Scientist ‘G’
Shri S. Sinha, Scientist, G
Dr. R.R. Sinha, Scientst ‘G’
 
2.               At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya, M.P., a new Member nominated to the
 Committee w.e.f. 24
th March, 2006.
3.         The Chairman then welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Department of  Biotechnology and requested
 the Secretary to make a presentation regarding the Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department.  Thereafter, the
 Secretary made a visual presentation regarding the major activities formulated for the year 2006-07 and achievements of
 the Department during the year 2005-06.  He also mentioned about the budgetary allocations under different heads as also
 the functioning of the Department.  The Members then sought clarifications on points arising out of the presentation.  The
 Secretary replied to them.
  4.       The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 1.30 p.m. for lunch and reassembled at 3.00 p.m. to hear  Secretary,
 Department of Atomic Energy.
5.         *                                              *                                                          *
6.         A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7.         The Committee the adjourned at 04.45 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 4
th April, 2006.
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
XXII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 15
th May, 2006 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament
 House Annexe , New Delhi.
                       
PRESENT

157thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/157threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 
1.         Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Dr. Prabha Thakur
3.         Shri Dilip Singh Judev
4.         Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
 
LOK  SABHA
 
5.         Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
6.         Shri Francis Fanthome
7.         Shri Brahmananda Panda
8.         Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
9.         Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
10.       Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
11.       Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
12. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
      Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty                 
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
2.               The Committee took-up for consideration its draft ***, ***, 157
th, ***, ***, *** and *** Reports on Demands
 for Grants (2006-07) pertaining to the ***, ***, Department of Biotechnology, ***, ***, *** and *** respectively. After
 some discussion, it adopted all the reports without any modification.
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman, and in his absence, Dr. Prabha Thakur to present the Reports in the Rajya
 Sabha and Dr. Sujan Chakraborty, and in his absence, Shri Francis Fanthome to lay the same on the Table of the Lok
 Sabha on Thursday, the 18
th May, 2006.
 4.        The Committee, then, adjourned at 4.20 p.m. to meet again at 3.30 p.m. on Monday, the 22nd May, 2006.
 
***Related  to other matters.
# Nominated w.e.f. 24th  March, 2006.
$ Dr. Chhattarapal Singh Lodha ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 23rd December, 2005 consequent upon his expulsion from the  Rajya Sabha.
& Prof. Saif-Ud-Din Soz ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 29th January, 2006 on being  inducted into the Union Council of Ministers.
* Smt. Kum Kum Rai ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of  her  term in the Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 2nd April, 2006.
§ Shri Birabhadra Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of his term in the Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 2nd April, 2006.