PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY THIRD REPORT
Action Taken by the Ministry on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Three Hundred Fifteenth Report
of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on  Science  and  Technology,  Environment  and  Forests  on  the
Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd January, 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd January, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2019/ Pausa, 1940 (Saka)
323
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY THIRD REPORT
Action Taken by the Ministry on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Three Hundred Fifteenth Report
of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on  Science  and  Technology,  Environment  and  Forests  on  the
Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd January, 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd January, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2019/ Pausa, 1940 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS  ......................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT  ............................................................................................................. 1-13
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government ........................................................................... 2-9
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ...................... 10-11
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ............ 12
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final Replies
of the Government are still awaited .............................................. 13
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS—AT A G LANCE  ................................................... 14
6. M INUTES  ............................................................................................................ 15-18

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September, 2018)
1. Shri Anand Sharma  ––  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri Anil Baluni
5. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
6. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
7. Dr. Raghunath Mohapatra
8. Shri Parimal Nathwani
9. Shri Sharad Pawar
10. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
15. Kumari Sushmita Dev
16. Shri Ninong Ering
17. Shri Laxman Giluwa
18. Dr. K. Gopal
19. Shri Sunil Kumar Jakhar
20. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
21. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
22. Shri Daddan Mishra
23. Shri Chirag Paswan
24. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
25. Shri Hari Narayan Rajbhar

(ii)
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Vikram Usendi
29. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
#30. V acant
#31. V acant
SECRETARIAT
1. Shrimati  Sunita Sekaran, Joint  Secretary
2. Shri T. N. Pandey,  Director
3. Shri S. Rangarajan,  Additional Director
4. Shri Mohd. Salamuddin,  Additional Director
5. Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
6. Shri Shubham Bose,  Assistant Research Officer
#  Shri Raghu Sharma and Shri Nagendra Singh ceased to be  members of the Committee consequent upon their resignation
from the Lok   Sabha w.e.f. 21st December, 2018.

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present  the Report on
its behalf, present this Three Hundred and Twenty-third Report on Action Taken by the  Ministry of Earth
Sciences on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred and Fifteenth Report of
the Committee on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences, which was presented/
laid in both the Houses of Parliament on 13th March, 2018.
2. There were 25 Recommendations/Observations in the  Three Hundred and Fifteenth Report of the
Committee. Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations  of the Committee were received
from the Ministry on 29th May,  and 15th  October, 2018.
3 In the meeting held on 27th December, 2018,  the Committee considered the draft Report and
adopted the same.
New Delhi ;          ANAND SHARMA
27th December, 2018 Chairman,
Pausa 6,1940 (Saka) Department, Related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.

(iv)
ACRONYMS
AAS : Agromet Advisory Service
ACROSS : Atmosphere and Climate Research-Modeling, Observing System
and Services
AMFUs : Agromet Field Units
CA T-ESSC : Advance Training Centre in Earth Sciences and Climate
CMLRE : Centre for Marine Living Resources and Ecology
DAMU : District level Agro-Meteorological Units
GAGAN : GPS-Aided GEO Augmented Navigation
HPC : High Performance Computing
ICAR : Indian Council of Agricultural Research
IITM : Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology
IMD : India Meteorological Department
INCOIS : Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services
ISRO : Indian Space Research Organisation
MoES : Ministry of Earth Sciences
MTEF : Medium Term Expenditure Framework
NA VIC : Navigation with Indian Constellation
NCAOR : National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research
NCMRW : National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting
NIOT : National Institute of Ocean Technology
OTEC : Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion
RE : Revised Estimate
REACHOUT : Research Education and Training Outreach
SAC : Standing Audit Committee
SAGE : Seismology and Geosciences
UNESCO : United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation

REPORT
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Earth
Sciences on the recommendations/observations contained in Three Hundred Fifteenth  Report of the Committee
on ‘Demands for Grants (2018-2019) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences’. The Report was presented to
Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on the  13th  March, 2018.
2. Action Taken Note (ATN) has been received from the Ministry of Earth Sciences in respect of all the
nineteen recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Fifteenth Report. This has been
categorized as follows:-
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
Para:- 2.2, 2.4, 3.5, 4.3, 5.3, 6.1, 6.2, 8.7, 8.8, 9.5, 9.10, 10.5, 10.7, 11.3 and 11.4
(T
OTAL – 15).
Chapter II: Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies:
Para:- 2.7 and 7.4
             (T OTAL – 2).
The Committee is convinced with the replies furnished by the Ministry and, therefore, does not want
to pursue above-mentioned recommendations further.
Chapter III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee:
Para:- 7.5 and 7.6
(T
OTAL – 2)
Chapter IV: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the    Government
are still awaited:
Para:-
(T
OTAL - Nil)
3. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the succeeding pages.
1

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
FINANCIAL PERF1ORMANCE OF THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
1.1   The Committee notes that the BE allocation of the Ministry has been increasing during the last three
years.  However, during all the three years, not only was there a reduction in allocation at RE stage but the
Ministry also failed to utilize even the reduced allocation optimally by the end of each financial year, the
percentage of expenditure being 91.26%, 92.44% and 85.75% (as on 15.2.2018) respectively during the last
three years.  Though the Ministry’ s performance in implementing its policies and programme can be termed
as par excellence, the financial performance of the Ministry during the last three years can, in no way, be
termed as satisfactory. The Committee expects the Ministry to maintain financial discipline also. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should, review its financial performances during last three years and analyse
the reasons for underutilisation so as to develop a monitoring mechanism to ensure that such trend of
underutilisation does not continue in future. Para 2.2)
Action Taken
1.2 The financial performance of the Ministry is being reviewed on half-yearly basis by the Earth System
Science Council chaired by Secretary, MoES.  The last meeting was held on 27-28th April, 2018 at INCOIS,
Hyderabad.  It has also been decided to review the expenditure on monthly basis for achieving the financial
targets, as projected in Monthly Expenditure Projection.
Recommendation/Observation
1.3 The Committee observes that the BE allocation of the Ministry was reduced by nearly 
` 121.79 crore at
RE stage during 2017-18, which indicates that the progress of the schemes/programme was not on schedule
and targets not achieved as a result of which the RE allocation was reduced by Ministry of Finance. Further,
Ministry of Earth Sciences has spent nearly 86% of the allocation till 15th February, 2018 and the expenditure
under most of the schemes, except Seismology and Geosciences (SAGE) and Research Education and Training
Outreach (REACHOUT), is satisfactory. The Committee also observes that some of the autonomous bodies
under Ministry of Earth Sciences such as Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS),
Hyderabad, National Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai and National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean
Research (NCAOR), Goa have already fully utilised RE allocation made to them.
The Ministry is left to expend the remaining 14% in the remaining 44 days of the financial year 2017-
18. The Committee hopes that unlike the previous years, the Ministry would be able to utilise full allocation
during 2017-18. The Committee also recommends that adequate additional financial support, if required,
2

3
should be made to the three autonomous bodies which have already fully utilised the allocations made to
them. (Para 2.4)
Action Taken
1.4 The Ministry would like to thank the Committee for supporting additional allocation to meet the budgetary
requirement for the autonomous bodies of the MoES. It may kindly be noted that the Ministry has fully
utilised the funds allocated at RE stage for operation and maintenance of the autonomous bodies.  The
shortfall in the funds would be taken up with Ministry of Finance at the second supplementary stage during
the current Financial Year.
OCEAN SERVICES, TECHNOLOGY OBSERV ATIONS, RESOURCES MODELLING AND SCIENCES
(O-STORMS)
Recommendation/Observation
1.5 The Committee notes that the completion of CMLRE Building at Kochi is way behind scheduled target
of October , 2015 and the probable date of completion now is May 2018. The Committee is of the view that
delayed execution of projects not only escalates the cost of the projects but also reflects poorly on the
organisations concerned. The Committee recommends that the Ministry must impress upon all the concerned
agencies to complete the construction of the building at the earliest so that there is no surrender of funds on
this count in future. (Para 3.5)
Action Taken
1.6 Ministry has taken all possible steps to closely monitor the progress of the construction work and in
the recent PMC meeting CPWD was asked to complete the work by the end of August, 2018.
W A VE ENERGY
Recommendation/Observation
1.7 Keeping in view the energy resource constraint in the country and the need for additional sources of
energy, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should undertake a detailed study on the subject. The
Ministry should also study as to whether the technology will be economically viable and how much this
source of energy will benefit the country, if the production is harnessed.  (Para 4.3)
Action Taken
1.8 National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) has been involved in demonstrating technologies for
harnessing energy from wave and marine currents and power has been produced at sea on demonstration
mode. The experience can now be used to scale up these technologies. Further, a proposal is under
consideration for installing a desalination plant at Kavaratti in Lakshadweep which will be powered by
Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC). As of now, the technologies developed are not economically
viable, however, are useful for islands and ocean observations.
RESEARCH EDUCATION AND TRAINING OUTREACH (REACHOUT)
Recommendation/Observation
1.9 The Committee notes that although the BE allocation (2017-18) of 
` 44.00 crore for REACHOUT was

4
increased to ` 46.00 crore at RE stage, the Ministry has been able to spend only ` 33.22 crore by 15th
February, 2018 i.e. 72.21 percent only. Underutilisation in scheme which promotes research activities in
various sectors of Earth system sciences is certainly not desirable. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry of Earth Sciences should pay due attention towards research activities and ensure that no funds
earmarked for it are underutilised in future. (Para 5.3)
Action Taken
1.10 As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry will make every effort to fully utilise the funds
allocated for the REACHOUT Programme in 2018-19.
1.11 Though the funds were increased from `  44 crore to `  46 crore, there was re-appropriation of funds
of an amount of `  9.5 Crore under GIA for which the approval from Parliament was required. The same
was received on 30th March. The Ministry was able to spend `  45.50 crore by 31st March 2018.
INCREASE IN ALLOCATION FOR RESEARCH ACTIVITIES
Recommendation/Observation
1.12 The Committee notes that in 2017-18 and 2018-19, the allocation of REACHOUT is only 4.6% and
6.27% respectively of the total allocation for Central Sector schemes. Although the comparative allocation
has increased in 2018-19, the allocation for research scheme needs to be increased. (Para 6.1)
Action Taken
1.13 The Ministry noted the recommendations of the Committee and will make efforts to increase the
allocation for REACHOUT scheme.
Recommendation/Observation
1.14 The Committee is of the opinion that facilitating research and development and investing for the same
are extremely important for the development of any nation and for a developing country like India, the
critical importance of research and development cannot be overemphasised. The Committee urge that the
Ministry should pay due attention to this sector and work towards achieving its targets in facilitating
research and development. The Committee feels that the Ministry would be able to utilise its BE allocation
for the year 2018-19 to the extent possible and achieve the targets envisaged for the year. (Para 6.2)
Action Taken
1.15 The Ministry noted the recommendations of the Committee.  The Ministry ensures the necessary
advance measures will be initiated to utilise the BE allocations for the year 2018-19 towards achieving the
targets.
ARRESTING BRAIN DRAIN
Recommendation/Observation
1.16 The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry for developing skilled manpower required for
Ministry of Earth Sciences major job objectives. However, as brought out by the Committee in the preceding

5
paragraphs, the scholar intake is certainly less than required in the country. Therefore, there is a need to
develop a scientific temperament in the youth of our country and create their interest in scientific subjects so
that we have more and more people coming forward in this field. The coordinating body suggested by the
Committee in the earlier paras can also take a lead in this regard and make scientific subjects more popular
amongst our youth. (Para 8.7)
Action Taken
1.17 Towards development of skills in the field of Earth Sciences, the MoES has established  an international
training centre for operational oceanography at INCOIS, Hyderabad.  This will provide a good scientific
temperament among the graduates for conducting front ranking research in the field of ocean, science and
technology.  In December, 2017, this centre has been upgraded as category II Centre of the UNESCO.  In
coordination with Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR), Ministry of Agriculture,  the Ministry has
been establishing the District  level   Agro-Meteorological  Units (DAMU) in each of the district to provide
training to the local farmers and utilization of weather forecast information.  This will be in addition to
existing 130 Agromet Field Units (AMFUs) which will act as DAMUs for the districts of their location, 530
DAMUs will be established in a phased wise manner.
Recommendation/Observation
1.18 The Committee is of the view that brain drain has become a major concern in the country. A majority
of the country’ s skilled workforce goes abroad in search of greener pastures. The Committee feels that there
is no dearth of talent in the country. The need is to tap this talent and provide all necessary wherewithal for
achieving excellence in their respective fields. The Committee recommends that there should be no let up in
the efforts of the all scientific Ministries/Departments of the Government to attract talented people in
scientific fields. The Ministry of Earth Sciences too must inspire the best brains and continue with its
various schemes. (Para 8.8)
Action Taken
1.19 The Ministry would like to thank the Committee for supporting the activities to bring talented scientists
from abroad to India  for promoting high end research in the field of earth sciences.  In this connection,
Ministry has established Advance Training Centre in Earth Sciences and Climate (CAT-ESSC).  The primary
purpose is to generate large pool of dedicated weather and climate scientists, who on successful completion
of induction training will be placed in various constituent  units of MoES.  Besides Ministry has also established
Chair Professors in reputed National Academic and Scientific Organisations for benefit of Researchers and
opening centre of excellences.
ATMOSPHERE AND CLIMATE RESARCH-MODELLING OBSERVING SYSTEMS AND SERVICES
(ACROSS)
Recommendation/Observation
1.20 The Committee notes that although the overall financial performance of the Ministry under the ACROSS

6
scheme has been satisfactory, the delay in the civil works of IMD is a cause of concern. The Committee
recommends the Ministry should take up the matter with CPWD and other concerned agencies to ensure that
in 2018-19, the civil works of IMD progress as per the schedule and funds are utilised optimally
(Para 9.5)
Action Taken
1.21 In order to ensure that works are completed as per schedule and funds are utilized properly, proper
monitoring of all projects is being done. Authorizations are booked in instalments, so that funds are not
blocked and payments released accordingly as per completion of work.  Furthermore, as per recommendation
of the Committee, matter would be taken up with CPWD to ensure that the civil works are not delayed
during 2018-19 and funds are utilized optimally.
Recommendation/Observation
1.22 The Committee finds the replies submitted by the Ministry on the queries raised by the Committee with
respect to achievements regarding Agromet Advisory Services and District Agro meteorological Field Units
evasive. In response to both the queries, the Ministry has not categorically replied as to whether the Ministry
would be able to complete the targets during the year and has merely furnished the factual position in this
regard. However, the Committee observes from the replies that the Ministry fell too short of its target of
setting up of District Agro-meteorological Field Units (DAMUs). The critical importance of DAMUs in
dissemination of relevant information cannot be overemphasised and the failure to achieve the targets in
this regard does not reflect well on the part of the Ministry. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
should take a fresh look at its targets and plan accordingly so that the Ministry is able to complete its targets
during 2018-19 and the maximum number of farmers can avail the benefit of crop advisories. (Para 9.10)
Action Taken
1.23 It is planned to extend the Agromet Advisory Service (AAS) network to district level by setting up of
DAMUs in 530 districts in the premises of KVK of ICAR, complementary to existing 130 Agromet Field
Units (AMFUs), thus creating a network of 660 units for providing Agromet services to farmers in the
country by 2019-20.  A list of 250 districts including 115 aspirational districts has been finalized for setting
up of DAMU at KVKs and action has been initiated to set up the DAMUs in these 250 districts. ICAR has
designated Project Coordinator of KVK as Nodal Officer to look after DAMU activity. The initial fund of
`  2.4 cr. (@ ` 1.2 lakh per unit) has been already transferred to ICAR for establishing required facility to
start the advisory service in above districts. ICAR is giving thrust to this joint venture as it would be highly
beneficial for the farmers.   MoU has been signed between IMD and ICAR in Month of April, 2018. ICAR
can further follow up to start the activity at KVK level and other supportive activity including training etc.
Process for recruitment of manpower at DAMUs will also be taken up simultaneously on priority basis.
These 250 DAMUs will be opened during 2018-19.  For remaining 280 districts (to be established during
2019-20), preliminary process would be initiated during 2018-19 for interaction visit at KVKs with the help
of officers from Regional Meteorological Centre/Meteorological Centre, Agro Advisory Service Divisions,

7
Agricultural Technology and Application Research Institute and Agromet Field Units, to complete the network
of 660 DAMUs in the country by March 2020.
Cyclone Warning Services - Cyclone Ockhi
Recommendation/Observation
1.24 The Committee is of the view that inspite of the claims made by the Ministry with regard to advance
warning for the natural calamities, the end-beneficiary of the system has not been benefited to the desired
extent. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should identify the loopholes in the system and take all
necessary measures to plug the same for dissemination of service of forecasts and warnings to all the
concerned stakeholders.
  The Ministry should also impress upon all the State Governments to take immediate
action on the warnings and take all necessary action so that the benefit of advance warnings reaches to the
ground level. (Para10.5)
Action Taken
1.25 In order to enhance Outreach of IMD for dissemination of services and products following steps are
being taken :
* In collaboration with Survey of India, a dynamical web hosting of various observational and
model products in geo-spatial platform is being attempted. The experimental product has been
demonstrated by the service provider. After this web hosting, application products like Mobile
App will be attempted during 2018. Further, IMD has opened Facebook and Twitter accounts. It
is available on main page of IMD website. The warning products are being updated regularly. A
three minute video film on All India weather forecast is being prepared daily for telecast by the
Doordarshan. Also this movie is available on Facebook and Twitter.
* METCAP PLUS (Meteorological communication and application package) is being introduced. It
is a Visualization software (all observations including satellite, Radar, AWS, conventional and
NWP models) adapted from Turkey Meteorological Service. It can work as a Decision support
system for the forecasters.   It can help in preparing all types of forecasts starting from nowcast
to short / medium range forecast. It can cater to aviation and non-aviation forecasts. It can also
be used for sector specific forecasts like cyclone forecast.
* WMO’s South Asia Flash Flood Guidance Centre will start experimentally at IMD, New Delhi
from 2018. The primary mission of this System is to provide real-time informational guidance
products pertaining to the imminence of potential small-scale flash flooding throughout the region
of application.
* Augmentation of the DWR network over the country helped in plugging the existing gaps in the
meteorological observational network of radars for most parts of the country for providing adequate
warning. Currently the number of location specific now casting (forecasting for next three hrs)

8
against thunderstorm has been increased to 399 in 2018 apart from district-wise now cast for
severe weather events introduced since 2017. The now cast bulletins are disseminated through
IMD website, SMS and Farmers portal of Government of India
* To manage the heat wave impact, since 2016, India Meteorological Department (IMD), Ministry
of Earth Sciences (MoES) has started issuing Hot Weather Season forecast outlooks of March-
May temperatures.  A bi-weekly outlook is also issued every Thursday.  In addition, IMD also
issues heat wave alerts and warnings for 5-7 days and outlook for subsequent 7 days with daily
updates of Heat Waves experienced.
The State Meteorological Centres of IMD in association with various State Governments have
been closely coordinating in issuing heat wave alerts so as to minimize public exposure and to
provide due assistance to the vulnerable people (Senior citizens and children) from sun stroke
related incidences.  Efforts of IMD are supported by expanding the outreach of heat wave alerts
by State Government agencies through print/visual media and other civil society organization.
Heat Action Plan is being implemented in cities across central India since 2016 including
Ahmedabad, Surat, Nagpur, Akola, Gondia, Chandrapur, Nanded, Jalgaon, Bhubaneswar and
Cuttack.  It is a comprehensive early warning system and preparedness plan for extreme heat
events.  The Plan presents immediate and longer-term actions to increase preparedness,
information-sharing, and response coordination to reduce the health impacts of extreme heat on
vulnerable populations.
Heat wave information including prevailing heat wave conditions, observed temperatures and
their anomaly, Heat Wave Warnings and Extended Range Forecast of Heat Wave Warnings are
being uploaded on IMD website as and when required and is updated twice a day.  Forecasting
offices functioning at most of state capitals across the country are providing the state level
information to the concerned State Government authorities and public in general.  Warnings are
being made available to more and more people through various electronic and print media and by
emails to many stakeholder including power, health and disaster management sectors.
* HMoES has written the letters to Hon’ble CMs of different States for preparing heat action plan
for their States. Similarly DGM, IMD has written letters to Chief Secretaries of States for this
purpose.
* MoES (INCOIS and IMD) are working with ISRO and State Govts. to implement NA VIC and
GAGAN systems for dissemination of fishermen warning to fishermen at deep sea.
1.26 Meteorological Centres, which represent IMD in their respective States, have been advised to have
good coordination with the State Governments.
Recommendation/Observation
1.27 The Committee appreciated the efforts of the Ministry regarding installation of ‘Pratyush’ High Power

9
Computing System at IITM, Pune. The Committee hopes that this High Power Computer System would not
only help improving the weather and climate prediction and forecast systems but would also predict cyclones
and tsunamis accurately and help in seismological studies. (Para10.7)
Action Taken
1.28 MoES would like to express gratitude to the committee for their appreciation towards procurement of
HPC.  Although the HPC system will be placed at two sites namely, IITM, Pune and NCMRW, Noida,   the
other centers of MoES responsible for various operational services including prediction of cyclones and
tsunamis and seismological studies, will be able to access the HPC through the NKN facility.
NON-SETTLEMENT OF AUDIT PARAS
Recommendation/Observation
1.29 The Committee notes with concern the audit paras relating to irregular payment of gratuity to employees
of NIOT, Chennai and non-establishment of desalination plants and wasteful expenditure on establishment
of desalination plants by NIOT. The Committee recommends that the Ministry must take corrective measures
in respect of all such instances and ensure that such incidents do not recur. (Para11.3)
Action Taken
1.30 The Ministry had taken a note on the recommendation of the Committee and setup a Standing Audit
Committee (SAC) to monitor the Audit Para under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Ministry of Earth
Sciences which are being held on monthly basis. Accordingly, the Audit Para in respect of irregular payment
of gratuity to employee of NIOT, Chennai and non-establishment of Desalination Plants and wasteful
expenditure on establishment of Desalination Plant by NIOT have been settled.
Recommendation/Observation
1.31 The Committee is further constrained to note that some of the Audit Paras of the Ministry are yet to be
settled even after 2 to 3 years.
  The Committee is of the view that the Audit Paras must be settled at the
earliest and for this purpose, the Ministry must submit satisfactory replies to the Audit so that they are settled
at the earliest and do not get entangled in repetitive submission of revised ATNs. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Earth Sciences should take necessary action accordingly for early settlement
of the Audit Paras pertaining to the Ministry. (Para 11.4)
Action Taken
1.32 The Ministry had taken a note on the recommendation of the Committee and setup a Standing Audit
Committee (SAC) to monitor the Audit Para under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Ministry of Earth
Sciences which are being held on monthly basis. Accordingly, the MoES has taken a proactive role in the
settlement of the Audit Para by timely submission of ATNs. It may kindly be noted that during the last one
year six Audit Para out of nine have been settled.

10
CHAPTER – II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR THE YEAR 2018-19
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 The Committee notes that the Ministry has been provided 
` 202.31 crore more than the RE allocation of
2017-18, which comes to nearly 13%. The Committee welcomes the increase in the allocation of the Ministry
for 2018-19 but at the same is constrained to note that an important programme like acquisition of Polar
Research Vessel will be further delayed due to non availability of funds. However, the allocation is still
lower than the projected demand of the Ministry of 
` 2219 crore. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should make all out efforts to ensure that the allocation made is utilised to the maximum in its
schemes/programmes and its physical targets proceed on schedule so that it is in a sound position to seek
additional allocations at RE Stage. (Para 2.7)
Action Taken
2.2 The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approved the acquisition of the Polar Research
Vessel at a total cost of `  1051.13 crores. Due to non-conclusion of tender process for contracting a
shipbuilding company, retendering under process. The acquisition, however, will be possible only if these
additional funds be made available to MoES over and above the limit of MTEF. MoES will approach the
Ministry of Finance for additional fund requirement.
COORDINATION BETWEEN THE SCIENTIFIC MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS
Recommendation/Observation
2.3 The Committee observes that there is overlapping and duplication in research efforts of many scientific
organisations of the country. For instance, Ministry of Earth Sciences has developed technology for
desalination of water. But similar technologies have also been developed by Departments of Science &
Technology, Scientific and Industrial Research and Atomic Energy also. Also, Indian National Centre for
Ocean Information Services, Ministry of Earth Sciences provides services to the fishermen/mariners at sea
through NAVIC in collaboration with ISRO and through GAGAN with Airports Authority of India about
cyclone/tsunami warnings, potential fishery zone and helping in tracking of ships. Both NAVIK of ISRO
and GAGAN of Airport Authority of India seem to provide almost identical services to fishermen/
mariners. (Para 7.4)
Action Taken
2.4 INCOIS is the only agency in the country that generates and provides the service/data on Ocean
Forecasts, Tsunami early warnings and Potential Fishing Zones. INCOIS has collaborated with ISRO and
10

11
Airport Authority of India to disseminate this information directly to fishermen and ships at Sea using
NA VIC and GAGAN. NA VIC has ~ 1500 km coverage from the coast and 26 kpbs bandwidth and GAGAN
has coverage over entire Indian Ocean and bandwidth of 256 kbps. Hence, NAVIC is useful only near the
coast for short messages and GAGAN is useful all over the Indian Ocean for longer messages. The
dissemination through both only will ensure wider reach of information to large number of users.   GAGAN
messages can reach to ships anywhere in the Indian Ocean in addition to fishermen. Hence, they are
complementary rather than duplicates.

CHAPTER – III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
COORDINATION BETWEEN THE SCIENTIFIC MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS
Recommendation/Observation
3.1 Although the Ministry has claimed working closely with various Ministries/Departments/Institutions at
different levels for effective and coordinated implementation of programmes to avoid duplicity in research
and technology development, the Committee is of the view that coordination highlighted by the Ministry
seems to be more for effective implementation of their programmes only. The Secretary of the Ministry has
admitted that at present there is no mechanism of an umbrella organisation for coordination between different
Ministries/Departments. (Para 7.5)
3.2 The Committee has already cited some instances of overlapping and duplication of research work. The
Committee feels that there is an urgent requirement of some institutional mechanism for effective coordination
between various scientific Ministries/Departments of the Government. The Committee hopes that as stated
by the Secretary, the proposal submitted by the Ministry of Earth Sciences will be considered at the earliest
to ensure that all gaps coming in the ways of effective coordination between scientific research work of the
various scientific Ministries/Department are filled at the earliest. (Para 7.6)
Action Taken
3.3 As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry is currently working with other relevant Ministries
such as, Environment, Agriculture, Aviation, S&T, Water Resources, Mines and Minerals, Coastal States for
effective implementation and coordination of the programmes to avoid duplicacy.  However, currently there
is no overarching established mechanism to oversee monitoring programmes except the annual monitoring
of work of Niti Aayog and Ministry of Finance being done through Outcome  Budget submitted by the
Ministry.
Further Observation/Recommendation
3.4 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and is of the view that an established institutional
mechanism for coordination between the various Scientific Ministries/Departments of the
Government of India is absolutely essential.  Judicious  utilisation of resources is important and
duplication of research work constitutes a wastage of various valuable resources. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take the lead and ensure necessary action is
taken in this regard.
12

CHAPTER – IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL  AWAITED
Nil
13

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS–AT A GLANCE
COORDINATION BETWEEN THE SCIENTIFIC MINISTERS/DEPARTMENTS
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and is of the view that an established institutional
mechanism for coordination between the various Scientific Ministries/Departments of the
Government of India is absolutely essential.  Judicious  utilisation of resources is important and
duplication of research work constitutes a wastage of various valuable resources. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take the lead and ensure necessary action is
taken in this regard.     (Para 3.4)
14

MINUTES

V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 27th December, 2018 in Committee Room No. 4, ‘A’
Block, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri Anil Baluni
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
5. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Jakhar
8. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
9. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
10. Shri Daddan Mishra
11. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
12. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
13. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He informed the
Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 317th, 318th, 319th, 320th,
321st, 322nd and 323rd reports of the Committee on Action Taken by  the Government on the
17

18
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in reports of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2018-19) of the Ministries/Departments of Biotechnology; Science and Technology; Scientific and
Industrial Research; Space; Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Atomic Energy; and Earth Sciences
respectively. The Committee, then, considered the draft 317th to 323rd reports and adopted the same.
3. The Committee decided to present/lay its 317th to 323rd reports in both the Houses of Parliament on
the 2nd January, 2019. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to decide the names of the Members
for presentation/laying of the reports in both the Houses of Parliament.
4. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3.25 
P.M.