Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
REPORT NO.
315
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th March, )13 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th March, )13 2018
THREE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH REPORT
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)
Demands for Grants (2018-19)
of the Ministry of Earth Sciences
(Demand No. 25)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

31
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2018-19)
of the Ministry of Earth Sciences
(Demand No. 25)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th March, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th March, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )-(v)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-17
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE .............................................................. 18-21
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 23-29

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
 ( Constituted on 1st September , 2017)
1. Shri Anand Sharma    —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
5. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
6. Shri C.P. Narayanan
7. Shri Parimal Nathwani
8. Shri Sharad Pawar
9. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri P.P . Chauhan
16. Kumari Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
21. Shri Daddan Mishra
22. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
23. Shri Chirag Paswan
24. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
130. Vacant
231. Vacant
(i)
1 Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 12th December, 2017.
2 Shri Nana Patole ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from the Lok Sabha w.e.f. 14th December, 2017.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this Three Hundred Fifteenth Report of the Committee. This Report deals with the detailed
Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences (Demand No.25).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on 20th February, 2018, the Secretary and other officers of the
Ministry of Earth Sciences gave an overview of the various activities of the Ministry and the Members
sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Ministry to enable it to scrutinise the
Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Ministry for replying to the clarifications
sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the draft report in its meeting held on the 6th March, 2018.
(ANAND SHARMA)
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
6 March,  2018 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Phalguna 15, 1939 ( Saka)  Science and Technology, Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

ACRONYMS
B E  : Budget Estimate
BIMSTEC : Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation
CAG : Comptroller and Auditor General
CMLRE : Centre for Marine Living Resources
CPWD : Central Public Works Department
CSIR : Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
DAMUs : District Agrometeorological Field Units
DBT : Department of Biotechnology
DST : Department of Science and Technology
GAGAN : GPS Aided GEO Augmented Navigation
HPC : High Performance Computing
ICAR : Indian Council of Agricultural Research
ICMAM : Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management
IITM : Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology
IMD : India Meteorological Department
INCOIS : Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services
ISRO : Indian Space Research Organisation
IST : Indian Standard Time
KVKs : Krishi Vigyan Kendras
M E A : Ministry of External Affairs
MeitY : Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
M H A : Ministry of Home Affairs
MHRD : Ministry of Human Resource Development
MoES : Ministry of Earth Sciences
MoF : Ministry of Finance
NA VIK : Navigation with Indian Constellation
NCAOR : National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research
(iv)

(v)
NCESS : National Centre for Earth Science Studies
NCMRWF : National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting
NCS : National Centre for Seismology
NDMA : National Disaster Management Authority
NIOT : National Institute of Ocean Technology
NITI Aayog : National Institution for Transforming
PPP : Public-private partnership
RE : Revised Estimate
SMS : Short Messaging Service
UNESCO : United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

1
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Ministry of Earth Sciences was established in the year 2006 by bringing all the agencies of
meteorological and ocean developmental activities under one umbrella. The sole purpose of the endeavour
was to address holistically various aspects relating to earth system processes for improving forecast of the
weather, climate and various natural geo-hazards. The ministry inter alia is responsible for development of
technology towards the exploration and exploitation of marine resources in a sustainable way for the socio-
economic benefits of the society. In October 2007, an Earth System Science Organisation (ESSO) was
established as an executive arm primarily to provide overall directions for implementation of various policies
and programmes.
1.2 The primary mandate of the Ministry is to develop and improve capability to forecast, weather,
climate and hazard related phenomena for societal, economic and environmental benefits including addressing
climate change science and developing climate services and integrated Himalayan meteorology. Secondly,
exploring ocean resources for socio-economic benefit including develop required state-of-the art technology
for harnessing marine non-living resources is major mission of the Ministry. The overarching vision of the
Ministry is to excel as knowledge and technology enterprise in the realm of earth sciences for socio-
economic benefit of the society. The objectives of the Ministry are as under:-
(i) To provide weather forecasts and advisories for agriculture, aviation, public safety, water
resources, shipping, sports including the extended and Long Range Seasonal Monsoon
forecasts.
(ii) To provide a wide range of ocean information advisories including fishery information.
(iii) To provide early warning of natural hazards viz., tropical cyclones, thunderstorms, floods,
Tsunami, storm surge etc.
(iv) To improve the understanding of Polar Science and its implications for climate change.
(v) To augment and sustain long term observations of atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere and solid
earth to record the vital signs of the Earth System and changes.
(vi) To conduct survey for assessing living and non-living resources.
(vii) To develop technology for harnessing marine resources.
(viii) To asses coastal marine productivity and Marine Ecosystems.
(ix) To translate knowledge and insight themes gained into services for societal, environmental and
economic benefits.
(x) To conduct cutting edge research in Earth Sciences.
(xi) To promote basic research including Capacity building in the Earth System Science.
(xii) To promote awareness and educate the public by extending support to seminars, symposia,
conferences and conduct workshops with stakeholders.

2
ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE MINISTRY
1.3 The Ministry of Earth Sciences functions through the Earth Commission. The executive arm of the
Ministry i.e. ‘The Earth System Science Organisation (ESSO)’ is responsible for implementing its policies
and programmes. It has four major branches of Earth Sciences viz., (i) Ocean Science and Technology
Services; (ii) Atmospheric and Climate Science Services; (iii) Geoscience and Technology; and (iv) Polar
Science and Cryosphere.
1.4 The policies and programs of the Ministry are being primarily pursued through its Centres viz.,
autonomous bodies and subordinate offices. Currently there are 10 centres / institutes under the Ministry to
pursue programs/policies of the Ministry in different areas of Earth Sciences. The institutions of the atmosphere
sciences are India Meteorological Department (IMD), National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting
(NCMRWF), Noida and Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), Pune. The institutions relating to
ocean science and technology are National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR), Goa, National
Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT), Chennai, Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services
(INCOIS), Hyderabad, Centre for Marine Living Resources and Ecology (CMLRE), Kochi and Integrated
Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM), Chennai. The National Centre for Earth Science Studies
(NCESS) and National Centre for Seismology (NCS) are also part of the Ministry to conduct research on
solid earth and earthquake monitoring. Each centre of the Ministry has a well-defined mandate to conduct
front research in a specific area of earth system.
1.5 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
and Forests considered the Demands for Grants 2018-19 of the Ministry of Earth Sciences in its meeting
held on the 20th February 2018.
2. FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE MINISTRY
2.1 The Committee assessed the financial performance of the Ministry during the last three years. The
Committee desired to know the BE and RE allocation as well as actual expenditure incurred by the Ministry
during the financial years 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18. In response, the Committee was furnished the
following information:-
(` in crore)
Financial Year Budget Revised Actual % of Actual
Estimates Estimates Expenditure Expenditure
against Revised
Estimate
2015-16 1622.68 1420.98 1296.8 91.26
2016-17 1672.45 1579.11 1459.76 92.44
2017-18 1719.18 1597.69 1370.17 85.75*
* As on 15th February, 2018.
2.2 The Committee notes that the BE allocation of the Ministry has been increasing during the
last three years. However, during all the three years, not only was there a reduction in allocation at

3
RE stage but the Ministry also failed to utilize even the reduced allocation optimally by the end of
each financial year, the percentage of expenditure being 91.26%, 92.44% and 85.75% (as on
15.2.2018) respectively during the last three years. Though the Ministry’s performance in
implementing its policies and programme can be termed as par excellence, the financial performance
of the Ministry during the last three years can, in no way, be termed as satisfactory. The Committee
expects the Ministry to maintain financial discipline also. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should, review its financial performances during last three years and analyse the reasons
for underutilisation so as to develop a monitoring mechanism to ensure that such trend of
underutilisation does not continue in future.
2.3 The scheme/programme/organisation-wise allocation made during 2017-18 and actual expenditure
incurred till 15th February, 2018 is as under:-
(` in crore)
Sl. No Schemes/Programmes 2017-18 2017-18 2017-18 %
Budget Revised Actual Exp./R.E
Estimate Estimate Expenditure
A. Centre’s Expenditure 473.85 441.80 393.92 89.16
B. Central Sector
Schemes
1. Ocean Services Technology 336.00 326.00 267.45 82.03
Observations Resources
Modelling and Sciences
(O-STORMS)
2. Atmosphere & Climate 496.00 423.00 360.14 85.13
Research-Modelling
Observing Systems &
Services (ACROSS)
3. Polar Sciences & Cryosphere 127.00 127.00 106.66 83.98
(PACER)
4. Seismological & Geosciences 76.70 88.82 68.48 77.09
(SAGE)
5. Research Education and 44.00 46.00 33.22 72.21
Training Outreach
(REACHOUT)
Sub-total 1079.70 1010.82 835.95 82.70
C. Autonomous Bodies
1. Indian National Centre for 30.05 23.17 23.17 100
Ocean Information Services,
Hyderabad

4
2. National Institute of Ocean 29.40 28.10 28.10 100
Technology, Chennai
3. National Centre for Antarctic 19.74 14.35 14.35 100
and Ocean Research, Goa
4. Indian Institute of Tropical 65.90 60.36 59.36 98.34
Meteorology, Pune
5. National Centre for Earth 20.84 19.09 15.32 80.25
Science  Studies,
Thiruvanthapuarm
Sub-Total 165.93 145.07 140.30 96.71
TOTAL 1719.48 1597.69 1370.17 85.75
2.4 The Committee observes that the BE allocation of the Ministry was reduced by nearly `````121.79
crore at RE stage during 2017-18, which indicates that the progress of the schemes/programme
was not on schedule and targets not achieved as a result of which the RE allocation was reduced
by Ministry of Finance. Further, Ministry of Earth Sciences has spent nearly 86% of the allocation
till 15th February, 2018 and the expenditure under most of the schemes, except Seismology and
Geosciences (SAGE) and Research Education and Training Outreach (REACHOUT), is satisfactory.
The Committee also observes that some of the autonomous bodies under Ministry of Earth Sciences
such as Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS), Hyderabad, National
Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai and National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research
(NCAOR), Goa have already fully utilised RE allcoation made to them. The Ministry is left to
expend the remaining 14% in the remaining 44 days of the financial year 2017-18. The Committee
hopes that unlike the previous years, the Ministry would be able to utilise full allocation during
2017-18. The Committee also recommends that adequate additional financial support, if required,
should be made to the three autonomous bodies which have already fully utilised the allocations
made to them.
BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR THE YEAR 2018-19
2.5 The Committee desired to know about the total demand projected by the Ministry for BE 2018-19 and
the actual allocation made to it. The Committee was informed that the Ministry had proposed an outlay of
` 2219.00 crore for 2018-19 as per the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). However, the
approved outlay for the Ministry is `1800.00 crore only. The detailed budgetary provisions for scheme/non-
scheme for financial year 2018-19 are as under: —
(` in crore)
Sl. No Name of Scheme 2018-19
BE
A. Centre’s Expenditure 454.77

5
B. CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES
1. Ocean Services Technology Observations Resources Modelling and 399.00 (#)
Sciences (O-STORMS)
2. Atmosphere & Climate Research-Modelling Observing Systems & 375.00 ($)
Services (ACROSS)
3. Polar Sciences & Cryosphere (PACER) 225.00 (*)
4. Seismological & Geosciences (SAGE) 110.00 (&)
5. Research Education and Training Outreach (REACHOUT) 74.23 (@)
Sub-total 1183.23
C. Autonomous Bodies 162.00
TOTAL 1800.00
(#) Acquisition of Coastal Research Vessels.
($) Installation of 10-Radar in Himalayas and National Facility Airborne Observations.
(*) Acquisition of Polar Research Vessel.
(&) Strengthening of Seismological Network.
(@) Establishment of Category-2 Centre of UNESCO.
2.6 The Committee also desired to know as to whether the funds allocated to the Ministry for BE
2018-19 are sufficient to carry out the programmes/schemes of the Ministry; if not, which schemes/projects
are likely to be affected? In response, the Committee was informed by the Ministry that the funds provided
for the year 2018-19 would be just sufficient to carry out the most of the ongoing programs. However, the
proposal for acquisition of Polar Research Vessel under the PACER program will be delayed due to paucity
of funds.
2.7 The Committee notes that the Ministry has been provided `````202.31 crore more than the RE
allocation of 2017-18, which comes to nearly 13%. The Committee welcomes the increase in the
allocation of the Ministry for 2018-19 but at the same is constrained to note that an important
programme like acquisition of Polar Research Vessel will be further delayed due to non availability
of funds. However, the allocation is still lower than the projected demand of the Ministry of ````` 2219
crore. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should make all out efforts to ensure that the
allocation made is utilised to the maximum in its schemes/programmes and its physical targets
proceed on schedule so that it is in a sound position to seek additional allocations at RE Stage.
2.8 The Committee analysed the performance of some of the major schemes of the Ministry during
2017-18 alongwith their physical and financial targets and achievements and other related concerns.
3. OCEAN SERVICES, TECHNOLOGY OBSERV ATIONS, RESOURCES MODELLING AND
SCIENCES (O-STORMS)
3.1 O-STORMS encompasses four programmes relating to the ocean sector viz., Ocean Observations,
Ocean Science Services, Ocean Survey and Mineral Resources and Ocean Technology. O-STORMS

6
programme mainly deals with understanding coastal and oceanic processes to provide ocean advisory
services, for conducting coastal research, development of technology for harnessing marine resources
and also of indigenous oceanic technology and conducting marine scientific surveys for exploration and
exploitation.
3.2 The budgetary details of the scheme for 2017-18 and 2018-19 are as under:-
(` in crore)
Budget Estimate  Revised Estimate Actual % Exp./R.E BE 2018-19
2017-18 2017-18 Ex penditure
2017-18 (Upto
15/2/2018)
336.00 326.00 267.45 82.03 399.00
3.3 The C ommittee notes that the Ministry has been able to spend 82.03 percent of RE all ocation
(2017-18). The Committee desired to know the reasons for nearly 25% increase in allocation under the
scheme in 2018-19 and in what way the Ministry intended to utilise the allocation made. The Committee was
informed that the primary reason for increase in allocation of about 25% during BE 2018-19 is due to
payments to meet the backlog expenditure towards operational maintenance of a fleet of Research Vessels of
the Ministry, namely Sagar Sampada, Sagar Kanya, Sagar Manjusha and procurement of Coastal Research
Vessels. The remaining expenditure would be required for the programmes being implemented by the four
research centres (NIOT, CMLRE, ICMAM and INCOIS) of the Ministry dealing with Ocean Technology,
Ocean Services, Marine Resource Assessment and Coastal Zone Management.
3.4 The Ministry also indicated that the reduction in RE 2017-18 was largely due to savings in office
expenditure and delay in construction of building of Centre for Marine Living Resources and Ecology
(CMLRE), Kochi. The Committee desired to know as to when was the work for construction of new
building of Centre for Marine Living Resources and Ecology (CMLRE), Kochi started and what was the
original target date of completion of the project. Further, what are the reasons for delay in construction and
by what time the construction will be completed? The Committee was informed that the project was initiated
in October 2010 by CPWD, Kochi. The original target date of completion was October 2015. Now, most of
the construction of civil works have been completed and only developmental work is underway. The tender
for developmental work was issued three times by CPWD due to non receipt of adequate number of financial
quotes as per the procedures. Now the CPWD had awarded the works in December, 2017 for developmental
works which include internal roads, service block, security cabin, street lights, cable trenches, car parkings,
walkways, Sumps etc. only, and as per the revised schedule, the expected date of completion will be May
2018.
3.5 The Committee notes that the completion of CMLRE Building at Kochi is way behind scheduled
target of October, 2015 and the probable date of completion now is May 2018. The Committee is of
the view that delayed execution of projects not only escalates the cost of the projects but also
reflects poorly on the organisations concerned. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
must impress upon all the concerned agencies to complete the construction of the building at the
earliest so that there is no surrender of funds on this count in future.

7
4. WA VE ENERGY
4.1 During the meeting of the Committee held on 20th February, 2018, the Secretary while highlighting
the achievements of the Ministry under O-STORMS scheme, informed about the development of renewable
energy from the sea. He further elaborated that a Wave Energy, which is another type of Ocean based
renewable energy source that uses the power of the waves to generate electricity, powered navigational
buoy has been developed and open sea trial of India’s first navigational buoy was successfully carried out
off Ennore.
4.2 As regards the future plan, he stated that performance monitoring and data analysis for completed
system of the wave powered navigational buoy and scaling up of the device will be taken up. The Committee
desired to know as to how much extent the wave energy has been exploited. The Committee also asked the
Ministry to submit a note on the subject to the Committee. However, the note is yet to be received.
4.3 Keeping in v iew the energy resource constraint in the country and the need for additional
sources of energy, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should undertake a detailed
study on the subject. The Ministry should also study as to whether the technology will be
economically viable and how much this source of energy will benefit the country, if the production
is harnessed.
5. RESEARCH EDUCATION AND TRAINING OUTREACH (REACHOUT)
5.1 This programme deals with (i) extending extra mural support to academic/research organizations in
various sectors of Earth System Sciences including technology development; (ii) Promoting focused research
in areas of national importance through integration of multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary scientific
expertise; (iii) supporting establishment of national facilities; (iv) Capacity building including chair professors,
M. Tech courses, setting up ESTC cells, knowledge information system, economic benefits, promoting
indigenous capability; (v) Advanced school of training for Earth System Science and climate, oceanography,
operational meteorology, training for BIMSTEC countries etc.; (v) International cooperation and related
joint activities; and (vi) Awareness and Outreach programs through participation in fairs/exhibitions,
celebrating specific days, promoting/supporting workshops/seminar/symposia in Earth System Science
related areas.
5.2 The budgetary details of the scheme for the years 2017-18 and 2018-19 are as under:-
(` in crore)
Budget Estimate Revised Actual % Exp./R.E BE 2018-19
2017-18 Estimate 2017-18 Expenditure
2017-18 (Upto
15/2/2018)
44.00 46.00 33.22 72.21 74.23
5.3 The Committee notes that although the BE allocation (2017-18) of `````44.00 crore for REACHOUT
was increased to `````46.00 crore at RE stage, the Ministry has been able to spend only `````33.22 crore by
15th February, 2018 i.e. 72.21 per cent only. Underutilisation in scheme which promotes research
activities in various sectors of Earth system sciences is certainly not desirable. The Committee

8
recommends that the Ministry of Earth Sciences should pay due attention towards research activities
and ensure that no funds earmarked for it are underutilised in future.
6. INCREASE IN ALLOCATION FOR RESEARCH ACTIVITIES
6.1 The Committee notes that in 2017-18 and 2018-19, the allocation of REACHOUT is only 4.6%
and 6.27% respectively of the total allocation for Central Sector schemes. Although the comparative
allocation has increased in 2018-19, the allocation for research scheme needs to be increased.
6.2 The Committee is of the opinion that facilitating research and development and investing for
the same are extremely important for the development of any nation and for a developing country
like India, the critical importance of research and development cannot be overemphasised. The
Committee urge that the Ministry should pay due attention to this sector and work towards achieving
its targets in facilitating research and development. The Committee feels that the Ministry would
be able to utilise its BE allocation for the year 2018-19 to the extent possible and achieve the targets
envisaged for the year.
7. COORDINATION BETWEEN THE SCIENTIFIC MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS
7.1 The Committee desired to know from the Ministry about the level of co-ordination with various
Scientific Ministries/ Departments in order to avoid duplicity in research work/ technology development, the
Committee was informed that the Ministry has been working very closely with various Ministries/Departments
at different levels for effective and coordinated way of implementation of programmes to avoid duplicity in
research and technology development. The Ministry also provided the details as under:-
Ministry/Department/Institutions Activities
Environment and Forest and Air Pollution, coastal zone management, climate change
Climate Change
Drinking Water and Sanitation/MHA Establishment of Desalination plants in Lakshadweep and Near
thermal plants
Agriculture/Water Resources Monsoon and weather forecasts, Fishing zone advisories
Mines/ Hydrography Deep Sea Mining, development of deep sea technology
CSIR/DST/DBT Marine Scientific Research, drugs from the sea,
NDMA Natural disaster, cyclone, storm surge, tsunami, flood
forecast, Earth Quakes
MEA/Shipping/Coast Guard/ Navy Maritime cooperation and regional cooperation
MHRD Capacity building/education
Space Satellite data communication and remote sensing payloads
NITI Aayog and MoF Programs and budget
Ministry of New and Renewable Offshore and onshore winds and solar energy.
Energy (MNRE)

9
7.2 The Committee desired to know whether there was some kind of umbrella organisation for coordination
to avoid the overlapping in work among the various scientific Ministries/Departments since many scientific
departments were working on similar projects.
7.3 Responding to the observations of the Committee, the Secretary stated that the Ministry has prepared
an umbrella scheme and submitted it to the Cabinet Secretary for consideration.
7.4 The Committee observes that there is overlapping and duplication in research efforts of
many scientific organisations of the country. For instance, Ministry of Earth Sciences has developed
technology for desalination of water. But similar technologies have also been developed by
Departments of Science and Technology, Scientific and Industrial Research and Atomic Energy
also. Also, Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services, Ministry of Earth Sciences
provides services to the fishermen/mariners at sea through NAVIC in collaboration with ISRO and
through GAGAN with Airports Authority of India about cyclone/tsunami warnings, potential fishery
zone and helping in tracking of ships. Both NA VIK of ISRO and GAGAN of Airport Authority of
India seem to provide almost identical services to fishermen/mariners.
7.5 Although the Ministry has claimed working closely with various Ministries/Departments/
Institutions at different levels for effective and coordinated implementation of programmes to
avoid duplicity in research and technology development, the Committee is of the view that
coordination highlighted by the Ministry seems to be more for effective implementation of their
programmes only. The Secretary of the Ministry has admitted that at present there is no mechanism
of an umbrella organisation for coordination between different Ministries/Departments.
7.6 The Committee has already cited some instances of overlapping and duplication of research
work. The Committee feels that there is an urgent requirement of some institutional mechanism
for effective coordination between various scientific Ministries/Departments of the Government.
The Committee hopes that as stated by the Secretary, the proposal submitted by the Ministry of
Earth Sciences will be considered at the earliest to ensure that all gaps coming in the way of effective
coordination between scientific research work of the various scientific Ministries/Department are
filled at the earliest.
8. ARRESTING BRAIN DRAIN
8.1 During his deposition before the Committee on the 20th February, 2018, the Secretary during
his presentation brought out the following in respect of activities under REACHOUT programme in
2017-18:-
Activities (2017-18) Total (Nos.) Remark
R&D Projects 21 Atmospheric Sciences - 5, Ocean
Sciences - 6, Seismology - 3
Cryosphere & Hydrology - 2
Training Centres 4 About 200 trainees including foreign nationals
were trained in operational meteorology (Pune)
and Ocean Science & Technology (Hyderabad)
Human Resources 20 M.T ech.–15, Ph.D.–5 (IIT Delhi and IIT Madras)

10
8.2 The Committee also desired to know about the steps taken by the Ministry in the field of skill development
for generating employment opportunities to the youths of the country. In response, the Ministry informed
that in order to promote skill development in the field of earth sciences, under REACHOUT scheme, the
MoES has established three training centres, one each at IITM Pune, INCOIS, Hyderabad and IMD, Pune
with an aim to develop adequate training modules with focus on operational and service-delivery oriented
responsibilities. The training centre at INCOIS has been designated as Category-2 centre (C2C) of UNESCO
with a view to promote employment opportunities within and outside India. The establishment of C2C is
also expected to increase ancillary development leading to employment generation in India. In addition to the
in-house training centres MoES also established Chair Professors at academic institutes/universities including
National Lab facilities. For the benefit of researchers, Centers of Excellence were opened at various Universities
with State-of-the-art research facilities and establishment of Earth Science and Technology Cells. Young
scientists from various services like Indian Air Force, Navy, coast guards, other Ministries etc. also come
regularly to get familiarized with modeling and data assimilation.
8.3 The Committee was further informed that under ‘Development of Skilled Manpower in Earth System
Sciences’ (DESK), a new training program for skilled manpower development is proposed to be initiated by
the Ministry during 2018-19. The major objectives is to operate a centralized (MoES) research fellow
program for all MoES institutes, conduct short term training courses for developing skilled manpower
required for the MoES major job objectives in operational, research, development and services, to conduct
targeted training activities on selected topics on recurring mode etc.
8.4 The issue of brain-drain in the country was also raised during the meeting held on 20th February,
2018. The Committee observed that the number of Ph.D scholars, as reflected by the Ministry in its
presentation, was very low. The Committee further observed that all the scientific Ministries/Departments
were producing less and less number of Ph.Ds. whereas the areas where the Ministry was targeting their
requirement was expending. This would certainly result in a huge gap between the demand and supply of
skilled and trained manpower.
8.5 Agreeing with the views expressed by the Committee, the Secretary stated as under:-
“I agree with you that the number of Ph.D students being trained by our MoES Institutions is small
number . So, we are coming up with a proposal to have our own MoES schemes, for which we are
writing a small document. For example, ICAR, has a big scheme for training JRF students and Ph.D
programme. The DST and DBT have their own programmes. We don’t have one, especially on earth
science. Compared to other subjects like Physics, Chemistry, the earth science community is very
small, Sir, because it is a highly interdisciplinary subject. If you want to learn earth science, you
should be good in mathematics, good in physics, good in biology, etc. So, all these interdisciplinary
subjects will come. So, we are soon going to launch a programme. At present, we train about 50 to 60
Ph.D students”.
8.6 The Secretary further stated that the scientific Ministries were increasing the number of Ph.D students
but the students doing science programmes was coming down every year. He brought out that in view of
this, the Government has launched Indian Institutes of Science Education and Research (IISER) and many
bright students/scientists were joining these institutions. However, he further stated that there scientist did
not stay in the country for long and ultimately ended up working in US, UK or elsewhere.

11
8.7 The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry for developing skilled manpower required
for Ministry of Earth Sciences major job objectives. However, as brought out by the Committee in
the preceding paragraphs, the scholar intake is certainly less than required in the country. Therefore,
there is a need to develop a scientific temperament in the youth of our country and create their
interest in scientific subjects so that we have more and more people coming forward in this field.
The coordinating body suggested by the Committee in the earlier paras can also take a lead in this
regard and make scientific subjects more popular amongst our youth.
8.8 The Committee is of the view that brain drain has become a major concern in the country. A
majority of the country’s skilled workforce goes abroad in search of greener pastures. The Committee
feels that there is no dearth of talent in the country. The need is to tap this talent and provide all
necessary wherewithal for achieving excellence in their respective fields. The Committee recommends
that there should be no let up in the efforts of the all scientific Ministries/Departments of the
Government to attract talented people in scientific fields. The Ministry of Earth Sciences too must
inspire the best brains and continue with its various schemes.
9. ATMOSPHERE & CLIMATE RESARCH-MODELLING OBSERVING SYSTEMS & SERVICES
(ACROSS)
9.1 This programme deals with (i) sustaining and strengthening of atmospheric observation systems to
meet the needs of monitoring as well as providing wide range of services viz. Agriculture, Aviation, city
forecasts, mountain regions, defence and sports, disasters in the country including setting up of a dedicated
forecasting system for the entire Himalayan region with a much focused objective of integrating and improving
the weather related services and climate services; (ii) development of a suite of atmospheric models required
for prediction of monsoon weather and climate in India on different time and space scales ranging from
short and medium range to seasonal mean including specific forecast of severe weather, such as cyclones,
heavy rains, storms, floods, heat-waves, fog and air-quality, micro physical characteristics of aerosols and
clouds and associated environmental conditions; (iii) conduct climate change research to generate a number
of regional scenarios of water and other climate services due to climate Long-term (multi-decadal) simulations,
conducting research to enhance understanding of the changing water cycle and paleoclimatic studies;
(iv) Continuous augmentation of high performance computation facilities and its operation and maintenance
on 24x7 basis for undertaking all modelling activities, forecast generation, data centre and data analytics, air
borne platform facilities for environmental observations.
9.2 The budgetary details of the scheme for 2017-18 and 2018-19 are as under:-
(` in crore)
Budget Estimate Revised Estimate Actual % Exp./RE BE 2018-19
2017-18 2017-18 Expenditure
2017-18 (Upto
15/2/2018)
496.00 423.00 360.14 85.13 375.00
9.3 The Committee desired to know the measures taken by the Ministry to enhance the dissemination of
agro-advisories to farmers and also to increase the number of registered farmers receiving the agro-met

12
services from the Ministry. The Ministry informed about the following measures taken by them in this
regard:-
(i) To enhance the acceptability of the agromet advisory by farmers at block/village level, IMD in
collaboration with ICAR is establishing the network at district level KVKs (DAMUs) for generating
sub-district level crop specific advisories, and also plan to organize farmer awareness
programmes in different regions. The DAMUs in 530 districts equipped with one
Agrometeorologist will be established during 2017-18 to 2019-20 to generate sub-district level
crop specific advisories.
(ii) IMD is working on Hiring of Agromet Advisory Dissemination Services to Farmers/Public
through SMS engaging private service providers. Tender based on RFP for this has been
floated, the closing date being 30.01.2018. Work order likely to be given in current financial
year. Agro-meteorologists at AMFUs/ DAMUs generating the Agromet Advisories will use this
system to push the SMS to farmers at district level.
(iii) The current dissemination status through farmers’ portal and PPP mode from January to
December 2017 is 20.6 to 22.7 million. 2.96 crores farmers database has been shared by
States Department of Agriculture to IMD for dissemination of advisories by AMFUs/
DAMUs.
(iv) MeitY and IMD has jointly developed speech based system for farmers to listen the weather
forecast for next 5 days in their languages across 12 States currently and scaled to all States in
future.
(v) Besides, farmer registration is being promoted through Stake holders meeting in 10 States and
Farmer Awareness Programme in 36 AMFUs.
9.4 The Committee observed that the BE 2017-18 allocation of ` 496.00 crore for ACROSS was reduced
to ` 423 crore at RE stage and sought to know reasons for reduction of funds. The Committee was
informed that the primary reasons for savings of ` 73 crores is largely on account of (i) meeting the annual
maintenance cost of High Performance Computing System installed in the month of November 2017, which
under the warranty period; (ii) less expenditure in the major works due to delay in construction of civil
works of IMD. The Committee desired to know the reasons for the slow progress of civil works of IMD
and steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that these works are completed at the earliest. The Committee was
informed by the Ministry that the authorizations issued to CPWD had not been booked till September 2017
due to slow progress in construction particularly during the monsoon period. Hence there was reduction of
budget at RE stage. In order to ensure that works are completed as per schedule and funds are utilized
properly, a proper monitoring of all projects has been established.
9.5 The Committee notes that although the overall financial performance of the Ministry under
the ACROSS scheme has been satisfactory, the delay in the civil works of IMD is a cause of concern.
The Committee recommends the Ministry should take up the matter with CPWD and other concerned
agencies to ensure that in 2018-19, the civil works of IMD progress as per the schedule and funds
are utilised optimally.
9.6 The Committee desired to know about the steps taken by the Ministry to improve the existing district

13
level Agromet Advisory Services (AAS) under ACROSS during 2017-18. The Committee also wanted to
know as to whether the Ministry would be able to complete its targets during the year?
9.7 In response, the Committee was informed that India Meteorological Department (IMD), Indian
Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM) and Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) under the Monsoon
Mission Project are actively engaged to develop probabilistic heavy rainfall predictions at 12 km. grid
scale upto 5 days in advance along with maximum temperature, minimum temperature, cloud cover, wind
speed/direction etc. with the higher skills than the current district level forecast skill. Efforts are on to set
up and make additional 530 DAMUs functional at various KVKs in phased manner. Coordination with the
district/taluka/village level and State Agriculture Department’s extension services machinery is enhanced
with the objective to increase farmers’ database at DAMUs/AMFUs to improve dissemination of crop
specific advisories for rainfed/irrigated crops through SMS as per the emerging needs of the end users.
The current pilot level sub-district agromet advisory bulletin being tried out in Maharashtra will be fine
tuned with improved 12 km. grid scale forecast products along with Agriculture Decision Support System
for various crops.
9.8 From the Background Note furnished by the Ministry, the Committee noted that among the targets of
the Ministry under ACROSS scheme in 2017-18 were improving the existing district level Agromet Advisory
Services (AAS) and setting up of District Agrometeorological Field Units (DAMU) in 660 districts and 400
districts. The Committee desired to know as to what extent the said target has been achieved so far and
whether the Ministry hoped to complete the target during the year?
9.9 The Ministry in their written reply informed the Committee that the site selection for 200 districts
including 115 Aspirational districts for establishing Agro-Meteorological Field Units (DAMUs) has been
done. MoU with ICAR for setting up of DAMUs in the premises of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) is in
progress. 200 DAMUs will be established during 2018-19.
9.10 The Committee finds the replies submitted by the Ministry on the queries raised by the
Committee with respect to achievements regarding Agromet Advisory Services and District
Agrometeorological Field Units evasive. In response to both the queries, the Ministry has not
categorically replied as to whether the Ministry would be able to complete the targets during the
year and has merely furnished the factual position in this regard. However, the Committee observes
from the replies that the Ministry fell too short of its target of setting up of District Agrometeorological
Field Units (DAMUs). The critical importance of DAMUs in dissemination of relevant information
cannot be overemphasised and the failure to achieve the targets in this regard does not reflect well
on the part of the Ministry. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take a fresh look
at its targets and plan accordingly so that the Ministry is able to complete its targets during 2018-19
and the maximum number of farmers can avail the benefit of crop advisories.
10. Cyclone Warning Services - Cyclone Ockhi
10.1 While informing the Committee about the Cyclone Warning Services, the Secretary informed that
IMD acts as World Meteorological Organization (WMO) recognized Regional Centre to provide cyclone
advisories to all countries in north Indian Ocean region. Further, there had been noteworthy improvement in
track and intensity forecast of the tropical cyclones 24 hour forecast error in track predication had been
reduced from 141 km. to 97 km. and Landfall error from 99 km. to 56 km. during 2006-10 to 2011-15.

14
Also, Probabilistic Genesis Forecast up to 3 days and Track and intensity forecast up to 5 days in text and
graphics was being made.
10.2 Informing the Committee about the track forecasts of Cyclone Ockhi, it was informed that the
North-westward movement of the cyclone towards Lakshadweep was predicted on the first bulletin itself
issued at 0830 hrs. IST of 29th November, 2017 and North-eastward recurvature of the track and its
movement towards south Gujarat coast was first predicted in the morning of 1st December, 2017 (five days
before it hit south Gujarat coast).
10.3 However, not agreeing to the claims made by the Secretary that they had issued warnings well before
the Ockhi Cyclone, the Committee pointed out that few people knew it in the affected areas till the cyclone
arrived and the entire coast was completely affected. By the time the State Government got the message,
many fishermen had gone to the sea and lost their lives.
10.4 The Secretary stated that they had issued the warning almost 24 hours in advance, and that information
to fishermen is given by different sources. They were also trying to improve the communication with the
Government as well as the fishermen.
10.5 The Committee is of the view that inspite of the claims made by the Ministry with regard to
advance warning for the natural calamities, the end-beneficiary of the system has not been benefitted
to the desired extent. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should identify the loopholes
in the system and take all necessary measures to plug the same for dissemination of service of
forecasts and warnings to all the concerned stakeholders. The Ministry should also impress upon all
the State Governments to take immediate action on the warnings and take all necessary action so
that the benefit of advance warnings reaches to the ground level.
10.6 The Committee desired to know about ‘Pratyush’ supercomputer which was established recently.
The Committee was informed that India’s fastest and first “multi-petaflops” supercomputer ‘Pratyush’ was
dedicated to the nation on 8th January 2018. Petaflops is a measure of a computer’s processing speed.
Christened “Pratyush”, meaning the sun, the High Performance Computing (HPC) facility has been established
at the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), Pune, and will be a national facility for improving
weather and climate forecast. This would be India’s number one HPC facility in terms of peak capacity and
performance. The facility would help the country with better forecasts in terms of monsoon, extreme
events, tsunamis, cyclones, earthquakes, air quality, lightning, fishing, hot and cold waves, flood and drought
among others. With the augmentation of this new ‘Pratyush” high performance computing (HPC) facility of
6.8 Peta Flops (PF), India’s ranking will move from the 368th position to around the top 30 in the Top 500
list of HPC facilities in the world. India will also be placed at the 4th position after Japan, UK and USA for
dedicated HPC resources for weather/climate community. The new HPC of 6.8 PF computational power is
installed at two MoES Institutes: 4.0 Peta Flops HPC facility at IITM, Pune and 2.8 Peta Flops facility at
NCMRWF, Noida.
10.7 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry regarding installation of ‘Pratyush’
High Power Computing System at IITM, Pune. The Committee hopes that this High Power Computer
System would not only help improving the weather and climate prediction and forecast systems but
would also predict cyclones and tsunamis accurately and help in seismological studies.

15
11. NON-SETTLEMENT OF AUDIT PARAS
11.1 The Commi ttee had sought information from the Ministry regarding the latest Audit Paras for the
last five years contained in the CAG Report or Internal Audit on its schemes/organizations and the action
taken/proposed to be taken thereon. In response, the Ministry submitted brief details of 8 Audit Paras as
under: —
Total No. of C&AG               Gist of the Para Action Taken/proposed to be
Paras raised in C&AG taken
Reports for the last
five years
Year 2013 (01) Gist - INCOIS irregularly introduced a Para has been settled.
Pension Scheme for its employees in
violation of the order of Ministry of
Finance and Diversion of ` 1.23 crores.
Year 2014 (02) National Data Buoy Project (NIOT Para has been settled.
01 Para settled and Chennai).
01 pending. Gist - Attempts to establish communication
through Indian Satellite remained at the trial
stage as of July, 2014. A dedicated vessel
procured for deployment of data buoys
was barely used for intended purpose.
Irregular Payment of Gratuity (NIOT Action :- Sincere efforts are
Chennai) being done by NIOT to recover
the irregular amount paid. In
Gist - Ministry of Earth Sciences irregularly case of non-recovery, proposal
permitted its autonomous bodies to pay for approval of competent
gratuity of ` 68.88 lakh to 54 regular authority will be submitted for
employees who had resigned from service, waiver of recovery.
with retrospective effect.
Year 2015 (02) “Unfruitful Expenditure due to non- Action:- Website is functioning
01 Para settled and functional website” (MoES/ INCOIS). but not fully functional. Full
01 pending. functionality of the website is
Gist:- Content Managed website developed being completed as soon as
by the MoES at a cost of ` 2.27 crore possible.
remained non-functional since Feb. 2012,
resulting in unfruitful expenditure.
“Installation and Upkeep of Meteorological Action :- Detailed A TN submitted
Observatories by RMC, Kolkata” (IMD). to Audit and Nil comments
Gist:- The maintenance of Observatories received.

16
set up by RMC, Kolkata for collection of Para has been settled.
various types of meteorological data was
inadequate. This together with shortage
of manpower resulted in observatories
lying defunct.
Year 2016 (01) Non-Establishment of desalination plants Action- As per the above
Para pending. and wasteful expenditure (NIOT). observations of Audit action has
been taken. Revised ATN is
Gist:-. NIOT, Chennai undertook a project being submitted to Audit.
on establishment of desalination plants
in 06 islands of Lakshadweep, without
conducting detailed survey of locations,
techno-economic conditions and assess-
ment of its resources for execution of the
large scale project.
Year 2017 (02) Non-recovery of fuel charges due to Ac tion:- Proposal for write-off
Both paras pending. improper contract management. is being sent to Ministry of
Finance.
Non-recovery of fuel charges due to
improper charter hire agreement with the
Russian Academy of Sciences, Russia.
Irregular implementation of promotion Action:- Proposal for one - time
scheme. waiver/exemption have been
sent to Ministry of Finance
Irregular Career Progression Path (CPP) requesting for waiver/
for career progression of the employees exemption for not obtaining
of Autonomous Bodies, which provides approval of CPP and recovery
higher  benefits  as  compared  to  the of excess expenditure due to
Government approved MACPS. CPP, on humanitarian ground.
11.2 The Committee observes that out of the 8 Audit paras, 1 is of year 2013, 2 of 2014, 2 of 2015, 1 of
2016 and 2 of 2017. The status of the Audit Paras reflects that out of 8, only 3 paras have been settled
whereas cases of 5 Audit Paras are pending.
11.3 The Committee notes with concern the Audit Paras relating to irregular payment of gratuity
to employees of NIOT, Chennai and non-establishment of desalination plants and wasteful
expenditure on establishment of desalination plants by NIOT. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry must take corrective measures in respect of all such instances and ensure that such
incidents do not recur.
11.4 The Committee is further constrained to note that some of the Audit Paras of the Ministry
are yet to be settled even after 2 to 3 years. The Committee is of the view that the Audit Paras

17
must be settled at the earliest and for this purpose, the Ministry must submit satisfactory replies
to the Audit so that they are settled at the earliest and do not get entangled in repetitive submission
of revised ATNs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Earth Sciences
should take necessary action accordingly for early settlement of the Audit Paras pertaining to the
Ministry.

RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE MINISTRY
The Committee notes that the BE allocation of the Ministry has been increasing during the
last three years. However, during all the three years, not only was there a reduction in allocation at
RE stage but the Ministry also failed to utilize even the reduced allocation optimally by the end of
each financial year, the percentage of expenditure being 91.26%, 92.44% and 85.75% (as on
15.2.2018) respectively during the last three years. Though the Ministry’s performance in
implementing its policies and programme can be termed as par excellence, the financial performance
of the Ministry during the last three years can, in no way, be termed as satisfactory. The Committee
expects the Ministry to maintain financial discipline also. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should, review its financial performances during last three years and analyse the reasons
for underutilisation so as to develop a monitoring mechanism to ensure that such trend of
underutilisation does not continue in future. (Para 2.2)
The Committee observes that the BE allocation of the Ministry was reduced by nearly `````121.79
crore at RE stage during 2017-18, which indicates that the progress of the schemes/programme
was not on schedule and targets not achieved as a result of which the RE allocation was reduced
by Ministry of Finance. Further, Ministry of Earth Sciences has spent nearly 86% of the allocation
till 15th February, 2018 and the expenditure under most of the schemes, except Seismology and
Geosciences (SAGE) and Research Education and Training Outreach (REACHOUT), is satisfactory.
The Committee also observes that some of the autonomous bodies under Ministry of Earth Sciences
such as Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS), Hyderabad, National
Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai and National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research
(NCAOR), Goa have already fully utilised RE allcoation made to them. The Ministry is left to
expend the remaining 14% in the remaining 44 days of the financial year 2017-18. The Committee
hopes that unlike the previous years, the Ministry would be able to utilise full allocation during
2017-18. The Committee also recommends that adequate additional financial support, if required,
should be made to the three autonomous bodies which have already fully utilised the allocations
made to them. (Para 2.4)
BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR THE YEAR 2018-19
The Committee notes that the Ministry has been provided `````202.31 crore more than the RE
allocation of 2017-18, which comes to nearly 13%. The Committee welcomes the increase in the
allocation of the Ministry for 2018-19 but at the same is constrained to note that an important
programme like acquisition of Polar Research Vessel will be further delayed due to non-availability
of funds. However, the allocation is still lower than the projected demand of the Ministry of `````2219
crore. The Co mmittee recommends that the Ministry should make all out efforts to ensure that
the allocation made is utilised to the maximum in its schemes/programmes and its physical
targets proceed on schedule so that it is in a sound position to seek additional allocations at RE
Stage. (Para 2.7)
18

19
OCEAN SERVICES, TECHNOLOGY OBSERV ATIONS, RESOURCES MODELLING AND
SCIENCES (O-STORMS)
The Committee notes that the completion of CMLRE Building at Kochi is way behind scheduled
target of October, 2015 and the probable date of completion now is May, 2018. The Committee is of
the view that delayed execution of projects not only escalates the cost of the projects but also
reflects poorly on the organisations concerned. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
must impress upon all the concerned agencies to complete the construction of the building at the
earliest so that there is no surrender of funds on this count in future. (Para 3.5)
WA VE ENERGY
Keeping in v iew the energy resource constraint in the country and the need for additional
sources of energy, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should undertake a detailed
study on the subject. The Ministry should also study as to whether the technology will be
economically viable and how much this source of energy will benefit the country, if the production
is harnessed. (Para 4.3)
RESEARCH EDUCATION AND TRAINING OUTREACH (REACHOUT)
The Committee notes that although the BE allocation (2017-18) of `````44.00 crore for REACHOUT
was increased to `````46.00 crore at RE stage, the Ministry has been able to spend only `````33.22 crore by
15th February, 2018 i.e. 72.21 per cent only. Underutilisation in scheme which promotes research
activities in various sectors of Earth system sciences is certainly not desirable. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Earth Sciences should pay due attention towards research activities
and ensure that no funds earmarked for it are underutilised in future. (Para 5.3)
INCREASE IN ALLOCATION FOR RESEARCH ACTIVITIES
The Committee notes that in 2017-18 and 2018-19, the allocation of REACHOUT is only
4.6% and 6.27% respectively of the total allocation for Central Sector schemes. Although the
comparative allocation has increased in 2018-19, the allocation for research scheme needs to be
increased. (Para 6.1)
The Committee is of the opinion that facilitating research and development and investing for
the same are extremely important for the development of any nation and for a developing country
like India, the critical importance of research and development cannot be overemphasised. The
Committee urge that the Ministry should pay due attention to this sector and work towards achieving
its targets in facilitating research and development. The Committee feels that the Ministry would
be able to utilise its BE allocation for the year 2018-19 to the extent possible and achieve the targets
envisaged for the year. (Para 6.2)
COORDINATION BETWEEN THE SCIENTIFIC MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS
The Committee observes that there is overlapping and duplication in research efforts of
many scientific organisations of the country. For instance, Ministry of Earth Sciences has developed
technology for desalination of water. But similar technologies have also been developed by

20
Departments of Science and Technology, Scientific and Industrial Research and Atomic Energy
also. Also, Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services, Ministry of Earth Sciences
provides services to the fishermen/mariners at sea through NAVIC in collaboration with ISRO and
through GAGAN with Airports Authority of India about cyclone/tsunami warnings, potential fishery
zone and helping in tracking of ships. Both NA VIK of ISRO and GAGAN of Airport Authority of
India seem to provide almost identical services to fishermen/mariners. (Para 7.4)
Although the Ministry has claimed working closely with various Ministries/Departments/
Institutions at different levels for effective and coordinated implementation of programmes to
avoid duplicity in research and technology development, the Committee is of the view that
coordination highlighted by the Ministry seems to be more for effective implementation of their
programmes only. The Secretary of the Ministry has admitted that at present there is no mechanism
of an umbrella organisation for coordination between different Ministries/Departments. (Para 7.5)
The Committee has already cited some instances of overlapping and duplication of research
work. The Committee feels that there is an urgent requirement of some institutional mechanism
for effective coordination between various scientific Ministries/Departments of the Government.
The Committee hopes that as stated by the Secretary, the proposal submitted by the Ministry of
Earth Sciences will be considered at the earliest to ensure that all gaps coming in the ways of
effective coordination between scientific research work of the various scientific Ministries/
Department are filled at the earliest. (Para 7.6)
ARRESTING BRAIN DRAIN
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry for developing skilled manpower required
for Ministry of Earth Sciences major job objectives. However, as brought out by the Committee in
the preceding paragraphs, the scholar intake is certainly less than required in the country. Therefore,
there is a need to develop a scientific temperament in the youth of our country and create their
interest in scientific subjects so that we have more and more people coming forward in this field.
The coordinating body suggested by the Committee in the earlier paras can also take a lead in this
regard and make scientific subjects more popular amongst our youth. (Para 8.7)
The Committee is of the view that brain drain has become a major concern in the country. A
majority of the country’s skilled workforce goes abroad in search of greener pastures. The Committee
feels that there is no dearth of talent in the country. The need is to tap this talent and provide all
necessary wherewithal for achieving excellence in their respective fields. The Committee recommends
that there should be no let up in the efforts of the all scientific Ministries/Departments of the
Government to attract talented people in scientific fields. The Ministry of Earth Sciences too must
inspire the best brains and continue with its various schemes. (Para 8.8)
ATMOSPHERE AND CLIMATE RESEARCH-MODELLING OBSERVING SYSTEMS AND SERVICES
(ACROSS)
The Committee notes that although the overall financial performance of the Ministry under
the ACROSS scheme has been satisfactory, the delay in the civil works of IMD is a cause of concern.

21
The Committee recommends the Ministry should take up the matter with CPWD and other concerned
agencies to ensure that in 2018-19, the civil works of IMD progress as per the schedule and funds
are utilised optimally. (Para 9.5)
The Committee finds the replies submitted by the Ministry on the queries raised by the
Committee with respect to achievements regarding Agromet Advisory Services and District
Agrometeorological Field Units evasive. In response to both the queries, the Ministry has not
categorically replied as to whether the Ministry would be able to complete the targets during the
year and has merely furnished the factual position in this regard. However, the Committee observes
from the replies that the Ministry fell too short of its target of setting up of District Agrometeorological
Field Units (DAMUs). The critical importance of DAMUs in dissemination of relevant information
cannot be overemphasised and the failure to achieve the targets in this regard does not reflect well
on the part of the Ministry. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take a fresh look
at its targets and plan accordingly so that the Ministry is able to complete its targets during 2018-19
and the maximum number of farmers can avail the benefit of crop advisories. (Para 9.10)
CYCLONE WARNING SERVICES - CYCLONE OCKHI
The Committee is of the view that in spite of the claims made by the Ministry with regard to
advance warning for the natural calamities, the end-beneficiary of the system has not been benefitted
to the desired extent. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should identify the loopholes
in the system and take all necessary measures to plug the same for dissemination of service of
forecasts and warnings to all the concerned stakeholders. The Ministry should also impress upon all
the State Governments to take immediate action on the warnings and take all necessary action so
that the benefit of advance warnings reaches to the ground level. (Para 10.5)
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry regarding installation of ‘Pratyush’
High Power Computing System at IITM, Pune. The Committee hopes that this High Power Computer
System would not only help improving the weather and climate prediction and forecast systems but
would also predict cyclones and tsunamis accurately and help in seismological studies. (Para 10.7)
NON-SETTLEMENT OF AUDIT PARAS
The Committee notes with concern the audit paras relating to irregular payment of gratuity
to employees of NIOT, Chennai and non-establishment of desalination plants and wasteful
expenditure on establishment of desalination plants by NIOT. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry must take corrective measures in respect of all such instances and ensure that such
incidents do not recur. (Para 11.3)
The Committee is further constrained to note that some of the Audit Paras of the Ministry
are yet to be settled even after 2 to 3 years. The Committee is of the view that the Audit Paras
must be settled at the earliest and for this purpose, the Ministry must submit satisfactory replies
to the Audit so that they are settled at the earliest and do not get entangled in repetitive submission
of revised ATNs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Earth Sciences
should take necessary action accordingly for early settlement of the Audit Paras pertaining to the
Ministry. (Para 11.4)

MINUTES

25
VIII
EIGHTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 1l.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 20th February, 2018 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma    —    Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
4. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
5. Shri Sharad Pawar
6. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK  SABHA
7. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
8. Shri Ninong Ering
9. Dr. K. Gopal
10. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
11. Shri Daddan Mishra
12. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
13. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
14. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Earth Sciences
1. Dr. M. Rajeevan, Secretary
2. Dr. K. J. Ramesh, DG, IMD
3. Ms. Sumita Sarkar, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor
4. Dr. Vipin Chandra, Joint Secretary
5. Dr. S.S.C. Shenoi, Director, INCOIS, Hyderabad
6. Dr. M. A. Atmanand, Director, NIOT, Chennai
7. Prof. Ravi S. Nanjundiah, Director, IITM, Pune
8. Dr. M. Ravichandran, Director, NCAOR, Goa
9. Dr. M. Sudhakar, Director, CMLRE, Kochi
10. Dr. E. N. Rajagopal, Head, NCMRWE, Noida
11. Dr. N. Purnachandra Rao, Director, NCESS, Thiruvananthapuram

26
12. Dr. M. V . Ramana Murthy, Director, ICMAM, Chennai
13. Dr. Vineet Kumar Gahalaut, Director, National Centre for Seismology, Noida
14. Shri Eddie L. Khawlhring, Controller of Accounts
15. Dr. M. P. Wakdikar, Advisor
16. Dr. K. Somasundar, Advisor
17. Dr. B. K. Bansal, Advisor
18. Dr. Gopal Raman Iyengar, Advisor
19. Dr. Kamaljit Ray, Advisor
20. Dr. N. Khare, Advisor
21. Dr. Parvinder Maini, Advisor
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the Secretary, and other
officers of Ministry of Earth Sciences to the meeting of the Committee. The Chairman sought to know the
views of the Secretary about the budgetary allocation of the Ministry for the year 2018-19, projected outlay,
budgetary reduction, impact of reduction on the programmes/projects/activities of the Ministry, targets
envisaged for the next financial year, targets achieved during 2017-18, challenges faced by the Ministry and
the corrective measures taken thereon and internal monitoring mechanism, etc.
3. Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences made a power point presentation briefly informing the Committee
about major activities and achievements during 2017-18 under the Central Sector Schemes viz., Ocean
Services Technology Observations Resources Modelling and Sciences (O-STORMS), Atmosphere and
Climate Research-Modelling Observing Systems and Services (ACROSS), Ploar Sciences and Cryosphere
(PACER), Seismological and Geosciences (SAGE) and Research Education and Training Outreach
(REACHOUT). The Secretary also briefed the Committee about the activities, functioning and major
achievements of the autonomous bodies of the Ministry namely Indian National Centre for Ocean Information
Services, Hyderabad; National Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai; National Centre for Antarctic and
Ocean Research, Goa; Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology, Pune; and National Centre for Earth
Science Studies, Thiruvananthapuram. The Secretary also informed about the major activities proposed
for the year 2018-19 such as strengthening of Agrometeorological Services for farmers, setting up weather
radar network over NW Himalayas, developing Air Pollution Emergency Alert System for Delhi by October,
2018, Technology Development for Deep Ocean Mining, setting up Six Desalination Plants in Lakshadweep,
continuation of Exploration of Polar regions and Studies on Cryosphere, procurement of Polar Research
V essel, strengthening of Seismological Network etc. The Secretary also briefed the Committee about the
financial performance of the Ministry for the year 2017-18. It was informed that against the total allocation
of `1597.69 crore at RE stage, the actual expenditure of the Ministry as on 15th February, 2018 was
`1370.17 crore.
4. The Chairman and Members of the Committee then raised their queries relating to various issues such
as Wave Energy, coordination amongst various scientific Ministries/Departments, increase in allocations for
research activities, efforts made by the Ministry to ensure the community involvement in weather forecasting,
disaster warnings, etc., awareness campaign of the Ministry, usage of supercomputer “Pratyush”, revenue
generation activities of the Ministry, mobile application for communicating the advisories for the farmers,
progress achieved in the area of sea mineral exploration, steps taken for arresting brain-drain in the country,

27
lack of advance warning for natural calamities such as Cyclone Ockhi, shortfall in achieving the targets of
Agromet Advisory Services and District Agrometeorological Field Units (DAMU), delay in civil works of
IMD and CMLRE, Kochi and the steps taken for their timely completion, performance of the Ministry with
respect to realisation of targets set for the year 2017-18, establishment of desalination plants, status of the
Poly Metallic Nodules and Gas Hydrates projects, institutional linkage with the other countries of the world
for training, reasons for low number of Ph.D.s, etc.
5. The Secretary and other representatives of Ministry of Earth Sciences, while presenting their views,
also responded to other queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee, The Chairman also
directed the Secretary to furnish the written replies to queries/points/issues raised by the Chairman and the
Members of the Committee, which could not be replied during the meeting, to the Secretariat within ten
days.
6. The witnesses then withdrew.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 12:47 
P.M.

28
IX
NINTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 6th March, 2018 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma    —    Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
4. Shri C. P. Narayanan
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK  SABHA
6. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
7. Shri Daddan Mishra
8. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
9. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
10. Shri Nagendra Singh
11. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He informed
the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 309th, 310th, 311th,
312th, 313th, 314th and 315th reports on Demands for Grants 2018-19 of the Departments of Bio-technology,
Science and Technology, Scientific and Industrial Research, Space, Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change, Department of Atomic Energy and Ministry of Earth Sciences, respectively.
3. The Committee, after considering the recommendations made in the draft reports, adopted the draft
309th, 310th, 311th, 312th, 313th, 314th and 315th reports after some alterations/modifications suggested
by the Chairman of the Committee in the 314th Report of Department of Atomic Energy. The Committee
also decided to present/lay the reports to both the Houses of Parliament on 13
th March, 2018.
4. The Committee also decided to nominate the Chairman and in his absence Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
and in her absence Shri Prasanna Acharya to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Dr. K. Gopal and in his
absence Shri Vikram Usendi to lay the reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th March, 2018.

29
***Relate to other matters.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3.40 
P.M.