AUTHENTICATED  
EPARTMED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE &  
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS  
AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTY SECOND REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Seventy Fifth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change on the Demands For Grants 
(2023-24) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2023) 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
382 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
 
 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
       August, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTY SECOND REPORT 
 
       Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Seventy Fifth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change on the Demands For Grants     
(2023-24) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2023) 
 

 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
   
  PAGES 
   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION  (ii) 
  3. ACRONYMS  (iii) 
4. REPORT  1-11 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been  
                       accepted by the Government 
 
2-5 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee     
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
replies 
 
6-9 
 Chapter III.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted  by the     
Committee 
 
10 
 Chapter IV.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
                      Replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
11 
5. MINUTES  12-14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
                             
 _____  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2022-23) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh - Chairman 
 
         RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Shri Niranjan Bishi  
4. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
6. Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
7. Shri Jose K. Mani 
8. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
9. Shri Nabam Rebia   
10. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  
         LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
12. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
13. Shri Jashwantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
14. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
15. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16. Shri Sunny Deol 
17. Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
18. Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
19. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
20. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
21. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
22. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
23. Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
24. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
25. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha  
26. Shri Anurag Sharma 
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
28. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
29. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava  
30. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
31. *Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Narendra Kumar, Director 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
       Shri Thangzasiam Paite, Committee Officer 
       
  _______________________________________________________________ 
   * Shri S. Jagathrakshakan ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 8th December, 2022 
 
(i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having bee n authorised 
by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Three Hundred Eighty 
Second Report on Action Taken by the Government on the  recommendations/observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Seventy Fifth Report  of the Committee on  Demands for 
Grants (2023 -2024) of the Department of  Scientific and Industrial Research, which was 
presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 15 th March, 2023 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
20th March, 2023.  
2.   There were 15 recommendations/observat ions in the Three Hundred Seventy Fifth 
Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of the 
Committee were received from the Department on 19th June, 2023.   
3.   In the meeting held on 9th August, 2023, the Committee considered the draft Report 
and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
 (JAIRAM RAMESH) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
09 August, 2023    Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
Sravana18,  1945 (Saka)  and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change,  
Rajya Sabha 
 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 

 
ACRONYMS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
APIs Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients  
ATN Action Taken Note 
ATR Action Taken Report 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CEL Central Electronics Limited 
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
DSIR Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
IP Intellectual Property 
JRF Junior Research Fellowship 
KSM Key Starting Materials 
LSG Lab Strategic Group 
MoEF & CC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
NCL National Chemical Laboratory  
NET National Eligibility Test 
NMITLI New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative 
NRDC National Research and Development Corporation  
PSE Public Sector Enterprises 
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals 
UGC University Grants Commission  

1 
 
REPORT 
 
 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change deals with the action taken by  
the Government  on the recommendations/observations of the  Committee contained in its ‘Three 
Hundred Seventy Fifth Report’ on ‘Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (DSIR)’ . The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha on the 15 th March, 2023 and 
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 20th March, 2023.  
2. Action Taken Note s (ATNs) ha ve been received from the Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (DSIR) in respect of  all the 15 recommendations/observations contained in the 
‘Three Hundred Seventy Fifth Report’ . The r eplies of the Department of Scientific and Industrial 
Research have been categorized as follows:-  
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos., 2.8, 4.5, 5.7, 5.9, 5.11, 6.5 and 7.5  
 Total recommendations – 07  
Chapter II:    Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: 
Para Nos. 2.3, 2.9, 3.5, 4.4, 5.5, 5.6 and 7.4  
 Total recommendations – 07   
Chapter III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: ‘Nil’ 
Chapter IV:   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Para No. 3.6  
 Total recommendation- 01 
 
3. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters. 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
OVERALL BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022 -23 (BE, RE & 
ACTUAL EXPENDITURE) AND ALLOCATION FOR 2023-24. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.1 The Committee finds merit in the Department’s request for an additional budgetary allocation 
to the tune of ₹1048.26 crore, over and above the provision made in B.E. 2023 -24. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Department may seek the requisite additional allocation from the 
Ministry of Finance at the R.E. stage. Further, the Committee recommends that,  apart from re -
appropriation of CSIR internal resources to supplement CSIR -driven projects, the Department should 
explore options for more collaborations with other Departments/Ministries as well as the private 
sector, through enhanced outreach and dissemi nation of information about i ts activities and 
achievements.                  (Para 2.8 of the 375th Report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.2 Department thankfully acknowledges the Committee’s recognition towards need for an 
additional allocation to the tune of ₹1048.26 crore, over and above the provision made in B.E. 2023-24. 
As per recommendations of the Committee, Department will seek additional funds from the Ministry of 
Finance at the R.E. stage to sustain its key programmes/initiatives. 
1.3 Department will also follow the directions of the Committee regarding exploring options for 
more collaborations with other Departments/Ministries as well as the private sector through enhanced 
outreach and dissemination of information about its activities and achievements . Department has 
already started stakeholder discussions with Industry to take their views on increasing collaboration 
with them in the areas of support to in -house R&D, more Technology Transfers & Commercialization, 
and their suggestions to create a vibrant R&D ecosystem in the c ountry.  Additionally, Department 
would also like to submit that: 
 CSIR Labs have been engaged in attracting funds from other available sources including efforts 
have been made for obtaining contributions under Corporate Social Resp onsibility (CSR) f rom 
eligible Indian Corporates/Industries for undertaking R&D projects for promotion of SDGs; 
 CSIR Labs have been interacting with stakeholder Ministries such as MoEF & CC etc. to make 
them aware of capabilities of CSIR while undertaking projects in areas of mutual interest. CSIR 
Labs are also engaged with Industries and undertakes R&D projects of global 
competitiveness/national relevance; and  
 CSIR Labs have been interacting with many Industries from India and abroad to promote CSIR 
knowledge base. Many such industries are financially supporting CSIR R&D projects f or 
development of technologies/products of their interest. 

3 
 
 
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR) 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.4 The Committee is of the view that , although many new initiatives are being undertaken, a lot 
more needs to be done in order to successfully meet the challenges of the future. The Committee 
recommends that the Department should undertake meaningful initiatives to establish strong 
foundations to enable the country to become a global leader in scientific research and development. 
While sufficient allocation of funds is an obvious pre -requisite to effectively pursue this goal, the 
Committee feels that it is essential to let more private sector /industries on board to play a greater role 
in contributing to R&D in the country. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that more 
representatives of industries/companies should be motivated to partake in this endeavour, especially by 
way of capital investments.                  (Para 4.5 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
1.5 Department sincerely acknowle dges the C ommittee’s recommendations and will follow the 
directions of the Committee. The Department has been constantly working to promote in -house R&D 
activities of t he industry through Recognition/Registration, Certification of R&D Expenditure of the 
industry for weighted tax deductions under Section 35 (2AB) of IT Act 1961 among others. It is further 
submitted that the Department understands the requirement of transl ational R&D in terms of 
collaboration with relevant industries and getting financial support for a certain portion of R&D 
expenditure from them. CSIR has been constantly working towards this goal and is taking up a lot of 
initiatives such as NMITLI, One Week One Lab, CSIR Societal Portal, iConnect, etc. Though, with 
these efforts, there has been a great response from the industrial fraternity. However, CSIR will 
continue to explore all possible dimensions to convert the industry interests to capital investm ent in 
CSIR R&D works. Department has tasked IIM Calcutta to conduct a detailed study/evaluation of the 
ongoing Fiscal Incentive Scheme of the Department and to explore the possibility of improvement of 
industrial R&D ecosystem in the country under the aeg is of DSIR. Department has also started 
stakeholder discussions on R&D (with various industrial sectors) to take their feedback and 
suggestions on the required new initiatives for strengthening of scientific and industrial research in the 
country to make it a global leader. 
 
CAPACITY BUILDING AND HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT OF CSIR 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.6 Further, the Committee takes note of the status of CSIR award schemes, which are yet to be 
declared even at the last quarter of the current finan cial year, and recommends that appropriate and 
expeditious action may be taken to complete the process.              (Para 5.7 ibid) 
 

4 
 
Action Taken 
1.7 Department will follow the directions/recommendations of the Committee. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.8 The Committee observes that the figures for patent applications filed and granted and papers 
published during 2022 -23, are lower than those of the preceding year. As these are key indicators of 
the scientific and technological advancements of a country,  the Committee exhorts CSIR to intensify its 
efforts towards improving these numbers during 2023-24.              (Para 5.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.9 Department will follow the directions of the Committee. It is humbly submitted that CSIR is the 
only R&D orga nization filing, prosecuting and maintaining its patents In -house in India. CSIR 
centrally as well as at lab level is increasing awaren ess through webinars/workshops/ seminars related 
to importance of filing of patents, design, copyrights and other forms of  IP. CSIR is having dedicated 
IP co-ordinators in each of its laboratories helping scientists in securing of IP. IP awareness programs 
are also conducted at the lab level. CSIR through all these interventions is trying to improve its number 
of filings not only in patents but also in other forms of IP. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.10 The Committee applauds the efforts made by CSIR for revenue generation, and recommends the 
Council to set targets in this regard and, accordingly, explore more avenues for h igher revenue 
generation during the next financial year.              (Para 5.11 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
1.11 Department thankfully acknowledges the Committee’s recognition and appreciation towards 
efforts made by CSIR for revenue generation. Department will f ollow the recommendations of the 
Committee. 
 
CSIR MISSION MODE PROJECT ON ‘WASTE TO WEALTH’ 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.12 The Committee highly commends the efforts of the Department in the field of waste 
management and, in particular, is pleased to le arn about the technologies developed for converting 
various wastes to wealth. Taking cognizance of the need for a well coordinated waste management 
strategy in the country for various types of wastes, the Committee recommends that the Department 
should make concerted efforts to ensure that the Mission project on waste to wealth is implemented 
with all sincerity and in a holistic manner. Apart from sufficient budgetary allocations towards the 
project, efforts should be made to involve other stakeholders as w ell. Further, thrust should be given to 
research and development of more waste -to-wealth technologies including for electronic wastes – the 
management of which is becoming an important issue for the country.            (Para 6.5 ibid) 

5 
 
 
Action Taken 
1.13 Department thankfully acknowledges the Committee’s recognition and appreciation of 
Department’s efforts and contribution in the field of waste management.  Department will fol low the 
recommendations of the C ommittee. It is humbly submitted that a new waste -to-wealth mission is 
under formulation by CSIR and will be launched in the FY 2023 -24 to address a variety of industrial 
and other important waste management issues, including fossil fuel waste, biotic waste, metallic waste, 
non-metallic waste, and electronic waste. 
 
MISSION PROJECT ON ACTIVE PHARMACEUTICAL INGREDIENTS (APIs) 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.14 The Committee recommends that specific targets, both short term and long term, should be set 
for reducing the dependence on imported raw materials fro m around 80 per cent at present, to 30 or 
40 per cent in the next five years. To achieve this, the Committee recommends that the proposed 
Mission project should be dovetailed with the initiatives being undertaken in this area by other 
Ministries/Departments and the private sector, adequate funds should be earmarked for the purpose so 
that financial constrains do not hinder the much needed research work, and options should be explored 
for benefiting from latest emerging technologies such as Artificial Intell igence (AI), with the overall 
objective of achieving the desired outcomes within the shortest possible timeframe. The Committee 
would also like to be kept abreast of the progress made by the Department in this regard.  
          (Para 7.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.15 Department will follow the directions/recomm endations of the C ommittee. It is kindly 
submitted that CSIR has excellent expertise in organic synthesis, process chemistry and chemical 
engineering.  With this expertise, CSIR has developed cost -effective processes for various APIs and 
their intermediates. Such developed processes have been successfully transferred for few molecules 
like α -Lipoic acid, Azelaic Acid and Paracetamol to pharma companies for production and 
commercialization.  A pilot plant fo r paracetamol has been erected and commissioned in 2019 at NCL. 
Similarly, CSIR contributed in repurposing of drugs for COVID -19 towards affordable health care, 
which include Remdesivir, Molnupiravir, Umifenovir, Favipiravir. Favipiravir, transferred to M/s Cipla 
Ltd, Mumbai, is commercialized in the name of “CIPLENZA”.  It is also submitted that CSIR -IICT, 
Hyderabad has already established a kilo -lab facility, which shall soon be GMP accredited lab. To 
continue R&D in this important domain and direction, a  mission project on APIs is under formulation 
with primary aim to develop viable, non -infringing synthesis routes for selected APIs, based on their 
need for the country and broadly for cardiovascular, respiratory diseases and Diabetes.  CSIR efforts in  
the domain of APIs/KSMs aspire to serve the country by aiming at import substitution and contributing 
to ‘Make in India’ program. 
 

6 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
OVERALL BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022 -23 (BE, RE & 
ACTUAL EXPENDITURE) AND ALLOCATION FOR 2023-24. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.1 The Committee appreciates the overall satisfactory financial performance of the Department. 
At the same time,  the Committee expresses concern over the sub -optimal utilisation in respect of the 
Central Sector Schemes/Projects, as over 50 per cent of the funds allocated under this remain to be 
utilized within the remaining quarter of the current financial year. The  Committee, therefore, urges the 
Department to ensure optimal utilization of funds during the course of the financial year. In future, 
periodic monitoring preferably on quarterly basis may be undertaken to facilitate the same. 
          (Para 2.3 of the 375th Report) 
Action Taken 
2.2 Department sincerely acknowledges the Committee’s recommendation and will follow the 
directions of the Committee. Also, as advised by the Committee, the Department will undertake 
periodic monitoring on quarterly basis to ensure  optimal utilization of funds during the course of 
the financial year. Department also thankfully acknowledges the Committee’s recognition towards 
satisfactory financial performance of CSIR.  Further, NRDC, a PSE with DSIR would also do the 
needful in ensuring complete utilization of funds for its respective schemes in the CFY 2023-24. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.3 The Committee underscores the criticality of timely completion of projects and, therefore, 
recommends the Department to undertake regular r eview of its financial and physical targets, in order 
to make a practical assessment of any further corrective measures which may be required to overcome 
the challenges in the way of achieving set targets.                        (Para 2.9 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
2.4 Department duly acknowledges the observation and concern of the Committee. Department 
would like to submit that constant monitoring/review is being made in DSIR & CSIR for the ongoing 
projects against their financial and physical targets. 
2.5 It is humbly submitted that CSIR has devised a strong monitoring mechanism for its project/s 
which is as given below:  
 The project is technically evaluated by the monitoring committee which comprises domain experts 
and evaluates the projects half -yearly and also  by the Mission/Theme Director who monitors the 
project regularly.   

7 
 
 Further, to evaluate the financials of the project there is both an internal CSIR audit and a CAG 
audit; and  
 In addition to this, the coordinating lab Director reviews and monitors the p rogress on monthly 
basis and all the administrative bottlenecks faced by the project are reviewed and handled weekly 
during the Lab Strategic Group (LSG) Meeting. 
2.6 Projects supported by NRDC are also regularly reviewed and adequate assessment is made to  
ensure timely completion and in achieving set targets and milestones.  
 
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES/PROJECTS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.7 The Committee s takes note of the important initiatives undertaken through the umbrella 
schemes of the Department, and expresses its appreciation for the significant work being done through 
them. However, given the abysmal actual utilization of funds during 2022 -23 under these schemes, as 
has been pointed out at para 2.3, the Committee is constrained to observe that a be tter monitoring 
mechanism needs to be put in place to ensure an effective check on its physical and financial 
performance. Concomitantly, the Department should also indicate and quantify, to the extent possible, 
physical targets it aspires to achieve across all the schemes/sub-schemes.            (Para 3.5 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
2.8 Department appreciates the observation of the Committee regarding fixing of targets and for 
setting up a monitoring framework. In this regard, it is informed that targets are fixed  as per the 
approved Standing Finance Committee. In addition  to this, the targets and the achievements against 
each of these targets is monitored by Niti Aayog through the Output Outcome Monitoring framework 
office. The physical targets and the a chievements in all the schemes/ sub-schemes is also monitored by 
the concerned officer heading the program divisions in the Department. CSIR & NRDC have also set 
targets for the activities to be carried out under the schemes for the year 2023 -24 and the achievement 
in terms of physical and financial performance is regularly monitored. 
 
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR) 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.9 The Committee applauds the contribution of the Department through CSIR and its network of 
laboratories in the pursuit of excellence across all sectors of scientific research and development. The 
Committee also notes that these endeavours of CSIR are well -aligned to the economic, industrial and 
social priorities of the nation, as exemplified by their conv ergence with the Government's Mission 
Programmes such as Atma Nirbhar Bharat, Make in India, Startup India, Swachh Bharat, focus on 
green growth, etc.                   (Para 4.4 ibid) 
 

8 
 
Action Taken 
2.10 Department thankfully acknowledges the Committee’s r ecognition and appreciation towards 
Department’s contribution through CSIR and its network of laboratories in the pursuit of excellence 
across all sectors of scientific research and development including their convergence with the 
Government’s Mission Programmes. 
 
CAPACITY BUILDING AND HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT OF CSIR 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.11 Recognizing the criticality of human capacity building and development, the Committee 
appreciates the work being done by the CSIR towards this end. Howeve r, the Committee notes that the 
scholarships/fellowships are provided to students mostly at higher levels. Options may, therefore, be 
explored for instituting scholarships/fellowships at lower/entry levels too, such as graduation or even 
senior secondary level, in order to encourage the youth of the country to pursue science studies. 
(Para 5.5 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
2.12 It is humbly apprised to the Committee that Department of Science and Technology, Ministry 
of Science and Technology under its INSPIRE Scheme  provides scholarship to schools stude nts for 
higher studies. Further, the Department of Higher Education instituted “NSP Central Sector Scheme of 
Scholarship for college and university students” for pursuing graduation, BE/B.Tech and PG.   
2.13 The sugges tion of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee for institutin g 
scholarships/fellowships by CSIR at lower /entry levels too, such as graduation or even senior 
secondary level has been noted. Department will take the suitable needful actions if budgetary 
allocations are provided by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure to meet the expenses 
on such scholarships. 
2.14 It is also kindly submitted that graduates in Science and Engineering are eligible for JRF 
through the CSIR -UGC National Eligibility Test (NET). Apart from JRF -NET, CSIR also offer s JRF 
fellowship to engineering and pharmacy graduates under its JRF-GATE scheme. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.15 The Committee is of the considered opinion that, apart from awarding some 
fellowships/scholarships, there is a need to nurture and groom young students to become future 
scientists. CSIR, with its vast chain of scientific labs and strong team of scientists, can play a major 
role in this direction. The Committee, therefore, recomm ends that the Department should also work 
towards introducing various policies and programmes to attract, harness and retain the youth in the 
field of science.                   (Para 5.6 ibid) 
 
 
 

9 
 
Action Taken 
2.16 It is kindly submitted that CSIR has been  engaged in connecting school students with scientists 
through its “Jigyasa” (student -scientist connect) program since 2017. The programme envisages 
opening up the national scientific facilities to school children, enabling CSIR scientific knowledge base 
and facility to be utilized by school children to develop ‘Scientific Temper’ in the young minds thereby 
attracting school children towards science. The Jigyasa program is being implemented through CSIR 
laboratories wherein more than 5,25,000 students and m ore than 45,000 teachers across the country 
have benefitted, directly since 2017. CSIR has signed MoU with Kendriya Vidyala Sangathan, 
Navodaya Vidyalaya Samithi, NITI Aayog, Karnataka Science & Technology Agency, Chief 
Development Officer Bulandshahr, Ind ian Institute of Technology -Bombay, National Council of 
Science Museums (NCSM) for collaboration in Scientist -Student connect under “Jigyasa” platform of 
scientific social responsibility. 
2.17 CSIR has also developed and launched a Virtual Lab Platform und er Jigyasa.  With the launch 
of Virtual Lab Platform, CSIR had organized Bootcamps and virtual National Level Scientific 
Creativity competitions. 15 bootcamps were organised that had an outreach of more than 20,000 
students. Prize awards to the top 75 cont ents created in comics, science fiction, infographics, videos, 
app development and animation were provi ded by Hon’ble Minister of S&T.  Moving ahead, Jigyasa 
has also developed mobile app for better linkage of students with scientists. 
 
MISSION PROJECT ON ACTIVE PHARMACEUTICAL INGREDIENTS (APIs) 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.18 The Committee is fully aware of current state of huge dependence of the Indian Pharmaceutical 
industry on import of majority of raw materials used in the pharmaceutical industry. T he Committee, 
therefore, expresses its wholehearted support towards CSIR’s proposed Mission Project on APIs, and 
wishes the Department a speedy progress in this direction.              (Para 7.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
2.19 Department thankfully acknowledges t he Committee’s recognition and support for 
Department’s proposed Mission project on APIs. These recognitions will fuel the on -going R&D 
activities on APIs to get great momentum and result in new technological breakthroughs.     

10 
 
  
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE  
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES/PROJECTS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.1 The Committee also desires to be kept abreast of the status of CEL, its disinvestment process as 
well as the vision and future plan of the Department regarding this PSE.  (Para 3.6 of the 375th Report) 
 
Action Taken 
4.2 CEL is under  strategic disinvestment and Department will take action as per directions/advice 
of DIPAM in this regard and keep the Committee updated if any significant development takes place. 
 
 
 

12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________ 
MINUTES 
___________________________________________________________________ 

13 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT -RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE (2023-24) 
 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 3:30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 9 th August, 2023 in Room 
No. 67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav - in the Chair 
2. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
3. Shri Jose K. Mani 
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
5. Shri Nabam Rebia 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
7. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
8. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
9. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
10. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
11. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani 
12. Shri Anurag Sharma 
13. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi 
 SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. K.S. Somasekhar, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Narendra Kumar, Director 
 Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
          Shri Rama Nand, Committee Officer 
  

14 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee and informed them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to consider and 
adopt the draft Reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in Reports of the Committee 
on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministries/Departments under its purview.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 380 th, 381st, 382nd, 383rd, 
384th, 385th and 386th Reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on 
the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in Reports of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the Ministries/Departments of Atomic 
Energy; Biotechnology; Scientific & Industrial Research; Science & Technology; Space; 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, respectively and adopted 
the same unanimously without any change. 
4. Thereafter the Committee discussed its future programme and decided to 
undertake a Study visit in the month of September, 2023. The Committee authorised its 
Chairman to finalise the tour programme. 
5. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.00 p.m. 
 
 
NEW DELHI NARENDRA KUMAR 
09.08.2023 DIRECTOR 
 