Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2015/Ashadha, 1937 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
261
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 21th July, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 22nd July, 2015)
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT
Pollution in Tier-II Cities of
Punjab-Ludhiana and Amritsar

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT
Pollution in Tier-II Cities of
Punjab-Ludhiana and Amritsar
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the  21st July, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the  22nd July, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2015/Ashadha, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................................................ 1—23
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS - AT G LANCE ................................................................ 24—27
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 28—34
7. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................ 36— 54

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1 st September, 2014-15)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
6. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri Bhupinder Singh
 9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Beig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
22. Shri Nana Patole
23. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
24. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
25. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
27. Shri Nagendra Singh
28. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
*31. Shri Chirag Paswan
*  Nominated w.e.f.  25 th March, 2015.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to
present the Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred and Sixty-first Report on ‘Pollution
in Tier-II Cities of Punjab-Ludhiana and Amritsar’.
2. During its study visit to Ludhiana and Amritsar from 13th to 15th February, 2015, the
Committee heard the views of the various Central and State Government Officials, Experts and
Civil Society Organisations/NGOs on pollution related issues in Ludhiana and Amritsar.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Central and State Government Officials,
Experts and Civil Society Organisations/NGOs for rendering their valuable views/replies to
clarifications sought by the Committee.
4. In its meeting held on 24 th June, 2015, the Committee considered the draft report and
adopted the same.
ASHWANI KUMAR
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
June 24 , 2015 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Ashadha 3, 1937 Science and Technology, Environment and Forests
Rajya Sabha

(iv)
ACRONYMS
PSIEC : Punjab Small Industries and Export Corporation Ltd.
TDS : Total Dissolved Salts
GLADA : Greater Ludhiana Area Development Authority
LIT : Ludhiana Improvement Trust
LMC : Ludhiana Municipal Corporation
PSIDC : Punjab State Industrial Development Corporation
PUDA : Punjab Urban Development Authority
HOUSEFED : House Building Societies Ltd.
UASB : Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket
BOD : Bio Chemical Oxygen Demand
ElL : Engineers India Limited
BOO : Build Operate & Own
ASPT : Activated Sludge Process Technology
JICA : Japan International Cooperation Agency
SBR : Sequencing Batch Reactor
HCFs : Health Care Facilities

REPORT
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests under the Chairmanship of Shri Ashwani Kumar had decided to take
up the issue of pollution levels of some of the Tier-II cities of the country.  In that series,
the Committee undertook its study visit to Ludhiana and Amritsar from 13 th to 15 th February,
2015.
LUDHIANA
2. On 13 th February, 2015, the Committee visited Ludhiana where it first visited Buddha
Nallah.  The Chairman and Member Secretary, Punjab Pollution Control Board also
accompanied the Committee.
2.1 The Committee found that the condition of Buddha Nallah was a cause of grave
concern as an environmental challenge.  Water of the Nallah was dark black, contaminated with
effluents and garbage, emitting strong odour.  The Committee found that untreated municipal
sewerage and animal waste was draining into the Nallah.  On being enquired about the reasons
for such a situation of the Nallah which runs through the most populous town of Punjab, the
Committee was informed by representatives of the Punjab Pollution Control Board that though
the Board had taken up the matter of unauthorized discharge of solid and liquid municipal
waste into the Nallah with local authorities, the situation had not improved.  Municipal
Corporation of Ludhiana had a proposal to install STPs to treat the sewage generated in the
town.
3. The Chairman lamented that Buddha Nallah which used to be a fresh water stream
getting over flow from River Sutlej had turned into an open sewer line rather than a stream.
Once the precious asset to the city of Ludhiana, the Buddha Nallah has become a curse posing
serious health hazard to the public.
4. The Chairman, expressing his deep anguish over the sorry state of affairs of the Nallah,
commented that notwithstanding the promises and assurances of action by the officials for so
long, the condition of Buddha Nallah continued to deteriorate year after year owing to a callous
and casual approach of the authorities responsible for conserving and cleaning it.  The situation
had gone from bad to worse over the years and it was time that some concrete and result
bearing efforts were made by the state administration to improve its condition.
5. Thereafter, the Committee visited the Haibowal Dairy Complex.  The Committee was
informed that there were about 550 dairies in the complex having a total number of about
25,000 cattle.  The estimated discharge from Dairies into Buddha Nallah was about 15 MLD.
The Committee was also informed that about 550 MTD cattle dung was generated out of
which about 170 MTD was used in a biogas power plant of 1 MW capacity.  To prevent
discharge from drains into Buddha Nallah, the Municipal Corporation of Ludhiana and Punjab
Energy Development Agency had prepared a scheme for installation of another biogas power
plant to absorb/utilise the remaining quantity of cattle dung, floor washings and cattle
washings.

2
6. When the Chairman asked about the progress made with regard to the setting up of
biogas power plant, it was informed that a Detailed Project Report had been prepared and
submitted to the Govt. of Punjab.  On being asked if any financial allocation for the project
had been made, the concerned Authority answered in the negative.  The Chairman desired that
all necessary steps required to be taken to stop discharge from Dairies into Buddha Nallah
needed to be taken in right earnest.  The Committee expressed its total dissatisfaction with the
approach of the Municipal & State Government authorities.  The Chairman said that the people
of Ludhiana cannot be expected to wait endlessly for the Government to act.
7. The Committee thereafter held a meeting with NGOs/civil society members on 13 th
February, 2015 at Ludhiana.
8. In his opening remarks, the Chairman underlined the need to strike a fine balance
between environment and development as these were supplementary and complementary to
each other but in our zeal for rapid development, environmental concerns often got overlooked
leading to environmental degradation and ecological imbalances.
9. The Chairman also pointed out that Ludhiana was identified by the Central Pollution
Control Board in 2009 as one of the most critically polluted industrial clusters in the country
with the score of 81.66 on the Comprehensive Environment Pollution Index.  He thereafter
asked members of civil society organisations and representatives of non-governmental
organisations to apprise the Committee of the environmental challenges faced by Ludhiana and
the manner in which these could be addressed within a timeframe.  They were also asked to
suggest measures that could be taken to effectively control pollution & ecological degradation
in Ludhiana.
10. Members of the NGOs
1/civil society raised a number of issues pertaining to the
environmental status of Ludhiana.  Some of the views expressed by the NGOs were as
follows:-
(i) The President, The Ludhiana Electroplaters Association informed the Committee
that their Association as a challenge took up the task of installing the Common
Effluent Treatment Plant for electroplating industries being set up by Punjab
Small Industries and Export Corporation Ltd. (PSIEC).  A Special Purpose
Vehicle in the name of Ludhiana Effluent Treatment Society was created in 2006
and the treatment plant was started in 2007, after installing additional
equipments as the plant was not meant for electroplating industries.  All the
parameters of Punjab Pollution control Board were met at the time of installation
barring Total Dissolved Salts (TDS) which was achieved in 2008.  The plant
was running on a zero liquid discharge technology with a RO plant and Multiple
Evaporator System which treated about 300 Kilo Liter of effluent per day.  This
plant was unique and first of its kind in India.  He further added that with the
expansion of electroplating industry, the existing area in which the industries
were located, had become inadequate. There was no further scope of expansion
of the industry.  Therefore, there was an urgent need to relocate existing
electroplating industries to some bigger cluster. He suggested that approximately
1 A copy each of the representations received is at Annexure-I

3
100 acre vacant land at Bhatian may be considered for shifting electroplating
industries.
(ii) The representative of PEHAL-The Beginning stated that with his experience both
as a councilor and as a representative of non-governmental organisation,
actively involved with the environmental issues faced by Ludhiana, he was of
the view that the problem could not be solved by the Govt. alone.  Peoples’
active participation in making the City neat and clean was very vital.  He
mentioned that after social/religious gatherings, heaps of thermocol plates are
thrown out in the open, which got littered on the streets/roads which present
a very shabby picture of the City.  Since these plates are non-biodegradable,
they continue to be environmental hazard for fairly long time.  He, suggested
that thermocol plates, tumblers, etc. may be banned.  He further stated that the
municipal authorities of Ludhiana were also responsible for the pitiable
conditions of Buddha Nallah, because municipal waste both solid and liquid was
being dumped by them.  Whenever there was a hue and cry by the public, the
garbage collected at one site of the Nallah was pushed to the other municipal
ward. He suggested that there was an urgent need for holistic development of
Buddha Nallah.  He suggested that green belts all along the Buddha Nallah
needed to be developed/ improved.  He also informed that in the absence of
lining of Buddha Nallah, a lot of municipal solid, plastic, and other hazardous
wastes were lying along its banks.  Even some slum dwellings had come up at
vacant places on the banks of the Nallah.  He suggested that the side walls/
banks of Buddha Nallah may be concretized, so that hazardous industrial
effluents/sewage did not seep into the ground water and pollute it.  He also
pointed out that heaps of construction material/ debris are dumped here and
there along the roads, thus creating a lot of problem for the traffic.  This also
added to the pollution problem of the City.  He suggested that local authorities
should take necessary action on these issues.
(iii) The Chairman, Indian Institute of Architect, Ludhiana Centre pointed out that
unplanned growth of Ludhiana was the main reason for its present state of being
one of the most polluted cities in the country.  There was no long-term Master
Plan for the city, no proper plan for industrial growth and no proper transport
policy.  Buildings in the City were being constructed without involving the
architects.  There were multiple agencies involved in the development of Ludhiana
viz. Greater Ludhiana Area Development Authority (GLADA); Ludhiana
Improvement Trust (LIT); Ludhiana Municipal Corporation (LMC); Punjab State
Industrial Development Corporation (PSIDC); Punjab Urban Development
Authority (PUDA); the Punjab State Federation of Cooperative; House Building
Societies Ltd. (HOUSEFED), etc.  For any project to take off, one has to seek
permission/NOC from all these agencies which resulted in delay in completion of
the projects and therefore suggested that there should be one agency for Ludhiana
on the lines of DDA in Delhi.  He also suggested that involvement of architects
in preparing master plan and its implementation must be ensured so that adequate
provisions for recreational facility/open green space was made in the master plan.

4
(iv) The representative of Bharat Jan Gyan Morcha informed the Committee that
Paryavaran Vahini, a forum which used to facilitate interaction of members of
civil society with local district administration/authorities, has been disbanded.
As a result, the channel of communication between the two had been broken.
Neither the local problems of the people reached the local administration nor did
the steps taken by local administration for control of pollution involve the
participation of the civil society members.  He asserted that the participation
and cooperation of the people in the efforts of the Government for making
pollution mitigation measures effective was necessary.  He, therefore,
emphasised that Paryavaran V ahini needed to be revived.  He also lamented that
crores of rupees have been spent on Sutlej River and Buddha Nallah revival
plan, but no concrete results had been achieved.  He, therefore, suggested that
efforts made in this direction needed to be result oriented so that visible results
were achieved in a time bound manner.
(v) The President, Rotary Club, Greater Ludhiana suggested that the adequate
parking area needed to be developed in order to contain vehicular pollution.  In
the absence of parking area, vehicles were parked on the road causing traffic
jam and chaos and giving rise to the air pollution.  He suggested that to contain
noise, the local administration should put blanket ban on honking and also issue
challan for making noise pollution.
(vi) The representative of Sambhav Foundation informed the Committee that his
organisation had successfully planted over 1,85,000 trees in 2014.  He also
informed that in the year 2015, the organisation proposed to plant 1 crore trees
all over Punjab.  Highlighting the reasons for the pathetic condition of Buddha
Nallah, he pointed out that despite installation of STPs, reckless discharge of
domestic sewerage, industrial effluents, waste water from dairies/ butcheries,
etc. into the Buddha Nallah continued unabated mainly because all of them had
not been linked to STPs.  He also emphasised that to deal with the above
problem, the number of STPs needed to be increased and for that purpose the
Central Govt. and State Govt. should provide relief/funds and technology to the
industries/ Municipal Corporation of Ludhiana.  He also brought to the notice of
the Committee the fact that despite Punjab & Haryana High Court ban on diesel
powered auto rickshaws, approximately 20,000 auto rickshaws were plying in
the City which contributed hugely to the air pollution of the City.  He suggested
that necessary efforts were needed to be made for installation of adequate
numbers of LPG/CNG filling stations in the City, so that vehicles running on
these clean fuels are encouraged.
(vii) The representative of VMAD pointed out that despite a ban, the burning of
waste of Jhona rice was a major source of air pollution in Punjab, which
needed to be effectively tackled. It was also suggested that Punjab Pollution
Control Board should declare their annual targets of pollution control in the City
and then they should work in close cooperation with the NGOs to achieve the
same. They should ensure visible results. It was also suggested that a dedicated

5
fund was needed to be created exclusively for creating awareness and educating
youngsters about environment so as to foster the spirit of enlightened citizens.
Polythene and poly bags were adding to the garbage causing a lot of problem
for the civic authorities as they choked sewerage and drains.  She was of the
view that production of polythene needed to be banned.  Roadside taps running
all the time and wasting precious and scarce water needed to be handled.
(viii) Shri Arvind Goel, Resident of Aggar Nagar, Ludhiana raised the issue of solid
waste dumping site, Jamalpur at Tajpur Road, Ludhiana for which he claimed
that Municipal Corporation of Ludhiana got clearance from the Union Ministry
of Environment and Forests by misleading and concealing the facts.  He claimed
that 30 meter wide green belt was to be provided all along the boundary of the
dump site and it was supposed to  be 20 kms. away from airport and the waste
was to be covered at the end of each working day with a minimum of 10 cm.
of soil.  He  urged upon the Committee to get the matter looked into.
(ix) Shri Ayush Jain, a Social Activist, claimed that most of the environmental rules/
norms were being violated with impunity.  To support his claim, he cited the
instance of illegal mining of sand in Sutlej River and also that some big
industrial Houses were discharging contaminated water straight into the ground
water through bore well.
11. The Committee also had an interaction with factory owners and officers of the Govt.
of Punjab/local authorities of Ludhiana on issues of air, water and noise pollution, haphazard
urbanisation, solid waste management, sewerage treatment, etc.
12. The Chairman informed that the Committee was visiting Ludhiana to discuss issues
related to air, water and noise pollution, haphazard urbanisation, solid waste management,
sewage treatment, etc. in Ludhiana.  The Chairman pointed out that it was disturbing to note
that Ludhiana, as per a study conducted by WHO in 2011 had earned the dubious distinction
of being not only one of the most polluted cities in the country but also the fourth most
polluted city in the world.  Union Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change had
imposed a moratorium on the establishment of new industrial units in the City in 2010, it being
included in the list of 43 critically polluted cites in the country.  The Committee had acquired
first hand information on the condition of Buddha Nallah and was shocked to observe its state
of affairs and the overall environment and ecology of Ludhiana.  Keeping in view the alarming
situation, the Committee directed that the Punjab Pollution Control Board, local civic
authorities, law enforcement agencies and all other stakeholders must make collective and
concerted efforts within a realistic timeframe to meet the challenge.  The Chairman added that
a comprehensive Environmental Action Plan be formulated to control pollution in Ludhiana.  He
asked those present to apprise the Committee of the extent to which qualitative and quantitative
improvements had been noticed in the pollution level of Ludhiana as a result of that Plan.  The
Committee also sought to be apprised of the latest updates, particularly on the proposed
installation and commissioning of two common effluent treatment plants for dyeing clusters,
improvement in public transport system, etc.  The Committee also wanted to know from the
industrialists present about the incentives/cooperation, they received for adopting environment
friendly technologies and taking other measures to mitigate pollution caused by the industries.

6
13. The Chairman, Vardhman Spinning & General Mills submitted that rapid urbanisation
and industrialisation had resulted in generation of huge quantity of organic and inorganic wastes
which were generally dumped on land or discharged into water bodies without adequate
treatment.  This caused a lot of environmental pollution and health hazard.  The need therefore
was to adopt suitable waste processing and treatment technologies which while giving energy
also reduced the need for land for their disposal and also suitably reduced transportation of
waste to land fill site.
14. The Committee was informed by representatives of BARC that a 2 MT per day capacity
Nisarguna biogas plant developed by Bhabha Atomic Research Centre was set up in the
Vardhman Textile Unit at Baddi, Himachal Pradesh for processing both municipal and other
solid waste generating bio gas and manure therefrom.
15. The representative of Bahadur Ke Textile and Knitwear Association raised the issue of
difficulties being faced in setting up of 15 MLD common effluent treatment plant with zero
liquid discharge system and 10 MW captive power plant at a cost of Rs. 148.86 crore for
dyeing industries.  He informed the Committee that for the plant an application for a loan of
Rs. 108 crore from a consortium of banks consisting of the State Bank of Patiala; Export
Import Bank; and Small Industrial Development Bank of India and also for financial assistance
from Govt. of India under the centrally sponsored scheme of common effluent treatment plants
for Rs. 20 crore and also for Rs. 5 crore from State Govt. of Punjab was  made.  The
Committee was also informed that no financial assistance from the Govt. or loan from the
Banks had been given for the plant.
16. On the issue, presenting the viewpoint of Govt. of India, Advisor, Ministry of
Environment, Forests and Climate Change informed that since the project proposal was sent
directly to the Govt. of India, it could not be processed because as per procedure, it had to
be routed through State Pollution Control Board.  He further assured that the project would be
expeditiously examined in case it is sent through State Pollution Control Board.
17. Thereafter, Secretary, Science & Technology and Environment made a Power Point
presentation covering the issues raised by the Chairman.  Some of the major highlights of the
presentation were as follows:-
(i) The total length of Buddha Nallah was about 51 Kms., out of which 16.76 Kms.
was upstream of Ludhiana, 14 Kms. within Ludhiana City and the balance about
21 Kms. downstream of Ludhiana.  Ludhiana City generated domestic waste
water in the range of 600 to 740 MLD per day.  There were 5 STPs working
in Ludhiana with a total installed capacity of 466 MLD.  A joint survey
conducted by Punjab Pollution Control Board; Municipal Commissioner,
Ludhiana; and Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board in May, 2014 found
that 16 unauthorised outlets were discharging untreated municipal sewage to the
tune of 265 MLD into Buddha Nallah.
(ii) About 80 MLD effluents were entering in STP Jamalpur as against its designed
capacity of 48 MLD.  Because of overloading of the STP and its old
technology, namely, Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB), the treatment

7
efficiency was considerably low.  The STP was proposed to be upgraded using
new Sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR) Technology.  An additional STP of 70
MLD capacity was also proposed to be setup at Jamalpur with an estimated
cost of Rs. 70 Crore.
(iii) T echnology upgradation of the existing Bhatian STP of 111 MLD capacity was
also proposed by using new technology at a cost of Rs. 48 crore.  An additional
STP of 100 MLD capacity at a cost of Rs. 90 crore was also proposed to be
setup at Bhatian.  Punjab Pollution Control Board had been regularly monitoring
the quality of water flowing in Buddha Nallah.  Bio Chemical Oxygen Demand
(BOD) level in the city area of the Nallah ranged from 150 Mg per liter to 250
Mg per liter, while, chemical oxygen demand varied from 450 Mg per liter to
750 Mg per liter.
(iv) A pilot project for the ecological restoration of water quality of Buddha Nallah
using an in-situ bioremediation technique funded by Ministry of Environment,
Forests and Climate Change was being installed at a cost of Rs. 15.28 Crore.
Green infrastructure, Pune was executing the project.  This project involved
building of 5 porous green bridges to treat the sewage.  Out of the proposed
5, 3 green bridges had been commissioned. The work on the remaining two
green bridges were going on.
(v) The BOD level downstream of green bridges varied from 54 Mg per liter to 150
Mg per liter, which was far more improved.
18. The Committee was informed that the feasibility of cementing of banks of Nallah was
being explored.  A DPR in this regard was expected to be submitted by March, 2015 and the
total cost of the project would be around Rs. 280 crore.  The Committee suggests that the
viability of covering the 14 Km. stretch of Buddha Nallah within Ludhiana City may be
explored so as to build a road on it.  It might save the citizens of the City from health
hazards posed by the highly polluted Nallah and also the possibility of dumping of filth,
garbage, etc. into the Nallah could be obviated.  The Committee was  informed that
Master Plan Ludhiana 2021, was finalised in 2007 and the same was in the process of
being reviewed.
19. The Committee recommends that the local/municipal authorities carry out a
comprehensive survey and identify encroachments on public land so that, encroachments
could be removed to make way for open spaces in accordance with the Master Plan.
Open spaces in the form of parks & play grounds need to be developed for the benefit
of the elderly and for the Children. It is of the view that all the District authorities
should promote and encourage interaction and engagement of the Govt. authorities with
the civil society/NGOs on pollution mitigation measures .
SEWAGE TREATMENT
20. With regard to sewage, the Committee was informed that M/s Engineers India Limited
(EIL) was engaged by the Govt. of Punjab as consultant, which was in the process of

8
preparing a DPR with regard to identification of the possibilities to stop the discharge of
untreated effluent into Budha Nallah and to divert the same to an STP for treatment. This DPR
is expected to be submitted by 31.03.2015 on pollution mitigating measures.
21. The Committee recommends that the proposed DPR be prepared/approved within
the given timeframe and steps be taken on priority to complete the project
expeditiously.  The outlets carrying untreated sewage and falling into Buddha Nallah
must be closed or discharge be treated in a time bound manner and an Action Taken
Report be submitted to the Committee.   Time was of the essence in this regard and
pending the use of additional STP’s etc., immediate action regarding the covering of
Nallah, developing green belts and vigorous enforcement of norms by the PPCB for
discharge of waste & dumping of garbage in the Nallah must be undertaken immediately
under intimation to the Committees within one month.
22. In this respect Committee has been informed that there were 17 outlets of Municipal
Corporation, Ludhiana which were discharging waste water into Budda Nallah, out of which
following 4 outlets have been plugged permanently:
(i) Disposal of EWS Colony near Geeta Nagar Bridge along Tajpur Road;
(ii) MC Disposal near Atam Nagar/Sunder Nagar;
(iii) MC Disposal near New Shivpuri (Opp. Shani Mandir);
(iv) MC Disposal at the backside of RamSharnam Satsang Bhawan.
Preliminary DPR for installation of 2 new STPs, has been submitted by M/s Engineers India
Limited (EIL) to the Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board and the report is under active
consideration of Government of Punjab to finalize the same
DAIRY COMPLEX, HAIBOWAL
23. Regarding the Dairy Complex, Haibowal, the Committee was informed that there is a
proposal to shift these dairies to a suitable place and to install effluent treatment plant to treat
liquid waste generated by the dairy complex. M/s Engineers India Limited has been engaged by
the Govt. of Punjab as consultant and is in process to preparation of DPR in this regard which
is expected to be submitted by 31.03.2015.
24. In this respect Committee has also been informed that:
(i) Preliminary DPR for installation of ETPs to treat the liquid waste of the dairies
at Tajpur Road and Humbran Dairy complex has been submitted by M/s
Engineers India Limited (EIL) to Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board and
Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana.  The report is under active consideration of
Government of Punjab to finalize the same.
(ii) PEDA has prepared the DPR on Build Operate & Own (BOO) basis for installation
of Bio-Methanation Plant for generation of 1 MW electricity or 12000 Cubic
meter of Bio-CNG to handle 235 ton of cow dung at Tajpur Road Dying
Complex.  E-tender has been floated for 18.05.2015 for getting technical bids.

9
25. The Committee feels that shifting of dairies may not be a viable solution of the
pollution caused by these dairies.   It is hoped that the proposal to install an STP has
since been submitted.  The Committee would like to know whether DPR has since been
approved and what further steps have been  initiated by the State/Municipal Authority
towards the actual operationalisation of the STPs.  The Committee would like to be
informed about the date of installation of the plants and the award of work under the
respective procedures for the aforesaid purpose.
SHIFTING OF ELECTROPLATING UNITS
25.1  In this respect, the Committee has been informed that:
(i) PSIEC has taken procession of 15 Acre of vacant land at Tajpur Road adjoining
to the upcoming CETPS.  The development of Industrial Focal Point in this 15
acres of land has been started.  The PSIEC has reserved this Industrial Focal
Point exclusively for the shifting of 67 Scattered dyeing units presently located
in scattered area of Ludhiana.
(ii) DTP, Ludhiana vide its letter dated 13.05.2015 has informed that 273 acres of
land has been proposed for establishment of industries, which will be a part of
planning of Aeropolis City, Sahnewal. For this project, land will be acquired by
GLADA.
25.2 The Committee recommends that land should be developed and made available
expeditiously for relocation of tiny/small scale electroplating industries operating in the
non designated area of Ludhiana.   The Committee would like a time frame to be fixed
for the purpose under intimation to the Committee.  This may be done within three
months.
25.3 In order to prevent throwing/dumping of waste into the canal /river, the
committee feels that there should be a railing of suitable height on each bridge as well
as along the sides of the canal/river within the city reach.  There could also be a water
enclosed mess for puja material so that it should not go in the canal/river. From this
mess, the waste puja material can be shifted to waste disposal plant. There should be
a provision of imposing heavy fine for throwing garbage/plastic bags in canals/rivers,
which should be actively and purposively enforced.
25.4 The Committee feels that for effective implementation of a ban on burning of
paddy. Govt. should launch a massive awareness campaign amongst farmers and
incentives should be given to them for collection of paddy straw at one place or
promoting its alternative use.  In this respect, the Committee was informed that the
farmers are made aware regarding the preparation of compost/organic manure from the
farm waste. Every year two camps are organized at District Block and Village Level in
order to educate the farmers regarding the ill effects of stubble burning and to promote
new techniques like happy seeder, zero till drill machines.  Apparently, much more
needs to be done.  A detailed plan should be submitted in this regard to the CPCB and
the Committee.

10
25.5 The Committee has been informed that the Punjab Pollution Control Board is creating
awareness among the people and educating them to use jute bags instead of plastic bags for
carrying vegetables from the market.  The advertisements are being given in the leading news
papers of the state of Punjab.
25.6 The Committee feels that there is need to encourage people to use jute bags
instead of plastic bags for carrying vegetables/household items from the market. The
Committee is of the view that the farmers should be made aware regarding the
preparation of compost/organic manure from the farm waste.  Every year two camps
are organized at District Block and Village Level in order to educate the farmers
regarding the ill effects of stubble burning and to promote new techniques like happy
seeder, zero till drill machines. The rain water harvesting system should be
encouraged.
25.7 Besides this, the Committee recommends that (i) Parking areas as well as no
parking zones in the city should the earmarked. The pressure horn in automobiles
should be banned;  (ii) Municipal Corporation should start a project through which
corporate bodies can be encouraged along with Municipal Authorities to develop vacant
land for landscaping of Ludhiana; (iii) Emphasis should be laid on exploring the
possibility of using STP sludge as manure and to produce gas; and  (iv) Provision should
be made for providing funds to the special purpose  vehicle to install CETPs for
treatment of effluent from the industries of   the States, whose water supply schemes
are based on river/canal  water.  Specific action with respect to these measures should
be decided upon at the earliest under intimation to the Committee.
AMRITSAR
26. On 14
th February, 2015, the Committee visited Amritsar and discussed issues of air,
water and noise pollution in Amritsar with Members of civil society organisations/NGOs.
27. At the outset, the Chairman underlined the importance of environment, the preservation
of which is a national imperative raising issues of inter and intra-generational equities.  The
need of the hour, therefore, was to ensure a collective national enterprise to ensure a
sustainable development model which could ensure inter-generational equities through
preservation of the necessary ecological balance.  He said that the Committee was visiting
some of the Tier-II Cities to discuss their status on environmental parameters and in that
process, the Committee proposed to discuss issues of urban renewal including air, water and
noise pollution, haphazard urbanization, solid waste management, sewerage treatment, etc. in
Amritsar–a city which was facing huge environmental challenges.
28. He emphasized that in view of the alarming situation, it was imperative that Govt.
officials/law enforcement agencies and all other stakeholders took urgent measures to address
the situation purposively by fixing a realistic timeframe. He further pointed out that
representatives of civil society organisations/ NGOs keep a close watch on environmental
issues confronting the holy city of Amritsar and vigorously act towards ensuring a clean and
healthy environmental in Amritsar and the surrounding  areas.

11
29. The representatives 2 of civil society/NGOs raised a number of issues pertaining to the
environmental status of Amritsar.  Some of the significant and prominent views expressed were
as follows:-
(i) Dr. Balvinder Singh, Social Activist, emphasised on the need for devising a
proper and effective Master Plan for the City.  He pointed out that there was
not enough open space/parks for the children to play nor was there any stadium
to organise sports events, etc. in the City.  There was absolute lack of parking
space in the City as a result of which vehicles are parked on the roadside in
a haphazard manner giving rise to traffic chaos and air pollution.  The ground
water table was going down day by day, but local civic authorities did not
bother to create any awareness for rain water harvesting.  There was no proper
system for garbage collection.  Heaps of debris giving dirty look to the city
could be seen lying here and there.  There was, therefore, an urgent need for
developing debris handling and recycling facilities in the City.  He also pointed
out that there was no sewage treatment plant in the City.  Local authorities had
been giving fake assurances of setting up of sewage treatment plants without
making any allocation for the purpose.  While, summing up, he emphasised that
a proper and purposive town planning was badly required to address the
problem of pollution in Amritsar.
(ii) The representative of Fortis Hospital submitted that to maintain cleanliness and
hygiene in the City, there was an urgent need for providing sufficient number
of dustbins in each and every mohalla of the City.  In the absence of the
dustbins, people are forced to throw their domestic garbage on roads and
streets.  He also laid emphasis on strengthening the mechanism of collection and
disposal of biomedical wastes.  He also suggested that the practice of change
of land use needed to be discontinued, so that, no polluting units come up
within the residential areas.
(iii) The President, Barkat Welfare Society, asserted that diesel run vehicles and
three-wheelers plying in the city were the main contributors to air pollution in
the City.  Solid waste disposal and management rules were not being
implemented due to laxity on the part of the law enforcement agencies.  He
desired that rain water harvesting should be made mandatory for all the new
buildings for recharge of ground water.  He opined that mass transport system
needed to be encouraged so as to discourage people from using their own
private vehicles.  He was of the view that instead of going for a long-term high
capital intensive mass rapid transport system, Metro-rail Project, the fleet of
CNG buses could be added to the transport system of the City as a short-term
measure.  He was of the view that wide roads were not necessarily required for
doing away with the problem of traffic congestion.  What was, in fact, needed
was to regulate the traffic in a more scientific and effective manner.  He also
felt that to make the City neat and clean waste collection and their scientific
disposal was required.  He also suggested that to address the environmental
challenges of the City participation of NGOs and civil society members was
needed.  He pointed out that disposed of animal carcasses at the land fill sites,

12
transportation of solid waste in open trucks needed to be discouraged.  The
practice of irrigating fields with the untreated sewerage and polluted water, be
banned as such a practice caused contamination of vegetables and agricultural
products with heavy metals and other deadly pollutants.  People are forced to
defecate and urinate in the open mainly because of the fact that public toilets
were filthy.  Local municipal authorities should keep the public toilets clean and
hygienic so as to encourage people to use it.
(iv) The representative of All India Pingalwara Charitable Society, mainly focused on
the problem of noise pollution and said that there was lack of enforcement of
norms in this regard.  The menace of noise pollution, particularly, during festive
seasons aggravated as it continued till late in the night and sometimes even till
early in the morning.  Running of gensets which are around 16 lakhs in number,
when the electricity supply was off not only added to noise but also
considerable air pollution.  She emphasised that diesel gensets needed to be
replaced with electric or gas run gensets.
(v) The representative of Conservator of Nature Missionary Khudai Khidmatgaran
stated that his organisation had planted approximately 1.22 lakh plants in the
City. Survival rate of these plants go upto the extent of 85 per cent.  He
suggested that more and more trees needed to be planted to check the
deterioration in the environmental condition of the City and also to give a clean
and green look.  He proposed that road crossings, particularly, the areas around
major crossings and red lights should be landscaped.  Toilets should be
constructed alongwith the footpaths.  He also suggested that since the
underground water was contaminated water treatment plants needed to be
installed.
(vi) The representative of Amritsar Swadeshi Woolen was of the view that an
awareness programme to educate all those industries which were discharging
effluents in the water bodies, needed to be launched so as to discourage them
from doing so.  He also suggested that sludge generated from the industrial
units might be used for making bricks and cement as it did not contain any
hazardous pollutants like heavy metals, etc.  To address the challenge posed by
the menace of plastic and polly bags, he also suggested that their collection and
recycling needed to be ensured.  He also emphasised on the need of rain water
harvesting.  For the successful and effective running of sewage treatment
plants, he suggested that instead of electricity, they should be run on methane
gas, which could be harnessed from the treatment of sewage.  By doing this
uninterrupted running of sewage treatment plant could be ensured.
(vii) The representative of V oice of Amritsar voiced her concerns by saying that one
of the main reasons for increasing vehicular pollution was encroachment upon
major part of the city roads upon which hampered smooth flow of traffic.  She
was also of the view that manual sweeping/cleaning of roads was also one of
the factors contributing to air pollution in the city.  In the process of sweeping,
micro dust particles get stirred and mixed with air and gradually goes down in

13
our lungs as we breathe. Thus, dust did not get removed through sweeping
rather it gets relocated and resettled.  She, therefore, suggested that instead of
manual cleaning, vacuum cleaning should be introduced.  She also pointed out
that gensets were also causing air pollution in the City.  To make the city clean
and green, she emphasised on need for planting more trees in the City.
(viii) Dr. Charanjit Singh Gumtala raised the issue of solid waste treatment plant
proposed to be setup at Bhagtanwala, Amritsar which was only 1800 meters
away from the Golden Temple.  He pointed out that solid waste treatment plants
generate a number of pollutants like carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, particulate
matter containing heavy metal compounds and dioxins which were extremely
hazardous for the people leaving around the area.  He also informed the
Committee that more than 50,000 residents of the nearby areas had been
protesting against the dump yard and demanding its shifting but to no avail.  He
requested the Committee to undertake a visit to the site for on the spot
assessment.
(ix) The representative of Amritsar Vikas Manch drew attention of the Committee to
uranium content (carcinogenic element) beyond the prescribed limit in
underground water of Amritsar.  He quoted a newsitem in which it was reported
that 87 out of 142 potable water samples collected from various parts of the
City contained more Uranium elements than the prescribed limit.  Out of the 87
samples, 19 had uranium content of more than 60 micrograms per liter, while
58 samples, uranium content of 30 to 60 micrograms per liter.  The permissible
limit of uranium content was 30 to 60 microgram per liter as per the Atomic
Energy Regulatory Board of India, while the WHO limit of uranium content was
from 15 to 30 micrograms.
(x) The representative of Department of Botanical & Environmental Sciences
informed the Committee that the proposal of Municipal Corporation to setup
sewerage treatment plants was only on paper and no substantial work on the
ground had been undertaken.  Further, Municipal Corporation had not conducted
any pilot study to check the efficiency of the proposed sewerage treatment
plant.  He was of the view that it was impossible to treat BOD (organic matter)
in the milligram level when industries were discharging effluents in kilograms.
To buttress his claim, he stated that the sewerage treatment plants at Ludhiana
were not able to achieve the desired efficiency due to mixing of industrial waste
with the sewerage.  He also raised his concern on the setting up of solid waste
management plant at Bhagtanwala where solid wastes including animal carcasses
were being dumped in most unscientific manner.
(xi) The representative of the Joint Agitation Committee (Regd.), Amritsar raised the
issue of dumping of municipal solid waste at Bhagtanwala dump site which was
surrounded by residential areas and grain market and a proposed solid waste
management plant at the location.  He informed the Committee that lakhs of
metric tonnes of solid waste was lying in the open which was causing diseases
in the nearby colonies.  He opined that with the completion of the proposed

14
municipal solid waste management plant, apart from the Golden Temple, several
other holy places like Gurudwara Santokh Sar, Durgiana Temple, Gurudwara
Bibeksar, Ram Bagh Church, Town Hall Masjid, Jama Masjid and other heritage
sites like Jaliyanwala Bagh, Quila Govindgarh and other would be adversely
affected.
(xii) The representative of Pollution Control Committee while expressing his views
through power point presentation, stated that there was no sewerage treatment
plant nor any solid waste management facility in the City.  He also said that
there was lack of proper system of collection and disposal of used batteries and
electric wastes; non-implementation of plastic waste management rules, traffic
congestion, encroachment on roads and public places, absence of carcass
utilisation centre for dead animals; unscientific slaughtering of sheep and goats,
etc.  These were some of the issues adding to the environmental challenges of
the City.  With regards to water pollution, he informed the Committee that the
three storm water open drains maintained by Drainage Deptt., namely, Tung
Dhala Drain, City Outfall Drain and Chabba Drain which fell in River Ravi,
through Hudiara Drain, were carrying untreated municipal and industrial sewage
which was badly affecting underground water quality.  Contamination of water
was getting manifested in a number of ways.  Vegetables had been found to
contain heavy metals; water having uranium content and soil upto 1 feet depth
contained heavy metals, etc. as per a study conducted by Guru Nanak Dev
University.
30. The next meeting of the Committee was held with representives of Government bodies
and local authorities.
31. The Chairman, while welcoming the Secretary, Science & Technology and Environment,
the Principal Secretaries, Punjab Urban Planning and Development Authority, Housing and
Urban Development, Govt. of Punjab, Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of Amritsar;
Chairman and Member Secretary, Punjab Pollution Control Board, representatives of Union
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change and other officials to the meeting,
highlighted that in view of the alarming situation that confronted Amritsar, all responsible
authorities and stakeholders ought to make collective endeavours and take the needed measures
to address the situation urgently and purposively, within a given time frame.  He further stated
that the Committee was informed in the morning session by civil society members/ NGOs that
the main contributors of pollution in Amritsar were industries, hospitals, municipal solid waste,
plastic waste, vehicular pollution, etc.  Untreated municipal sewerage was being discharged into
the water bodies.  Municipal solid waste was being dumped in the open at a land fill site which
was located in a residential area.  Hazardous wastes and animal carcasses were also being
dumped at the land fill site.  He asked Govt. officials to apprise the Committee of the various
steps taken by different agencies to address these environmental issues.  He also asked the
authorities to inform the Committee of the manner in which the Committee could help the
authorities in their endeavours to improve the environmental parameters of the City of Amritsar.
32. The Secretary, Science & Technology and Environment made a PowerPoint presentation
on the sources of various types of pollution in Amritsar and the efforts made by various Govt.

15
Authorities/ Bodies to mitigate them.  The Committee was informed that the sectors
contributing to environment pollution in Amritsar were mainly industries and urban local bodies,
i.e., Municipal Corporation of Amritsar and the biomedical wastes generated by healthcare
facilities. The Committee was informed that in Amritsar, there were mainly two types of
industries – (i) Textile dyeing industries and (ii) Electroplating industries. Out of the 35 dyeing
industries, 11 had upgraded their effluent treatment plants; 8 units had completed 90 per cent
and 16 units 50 per cent of the upgradation work.  All the 37 medium and small-scale
electroplating industries had joined the common effluent treatment plant setup at phase VIII
Focal point Ludhiana.
33. He further added that Amritsar generated about 217 MLD of domestic waste water but
admitted that presently there was no sewage treatment plant operational to treat the waste
water.  However, 3 sewage treatment plant had been proposed to be setup at 3 different
locations with a total installed capacity of 217.5 MLD.  Work on two treatment plants of 95
MLD capacity each with Activated Sludge Process Technology (ASPT) funded by Japan
International Cooperation Agency (JICA) was in progress.  For the third STPs of 27.5 MLD
capacity with sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR) Technology works have been tendered.  The
total cost of the entire project was Rs. 160 crore.
34. With respect to the municipal solid waste, the Secretary informed the Committee that
about 655 metric tonnes, solid waste was generated per day in the jurisdiction of Municipal
Corporation of Amritsar.  An action plan had been initiated for segregation and collection of
waste.  So far as the disposal of municipal solid waste was concerned, it was informed that
presently the Municipal Corporation was dumping the municipal solid waste at a new site, i.e.,
Village Fatahpur, Chabhal Road, Amritsar and not at Bhagtanwala.
35. As regarding Bio-Medical Waste Management, the Committee was informed by Punjab
Pollution Control Board that the Board had checked 69  Health Care Facilities (HCFs) out of
which 61 HCFs were found complying with Bio Medical Waste (Management & Handling)
Rules, 1998.  Action had been initiated against the 05 HCFs and Bank guarantees as an
assurances have been deposited by these HCFs and action was under process against 03 HCFs.
In addition to above, the Board held also initiated legal action by way of launching prosecution
against 08 violating HCFs in the calendar year 2014.
36. There were two air quality monitoring stations in Amritsar installed under National Air
Quality Monitoring Programme.  As per the ambient air quality data, with respect to SO2 and
NO2, the pollution level had been found to be within the national ambient air quality standards
during the last 3 years, i.e., 2011-12 and 2013, except the PM10 level which had also shown
a declining trend during the above period.  From 2010 in 2011, PM10 level came down to 202
in 2012 and 180 in 2013.  So far as, air pollution control measures were concerned all the
large-scale units have installed air pollution control devises for controlling their emissions.
37. The Committee was further informed that a Solid Waste Management Plant for Amritsar
was in the process of being setup and it was expected to be completed by the end of 2016.
The Chairman desired that Commissioner, Municipal Corporation, Amritsar must ensure that the
solid waste management plant was installed within the given timeframe. The Committee also
desired that the grievances of the residents against the land fill site at Bhagtanwala needed to
be sympathetically looked into by the local authorities, so as to arrive at an amicable solution.

16
38. In response to a query regarding noise pollution, the Committee was informed that the
Punjab Pollution Control Board had monitored 06 nos. marriage palaces situated at Village -
Khassa on National Highway-1 leading to Attari.  During a visit, the noise generated from these
marriage palaces were found beyond the prescribed limits laid down under Noise Pollution
Control Rules, 2000.  Accordingly, these marriage palaces were heard by the Senior
Environmental Engineer of the Board wherein it was decided that the marriage palaces shall
ensure that the contribution of noise from the marriage palace would not increase beyond
permissible limits prescribed for the area. The Committee also desired that Deputy
Commissioner, Amritsar ensure that noise pollution norms were strictly enforced.
39. The Department of Atomic Energy made a presentation  on the waste treatment plant
developed by Bhabha Atomic Research Centre.  The Committee was informed that the
NISARGRUNA Technology has been developed for the urban and rural waste management,
energy conservation, better environment and restoration of soil fertility.  The technology offers
a comprehensive solution for handling the biodegradable waste materials.  The process involves
combination of aerobic and anaerobic degradation of the biodegradable waste materials.  The
aerobic phase is aided by the addition of hot water to support the growth of efficient
thermophilic  and thermoduric microbes.  The anaerobic phase results in formation of biogas
and organic manure, which can help in obtaining the self rest inability of the project.  The first
step of the NISARGRUNA Technology involves the processing of waste before putting it into
a predigester tank.  The waste is then converted into slurry in the predigester tank.  This helps
in first stage of methanogenesis viz. hydrolysis. There will be no scum formation and no
clogging.  The next stage involves use of thermophilic/thermoduric microbes for faster
degradation of the waste which is assured by mixing the waster with hot waste and
maintaining the temperature between 45-50
o C.  The hot water supply is from a solar heater.
In all these phases, the main objective is to digest proteins and low molecular weight
carbohydrates to produce volatile fatty acids.
40. After the predigester tank, the slurry enters the main tank where it undergoes mainly
anaerobic degradation by a consortium of archaebactria.  The biogas is generated, separating
out water in an underground tank and also a finely divided power gets settled in the tank and
after a month, high quality manure can be dug out from the  settling tanks.
41. Thus, technology offered by Department of Atomic Energy, Nisargruna helps in:-
(1) Decentralized processing of biodegradable waste
(2) Achieving the dream of zero garbage and zero effluent
(3) Reduction in transportation costs
(4) Maintenance of biogeochemical elemental cycles
(5) Generation of by-products which can give financial support and motivation for
the operators
(6) Employment generation in lower economic strata of society
(7) Reduction dumping yard menace

17
(8) Quality improvement in dry waste as the wet and degradable portion is removed
from that
(9) Benefits in carbon credits
(10) Benefits in health sector.
42. The Committee recommends that to mitigate the pollution of Amritsar, action on
following points be taken immediately under intimation to the CPCB and the
Committee:
(i) The Department of Local Government and Department of Transport must
look into the issues namely disposal and transportation of carcasses of
slaughtered animals, disposal of municipal solid waste, enforcement
system to implement the rainwater harvesting mechanism in the
construction projects.
(ii) Deputy Commissioner, Amritsar must ensure that the Noise Pollution
Control Rules, 2000 are implemented effectively.
(iii) Interaction of Municipal and other authorities with NGO’s and other stake
holders regularly is needed to have not only better understanding of the
issues for their better solution. The Department of Science, Technology &
Environment must take lead on the issue by constituting the DC’s
Committees with NGOs/Civil Society participation under the Chairmanship
of concerned DCs.
(iv) In house treatment of Municipal Solid Waste must be encouraged  as it
will produce methane gas to use in the household kitchens for cooking
purposes. A pilot study needs to be initiated by the Department of Local
Government for having a demonstrative effect for others.
[The Committee was informed that the PPCB has encouraged an industry
to produce the Bio-Gas & Bio-Fertilizers by using Cow dung, Poultry
Litters etc. and has granted consent to establish (NOC) to M/s Wadala
Energies, Village-Wadala Bhittewad, Distt-Amritsar to produce the Bio-Gas
@ 2,400 KLD & Bio-Fertilizers @ 56,00 LKD.  The industry is in
construction phase and soon it will be commissioned.]
(v) The transport authorities of the district must ensure that the auto-
rickshaws to be operated on CNG based fuel and their routes must be
fixed and not allowed to stop anywhere on the road except prescribed
stoppages.
(vi) The use of high sound pressure horns by the vehicles, causing noise
pollution, running in the city, must be prohibited and prohibition must be
enforced directly.
[In response, the Committee has been informed that the District Transport
Officer, Amritsar and Traffic Police, Amritsar had challaned owners of 1093
and 199 vehicles respectively for using pressure horns during 2014-15]

18
(vii) The municipal solid waste generated by the marriage palaces must be
disposed off in an environmentally sound manner.
[The Committee has been informed that in the harvest season, there is very
limited nos. of marriages/functions organized in the Marriage Palaces at
different times.  No complaint was received regarding mismanaged disposal of
Municipal Solid Waste generated by the Marriage Palaces.  The Punjab Pollution
Control Board regularly keeping strict vigil that Marriage Palaces not to dispose
their Municipal Solid Wastes in an unsound environmentally manner.
(viii) A drive may be started to plant more trees along road side and in vacant
places to make the city green and clean.
(ix) Proper fencing may be provided around the Municipal Solid Waste
dumping site to avoid the entry of stray animals.
(x) The cremation grounds existing within the city should as far as possible
be shifted outside to reduce pollution generated from it.
(xi) No D.J. System and loudspeakers be allowed after 10 p.m., which causes
noise pollution in the locality.
(xii) The sewage treatment plants installed by MES and other Educational
Institutions must be operated efficiently.
[In response, the Committee has been provided the details of functioning of
STPs installed by the MES and Educational Institute which are as under:-
S.No. Name & Address Date of Domestic Results
Effluent
1. Guru Nanak Dev University, 4/12/2014 W ithin limits
G.T. Road, Amritsar
2. Garrison Engineers, Amritsar 9/12/2014 W ithin limits
Cantt (Old), Amritsar
3. Garrison Engineers (NAMS), 9/12/2014 W ithin limits
Khasa Cantt, Chheharta, Amritsar
The Committee was also informed that the outlet of these STPs towards the
Tung Dhab Drain have been got permanently plugged and at present there is no
discharge in to drain.]
(xiii) In the walled city of Amritsar, the electricity operated three wheelers may
be   allowed   and   vehicles   running without pollution control certificate
must be challaned.
(xiv) Bio Medical Waste must be properly handled and disposed of in an
environmentally sound manner.

19
(xv) The huge amount of de bris generated by construction activities in the
cities must be disposed off effectively in an environmentally sound
manner.  Concerned Municipal Corporation must deploy adequate trucks
to clear the debris from the construction sites considering that debris is
main pollutant of the air  we breathe.
(xvi) Rain water harvesting projects must be implemented to conserve the
water.
(xvii) For executing the work of STP in Amritsar, the assistance for funding
must be given by the Central Government or by the international
agencies.  State Government should approach the Central Government for
necessary funds for the purpose.
(xviii) A Pilot study may be carried out to use plastic waste for  the construction
of roads in the city.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS—AT A GLANCE
1. The Committee suggests that the viability of covering the 14 Km. stretch of
Buddha Nallah within Ludhiana City may be explored so as to build a road on it. It
might save the citizens of the City from health hazards posed by the highly polluted
Nallah and also the possibility of dumping of filth, garbage, etc. into the Nallah could
be obviated. The Committee was informed that Master Plan Ludhiana 2021, was finalised
in 2007 and the same was in the process of being reviewed. (Para 18)
2. The Committee recommends that the local/municipal authorities carry out a
comprehensive survey and identify encroachments on public land so that, encroachments
could be removed to make way for open spaces in accordance with the Master Plan.
Open spaces in the form of parks & play grounds need to be developed for the benefit
of the elderly and for the Children. It is of the view that all the District authorities
should promote and encourage interaction and engagement of the Govt. authorities with
the civil society/NGOs on pollution mitigation measures. (Para 19)
3. The Committee recommends that the proposed DPR be prepared/approved within
the given timeframe and steps be taken on priority to complete the project
expeditiously. The outlets carrying untreated sewage and falling into Buddha Nallah
must be closed or discharge be treated in a time bound manner and an Action Taken
Report be submitted to the Committee. Time was of the essence in this regard and
pending the use of additional STP’s etc., immediate action regarding the covering of
Nallah, developing green belts and vigorous enforcement of norms by the PPCB for
discharge of waste & dumping of garbage in the Nallah must be undertaken immediately
under intimation to the Committees within one month. (Para 21)
4. The Committee feels that shifting of dairies may not be a viable solution of the
pollution caused by these dairies. It is hoped that the proposal to install an STP has
since been submitted. The Committee would like to know whether DPR has since been
approved and what further steps have been initiated by the State/Municipal Authority.
towards the actual operationalisation of the STPs. The Committee would like to be
informed about the date of installation of the plants and the award of work under the
respective procedures for the aforesaid purpose. (Para 25)
5. The Committee recommends that land should be developed and made available
expeditiously for relocation of tiny/small scale electroplating industries operating in the
non designated area of Ludhiana. The Committee would like a time frame to be fixed
for the purpose under intimation to the Committee. This may be done within three
months. Non designated area of Ludhiana. The Committee would like a time frame to
be fixed for the purpose under intimation to the Committee. This may be done within
three months. (Para 25.2)
20

6. In order to prevent throwing/dumping of waste into the canal/river, the
committee feels that there should be a railing of suitable height on each bridge as well
as along the sides of the canal/river within the city reach. There could also be a water
enclosed mess for puja material so that it should not go in the canal/river. From this
mess, the waste puja material can be shifted to waste disposal plant. There should be
a provision of imposing heavy fine for throwing garbage/plastic bags in canals/rivers,
which should be actively and purposively enforced. (Para 25.3)
7. The Committee feels that for effective implementation of a ban on burning of
paddy. Govt. should launch a massive awareness campaign amongst farmers and
incentives should be given to them for collection of paddy straw at one place or
promoting its alternative use. In this respect, the Committee was informed that the
farmers are made aware regarding the preparation of compost/organic manure from the
farm waste. Every year two camps are organized at District Block and Village Level in
order to educate the farmers regarding the ill effects of stubble burning and to promote
new techniques like happy seeder, zero till drill machines. Apparently, much more needs
to be done. A detailed plan should be submitted in this regard to the CPCB and the
Committee. (Para 25.4)
8. The Committee feels that there is need to encourage people to use ,jute bags
instead of plastic bags for carrying vegetables/household items from the market. The
Committee is of .the view that the farmers should be made aware regarding the
preparation of compost/organic manure from the farm waste. Every year two camps are
organized at District Block and Village Level in order to educate the farmers
regarding the ill effects of stubble burning and to promote new techniques like happy
seeder, zero till drill machines. The rain water harvesting system should be
encouraged. (Para 25.6)
9. Besides this, the Committee recommends that (i) Parking areas as well as no
parking zones in the city should the earmarked. Tube pressure horn in automobiles
should be banned; (ii) Municipal Corporation should start a project through which
corporate bodies can be encouraged along with Municipal Authorities to develop vacant
land for landscaping of Ludhiana; (iii) Emphasis should be laid on exploring the
possibility of using STP sludge as manure and to produce gas; and (iv) Provision should
be made for providing funds to the special purpose vehicle to install CETPs for
treatment of effluent from the industries of the States, whose water supply schemes are
based on river/canal water. Specific action with respect to these measures I should be
decided upon at the earliest under intimation to the Committee. (Para 25.7)
10. The Committee recommends that to mitigate the pollution of Amritsar, action on
following points be taken immediately under intimation to the CPCB and the
Committee:
(i) The Department of Local Government and Department of Transport must
look into the issues namely disposal and transportation of carcasses of
slaughtered animals, disposal of municipal solid waste, enforcement
system to implement the rainwater harvesting mechanism in the
construction projects.
21

22
(ii) Deputy Commissioner, Amritsar must ensure that the Noise Pollution
Control Rules, 2000 are implemented effectively.
(iii) Interaction of Municipal and other authorities with NGO’s and other stake
holders regularly is needed to have not only better understanding of the
issues for their better solution. The Department of Science, Technology &
Environment must take lead on the issue by constituting the DC’s
Committees with NGOs/Civil Society participation under the Chairmanship
of concerned DCs.
(iv) In house treatment of Municipal Solid Waste must be encouraged as it
will produce methane gas to use in the household kitchens for cooking
purposes. A pilot study needs to be initiated by the Department of Local
Government for having a demonstrative effect for others.
(v) The transport authorities of the district must ensure that the auto-
rickshaws to be operated on CNG based fuel and their routes must be
fixed and not allowed to stop anywhere on the road except prescribed
stoppages.
(vi) The use of high sound pressure horns by the vehicles, causing noise
pollution, running in the city, must be prohibited and prohibition must be
enforced directly.
(vii) The municipal solid waste generated by the marriage palaces must be
disposed off in an environmentally sound manner.
(viii) A drive may be started to plant more trees along road side and in vacant
places to make the city green and clean.
(ix) Proper fencing may be provided around the Municipal Solid Waste
dumping site to avoid the entry of stray animals.
(x) The cremation grounds existing within the city should as far as possible
be shifted outside to reduce pollution generated from it.
(xi) I No D.J. System and loudspeakers be allowed after 10 p.m., which causes
noise pollution in the locality.
(xii) The sewage treatment plants installed by MES and other Educational
Institutions must be operated efficiently.
(xiii) In the walled city of Amritsar, the electricity operated three wheelers may
be allowed and vehicles running without pollution control certificate must
be challaned.
(xiv) Bio Medical Waste must be properly handled and disposed of in an
environmentally sound manner.
(xv) The huge amount of debris generated by construction activities in the
cities must be disposed off effectively in an environmentally sound

23
manner. Concerned Municipal Corporation must deploy adequate trucks to
clear the debris from the construction sites considering that debris is
main pollutant of the air we breathe.
(xvi) Rain water harvesting projects must be implemented to conserve
the water.
(xvii) For executing the work of STP in Amritsar, the assistance for funding
must be given by the Central Government or by the international
agencies. State Government should approach the Central Government for
necessary funds for the purpose.
(xviii) A Pilot study may be carried out to use plastic waste for the construction
of roads in the city. (Para 42)

MINUTES

XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 24 th June 2015 in Room No.139,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Ashwani Kumar - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
3. Shri C.P. Narayanan
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
5. Shri Bhupinder Singh
6. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
7. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
9. Kum. Sushmita Dev
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Shri Laxman Giluwa
12. Shri Daddan Mishra
13. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
14. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
15. Shri Nagendra Singh
16. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
27

*** Relate to other matters.
Representatives of Ministrv of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
1. Shri Ashok Lavasa, Secretary
2. Shri S.S. Garbyal, Director-General (Forests) & Special Secretary
3. Dr. S.S. Negi, Additional Director-General (FC)
4. Shri M.S. Negi, Inspector-General Forest (FC)
5. Shri B.K. Singh, Director
6. Shri H.C. Chaudhary, Director
2 . *                               *                               *
3 . *                               *                               *
4 . *                               *                               *
5 . *                               *                               *
6 . *                               *                               *
7 . *                               *                               *
8 . *                               *                               *
9 . *                               *                               *
1 0 . *                               *                               *
1 1 . *                               *                               *
1 2 . *                               *                               *
1 3 . *                               *                               *
1 4 . *                               *                               *
1 5 . *                               *                               *
1 6 . *                               *                               *
17. Theeafter, the Committee, considered the draft 261 st Reort on ‘Pollution in Tier-II Cities
of Punjab-Ludhiana and mritsar’, and adopted the same.
1 8 . *                               *                               *
19. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
20. The meeting of the Committee aduourned at 12.45 P.M.
28

Annexures

ANNEXURE -I
Representatives of Civil Society Organizations/NGOs at Ludhiana
1. Shri Joginder Kumar, President, The Ludhiana Electroplaters Association
2. Shri Tanveer Singh Dhaliwal, Councillor & Smt. Neelam Sodhi, PEHAL-The Beginning
3. Shri Sanjay Goel, Chairman & Shri Rakesh Tagri, Indian Institute of Architect,
Ludhiana Centre
4. Shri Krishan Lal Malik and Maj. S.S. Aulakh, Bharat Jan Gyan Morcha
5. Shri Amanpreet Singh Arora, President, Rotary Club, Greater Ludhiana
6. Shri Rahul Verma, Sambhav Foundation;
7. Shrimati Baljeet Kaur, VMAD
8. Shri Arvind Goel, Aggar Nagar, Ludhiana
9. Shri Ayush Jain, Social Activist, Ludhiana
31

ANNEXURE -II
Representatives of Civil Society Organizations/NGOs at Amritsar
1. Dr. Balvinder Singh, Social Activist
2. Dr. M.P. Singh, Fortis Hospital, Amritsar
3. Shri Randeep Singh Kohli, President, Barkat Welfare Society
4. Dr. Inderjit Kaur, All India Pingalwara Charitable Society
5. Shri P.S. Bhatti, Conservator of Nature Missionary Khudai Khidmatgaran
6. Mr. Sachin Khanna, Amritsar Swadeshi Woolen
7. Shrimati Indu Arora, V oice of Amritsar
8. Dr. Charanjit Singh Gumatala
9. Shri Kulwant Singh Ankhi, Amritsar Vikas Manch
10. Shri Manpreet S. Bhatti, Assistant Professor, Deptt. of Botanical & Environmental
Sciences
11 Shri Sandeep Kurl, Joint Action Committee
12. Shri Prabhdial Singh Randhawa, Pollution Control Committee
32

THE LUDH.lANA ELECTROPLATERS ASSOCIATION
(Incorporated Under Companies Act, 1956)
President Off.: 2678881. Secretary Off.: 2532224
Resi.: 2432327, Resi.: 2503321
Mobile: 9915083800 Mobile: 9915646790
Reqd. Office:
E-312 Phase IV-A, Focal Point,
Ludhiana -141010.
email: hemant_9mi@yahoo.in
lEA/LDH/103/15 DA TE: 09.02.2015
Shri M.K Khan
Joint Secretary,
Rajya SabhaSecretariat,
New Delhi.
Reg: Visit of Parliamentary Standing Committee of Ministry of Environment and Forest.
Dear Sir,
We have been given to understand that Parliamentary Standing Committee is visiting ludhiana
on 13.02.2015.
We have to inform you that Our Association, registered under Indian Companies Act, 1956,
since 1966 is the only stakeholder of electroplating industry in Punjab.
The Association has been effectively taking up. various issues’with PPCB since, 1985 and had
organized various seminars with PPCB. .
Common Effluent Treatment Plant for Electroplating industries was setup by PSIEC in 2004-
05, which can’t be operationlised.
The Association was directed by Principal Secretary Industries and Commerce Punjab, in Sept,
2006 to operationalise CETP. It took it as a challenge and SPV in the name ot Ludhiana
Effluent Treatment Society was registered in Dec, 2006. The  undersigned was nominated as
‘F’Qunder’CEO along with 5 other Directors.
The operator took over CETP ‘on as and where condition’ o’n 1-06-2007, which was not
meant for electroplating industries. The addition’al equipments were installed and parameters of
PPCB were met with barring TDS in Dec, 2007. TDS was achieved in Dec, 2008. Zerd liquid
discharge was achieved on 31- 03-2~109 by installing RO System with Multiple evaporator
system, which is unique and first of its kind in India.
We seek Appointrnent with the Committee.
An early action in matter shall highly be appreciated.
Thanking You;
Yours Faithfully,
(Joginder Kumar)
33

34


35


36
PROBLEMS
z Pollution (Industry Vehicles, Autos Etc.)
z Water Pollution (Industry, Buddha Nallah)
z Noise Pollution (Traffic Congestion, Industry Ete.)
z Traffic Congestion (More Vehicles, Less Roads Encrochments)
z Unplanned Everything
z Very Poor Implementation of Building Bye Laws
z Location and Less Number of Bus Stands
z Congested and Outdated Railway Station
z Congested and Outdat D Airport
z Poor Planning of Proposed Metro
z No Proper Local Transport So Far
z Not Sufficient Open Recreational Spaces
z Nq Ring Road In Last 20 Years
z City Still Not Railway Crossings Free
z Haphazard Growth All Around
z Proper Network of Water Supply and Sewerage Missing
z City Centre Hanging for Last 20 Years
z Single Flyover Still Not Complete in 20 Years (Lakkad Pul)
z Underpasses Not Properly Planned and in Use At Many Places
z Poor Designsof in Use Elevated Roads, Flyover Ete.
z Poor Rain Water Disposal System
z Losing Green Cover Daily
z Very Poor Layout of Electric Poles,’ Cabtes, Transformers Ete.
z Budhha Nullah: Most Serious Health Problem Reason
z Encroachments Everywhere
z Political Interference Too Missing
z No Free Hand To Town Planners, Architects Ete.
z So Many Implementing Agencies...................Why? No Coordination!

37
SOLUTIONS
z First of All, Ludhiana Must Have Excellent Future Master Plan Atleast Upto 2050-2060
Free From Political Interference.
z Local Architects From Iia Must Be Taken Into Local Bodies for Better Decission.
z Ludhiana Must Have Single Development Agency (Llke Delhi-DDA) Like Ludhiana
Development Authority-LDA Instead of So Many Existing Agencies Like Lmc, Glada,
Puda, LIT Housefed

PRESENTATION FOR BETTER LUDHIANA
Dear Sir/s,
It gives me immense pleasure and pride to introduce to you Sambhav, an NGO working
towards improving the quality of life of people of Ludhiana. But before I put before you all
the details about Sambhav and its various Objectives, let me thank you all for taking out time
from your busy schedule to learn more about Sandbhav and the many causes it has pledged
itself to.
ABOUT SAMBHA V
Sambhav is a non government organization committed towards making a positive
difference in the lives of people of Ludhiana. With the motto - ‘We own our city and we will
be responsible for its uplift’ we have been running this organization for fifteen years now,
undertaking philanthropic activities across the city of Ludhiana.
Sambhav is a professionally run, registered NGO, and includes in its governing body
prominent city residents who are devoted to public service. We arc a non-political, non-
religious organization and take pride in our not-for-profit work ethics and transparent
functioning.
OUR PROJECTS
> Project Ear th Hour . Plantation Drive
One of the major problems that plague the city of Ludhiana is pollution. Owing to it
being an industrial hub, the city residents are perpetually bogged down by health issues arising
out of pollution. To tackle this menace, we initiated Project Earth Hour Plantation Drive last
year. Under this project, on 20 th July 2014, over I lakh tree saplings were planted across the
city in one hour, a feat that was also an attempt at creating a world record. The whole city
came forward to be a part of this initiative, with educational institutions, corporate bodies
and.government organizations too pitching in with overwhelming support.
By the end of the drive, we were successful in planting over 1,85,000 trees, which in
itself was a world record. I must mention here that the project also kept in consideration the
post plantation requirements such as irrigation facilities and assigning people to tend to the new
saplings.
38

> Project Hum Banenge Crorepati
The successful execution of the Project Earth Hour Plantation Drive has now inspired
and  motivated us to go a step further and dream of planting more trees this year. And to
achieve this dream, we are working on another project — Earth Hour Plantation Drive 2015:
Hum Banenge Crorepati. As the project name suggests, we aspire to plant 1 crore trees all over
Punjab.
The day chosen to execute this project is 19 th July 2015. On this day, the entire state of
Punjab will come together to help make the state a greener and thus a cleaner place to live
in. The state denizens are looking forward to the day and I must add, this project is already
inspiring them to contribute their bit to Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s Swachh  Bharat
mission.
Taming the Traffic Snarl
Sambhav is also actively involved in tackling traffic snarl issues in the city and thereby
helping in control pollution caused by traffic. One of our major initiatives in this regard
included closure of unwanted road medians and repositioning of telephone and electric poles.
Sambhav also played a significant role in Jagraon Bridge Traffic Decongestion, wherein the
bridge has now transformed into a no-stop intersection with the help of Traffic Police,
Ludhiana. Our volunteers now regularly man this crossing to ensure smooth flow of traffic.
Project Clean Buddha Darya
Budha Darya, unfortunately now known as Budha Nullah is our other major concern,
which once was an asset to the city, but is now source of public nuisance and poses a serious
health hazard. Untreated domestic and industrial sewerage of the city is emptied into Buddha
Darya. The darya, in turn, empties into the mighty Sutlej flowing nearby, which depicts that
Buddha darya is a health hazard for the people of Ludhiana, but also to the bordering towns
and villages on the banks of river Sutlej.
While the untreated water flowing from various industries is one of the sources of
pollution in the darya.
Besides, unchecked diversion of sewerage water and solid plastic waste has added to
the darya’s pollution woes. Dairies and butcheries operating along the darya too have been
throwing  their waste into the dary.
To tackle the domestic wastage into the daryaa sewage treatment plants (STP) have
been set up at Bhattiyan, Balloke and Jamalpur in Ludhiana. STPs are now being enhanced so
as to cater to escalating rate of domestic wastage in the city.
It is pertinent to mention here that and adequate amount of untreated sewage, which
has not yet been linked to STP’s is directly flowing into the stream, rather it should go through
STP only.
The dyeing industries are located in the following clusters: Focal Point, Tajpura Road,
Bahadur Road and scattered areas and they are setting up new CETP’s to treat industrial
effluents.

Sambhav Foundation, SCO 31F, 1 st Floor, Above Quiznos, BRS Nagar Market, Behind Orient
Cinema, Ludhiana, Punjab, India 141001
Common Effluent Treatment Plant has been set up in Focal point, phase 8 to treat the
discharge of toxic chemical  released by the electroplating industries but there are some
spattered indtlstI1es wretch are still not linked to CETP. Various units located in inner parts
of the city, need to be relocated with new CETP.
To deal with untreated domestic and industrial sewerage effectively, some more CETP”s
and STP’s are being installed which requires government funding and monitoring. An
emergency planning should also be done to eradicate dairy waste from the stream. If all the
arrangements will be conducted efficaciously, Buddha darya can be pollution free within the
Span of 2 years and it can again be removed from the tag of “bane in the city”
The central government and the state government should set up a nodal agency to
facilitate dyeing industries, Electroplating industries and Municipal Corporation f0f funds and
technology both.
AIR POLLUTION
Number of pending & projects in Ludhiana are leading to increase in traffic chaos and
pollution woes as well. It is unfortunate to say that one of the to say that one of the project
“Lakkar Bridge” took 14 years to complete and still some portion of it is on board.
Work on NHl, was clogged up from last 3 years is now in continuance but at a slower
pace. Dust caused to delayed constructions is hiking air pollution in the city and adjoining
areas.
It is also to bring to your notice that honorable Punjab and Haryana High issued order
to not to permit diesel powered auto-rikshaws with registration numbers of Ludhiana and
having permit of Samrala, Khanna, Jagraon, are being driven in our city, even after the year
209. This again contributes to more of air pollution in the city.
It is nothing to blame on auto-riskshaw drivers for this act, as government itself has
also failed to provide with-LPG/CNG’s filling stations in. the city. So, to encourage
environment friendly auto rikshaws, proper installation of LPG/CNG filling stations should be
done.
Sambhav Foundations.
Rahul Verma
40

RESPECTED AUTHORITY
Myself Baljeet Kaur, Vmad
Making a difference a training Organisation of Leadership Skills, Life skills for youngsters and
women. Last year on 20 th July 2014 we planted 1 lakh plants in one ho are with SAMBHA V .
N.GO. This year we are going to plant 1 crore plants in Punjab. Here are some Ideas I want
to share about pollution and Environment.
1975- A law was passed  that No Farmer can such the waste of “JHONA-Rice” which actually
burns nutrients of the land  and then to regain it farmers we “POTASH” and other chemicals.
So a strict action is required as it is polluting health of the humanity. we as a N.G.O. are ready
to support Administration for this cause.
Pollution Control deptt. Should declare their annual targets of pollution in the City and then
they should work with conerned N.G.O’s and Create visible results we should never forget the
“Power of declaration and tan work.”
There should be a fund which can be used to aware and educate our youngsters about
Environment so that we can create better entrepreneurs.
There is a gabage  at every draw when there is rain, It gets mixed  and gets into soil which
creates sole pollution.
I take the opportunity to forwad  your attention towards the use of polythins. It adding the
gabage like anything. I suggest Govt. should talk the strict actions and should baan It. Punjab
is Suffering with “Shortage of water” Its water level is getting low and low day by day. we
should take the strict action for taps which are placed on road, which are running all the time
and people. Who are washing cars should be punished.
Training of sweepers is very much required.
Thank you
Reqavds.
Baljeet Kaur
Director Vmad.
Trustee Sambhav.
41

The Chairman Sahib,
Dear Sir,
Ludhiana is Among the 10most Polluted Cities in the World. Thanks to MCL’, Who With the
Help of PPCB is Contributing to Enhance Pollution Levels in Ludhiana.
Example is the case of solid waste dumping Site, Jamalpur Attajpur road Ludhiana Ministry of
Envoirment, forests and climate control. New Delhi has issued environmental clearance for
setting up of solid waste fv1anagement facility at Jabalpur Ludhiana to melon 31 an 2013.
[Copy Attached]’. All rules being not followed are highlighted.
In this Regard I want to tell you that MCL got this clearance certificate by Misleading Ministry
CDF environment and till date also they are not following rules. This going on with the help
of PPCB.
I am giving written complaints to PPCB in this regard [Copies attached but they are not taking
any action against MCL MCL is giving PPCB Fake reports of following rules at dumping site
and PPCB is accepting such reports. Instead PPCB Should Look after such violations at there
level and take strict action against MCL when contacted personally with PPCB officials, they
asked me where to dump the sold waste.
I Strongly recommend you to please look into the matter and send some centeral team to
conduct a inquiry in this regard.
Following are some rules not being followed.
1. No 30 Meter side green bet is provided all along the boundry of site let the
green belt on one side, even boundrywall has not been made.
2. According to rules a dumping site should be minimum 20 kms away from any
airport. But this site is 10 kms from Ludhiana airport at sahnewal any
mishapening happens due to birds flying will be sole responsibility of mal ans
3. All the waste should be covered at the end of each working day with minimum
10 cm of soil. This has never been done. But in report this rule is being
followed. (copy of annual report submitted my MCL to PPCB attached:)
You are requested to please save. Common people of ludhiana from mence of
pollution and recommend strict action against guilty officials who are not doing
their duty and making fake reports and accepting such reports. PLS intimate me
in thia regard.
I shall be very thankful to you.
Yours Sincerely
Arvind Goel
42

To
The Hon’ble Chairman,
Parliamentary Committee for Environment, New Delhi.
Stlb: Representation for the Environmental Projects held up due to delay - Central Assistance.
Dear Sir,
Most respectfully it is submitted that we have heard that you are here along with the team
members to eradicate the so called “Urban Decay” from our city as well as to improve the
sanitation of the urban areas. In Ldhiana the total urban infrastructure including sewerage
disposal, solid waste management, sanitation and roads are in state of collapse. At the top of
all is the management of effluents of maltreatment and dyeing, effluent treatment, which is
polluting the water bodies and the ground cuter as a who’e and cal1singh? voc. We are trying
to take a little step towards the handling and treatment of dyeing effluents being 9ischarged
at the Baliadurke Road dyeing industrial cluster. It is submitted as under:
1. That we are Bahadur ke Textile and Knitwear Association, Ludhiana. We have formed
a SPV for bringing up neat and clean 
Ludhiana.
2. That we are bringing up a prestigious project by setting up of 15 MID Common
Effluent Treatment Plant with Zero Liquid Discharge system with 10 MW co-generation
captive power plant with steam distribution system.
3. That-the total project cost is Rs.148.86 crores.
4. That this project is for treatment of effluent of dyeing industries and will recycle the
treated water thus will save ground water upto 85% of the present quantity.
 5. That we have applied for loan component of Rs. 108 crores from consortium of banks
viz. State Bank of Patiala as lead bank with two other FI’s/lenders as Export Import
Bank (EXIM Bank) and Small Industrial Development Bank of India (SIDBI).
6. That we have completed all the required formalities asked by the banks, but the
disbursement of the Joan is still awaited. ,
7. That we have request your goodself to expedite the disbursement process of the bank
to bring up the project at an early date.
8. That this project is also eligible for the financial assistance from the Gol under Revised
Guidelines for the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Common Effluent Treatment Plants
for. Rs.20 crores along, with assistance from the State Govt. for Rs.5 crores.
9. That we have already applied to the MoEF Gol as well as to the Govt. of Punjab for
the grant of their respective shares, but till today the grant is only moving in doldrums.
10. That it is humbly requested to expedite the, process of issue of grant by the Gol and
by Govt of Punjab to bring up this project at an early date.
Sir, we hope that you will be kind enough to consider our most genuine request and
will solve our banking and Grant in aid issues at an early date to bring up our long
desired project to eradicate, dyeing effluent problems from Bahadur ke Road area of
Ludhiana.
Thanking you,
Yours Sincerely
Bahadurke Textile and Knitwear Association
43

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.