PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED SECOND REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on  the  Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Two Hundred Ninety Fourth Report of the Department-
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2017-18)
of the Ministry of Earth Sciences
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th January, 2018 )
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)
302
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED SECOND REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Two Hundred Ninety Fourth Report of the Department-
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2017-18)
of the Ministry of Earth Sciences
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th January, 2018 )
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-11
5. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 13-16

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
(Constituted on 1st September , 2017)
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
5. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
6. Shri C.P. Narayanan
7. Shri Parimal Nathwani
8. Shri Sharad Pawar
9. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri P .P . Chauhan
16. Kumari Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20 Shrimati V asanthi M.
21. Shri Daddan Mishra
22. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
23. Shri Chirag Paswan

(ii)
24. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
130. Vacant
231. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
1 Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 12th December, 2017.
2 Shri Nana Patole ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from the Lok Sabha w.e.f.
 14th December, 2017.

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report
on its behalf, present this Three hundred second Report on the Action Taken by the Ministry of Earth
Sciences on the recommendations/observations contained in Two Hundred Ninety-fourth Report of the
Committee on Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences, which was presented/
laid in the both the Houses of Parliament on 31st March, 2017.
2. There were 22 recommendations/observations in the Two Hundred Ninety-fourth Report of the
Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of the Committee were received
from the Department on 30th May and 2nd December, 2017.
3. In the meeting held on 1st January, 2018 the Committee considered the draft Report and adopted
the same.
  N
EW D ELHI; ANAND SHARMA
1st January , 2018 Chairman,
Pausa 11, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
B E : Budget Estimate
DST : Department of Science & Technology
EEW : Earthquake Early Warning
IFD : Internal Finance Division
IVR : Interactive V oice Response
IMD : India Meteorological Department
M/oES : Ministry of Earth Sciences
NDMA : National Disaster Management Authority
NCS : National Centre for Seismology
PPP : Public Private Partnership
PMC : Project Management Consultant
RE : Revised Estimate
(iv)

REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Earth Sciences on
the recommendations/observations contained in the Two Hundred Ninety-fourth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2017-2018) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences, which was presented to both the
Houses of Parliament on 31st March, 2017. There were twenty two recommendations/observations in
the Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations/observations of the Committee
was received from the Ministry on 30th May and 22nd December, 2017.
The Committee's recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the
action taken by the Ministry of Earth Sciences are set out in the succeeding paragraphs:-
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE MINISTRY AND BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR
2017-18
Recommendation
The Committee notes that although there has been a reduction in the budgetary allocation at RE
stage during the last three financial years i.e. 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17, the Ministry has not been
able to utilize the allocated amount optimally and much amount had remained unspent. The Ministry in
its Background Note has tried to explain the reasons for underutilisation/savings in the budget for the
last three financial years. In most of the cases, delay in finalisation of projects/schemes or deferment
appears to be the main reason behind the underutilisation of funds. In few cases saving has been recorded
due to delay in approval from the end of Internal Finance Division (IFD) of the Ministry. Interestingly
in one case the saving has been recorded due to reduction of oil prices towards use in vessels on
expedition to Antarctica. But the Committee finds it hard to believe the reason for underutilisation given
by the Ministry at many places that the saving was primarily due to reduction in the budget at the RE
stage, which is contradictory in itself, unless the proposed scheme was dropped completely due to
reduction. (Para 4.3)
Action Taken
It is true as pointed out by the Committee that major savings against BE for the last three financial
years cannot be fully attributed reduction of budget at RE stage. However, the minor savings against RE
is largely accounted for the left over miniscule amounts under numerous object heads (about 20-25 nos.)
in each of the scheme. It may kindly be noted that it is not technically feasible to incur/achieve 100%
expenditure in all the 20-25 object heads of each of the program, which depends on several factors of
day-to-day operational requirement of the centers of MoES, which cannot be anticipated full in well
advanced. Accordingly, it may be noted that against RE the financial performance has always been over
95% compared to that of BE about 20-25%.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry will make all efforts to ensure
that there is no underutilisation of funds in future.
1

2
Recommendation
The Committee during the meeting took the above position very seriously and many Members
articulated their unhappiness over the state of affairs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such
underutilization by the Ministry should be avoided by taking timely decisions towards implementing the
schemes as the Committee strongly feels that there could be a correlation between the delay in the
implementation by the Ministry and reduction in the budget at RE stage by the Ministry of Finance.
(Para 4.4)
Action Taken
As suggested by the Committee, the Ministry will make every effort to avoid underutilization of
funds in future by taking timely decision towards implementation of the schemes. The Ministry also
would accord due diligence to prioritize the activities to minimize the delay in the implementation of
schemes vis-a-vis reduction of budget at RE stage.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
While analyzing the reason behind underutilization/saving given by the Ministry, the Committee has
taken note of the fact that IFD has also been responsible in delaying the projects which has resulted in
the underutilization. The Committee is unanimous over the idea that scientific Ministries should not be
treated on par with other Ministries headed by trained bureaucrats as far as financial management is
concerned. The Committee feels that scientific Ministries headed by reputed scientists should be allowed
to pursue their visions for the country and the Financial Advisers attached to these Ministries should
be sensitized to this fact. (Para 4.5)
Action Taken
The Ministry would like to thank the Committee for the important suggestion.
Comments
The Committee notes that the reply of the Ministry does not indicate whether it has taken
any action on the recommendation of the Committee. The Committee would like to know the
action taken by the Ministry in pursuance of the Committee's recommendations.
Recommendation
The Committee while understanding that the budgetary allocation to the Scientific Ministry/Departments
should not face any cuts or reduction at the RE stage during previous years or in 2017-18, finds it
difficult to endorse the idea as the facts during the previous financial years clearly tell a different story
which has been expressed by the Committee in above paras 4.3 to 4.5. The Committee finds it further
difficult to recommend an additional grant of 
` 500 crore as it is not sure about the utilisation of the
allocated amount at the BE level to the full. (Para 4.8)

3
Action Taken
The Ministry is grateful to the Committee for consideration to recommend sufficient budgetary
allocations to the scientific Ministry. However, the additional grant of ` 500 crores required primarily for
acquisition of research vessels may be considered in future after evaluating the financial performance in
the current year.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee is aware of the fact that after doing away with the distinction of 'Plan' and 'Non-
Plan' heads the Ministries will be tempted to manipulate allocations sometimes owing to exigencies and
sometimes to 'so-called' priority areas. It is in this light that the Committee recommends the Government
to provide additional grants at the RE stage to compensate fully the possible demand created on account
of the 7th Pay Commission recommendations. (Para 4.9)
Action Taken
The Ministry express gratitude for making recommendation to enhance budget resources at RE
stage to compensate fully the possible demand on account of 7th Pay Commission.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee is also aware that the financial budget 2017-18 is likely to be passed by the
Parliament before 31st March which means that there would be no requirement of vote on account and
the Ministries will be able to start withdrawing funds from Consolidated Fund of India from the day one
of the financial year 2017-18. Therefore, the Committee hopes that the Ministry will be able to utilize
the allocated funds in time and if that happens, the Committee would be glad to recommend grant of
additional funds of 
` 500 crore for the Ministry at RE stage in order to pursue important programmes
and activities in 2017-18 which had been deferred previously due to paucity of funds. (Para 4.10)
Action Taken
Ministry is grateful to the Committee for making a recommendation of an additional grants of ` 500
crores at RE stage for implementation of the flagship programmes of the Ministry.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
HIGH   PERFORMANCE   COMPUTING   SYSTEM
Recommendation
The Committee also recalled that it had been underlining the importance of high powered computers
since the year 2004, however, actualization of it is still eluding. The Committee reiterates that augmentation

4
of High Performance Computing to 10 peta flops will go a long way in achieving the high level of
accuracy in prediction relating to weather services. Hence, the Committee recommends that sincere efforts
be made for achieving it in a time bound manner so that this project is completed without further delay.
(Para 5.10)
Action Taken
Ministry has initiated necessary actions towards acquisition of High Performance Computing Systems
in a phased manner with a view to improve the weather forecasting services in India.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the steps taken in this direction.
ACCURACY  IN  WEATHER  FORECASTING
Recommendation
The Committee, while appreciating the achievements of the Ministry in the area of accuracy in
weather forecasting, observes that there is a lack of smooth dissemination of information regarding
predictions of extreme events to all the stakeholders. The track record of the Ministry has been above
par in the case of cyclone predictions which has been seen in the case of Hudhud and Vardah. But in
case of flash floods and floods caused due to heavy and incessant rainfalls, the information does not
reach fast enough to take pre-emptive actions on the ground zero. The Committee is given to understand
that the IMD collets the data, interpolates them to arrive at the predictions of flood and transmit it to
many agencies viz., Central Water Commission, National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) and
State Disaster Management Authorities, State Governments etc. However, sometimes they fail to assess
the severity of the situation which is what happened in the case of Uttarakhand Tragedy in 2015.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should develop a foolproof mechanism of
disseminating important data on the weather predictions to the last point so that damage to lives and
livelihood can be minimized. The Committee would like to suggest that the Ministry may designate
Director General, IMD to hold a compulsory Press Conference in the case of prediction of severe rains
which will be in addition to the existing mechanism of dissemination. (Para 5.16)
Action Taken
India Meteorological Department would like to thank the Committee for the deep appreciation with
respect to cyclone forecasting. IMD is also grateful to the Committee for their valuable suggestions to
conduct the press conferences on all service level improvements on regular basis. A detailed press brief
will also be issued on all such occasions.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
OCEAN SERVICES, TECHNOLOGY OBSERV ATIONS, RESOURCES MODELLING AND
SCIENCE (O-STORMS)
Recommendation
The Committee is aware that O-STORMS is an important scheme of the Ministry as it helps in
improving understanding of ocean dynamic, climate variability, ocean and coastal State forecast, sea

5
level variations, ocean flux studies, etc. It is also responsible for operational Tsunami Warning System
on 24X7 basis for issue of bulletins for India and to the countries of the Indian Ocean Region, besides,
continuously exploring ocean resources, operation and maintenance of Ocean Research Vessels and
development of ocean technology for deep sea mining among others. The Committee feels that
O-STORMS scheme is an important scheme which does not deserve any reduction of budget allocation
at RE stage as it would definitely hamper the scientific work at the ground level. Therefore, the
Committee, while acknowledging the fact that the Ministry could not even spend the reduced allocation
at RE stage, does not appreciate the budgetary reduction at RE stage. (Para 6.6)
Action Taken
It may kindly be noted that the marginal unspent funds are attributed to adding up of meager
leftover allocations under 20 budget object heads of O-STORMS. However, the expenditure has achieved
nearly 95% at RE stage.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
OPEN  SEA  CAGE  CULTURE
Recommendation
The Committee feels that efforts of the Ministry would bring the qualitative changes in livelihood
of fishermen as fish production would increase through Open Sea Cage Culture. However, the Committee
observes that fish produced through open cage culture may be compromising on omega 3 as not enough
algae are available to the fish as their feed which is necessary for the omega 3 in the fish and the fish
will be rich in omega 6 which is not good for human consumption. Therefore, the Committee urges the
Ministry to do in-depth research on the Open Sea Cage Culture, its impact on the fish, otherwise the
entire purpose of providing protein rich food to people will be defeated. (Para 7.2)
Action Taken
We agree that the greater use of plant based ingredient in fish feed may result in higher n-6 levels
in farmed fish. However, the issue can be overcome by choosing the appropriate fish meal based diet
sourced from oily fishes such as oil sardine and anchovies instead of land based protein sources. The
National Institute of Ocean Technology is using a marine finfish feed which contains highly digestive
protein purely from marine sources with balanced lipid level and high Omega- 3 HUFA for its experimental
cultures.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Polar Sciences and Cryosphere Research (PACER)
Recommendation
The Committee is given to understand that there are very few players who manufacture ice-class
research vessels with a technology to break ice at the sea. The previous experience tells us that first the

6
lowest amount was more than our budget, which made the Ministry to ask for more money from the
Government. Once this was satisfied and the tender was allotted, the bidder started negotiating for
certain changes to the agreed terms and conditions of the draft contract which was obviously not
acceptable and that is why we are back to square one. In this background, the Committee recommends
that specifications for ice-class research ship should be made broad-based in order to build competition
across the ship builders which will also include indigenous ship making companies to meet the requirement
by having collaboration with foreign ship building companies. This will not only facilitate servicing and
maintenance by the Indian companies, but will also reduce the cost substantially. (Para 8.16)
Action Taken
Ministry agrees with the suggestion of the Committee. National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean
Research, an autonomous institute under Ministry of Earth Sciences is updating the specifications as well
as making the qualification criteria broad based as per new guidelines of Government of India to facilitate
competitive bidding and also to encourage Indian shipyards by having collaborations with foreign ship
builders.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
SEISOMOLGICAL  AND  GEOSCIENCE  (SAGE)  PROGRAMME
Recommendation
The Committee is constrained to note that a huge cut at RE stage has forced the Ministry to
postpone the establishment of National Geochronology at Delhi and the allied work. Further the Committee
notes that there is a 50 per cent decline from the BE 2016-17 to the grant in BE 2017-18. The Committee
hopes that the Ministry will be able to complete the schemes already notified under the SAGE programme
within this allocation. However, if the allocation falls short of the requirement, the Committee suggests
that the Ministry should ask for an additional grant at the RE stage. (Para 9.5)
Action Taken
The Ministry would like to thank the Committee for recommending additional grant at RE stage of
2017-18 to meet the expenditure relating to establishment of National Geochronology at Delhi under the
SAGE program of the Ministry. This matter has been vigorously pursued with the Department of
Expenditure of Ministry of Finance.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the activities in the main phase have been initiated by the Ministry and
hopes that the drilling process would be started. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should
complete the drilling process within the scheduled time period to enrich its prediction of the regular
occurrence of the earthquake in the region. (Para 9.6)

7
Action Taken
The drilling of the first pilot borehole to a depth of 3000 metres in Koyna region commenced in
December, 2016 and has already reached a depth of 2091 metres as on April 11, 2017. The borehole
is expected to be completed by May 2017, after which in-situ measurements and laboratory investigations
will be taken up. The process for drilling of a ~ (5-7)km.-deep borehole for setting up deep borehole
observatory will be initiated after acquiring new information from the pilot borehole studies.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee also notes that huge amount has already been spent on this project and hopes that
desired goal of getting near-field seismological, geophysical, physico-mechanical and geological data for
design of deep fault-zone observatory is achieved and expertise gained from it would be useful in
studying the phenomena of other areas where regular earthquake occurs. The Committee further urges
the Government to make National Centre for Seismology (NCS) an interface in order to convert knowledge
generated under the programme into an earthquake early warning system. (Para 9.7)
Action Taken
As part of the preparatory phase of the project, data from 20 surface seismic stations and
6 borehole seismometer surrounding the Koyna seismic zone were acquired in addition to geological and
geophysical information regarding subsurface geology and structure. The focus of the ongoing main
phase investigations is the seismogenic zone per se, which is characterized by occurrence of earthquake
clusters located during the preparatory phase. A deep borehole observatory is planned in the region to
be established based on the results of preparatory phase and pilot studies. Data from deep observatory
is expected to provide valuable information regarding the genesis of the earthquakes that can be used
for further modeling studies. On the basis of the expertise acquired during the present programme,
similar studies will be attempted in other critical regions of the country, wherever feasible.
The Earthquake Early Warning (EEW) system is completely a different subject. The system basically
work on the principle of detecting the ground motion radiating from an earthquake rupture and estimating
the resulting ground shaking that will occur later in time either at same location or some other locations.
The EEW requires installation of dense network of sensors in the earthquake source zone and transmission
of data in real time at a central receiving stations for processing of data to estimate expected magnitude
and transmission of alert. National Centre for Seismology in near future, would be working to develop
an EEW system, for Himalayan region.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

8
NATIONAL  CENTRE  FOR  SEISMOLOGY
Recommendation
The Committee recalls that in its previous reports (Report Nos. 243, 260 and 284), it had recommended
for early creation of manpower, posts, infrastructure etc., for National Centre for Seismology. The
Committee, however, further reiterates that Ministry completes the task at the earliest. (Para 10.2)
Action Taken
Creation of Manpower and transfer of posts: In March 2017, a few queries were raised by the
Ministry of Finance which has been responded. The case is under active consideration by the Ministry
of Finance.
NCS Building: The building committee has been formed and the process of identifying a PMC will
be initiated soon.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the progress achieved on both the
counts.
RESEARCH, EDUCATION AND TRAINING OUTREACH (REACHOUT)
Recommendation
The Committee notes that although there has been a reduction in the budgetary allocation at RE
stage in 2016-17, the Ministry has not been able to utilize the allocated amount optimally and much
amount had remained unspent. The Committee observes that Ministry at the one hand striving for more
allocation for its various flagship programmes, on the other hand it is unable to utilize the available
funds at its disposal. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such underutilization by the Ministry
should be avoided and whatever amount is allocated should be utilized to the fullest extent.   (Para 11.4)
Action Taken
Ministry noted the recommendation and will make every effort to utilize fully the allocated funds
by prioritization of programmes.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee, however, feels that the Ministry should
chalk out an internal monitoring mechanism to ensure full utilisation of the funds and to keep
a strong check to avoid underutilisation of funds.
Recommendation
The Committee during its meeting held on 13th February had observed that people of the country
including elected representatives are not aware of the excellent work in the field of Earth Sciences being
done by the Ministry or much about the Ministry itself which may be beneficial for a very big segment
of the society like farmers, fishermen, students, research scholars etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends

9
that the Ministry should prepare a comprehensive awareness programme with a calendar of events using
social media platforms, radio, television etc., meant for students and general public but most importantly
for all the elected representatives right from the district level i.e. Members of Zila Panchayats, Legislative
Assemblies and Councils and Members of Parliament. The Committee strongly feels that elected
representatives can play an important role in making their constituents aware of scientific development
and ultimately developing scientific temperament in the public at large.
(Para 11.6)
Action Taken
The Ministry wishes to express gratitude to the Committee for appreciation of work being done in
the field of earth sciences and assure that a detailed plan will be chalked out to promote awareness and
bring out an annual calendar of events by using a wide range of digital and social media.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the steps taken in this direction.
SKILL DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation
The Committee, while appreciating the efforts of the Ministry in this matter, also observes that much
more is needed to be done for employment generation as there is thrust on this issue in the
12th Five Year Plan. The Committee is also of the view that Ministry should consider forging linkage
with Ministry of Agriculture in order to enhance and widen its contributions for Skill Development in
the country as Agriculture and Fisheries are broadly two major sectors getting benefit by the services
rendered by the MoES. (Para 12.2)
Action Taken
Ministry has been working to reach out to the large coastal fishermen community in extending the
fishery information services with the help of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
of Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare. Similar efforts are also being made under the Agro
Advisory Services Programme of the Ministry.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
WATER  DESALINATION  PLANTS
Recommendation
The Committee notes the positive impact of safe potable water being made available to the residents
of three islands i.e. Kavaratti, Minicoy and Agatti through desalination plants. It now hopes that other
islands do get safe drinking water soon enough. The Committee in its 284th Report had recommended
similar plants should be installed in remaining six islands with a view to provide safe drinking water
to them. It is sad to note that instead of providing the facilities in all the islands, the Ministry of
Drinking Water and Sanitation has approved only three islands having population more than 5000. The

10
Committee while fully disagreeing with population criteria recommends that Government should approve
all the islands as every single citizen has the right to safe drinking water . The Committee further
recommends that the Ministry should coordinate with all the concerned Ministries/Departments so that
all procedural formalities for the establishment of water desalination plants at the six islands are
completed at the earliest and the work on the projects begins without any further delay. (Para 13.3)
Action Taken
Ministry agrees with the views of the Committee. National Institute of Ocean Technology, an
autonomous institute under the Ministry of Earth Sciences has been providing all the technical support
on priority and provided Detailed Project Report including estimates for setting up six plants in Lakshadweep
Islands to expedite the approval by Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the progress achieved in this
direction.
Recommendation
The Committee also observes that existing desalination plants are being run on diesel which is not
considered as eco-friendly fuel. The Committee, therefore, suggests that while establishing new desalination
plants in islands of Lakshadweep and also for existing plants, technical feasibility may be explored for
running those plants on much cleaner fuel (like thermal energy) other than diesel in order to preserve
the fragile environment of the area. (Para 13.4)
Action Taken
The Ministry would like to thank the Committee for this important suggestion. Ministry has proposed
a new project for generating ocean thermal energy towards powering low temperature thermal desalination
plant at Kavaratti and preparatory activities have been initiated in this regard.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the progress achieved in the matter.
AGRO-METEOROLOGICAL SERVICES
Recommendation
The Committee observes that on paper the data on the number of farmers receiving agro-meteorological
advisories look very inspiring. However, in reality how many farmers are actually benefitting from this
service needs to be ascertained. The Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts should be made in
increasing the number of farmers benefiting from meteorological advisories and enhancing dissemination
through various media channels. At the same time a nation-wide survey seeking the feedback must be
conducted which will allow for further improvement in the services. (Para 14.4)
Action Taken
As suggested by the Committee, the Ministry is making all efforts to enhance reaching out to
farmers by providing agro-meteorological advisories. A wide range of media is being employed for

11
dissemination of the information to farmers viz., mobile SMS, email, Radio telephone, IVR technology
through Kisan Portal and under PPP mode. Presently 22 Million farmers in the country are getting
advisories through SMS directly. A periodic survey will be also undertaken to seek feedback for improvement
of the services. (Para 14.4)
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the findings of the survey should also
be shared with the Committee.
CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE FOR MoES
Recommendation
The Committee is shocked to know that there is no Consultative Committee for the Ministry of Earth
Sciences whereas there are 35 Consultative Committees representing all the Ministries. The Committee
recommends that Ministry may take up the issue with the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs and start the
process of constituting a Consultative Committee for the Ministry of Earth Sciences. (Para 15)
Action Taken
A Consultative Committee at present is not in existence for any of the scientific Ministries of the
Government of India. Earlier a common Consultative Committee for both Science and Technology and
Earth Sciences had been in existence. A letter has thus been written to DST to get a common Consultative
Committee constituted following due procedure.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the present status in the matter.

MINUTES

II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 1st January, 2018 in Room No. '63', First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
5. Kumari Sushmita Dev
6. Dr. K. Gopal
7. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
8. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
9. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
10. Shri Nagendra Singh
11. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and wished
them a happy and prosperous new year. He informed the Members that the meeting had been convened
to consider and adopt the draft 302nd to 308th reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in reports of the Committee on the Demands
for Grants (2017-18) pertaining to Ministry of Earth Sciences, Departments of Biotechnology, Science
& Technology, Scientific & Industrial Research, Space, Atomic Energy and Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change respectively. The Committee, then, considered the draft 302nd to 308th
Reports and adopted the same.
15

16
3. The Committee also decided to present/lay its 302nd to 308th reports to both the Houses of
Parliament on the 4th January, 2018. The Committee authorised the Chairman and, in his absence,
Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan, M.P. and Shri Prasanna Acharya, M.P. respectively to present the reports
in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Shivaji A. Patil, M.P. and in his absence, Kumari Sushmita Dev, M.P. to lay
the reports on the Table of Lok Sabha.
4. *** *** ***
5. *** *** ***
6. *** *** ***
7. *** *** ***
8. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3:45 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.