 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2016/ Phalguna, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
ACTION TAKEN   BY  THE  GOVERNMENT ON  THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWO HUNDRED FIFTY SEVENTH  REPORT OF THE 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-2016) OF THE  
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH  
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2016) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on ______________, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on _____________, 2013) 
 
REPORT 
NO. 
276 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
     
                                       
PAGES    
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
 
2. INTRODUCTION    
*3.       ACRONYMS                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                             
4.  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                                         
              
 *5.       MINUTES OF THE MEETING                                                                                                               
         
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
_________________________________________ 
*To be appended at printing stage 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2015-16) 
 (Constituted on 1st September, 2015) 
---------- 
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar  –– Chairman  
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan 
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
   6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian 
7. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy  
8. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh  
 9. Shri Bhupinder Singh 
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal 
   12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig 
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakraborty 
     14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan  
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary 
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev 
17. Shri Ninong Ering  
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa 
      19. Dr. K. Gopal 
20. Shri Daddan Mishra 
21. Shri Chirag Paswan  
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil 
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole 
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan  
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar  
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy  
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh  
28. Shri Nagendra Singh  
29. Shrimati Renuka Sinha  
30. Shri Vikram Usendi  
31. Shrimati M.Vasanthi  
          ___________________ 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Rohtas, Director 
 Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director 
 Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundre d Seventy-sixth 
Report on the Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on 
the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Fifty -seventh Report  of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (201 5-2016) of the Department of  Scientific and 
Industrial Research, which was presented/laid in the both the Houses of Parliament on 5 th 
May, 2015. 
 
2. There were twelve  recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Fifty-
seventh Report of the Committee.  Action Taken Notes on the recommendations o f the 
Committee were received from the Department on  5th August, 2015.   
 
3. In the meeting held on 15th January, 2016 , the Committee considered the draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
  
  
 
 ASHWANI KUMAR 
New Delhi: Chairman 
January 15, 2016 
25 Pausha, 1937 
         Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests 
 Rajya Sabha 
  
  
  
 
 
 

REPORT 
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of 
Scientific and In dustrial Research on the recommendations contained in the Two 
Hundred fifty-seventh Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for 
Grants (2015-16) of the Department of Sc ientific and Industrial Research,  (Ministry of 
Science and Technology)  presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 5th May, 2015. 
There were twelve recommendations in the Report of the Committee. Action Taken note 
on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Department on 5 th 
August, 2015.  The Committee, on e xamination of Action Taken Note , however is not 
satisfied with action taken by the Department in respect of seven recommendations (Para 
nos. 3.13, 4.6, 6.5, 7.6, 8.2, 9.11 and 13.2)  and would like the Department to take further 
action in respect of such recommendations as indicated in the Report. 
The Committee's recommendations, action taken note thereon and comments of 
the Committee on the Action Taken by the Department of Scientifi c & Industrial 
Research, are set out in the subsequent paragraphs:- 
FINANCIAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT  
Recommendation (Para 2.2) 
 The Committee notes that in spite of utilizing more than 99% of the allocation 
during 2012-13 and 2013-14, the budgetary allocation of the Department was reduced at 
RE stage during the last three financial years. The Committee is of the view that 
investments in scientific research are extremely important for the development of the 
nation and that reduction in budgetary all ocation at RE stage results in delay in 
implementation of schemes/ programmes of the Department. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that since the Department has potential of fully utilizing its budgetary 
allocation, reduction in allocation at the RE should not be resorted to. 
Action Taken by Government 
The Department thankfully acknowledges the observations of the Committee. The 
observations are being forwarded to the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, 
for appropriate action as deemed fit.  
Comments 
  The Committee takes note of the reply. 
SCHEMES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL 
RESEARCH 
Recommendation (Para 3.13 ) 
In all the above cited four schemes viz Promoting Innovations in Individuals, 
Start-ups and MSMEs, Patent Acquisit ion and Collaborative Research and Technology 
Development, Building Industrial R&D and Common Research Facilities and Access to 
Knowledge for Technology Development and Dissemination of the Department, there 
has been gross underutilisation of allocated res ources. The reasons cited for the same are 
administrative and in a way were avoidable. Because of underutilisations, allocation at 
BE stage for 2015 -16 for all the said schemes was reduced quite drastically. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends th at the Department should strengthen its 
administrative and monitoring mechanism for utilising the allocated resources in each 
quarter. Not utilising the allocated fund during first three quarters of the year and then 
using one third allocation during last quarter as an explanation for underutilisation, is 
untenable.  
Action Taken by Government 
 The SFC memorandum and guidelines of the schemes had to go through several 
iterations within the department and were approved only during the 3rd quarter of 2013 -
14. Even after approval, release of funds were linked to complying with certain pre -

conditions, such as 3rd party appraisal of the scheme, independent evaluation of the 
financial health of companies, etc. which could be complied with by the department, only 
by the 3rd quarter of 2014 -15. Furthermore, releases were affected since a condition was 
imposed that beneficiaries should spend their share in the project before availing DSIR 
support as opposed to earlier practice of releasing the first instalment at the time of 
commencement of project and releasing subsequent instalments upon receipt of 
utilization certificate from the beneficiary. Finally, in February -March, 2015, financial 
approvals even for the projects recommended by the inter -departmental committees were 
put on hold.  
In order to improve fund utilization, inter -alia, it is proposed that Guidelines or 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for processing of proposals for financial 
approvals are framed, which remain stable over a period of time. Also, the  roles of 
program heads, inter -departmental committees, financial advisers etc. need to be clearly 
defined. Newer compliances to be introduced in Guidelines/SOPs should be discussed at 
appropriate forums and approved by the competent authority. 
Comments 
The Committee does not find reasons stated for delay as cogent.  Moreover 
while framing the memorandum and guidelines, the Department should have 
visualized the time needed for granting approval.  The Committee reiterates its 
recommendation and hopes that th e Department would inform the Committee 
about the concrete steps taken to grant approval on time.   
RESULT FRAMEWORK DOCUMENT (RFD) 
Recommendation (Para 4.6 ) 
The Committee notes the performance of DSIR evaluated by third party under 
Result Framework Docum ent (RFD) and finds that performance is declining 
continuously. From a score of 96 % in 2010 -11, it has nosedived to 80% in 2014 -15. The 
Committee strongly disapproves such a trend. What is more appalling is the excuse of 
enforcement of model code of conduct in March, 2014 as reasons for under -performance. 
The Committee understands that model code of conduct prohibits only new 
schemes/programmes but it is applicable to ongoing schemes/projects, is a news to it.  
Action Taken by Government 
 The department notes of the Committee’s concern over the declining RFD score.   
In view of the introduction of Model Code of Conduct in March 2014, files being 
processed for support to private industries were put on hold, affecting performance of the 
scheme during 2013-14.  
Comments 
 The Committee does not find reasoning for the declining RFD score tenable 
in as much as that t he Department should have foreseen the situation causing out of 
operation of  Model Code of Conduct.  The Committee, therefore,  reiterates its  
recommendation.  
Recommendation (Para 4.7) 
 In view of the above, the Committee recommends that the Department should find 
out the reasons for its continuous decline under RFD and prepare a time bound action 
plan to improve its RFD score.  
Action Taken by Government 
 Reasons for continuous decline in RFD score have been, delayed approval of XII 
plan schemes and their slow implementation because of imposition of a number of pre -
compliance requirements.   Speedy implementation of the schemes with adequate 
guidance, advice and support from all concerned will help in improvement of the RFD 
score.  
 
 

Comments 
 The Committee takes note of the reply and hopes that the Department would 
come out with concrete steps to plug the loopholes.  
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS 
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR) 
Recommendation (Para Nos.  6.5 & 6.6) 
  The Committee observes that the number of patents granted to CSIR during 2014-
15 both in India and abroad has been way behind the target set for grant of patents. CSIR 
has been granted only 60 patents as against the target of 150. CSIR has itself admitted 
that the activities in the area could not be pursued at the desired level due to paucity of 
funds. The Committee observes that in the years 2013 -14 and 2014 -15, Rs 40.00 crores  
were allocated for the scheme at BE stage which was reduced to Rs. 35 crores at RE. In 
BE 2015-16, again an amount of Rs. 40 crore has been allocated. As such, the allocation 
made to CSIR for Intellectual Property and Technology Management has remained 
constant, with little margin to offset even the inflationary cost over the years.  
The Committee recommends that increased funds should be provided to CSIR for 
Intellectual Property and Technology Management scheme so that fund constraint does 
not come in the way of achieving progress in this sector. Since patent filing is one of the 
major indicators of the scientific and technological advancements of a country, the 
Committee also recommends that CSIR should further intensify and galvanise its efforts 
and try to improve upon its performance in terms of filing and grant of patents.  
Action Taken by Government 
 Department would like to submit the updated data on Patent filing and granted 
during 2014-15. 
 
 Filed  Granted  
Target  Achieved  Target Achieved 
India 170 308 150 64 
Abroad 250 392 250 282 
The above table shows that target for ‘patents to be granted’ in India during 2014 -
15 could not be achieved. As stated earlier Department would like to submit that it is 
because of pendency of work in Indian Patent Office.  
Department appreciates Committee’s concern that fund constraint for the Scheme 
should not come in way of achieving progress in the area of Intellectual Property. 
Department would take up the issue with Ministry of Finance at the stage of ‘Revised  
Estimate’ discussion as recommended by the Committee. Department will make all out 
efforts to exceed the target in filing and getting patents granted in India and Abroad.  
Comments 
 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
WORLD RANKING OF CSIR 
Recommendation (Para 7.6) 
The Committee is extremely disappointed to note that the world ranking of CSIR 
has dipped from 73 in 2011 to 84 in 2014. The Asia ranking of CSIR has also gone down 
from 15 in 2011 to 17 in 2014. Budgetary constraints and inadequate manpower  are not 
potent reasons to justify the decline of CSIR in world ranking during the last three years. 
CSIR may be holding No. 1 position in the country but its 17th rank in Asia again is 
indeed a matter of concern. The Committee is of the view that CSIR's c ontribution in the 
fields of research, innovation and technology development to improve its world ranking 
can bring laurels to the country and therefore, reiterates the recommendation made on this 
issue in its 244th Report that in order to fulfil the aspir ations of modern India, CSIR 
should aim to become amongst at least first 10 global organisations in its field and it 
should strive hard to achieve that ranking within next 5 years.  

Action Taken by Government 
 Department would put all efforts so that the C ommittee’s recommendation for 
CSIR to strive placing itself in top 10 global organizations be achieved. There are certain 
factors which influence the endeavour however and these are beyond the control of the 
Department. 
Comments 
 While taking note of the r eply, the Committee expect that some concrete 
action plan would be chalked out to improve ranking of CSIR. 
BUS MOUNTED REVERSE OSMOSIS (RO) WATER FILTER  
Recommendation (Para 8.2) 
The Committee appreciates the bus mounted Reverse Osmosis water filter 
developed by CSIR. However, the Committee is appalled to know that instead of 
commercialising such a path breaking innovation at least to States/State agencies, at 
present there is only one such RO unit with the Department. The Committee is at a loss to 
understand as to why, in the current climatic scenario, when natural disasters are on the 
rise in the country, no thought has been given to increasing the number of such mobile 
RO units or the commercialisation of this technology. At a time when the country is 
making preparations for meeting the challenges of disasters, the availability of such RO 
units has great relevance during disaster times. 
Action Taken by Government 
 Department appreciates the Committee’s concern about providing potable water 
to people in disaster-affected areas. As recommended by the Committee, Department will 
make all out efforts to draw a road map for the purpose.  
Comments 
 The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard.  
NATIONAL S&T HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME  
Recommendation (Para 9.10) 
  The Committee takes note of the reasons advanced by CSIR for not being able to 
achieve the targets set in respect of number of scholarships/fellowships/associateships 
awarded under Nati onal S&T Human Resource Development (Research Scheme). The 
Committee is of the view that financial constraints apart, lack of proper planning and 
methodology for grant of awards also played a pivotal role in CSIR not being able to 
achieve its targets in re spect of award of scholarships/fellowships/associateships, as a 
result of which a large number of bright students were denied opportunity of these 
scholarships/fellowships. Creating a bank of well trained researchers is extremely 
important for the developm ent of science and technology in the country. The 
fellowship/scholarships under this scheme provides motivation and encouragement to the 
personnel pursuing/engaged in scientific fields. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that in future, CSIR should set a  realistic target for award of its fellowships/scholarships 
so that it does not fall short of the targets set by it. 
Action Taken by Government 
Department through CSIR has been trying to create a pool of well -trained 
researchers which is extremely important for the development of Science and Technology 
in the country, as kindly pointed out by the Committee. As recommend ed by the 
Committee CSIR would try to set a realistic target for award of Fellowships/Scholarships.  
Comments 
 The Committee takes note of the reply. 
Recommendation (Para 9.11) 
The Committee also observes that the allocation made for S&T Human Resources 
has remained almost the same since the last three years despite the fact that the 
emoluments for research personnel have been revised. A numbe r of sanctioned posts are 

also lying vacant. These need to be filled up urgently. CSIR has also highlighted the need 
for additional funds under this head. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
budgetary support to this scheme should be adequately i ncreased so that lack of funds 
does not come in the way of incentives devised to encourage scientific research in the 
country  
Action Taken by Government 
 During 2015 -16, an amount of Rs. 288 crore has been allocated to the Scheme 
“National S&T Human Resou rce Development Programme”. Department has already 
requested Ministry of Finance to allocate additional funds of Rs. 220 crore to meet the 
expenditure on account of revision of rate of emoluments to research scholars w.e.f. 01-
10-2014 so that lack of funds  does not come in the way of incentives devised to 
encourage scientific research in the country, as directed by the Committee.  
Comments 
 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
NATIONAL CIVIL AIRCRAFT DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NCAD)  
Recommendation (Para 10.4) 
The Committee is extremely disappointed to note that a programme of great 
national importance such as National Civil Aircraft Development Programme (NCAD) 
Programme has made very little, rather no progress, at all during the last three years. The 
Committee is constrained to state that although our country has mastered space 
technology, we are yet to develop technology for developing a commercial aircraft. The 
Department has inter alia indicated financial constraints for non -approval of the 
programme duri ng the last three years. The Committee recommends that the 
administrative approvals for the fresh initiatives taken in collaboration with Hindustan 
Aeronautics Ltd. may be obtained at the earliest so that the actual work on the 
programme could be initiated  in right earnest. The Committee also recommends that 
adequate financial allocations be made for the above programme so that its execution is 
not delayed any further. A comprehensive review of the causes of delay of the project 
needs to be undertaken and responsibility fixed for the delay alongwith an action plan for 
successfully implementing the project within a stated time-frame considering the strategic 
importance of the project.  
Action Taken by Government 
 CSIR, in 2008, took up a pilot study for devel opment of a 50 to 70 seater 
Turboprop Civilian Transport Aircraft for Regional Connectivity. A ‘High Powered 
Committee’ was formed in May 2010 under the Chairmanship of Dr. Madhvan Nair, Ex. 
Chairman, Indian Space Research Organization to oversee the activ ity related to detailed 
feasibility study (report) for development of a 70 -seater Civilian Transport Aircraft for 
regional connectivity in consultation with all the stakeholders. The Feasibility Study 
Report recommended 70 to 90 seater Turbo Fan configurat ion. In 2012, Dr. Kelkar 
Committee was formed to explore the possibility of a Public -Private Partnership model 
for development of the Aircraft. The Committee found that there was lack of enthusiasm 
in the Indian Private Sector companies for participation i n the programme. It was mainly 
due to lack of clarity in identifying a launch customer, number of aircrafts to be 
manufactured, competition from several existing established players/ Original Equipment 
Manufacturer of the sector. The domain is complex and ecosystem for aerospace 
technology deployment does not exist in the country. CSIR has made all efforts necessary 
for the endeavour under reference.  
Recommendation was made for setting up a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) 
between M/s Hindustan Aeronautics Li mited and CSIR -NAL. Department is making all 
efforts to make the project operational.  
 
 

Comments 
 The Committee takes notes of the efforts and complexities invo lved with 
National Civilian Airc raft Development Programme and would like Department to 
keep making earnest efforts at the earliest for operationalisation of programme.  
CSIR 800 
Recommendation (Para 11.4) 
The Committee is at a loss to understand as to why a scheme launched to augment 
the incomes and improve the quality of lives of one million rural  citizens geographically 
spread across the country, was merged with another scheme, the objectives of the new 
merged scheme have no direct relation whatsoever with CSIR -800 scheme. The 
Committee hopes that with the merger of the CSIR -800 scheme with the Na tional 
Laboratories scheme, the objectives of the original CSIR -800 scheme will not be lost. 
The Committee recommends that there should be no let up in the activities of the 
Department on this front and adequate financial support should be provided to the 
Department for achieving the objectives of the scheme in the new merged scheme.  
 
Action Taken by Government 
 Department would like to submit for the kind consideration of the Committee that 
CSIR has reviewed and merged the CSIR-800 scheme with National Laboratories scheme 
in pursuance of the direction of Government of India to rationalize the implementation of 
schemes. The department would adequately fund CSIR 800 program and make all efforts 
to fulfill the objectives of the approved CSIR 800 projects/ activities. 
Comments 
 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
TREATMENT OF MUNICIPAL, URBAN WASTE ETC. 
Recommendation (Para 12.1, 12.2  and 12.3) 
 During the meeting of the Committee held on 9th April 2015, the Committee was 
informed by the Department about t he CSIR's involvement and contribution in clean 
Ganga Mission. One of the points highlighted by the Department was demonstration 
project on Phytorid Technology for treatment of sewage to avoid pollution load to River 
Ganga. It was informed that the project  was a single solution to treat municipal, urban, 
agricultural and industrial effluents. Further, it was a low cost project with facility for 
reuse of treated water.  
The Committee desired to know whether the above project was successful in practical 
terms and whether the technology had actually been applied to treat municipal and city 
waste. In response, the Committee was informed that extensive research work on the 
project had been done at National Environment Engineering Research Institute, Nagpur. 
In response to a further query as to whether the application of the technology could be 
actually seen at the ground level, the DG, CSIR failed to provide a categorical reply to 
the Committee.  
The Committee is of the view that treatment of municipal, urban, ind ustrial 
effluent etc. is one of the major problems not only of municipal authorities but of Town 
Planners also, which is also responsible for the increasing pollution load of our rivers. 
The Committee recommends that the Department should take immediate ne cessary steps 
to test the Phytorid technology at the ground level and, if required, further researches on 
the above technology should be carried out on urgent basis to make it a successful model 
in a time bound manner.  
Action Taken by Government 
Department would like to elaborate further on Phytorid technology as under:  
The technology is useful for treatment of municipal sewage both for urban and 
rural as a stand -alone system as it involves constructed wetland to tackle both organic 
carbon and nutrients v iz. nitrogen and phosphorous. This system is nature based and has 

been through R&D studies structured into technology. The technology is not a single 
solution for treating domestic, agriculture and industrial effluent. Particularly industrial 
effluents may cause toxicity due to heavy metals or other organic compounds which are 
not degradable. Agriculture runoff however can be treated as the system has both 
physical and biological component for treating the pollutants in agriculture runoff. The 
control of flow will be a major issue in case of runoff, as phytorid will require a properly 
controlled and designed hydraulic flow with proper retention time. However, as 
envisaged this project definitely can be deployed in Clean Ganga Mission particularly for 
the Nallah which are contributing Ganga pollution by way of conveying sewage into it. 
One such demonstration plant has been put up in Nagpur at the Nallah which flows with 
domestic sewage. The capacity is 0.1 MLD and results are very satisfactory. The capital 
cost of sewage treatment plant is almost equivalent to conventional technology provided 
the land cost is not added and is applicable wherever there is a land available for putting 
constructed wetland. But the major saving is on the operation and maintenance a nd 
therefore the technology is more sustainable. Treated water can be used for irrigation and 
other non-potable purposes. However, if the treated water is used for some other uses, 
select tertiary technologies such as filtration, disinfection can be combin ed for getting 
better water quality.  
Phytorid technology has been applied in the field successfully for treatment of 
domestic sewage at colony level and also for some of the municipal colonies. First plant 
was commissioned in 2006 at Kalina Campus at Mumb ai with the help of Mumbai 
University. About 40 such treatment systems are in operation in various places. One such 
demonstration unit is available in Nagpur which already has been mentioned in response 
to para 12.1. R&D for further improving the engineeri ng design vis -à-vis targeting high 
organic load is also in progress as continuous improvement in the technology is required 
to cater to specific problems.  
Action Taken by Government 
 The technology has already been provided in the municipal and urban town ships. 
CSIR-NEERI is proposing Dewat technologies as well as low cost technologies using 
combination of technologies where phytorid is one of the components to address the 
problems faced by municipalities / town planners. Though the present capacity of the  
plant at various places is not more than 100 M3 / day, higher capacity plants can be 
designed particularly for deployment in urban areas provided land is not the constraint. 
Land constraint will be addressed through combined technologies which are being 
developed by CSIR -NEERI. These include natural systems as well conventional and 
advance systems for delivering good water quality product. Institutes planning to use the 
technology plus combination of technologies in the Clean Ganga Mission at select places  
to provide solution to pollution in Ganga.  
Comments 
 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
ROBOTICS TECHNOLOGY  
Recommendation (Para 13.2) 
The Committee feels that Robotics is the technology of the future as the future 
management of human civilisation was going to depend heavily on robotics. Already, in 
countries like USA and Japan, robots were being used for treating and taking medical 
care of the aged people. Compared to these countries, India was way far behind in this 
critical field. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should make 
an action plan to make rapid progress in the field of robotics so as to be able to compete 
with advanced countries in this field in a given time frame. The Committee also 
recommends that required budget ary support should be provided to the Department to 
make rapid strides in this field.  
 

Action Taken by Government 
 Department would like to submit that during the current XII Five Year Plan, CSIR 
is executing following four projects wherein various forms of Robotics are being 
developed.  
• Technology Solutions for Micro Air Vehicle Development;  
• Robotics and Micro Machines; 
• Autonomous Underwater Robotics; and ;  
• Advanced Instrumentation Solutions for Health Care; 
 
The Department will make all efforts  to make available the approved budget to 
these projects in remaining period of the plan. 
Comments 
 The Committee , while taking note of  the reply , feels that the Department  
should chalk out an action plan to make rapid progress in the field of robotics to 
compete with advanced countries like USA and Japan in the field of robotics in a 
given timeframe.  The Department has only provided the names of projects it is 
executing in the XII Five Year Plan. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its 
recommendation and desires that an action plan to make rapid progress in robotics 
to be submitted to the Committee at the time of Demand for Grants 2016-17.  
 
 
 
 
 