Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2015/Ashadha, 1937 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
264
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 22nd July, 2015)
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 21st July, 2015)
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FOURTH REPORT
Environmental Issues in Mumbai and Visakhapatnam

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,  ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FOURTH REPORT
Environmental Issues in Mumbai and Vishakhapatanam
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  21st July, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on  22nd July, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2015/Ashadha, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

     Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

C O N T E N T S
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF T HE C OMMITTEE    .......................................................... (i)
2 .      I NTRODUCTION  ........................................................................................ (iii)
3. A CRONYMS  ....................................................................................... (v)
4. R EPORT  OF T HE C OMMITTEE  ...................................................................... 1 –13
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS – A T A G LANCE .......................................... 14 –16
6. M INUTES  ................................................................................................ 17 –22
7. A NNEXURES  ............................................................................................ 23 –26

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September, 2014)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar   –– Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
6. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri Bhupinder Singh
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Beig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
22. Shri Nana Patole
23. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
24. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
25. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
27. Shri Nagendra Singh
28. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
*31. Shri Chirag Paswan
* Nominated w.e.f.  25th March, 2015.
(i)

     SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
(ii)

INTRODUCTION
          I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorized by the Committee
to present the report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred and Sixty-fourth Report on
“Environmental issues in Mumbai and Visakhapatnam”.
2.     During its study visit to Mumbai and Visakhapatnam from 30th January to 2nd February,
2015, the Committee heard the views of the officers of the Central Government and State
Governments of Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh and Experts and Civil Society Organisations/
NGOs on ‘Environmental issues in Mumbai and Visakhapatnam’.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Central Government and State
Governments of Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh and Experts and Civil Society Organisations/
NGOs for rendering their valuable views/replies to clarifications sought by the Committee.
4.      In its meeting held on 9th July, 2015, the Committee considered the draft report and adopted
the same. 
NEW DELHI; ASHWANI KUMAR
9th July, 2015 Chairman,
Ashadha 18, 1937 (Saka)
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
 Science and Technology, Environment and Forests
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

ACRONYMS
MHADA – Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority
CIDCO – City and Industrial Development Corporation of Maharashtra Ltd.
BMC – Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation
NGO S – Non Governmental Organisations
CRZ – Coastal Regulation Zone
MSDP-II – Mumbai Severage Disposable Project-II
BOD – Biological Oxygen Demand
SSL – Suspended Solid Levels
MoEF&CC – Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
NDRF – National Disaster Response Force
APPCB – Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board
INSWAREB – Institute for Solid Waste Research and Ecological Balance
GVMC – Greater Visakha Municipal Corporation
(iv)

1
REPORT
.0
Pollution and environmental degradation is affecting all but its adverse effect is more in
metropolitan cities and many of the Tier-II cities. In that context, the Department-related Parlia-
mentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests took up the
subject of pollution levels of some of the metropolitan and Tier-II cities of the country for its
examination and report. The Committee undertook study visit to Mumbai and Visakhapatnam from
30th January to 2nd February, 2015 to study the pollution index of these two coastal cities.
Mumbai
2. In Mumbai, the Committee on 30th January, 2015 started its business by holding
interaction with civil society organizations and NGOs on urbanization vis-à-vis pollution in
Maharashtra in general and Mumbai in particular. A list of NGOs and civil society organisations
that appeared before the Committee is appended at Annexure-I.   Separately, the Committee
also interacted with Principal Secretary, Environment; Principal Secretary, Maharashtra Urban
Development Department; Vice-President, Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority
(MHADA); Chairman, Maharashtra Pollution Control Board; Managing Director, City and
Industrial Development Corporation of Maharashtra Ltd. (CIDCO); Principal Secretary, Town
Planning Government of Maharashtra; Commissioner, Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation
(BMC); Chairmen, Jawahar Lal Nehru and Mumbai Port Trusts and representatives of Union
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change on the subject.
3. The Chairman while initiating discussion pointed out that challenge of rising population,
haphazard urbanization, growing industrialization, and depleting natural resources, that the city of
Mumbai is facing. While Government agencies/authorities viz. BMC, CIDCO, MHADA, MMRDA,
etc. had been doing their bit to address these issues, the moot point remained whether those efforts
had been effective enough and what more was required to be done. He emphasized the need, of
revisiting the efficacy of existing policies and implementation.
4. He also emphasised on the need for solid waste management, special attention to sewerage
systems, encroachment of wetlands and forest areas, noise and vehicular pollution, air quality,
urban planning and need to adhere to the discipline of the relevant rules and regulations.
5. Representatives of Non-Governmental Orgnisations (NGOs)/Civil Society Organisations
raised a number of issues pertaining to environmental status and urban planning of Mumbai.  Some
of the views expressed by the NGOs are as follows:-
(i) Representative of The Energy Research Institute (Western Region Centre) stated
that urbanization is important but it has to be sustainable. She argued that to feed
the population living in metropolitan areas it is required to have agricultural areas
and free spaces near them. Careful planning is needed before setting up new
colonies. Additionally, encroachment near water bodies should be stopped as it will
lead to severe water crisis in the urban areas in coming years. She was of the view
that authorities should have plans to develop water bodies.

2
(ii) Representative of Hariyali NGO also emphasized on the need to developed water
bodies.
(iii) Representative of World Wild Life Fund for Nature, Maharashtra State office stated
that people have to be made aware about the environment protection.  Small
changes in lifestyle can impact the environment.
(iv) Representative of Sahyadri Nisarg Mitra was of the view that every individual
should solve his solid waste problem and awareness needs to be spread in that
regard especially in smaller cities. He also suggested improving Mandoli bio-
diversity area as eco-tourism spot with conservation programme.
(v) Representative of Ela Foundation made a power point presentation on the
problems arising out of urbanization in Mumbai and Pune. He spoke about the
Environmental, cultural and ideological pollution. He also spoke about territory
hazards particularly on aviation hazard near Airports, Mangrove ecosystem;
toxic and plastic waste affecting birds and fisheries. He suggested that mass
media should be used more effectively to create awareness on that issue in
collaboration with the Government.
(vi) Representative of Awaaz Foundation raised issues relating to noise pollution
stating that noise pollution adversely affected health. She also highlighted
increase in cases relating to road rage in urban areas. She argued that noise
pollution is a major health hazard. Noise during festival celebration is also a
health hazard. Areas should be earmarked for these kinds of celebrations.
Licenses should be given for these functions. It was suggested by her that
national parks should be declared silence zone. Strict Implementation of the
laws needed. She also suggested creating a new organization with overriding
powers to tackle the problem of pollution in Mumbai.
She added that noise pollution requires equal attention under Swachchha
Bharat Abhiyan and Brihan Mumbai Municipal Corporation had done good work
in this field. Harm caused by fire crackers to human ears was also raised by
Awaaz Foundation.  It was stated that permissible limit for human ears is 120
decibel for residential areas but unfortunately human ears can tolerate 120
decibels only. The Chairman thereafter raised his concern about increasingly
raising volumes of horn of vehicles plying on the road.  To reduce impact of
rising noise pollution on wildlife it was suggested to declare National Parks as
silent zones.
(vii) The NAGAR (NGO) expressed concern about proliferation of private vehicles
on road and encroachment on land by builders in Mumbai. Need for better co-
ordination amongst the various agencies involved in the development of Mumbai
was also emphasized. It was suggested that the infrastructure development in
city should be such as would ensure adequate open space around the buildings
and in the city to allow for recreational activities for the elderly and children.
The problem of noise pollution and its adverse impact on human health was also
brought out.

3
The issue of installation of 4th Generation mobile towers in Mumbai was
also brought out.   It was informed that the Municipal Corporation of Greater
Mumbai had planned to allow the telecom companies to install 4G base stations
or ground-based transceiver stations in open Parks, playgrounds, open areas,
roads, civic grounds, gardens, parking areas, civic pumping stations, etc. She
stated that installation of 4G towers in open spaces will pose a major health
hazard for citizens, especially children, pregnant women and senior citizens
visiting the open spaces. She apprehended that other operators would seek
similar permissions, leading to proliferation of cell towers and resulting in loss
of the few ‘breathing spaces’ left in Greater Mumbai.
(viii) Paryavaran Dakshta Manch stated that the depth of lakes had reduced due to
the immersion of idols made from plaster of paris. Therefore, awareness
amongst masses about not submerging of Ganesh idol in the lakes needs to be
spread.
(ix) Representative of Jalvardhini Pratishthan stressed upon the need to provide
potable water to urban population. He stated that in Mumbai, only about 25%
of waste water was treated,  55% was partially treated while 20% water was
not treated at all.
(x) Shri Hafeez Contractor, eminent architect stressed upon the need for a policy
of social housing in Mumbai. He stated that 80% of the city was in a dilapidated
condition. He was also of the view that CRZ regulations were not required in
Mumbai and should be abolished. He also expressed his concern about Global
warming.  He was of the view that green spaces, in Mumbai city need to be
developed by reclaiming the encroached parts of land.
(xi) Swabhiman Machimar Sangathana drew the attention of Government to the
abnormal increase in environmental pollution in ocean which was resulting in
increase of sea levels endangering the Mumbai city. He stated that there was a
huge problem of increase of plastic in the sea around Mumbai due to which
fishermen were facing major problems in the coastal areas. Marine reserves
were impacted adversely on account of the poor quality of water in the coastal
zones.  It was stated that in the past decade Mumbai had lost almost 40 per
cent of its mangroves largely because of reclamation of coastal areas on
account of housing, slum development and garbage dumps. He also stated that
the Hon’ble High Court of Mumbai had ordered a freeze on destruction of
mangrove forests in Maharashtra and had banned construction within 50 metres
of mangrove forests and directed to notify mangrove areas as protected forests.
But due to illegal activities mangroves are continuously decreasing.  On the
contrary, the State Government of Maharashtra was planning to construct a
memorial for Chhatrapati Shivaraji Maharaj on 50-100 acres, in an area where
local fishermen were residing and operating nearly 500 boats and making their
livelihood and those 15,000 families was dependant on the said business.

4
(xii) The Maharashtra Machhimar Kruti Samitee stated that the fishing community
was fast losing its livelihood, land and fishing opportunities due to various
ongoing modernisation processes like large scale on-shore and off-shore
activities of ONGC, NTPC, creation of special economic zones in the marshy
lands, real estate business, amusement parks and other activities.
(xiii) The Conservation Action Trust highlighted the destruction of green spaces in
Mumbai. It was pointed out that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change had permitted Tata Power Company to convert 500 MW thermal
power plant located in Mumbai to operate on coal instead of gas despite the fact
that the project was cleared by the Ministry on the condition that the plant will
be permitted to operate only on clean fuels such as gas and oil and not on coal.
It was stated that the decision will adversely impact the health of all citizens
of Mumbai. The representative of the Trust also drew attention to vehicular
pollution and stated that burning of garbage and biomass in Mumbai needs to
be completely stopped.
(xiv) By the Secretary of SPARC, it was stated that slum dwellers did not have even
the basic facilities and were not allowed to build toilets on Bombay Port Trust
land in the name of CRZ.
(xv) The National Association of Fishermen suggested that one family-one house and
one family-one car policies should be followed in Mumbai, so that the poor
could also own a house in Mumbai and vehicular pollution could be controlled.
It was suggested that some Government and private offices should be shifted
outside Mumbai city in order to control and regularize the traffic and the
720 km of costal line around Mumbai should be regularised. Mangroves
development should be undertaken immediately and proper rehabilitation of the
fishermen should be initiated at the earliest.
(xvi) Shri Nand Kumar Pawar from the fishing community flagged the issues relating
to fishermen community. According to him since 1990s for the concrete
development mangroves and Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) have suffered
losses in turn depriving the local community from the livelihood, and creating
dumping ground. Toxic garbage was being dumped on mangrove land which
created health problems to people living in the vicinity. For instance he cited
example of Uran mangrove areas where people were being displaced.  The
fishing community stated that due to pollution fishes are not coming to their
traditional area and fishing activity together with the economic activity
associated with the was negatively affected.
6. The Committee also had an interaction with senior officers of the Government of
Maharashtra on issues relating to the quality of air, water and also noise pollution, haphazard
urbanization, solid waste management, sewage treatment, etc.  Representatives of the Union
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change were also present during the meeting.
7. Starting the interaction, the Chairman pointed out that it was disturbing to note that
Mumbai was one of the most polluted cities of the world.  He further stated that the

5
Maharashtra Pollution Control Board, local civic authorities, law enforcement agencies and all
other stakeholders must make collective and concerted efforts within a realistic timeframe to
meet the challenge. He further added that a comprehensive Environmental Action Plan be
formulated to control pollution in Mumbai.  The Chairman also sought to be apprised of the
latest updates, particularly on the proposed installation and commissioning of the two common
effluent treatment plants; improvement in public transport system, etc.  Besides, members of
the Committee raised the issue of the manner in which environmental issues of Mumbai need
to be addressed.
8. A suggestion about creating a Central body to look into the permissions issue collectively
and solve all such problems was raised.
9. It was brought to the attention of the State Government that 40% of solid waste was going
without tarpoling and without carbohydrating.  1836 MT of liquid waste was treated unconvention-
ally in nalla creek and 814 MT of seepage was dumped in sea every day.
10. Regarding noise pollution in the city, it was stated by the State Govt. authorities that they
did not have a scientific noise profile of Mumbai. Periodically, they were collecting data and
ascertaining whether it met certain standards.  It was stated that there were some areas which
were declared as silent zones by the High Court. It was stated that a scientific noise profile of
the city and already appointed an agency and hoped that they would be able to get reliable data
on noise profile of the city after a period of one year. They were also enforcing silence zones with
the help of police. He further added that they would like to know what interventions were required
once they got the noise profile of the city.
11. The Committee was informed by the Municipal Commissioner, that solid waste generated
by city was taken to the dumping ground and not thrown into sea. From there some lichens or
some other pollutants might be the reason for pollution. About the water supply of Mumbai, he
stated that the water quality was very good and there was no complaint about poor quality except
from certain areas where water was contaminated due to leakages in pipelines etc. He also stated
that they had a long term vision for supply of potable water.
12. On sewerage, it was informed that the State Government had a futuristic plan Mumbai
Severage Disposable Project–II (MSDP-II) and the financial value of the proposed project was
R10500 crores, which entailed a number of things like construction of sewer tunnels, erection of
sewerage pumping station and processing units and these are all done keeping in view the standards
that are prescribed by the Maharashtra Pollution Control Board on various parameters of Biological
Oxygen Demand (BOD) and Suspended Solid Levels (SSL) etc.
13.  The Chairman enquired about the steps taken for greening the existing buildings. It was
informed that Maharashtra Government was coming up with new development control regulations
which were in final stages wherein provisions had made for green constructions in the new
buildings. As far as old buildings were concerned, it was informed that retrofitting will be done.
It was also stated that they would look into this aspect and consider some regulations for
retrofitting.
14. Some other significant issues cropped up during the meeting were destruction of Man-
groves, water, noise and vehicular pollution.

6
15. Mangroves play a very vital role in prevention of soil erosion that usually takes place on
the coastal belt of Ocean. Due to massive pollution caused by accumulation plastic, toxic garbage
and untreated sewage water on the coastal region of ocean has nearly destroyed mangroves. Real
Estate Developers have resorted to massive destruction of mangroves cover to encroach upon the
land for their real estate development. Dumping of spent oil and oil produce in the open sea by
cargo vessels have resulted in massive pollution in the sea. Ship breaking industry causes severe
damages to the Indian Ocean by way of dumping of such unusable iron ore into the sea.
16. It was argued that need of the hour is to lay stress on coastal ecological balance.
Efforts should be made to instil in young children at the school levels the urgent need and
benefits of preserving environment and cleanliness at individual level. The Civil Society made
an appeal that the decision of MoEF&CC to permit the location of a Navi Mumbai Airport i.e.
new airport on mangroves and wetlands and in close proximity to the Karnala Bird Sanctuary
needs to be reversed as not only was that ecologically and environmentally disastrous, would
also be unsafe for aero planes and for the birds.
17. Vehicular pollution is a serious threat to Mumbai not just in terms of air and noise
pollution but also congestion and road rage.  Good public transport system is must the burning
of garbage and biomass in Mumbai needs to be completely stopped. Testing of Heavy metals-
Firecrackers contain heavy metals and chemicals. The cumulative effect on composition of
particulate matter after crackers are burnt is extremely toxic to human health.  There is an
urgent need to conduct studies and take preventive action to safeguard human health. Lot of
unplanned construction activities also increase air pollution.
18. Dumping of debris is detrimental to the natural environment. Recycling of debris is also
important issue for controlling Air Pollution. The new provisions should prescribe for recycling
of debris in order to prevent dumping of debris, which is detrimental to the natural
environment.
19. Noise pollution remains largely ignored by implementation authorizes and citizen due to
absence of official studies providing clear linkages between noise and health. Noise control
needs to be integrated in Urban Planning after generation of adequate data.  Distributed Sound
systems, small loud speakers placed evenly within an audience at low volume, provide pleasing
sound to the audience while not disturbing surrounding area.
20. It was submitted to the Committee that solid waste of all Mumbai city was being
dumped in the coastal area or in the sea, which had become the main cause of sea-pollution.
Waste water finds its way to sea, which has affected the sea species particularly fishing. Mithi
river, Versova Creek and Mahul Creek are some of living examples.
21. The Committee feels that greening of existing buildings is a welcome step and
can contribute significantly towards pollution mitigation. The Committee recommends
that regulations regarding greening new and old buildings should be finalised at the
earliest.
22. The Committee is of the view that issues relating to environment in India’s
financial capital Mumbai need to be addressed urgently and concerned authorities of
Central and State Government should take urgent and purposive steps for improving the
infrastructure and taking pollution mitigation measures.

7
23.   The Committee feels that decreasing mangroves cover in Mumbai is a matter
of concern and therefore recommends that the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change and the State Government should take all necessary steps to save
and protect the mangroves areas from further encroachment. Necessary steps should be
taken by the concerned authorities to prevent garbage dumping in wetlands and
mangroves. All necessary development activities must be approved consistent with the
view to prevent ecological imbalances.  Steps should be taken by the concerned
authorities to prevent garbage dumping in wetlands and mangroves, check illegal
activities and dumping of spent oil in ocean.
24. The Committee feels that noise pollution in the city of Mumbai is one of the
factors adversely affecting the health of inhabitants and immediate steps are required
to be taken to contain noise pollution. The Committee recommends that scientific noise
profiling of the city of Mumbai needs to be completed at the earliest and noise pollution
should be checked alongwith the enforcement of the relevant laws.
25. The Committee finds that permissible limit for noise levels in the residential
areas of Mumbai at 120 decibel hardly leave any elbowroom when the toleration level
of human ears is 120 decibels.  Considering the toleration level of human ears the
Committee is of the view that permissible level of noise needs to be reduced.
26. The concerned agencies of State Government should find a solution towards
providing toilets to slum dwellers residing near the Bombay Port Trust.
27. The Committee finds that the dumping of untreated solid waste in to the sea,
rivers and creeks causes marine pollution. The Committee feels that untreated waste
should not and must not be dumped into the sea.
28. The Committee feels that administration needs to sensitize/create awareness
amongst the people to reduce the ill effect caused by noise coming out of horns of
vehicles plying on the road.  Declaring National Parks as silent zones will help in saving
wild life from the harm caused by noise pollution.
29. In view of the opposition to installation of 4G towers by the people and Civil
Society organisations, the Committee recommends that Civil Society Organisations and
citizens of Mumbai should be taken into confidence and their apprehensions on adverse
effects of electromagnetic field  radiation allayed before proceeding further on
installation of 4G towers .
30. The Committee feels that there should be arrangement for collection of waste water
since 90% of the same comes out as wastewater.  The Committee is of the considered view
that there is an urgent need to create an effective wastewater management system and
special arrangements should be made for water management in Sewage Treatment Plants.
31. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to increase the capacity of the
Sewerage Treatment Plants in the city and to strengthen the management of solid and
liquid municipal waste infrastructure in the city.  The Committee recommends that
immediate steps should be taken to check untreated flow of sewerage and waste into the
sea.  The Committee feels that steps taken by the Maharashtra Government to make
it necessary for bigger housing societies to set up their own sewerage treatment
facilities would lessen the burden on State Government.

8
Visakhapatnam
32. On 1 st February, 2015 at Visakhapatnam, the Committee first held discussions with the
officers of Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Andhra Pradesh State
Government Authorities; Member Secretary, Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board; District
Collector, Vishakhapatnam and Chairman, Vishakhapatnam Port Trust.
33. While initiating the discussion, the Chairman emphasised upon the need to address air,
water, noise pollution and management of solid waste in the city of Visakhapatnam. He stated
that more efforts were needed to be made to improve the environmental health of
Visakhapatnam especially because of its location in the bowl area. He added that stringent
compliance of the emission/effluent quality norms by industries is required to develop
Visakhapatnam as a smart city.
34.  The Committee was informed that under the Green Visakha Initiative to control air
pollution it was decided to plant 8 lakh saplings every year and 40 lakh saplings in five years
in Visakhapatnam. The Committee desired to know about the progress in plantation activities.
In response, the District Collector, Visakhapatnam informed that till date 12 lakh saplings had
been planted in the last three years and 28 lakh saplings were to be planted in the next two
years. He also apprised about the difficulties faced in achieving the targets. It was suggested
that experts should guide Government authorities to plan such species that grow quickly and
are environment friendly. The Committee also enquired about the rate of survival of plants.
35. Chairman, enquired about the effect of pollution on sea breeze. Member Secretary,
APPCB, replied that Visakhapatnam was like a bowl area, which aggravated the effects of
pollution. On this, the Chairman, desired to know how the bowl area was coping with it. He
also asked about the initiatives taken to tackle environmental pollution due to the Hudhud
Cyclone.
36. Chairman, Visakhapatnam Port Trust informed about the pollution mitigation activities
undertaken by them and details of plantation activities. He further informed that a study on the
assessment of the effectiveness of existing Air Pollution Management Plan of Public Private
Partnership (PPP) partners of VPT and other Port operational areas, had been entrusted to
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Kakinada which will be completed by June, 2015.
37. District Collector, Visakhapatnam stated that VUDA developed layouts with 10% open
space allotted for greenery. On Hudhud cyclone and its relief rehabilitation activities in Vizag,
the District Collector observed that East and West Godavari Districts had mangroves, which
safeguarded people from Cyclones. Informing about cyclone preparedness, he informed that
Visakhapatnam has 95 Cyclone shelters and the city got information/warning on cyclones from
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting and other agencies. He further stated that they were
taken unaware by its speed and casualties were largely reduced since the public had been
informed about the cyclone beforehand through radio and mobile phones.
38. The District Collector was of the view that it should be made mandatory for the
Telecom Operators to make the Cyclone warnings services free and that one should have
effective communication system to ensure public safety. It was suggested that an Underground
Communication System should be installed in the coastal area to avoid damage to

9
communication towers during Cyclones and 3000 Cyclone Shelters may be constructed. He
further suggested that the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) should devise norms to
bring Urban Local Bodies, Government Buildings and Aided Degree Colleges in its orbit during
such troubled times. He pointed out that during Cyclone Huhud, 80,000 Electric Poles were
lost/damaged and recommended having a Centralised Material Stores in different districts for
efficient and quick distribution, if a Cyclone struck the district.
39. The Committee feels that to minimise the loss caused by Hudhud cyclone and to
ensure public safety, a robust communication system needs to be installed. The State
Government should in collaboration with the Central Government authorities; take all
necessary steps for setting up of robust communication system in this regard at the
earliest.
40. Thereafter, on 2nd February, 2015, the Committee interacted with the Civil Society
Organisations and NGOs on air, water and noise pollution in Visakhapatnam.  A list of
representatives of Civil Society/NGOs/individuals who appeared before the Committee is at
Annexure-II.
41. In his opening remarks, the Chairman underlined the importance of environment, the
preservation of which was a national imperative raising issues of inter and intra-generational
equities. He emphasised that the need of the hour, was to evolve an alternative national
enterprise to ensure a sustainable development model which could ensure inter-generational
equities by preservation of the necessary ecological balance. He said that the Committee was
visiting some of the Tier-II Cities to discuss their status on environmental parameters and in
that process, the Committee proposed to discuss issues of urban renewal including air, water
and noise pollution, haphazard urbanization, urban planning, solid waste management, sewerage
treatment, etc. in Visakhapatnam which was facing huge environmental challenges especially
after the devastating Hudhud cyclone.
42. He stated that it was imperative that Government officials/law enforcement agencies
and all other stakeholders took urgent measures to address the situation purposively by fixing
a realistic time-frame. He further pointed out that representatives of civil society organisations/
NGOs keep a close watch on environmental issues confronting the city of Visakhapatnam and
vigorously act towards ensuring a clean and healthy environment in Visakhapatnam and the
surrounding areas.
43. Chairman invited suggestions from members of the civil society and NGOs and asked
them to present their views regarding the air, sea, noise pollution and challenges of
rehabilitation after Hudhud cyclone. He also sought their views on addressing environmental
challenges within a time-frame.
44. Representatives of civil society/NGOs raised a number of issues pertaining to the
environmental status of Visakhapatnam. Some of the significant and prominent views expressed
were as follows:-
(i) Chaitanya Sravanthi pointed out that air pollution caused due to the dust emitted
by coal being handled at the Visakhapatnam Port was one of the major issues
affecting the health of the citizens of Visakhapatnam. She stated that the
residents in old town area of Visakhapatnam were affected by different types of

10
diseases and the same had been brought to the notice of officials of
Visakhapatnam Port Trust, Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board (APPCB),
etc.
(ii) District Fishermen’s Youth Welfare Association mainly focussed on ocean
pollution and informed that due to marine pollution, the fish population had
decreased and 14 lakh fishermen, who depend on fishing in the Coastal Andhra
Pradesh, were facing numerous problems due to erosion of the sea coast and
improper implementation of coastal-related environmental laws and regulations.
He further said that even though they have approached the Courts to restrict/
stop illegal constructions in the coastal area, there was no outcome. It was
suggested that the Committee persuade the State Government to ensure that the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, the Notification on Coastal Regulation
Zone, 2011 and the A.P. High Court orders are strictly implemented.
(iii) Institute for Solid Waste Research & Ecological Balance (INSWAREB), informed
the Committee about fly ash. Their representative stated that India generates
200 MT of Fly Ash annually and fly ash had become an important resource.  He
informed that fly ash bricks were replacing clay bricks throughout the country.
He suggested that a National Convention should be organized by inviting State
and Central Government officials and industries that are associated with fly ash
utilisation, to seek their views in order to draw organised promotion of fly ash
brick building activity and its utilisation for sustainable development.
(iv) Sunkavalli Foundation primarily focussed on farmers’ issues, highlighting
pollution in villages and pointed out that due to indiscriminate use of chemical
fertilisers and pesticides, all the water bodies were being polluted, affecting the
health of rural people and the earth. He requested the Government to take up
the issue by collecting random samples of water, soil and emission levels at
various villages, mandal-wise for the well-being of the rural folk.
(v) Prof. R. Ramakrishna Rao of GITAM University informed that there were a
number of major industries inside and outside the bowl area of Visakhapatnam
causing pollution. He informed that industrial effluents, untreated sewage,
garbage, solid waste and pesticides residue, etc., were polluting the city and
suggested providing a buffer zone between industries and residential areas. He
also suggested undertaking a comprehensive survey to study the synergistic
studies of pollution, and online Monitoring Stations to collect data on pollutants,
and to monitor the status of ambient air quality. He also highlighted the need to
undertake a project to study the adverse impact of deteriorating air quality on
health & agriculture and take precautionary and preventive action across the
city to spread awareness.
(v) Indian Youth for Society was of the view that the lorries and trucks plying
cargo from and to VPT were not properly covering the loaded cargo with
tarpaulins resulting in cargo being spilled and dust emitted, causing serious
health hazards to the citizens of Visakhapatnam. He suggested having a Waste
Management Plant in each ward of the city.

11
(vii) Society for Education and Environment Development, informed that the District
Administration and Greater Visakha Municipal Corporation (GVMC) were not
playing an active role in pollution mitigation. Its representative stated that there
were a number of leakages in the underground drainage system in the city. He
stated that the buses and GVMC sanitary vehicles were emitting a lot of smoke,
causing air pollution. He also requested to restrict the use of polythene bags in
the city, which were regularly clogging the drains. He observed that water
pipelines near the drains also lead to contamination of water.
(viii) Green Vision informed that Flexi Banners too were adding to pollution since no
one was aware of their disposal method. He was of the view that chemical
industries located in Visakhapatnam besides causing pollution might cause
chemical accident as a result of which the city, which is covered by hills, on
three sides will be greatly affected. He informed that the use of electronic
gadgets was increasing daily and the E-waste and Bio-waste Management
needed urgent attention.
(ix) Representatives of Andhra University informed that there were many streams in
Visakhapatnam which were being converted into drains for dumping waste and
that water reservoirs which were meant for drinking water for the citizens of
Visakhapatnam were not being maintained for quality of water and suggested
that the concerned authorities should formulate an action plan to keep the city
green, clean and healthy.
(x) The representative of VITAM College stated that trucks plying from Gajuwaka
to Madhurawada consumed a lot of diesel while waiting at the traffic signals.
He also suggested shifting the Port activity to Dugarajapatnam and Ennore Ports
to reduce air pollution.
(xi) The Committee was also informed that though the Visakhapatnam Port was
taking up pollution mitigation measures by way of mechanisation, etc., but the
problem of pollution still existed. It was suggested that as the Andhra Pradesh
Government was proposing setting up a port at Ramayyapatnam /
Dugarajapatnam, the hazardous and dusty cargo should be transferred from
Visakhapatnam Port Trust to make Visakhapatnam Port pollution-free.
(xii) District Fishermen’s Welfare Society informed that people were suffering from
acute respiratory diseases due to the activities of the Gangavaram Port. It was
suggested that the steel plant located nearby should treat waste water effectively.
45. After considering all the suggestions/problems of NGOs and Civil Society Organiza-
tion and the submission of officials, the Committee feels that to mitigate the pollution of
Visakhapatnam, action on following steps needs to be taken up immediately:-
i. Problem of pollution in the bowl area of Visakhapatnam needs to be ad-
dressed urgently. State Government should look into the pollution caused by
transportation of coal in open/uncovered trucks and disposal of municipal
solid waste and take remedial measures.

12
(ii) Systematic efforts need to be made for scientific disposal of municipal
solid waste. Greater Visakhapatnam Municipal Corporation should identify
more sites for scientific landfills to dispose of the municipal solid waste
in an environmental friendly manner.
(iii) Untreated waste should not be allowed to go directly into the drains. Non
functional/defective Sewage Treatment Plants such as at Kailsagiri should be
restored immediately. For restoring the defunct STP at Kailasagiri and for
setting up of new Sewage Treatment Plants, financial assistance of the
Central Government or international agencies should be sought. The Andhra
Pradesh State Government may also consider approaching the concerned
national and international organisations for more funds to make
Visakhapatnam a Smart City.
(iv) Considering the fact that Visakhapatnam has a number of pharmaceutical
companies which cause the problem of bio-medical/pharmaceutical waste,
earnest efforts should be made for scientific disposal of bio-medical waste and
pharmaceutical companies should follow best waste incineration practises.
(v) Manufacture and use of plastic bags should be restricted to 40 microns.
(vi) Concerned state agencies in Visakhapatnam must ensure that the Noise
Pollution Control Rules, 2000 are implemented effectively and honestly.
(vii) Interaction of Municipal and other authorities with NGOs and other
stakeholders should be held regularly to have better understanding of the
issues for their solution.
viii. The use of high sound pressure horns by the vehicles, causing noise pollution
in the city must be prohibited and the prohibition should be enforced strictly.
(ix) The Committee expresses its concern over the loss of green cover during the
cyclone Hudhud and  is of the view that intensive efforts should be made to
bring back Green Visakha and hopes that the stakeholders i.e. public and
private sector companies will meet the specified target of planting saplings in
and around Visakhapatnam.
46. The Committee recommends that an Action Plan should be chalked out urgently to
meet the environmental challenges in a co-ordinated and purposive manner with active
participation of various stakeholders.
CONCLUSION
47. The overall perspective which has guided this Committee is inspired by its
conclusions and recommendations as stated in its 254
th Report presented to Parliament.  The
relevant extract therefrom is reproduced for emphasis.
“The Committee has endeavoured to consider the challenge of environment protection and
prevention of damage to our ecology in a holistic perspective. The challenge is indeed grave
and needs to be addressed as a matter of highest national priority as if tomorrow was today.

13
The agenda for action cannot be hostage to compulsions of partisan politics or to lack of
political will. Nor can the bureaucratic red tape and ‘passing the buck’ attitude be an excuse
for inaction. While pursuing our national goal of high economic growth as a means of
poverty alleviation we will need to reiterate in our actions the primacy of environmental
concerns.”
48. It is needless to point out that the State Government Departments mandated to assume the
preservation of environment in the context of urban planning will need to ensure overall responsi-
bility and must at same time be entrusted with enabling powers and authority to discharge their
mandate effectively.  The functioning of the Pollution Control Boards in the States needs to be
made more purposive and accountable alongwith Departments/municipalities concerned with the
various facets of urban planning and renewal.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
1. The Committee feels that greening of existing buildings is a welcome step and can
contribute significantly towards pollution mitigation. The Committee recommendeds that
regulations regarding greening new and old buildings should be finalised at the earliest.
  (Para 21)
2. The Committee is of the view that issues relating to environment in India's
financial capital Mumbai need to be addressed urgently and concerned authorities of
Central and State Government should take urgent and purposive steps for improving the
infrastructure and taking pollution measures.   (Para 22)
3. The Committee feels that decreasing mangroves cover in Mumbai is a matter of
concern and therefore recommends that the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change and the State Government should take all necessary steps to save and
protect the mangroves areas from further encroachment. Necessary steps should be
taken by the concerned authorities to prevent garble dumping in wetlands and
mangroves. All necessary development activities must be approved consistent with the
view to prevent ecological imbalances. Steps should be taken by the concerned
authorities to prevent garbage dumping in wetlands and mangroves, check illegal
activities and dumping of spent oil in ocean.   (Para 23)
4. The Committee feels that noise pollution in the city of Mumbai is one of the
factors adversely affecting the health of inhabitants and immediate steps are required
to be taken to contain noise pollution. The Committee recommends that scientific noise
profiling of the city of Mumbai needs to be completed at the earliest and noise pollution
should be checked alongwith the enforcement of the relevant laws.   (Para 24)
5. The Committee finds that permissible limit for noise levels in the residential
areas of Mumbai at 120 decibel hardly leave any elbowroom when the toleration level
of human ears is 120 decibels. Considering the toleration level of human ears the
Committee is of the view that permissible level of noise needs to be reduced.  (Para 25)
6. The concerned agencies of State Government should find a solution towards
providing toilets to slum dwellers residing near the Bombay Port Trust.         (Para 26)
7. The Committee finds that the dumping of untreated solid waste in to the sea,
rivers and creeks causes marine pollution. The Committee feels that untreated waste
should not and must not be dumped into the sea.   (Para 27)
8. The Committee feels that administration needs to sensitize/create awareness
amongst the people to reduce the ill effect caused by noise coming out of horns of horns
of vehicles plying on the road. Declaring National Parks as silent zones will help in
saving wildlife from the harm caused by noise pollution.   (Para 28)
14

9. In view of the opposition to installation of 4G towers by the people and Civil
Society organisations, the Committee recommends that Civil Society Organsisations and
citizens of Mumbai should be taken into confidence and their apprehensions on adverse
effects of electromagnetic field radiation alloyed before proceeding further on
installation of 4G towers.   (Para 29)
10. The Committee feels that there should be arrangement for collection of waste
water since 90% of the same comes out as wastewater, The Committee is of the
considered view that there is an urgent need to create an effective wastewater
management system and special arrangements should be made for water management in
Sewage Treatment Plants.   (Para 30)
11. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to increase the capacity of the
Sewerage Treatment Plants in the city and to strengthen the managment of solid and
liquid municipal waste infrastructure in the city. The Committee recommends that
immediate steps should be taken to check untreated flow of sewerage and waste into the
sea. The Committee feels that steps taken by the Maharastra Government to make it
necessary for bigger housing societies to set up their own sewerage treatment facilities
would lessen the burden on State Government.   (Para 31)
12. The Committee feels that to minimis the loss caused by Hudhud cyclone and to
ensure public safety, a robust communication system needs to be installed. The State
Government should in collaboration with the Central Government authorities; take all
necessary steps for setting up of robust communication system in this regard at the
earliest.   (Para 39)
13. After considering all the suggestions/problems of NGOs and Civil Society
Organization and the submission of officials, the Committee feels that to mitigate the
pollution of Visakhapatnam, action on following steps needs to be taken up
immediately:-
(i) Problem of pollution in the bowl area of Visakhapatanam needs to be
addressed urgently. State Government should look into the pollution
caused by trnsporation of coal in open/uncovered trucks and disposal of
municipal solid waste and take remedial measures.
(ii) Systematic efforts need to be made for scientific disposal of municipal
solid waste Greater Visakhapatanam Municipal Corporation should identify
more sites for scientific landfills to dispose of the municipal solid waste
in an environmental friendly manner.
(iii) Untreated waste should not be allowed to go directly into the drains. Non
functional/defective Sewage Treatment Plants such as at Kailsagiri should
be restored immediately. For restoring the defunct STP at Kailasagiri and
for setting up of new Sewage Treatments Plants, financial assistance of
the Central Government may also consider approaching the concerned
national and international organisations for more funds to make
Visakhapatnam a Smart City.

(iv) Considering the fact that Visakhapatnam has a number of pharmaceutical
companies which cause the problem of bio-medical/pharmaceutical waste,
earnest efforts should be made for scientific disposal of bio-medical waste
and pharmaceutical companies should follow best waste incineration
practises.
(v) Manufacture and use of plastic bag should be restricted to 40 microns.
(vi) Concerned State agencies in Visakhapatnam must ensure that the Noise
Pollution Control Rules, 2000 are implemented effectively and honestly.
(vii) Interaction of Municipal and other authorities with NGOs and other
stakeholders should be held regularly to have better understanding of the
issues for their solution.
(viii) The use of high sound pressure horns by the vehicles, causing noise
pollution in the city must be prohibited and the prohibition should be
enforced strictly.
(ix) The Committee expresses its concern over the loss of green cover during
the cyclone Hudhud and is of the view that intensive efforts should be
made to bring back Green Visakha and hopes that the stakeholders  i.e.
public and private sector companies will meet the specified target of
planting saplings in and ar ound Visakhapatnam.   (Para 45)
14. The Committee recommends that and Action Plan should be chalked out urgently
to meet the environmental challenges in a co-ordinated and purposive manner with
active participation of various stakeholders.   (Para 46)
15. The overall perspective which has guided this Committee is inspired by its
conclusion and recommendations as stated in its 254
th Reports presented to Parliament.
The relevant extract therefrom is reproduced for emphasis.
"The Committee has endeavoured to consider the challenge of
environment protection and prevention of damage to our ecology in a
holistic perspective. The challenge is indeed grave and needs to be
addressed as a matter of highest national priority as if tomorrow was
today. The agenda for action cannot be hostage to compulsions of partisan
polities or to lock of political will. Nor can the bureaucratic red tape and
'passing the buck' attitude be and excuse for inaction. While pursuing our
national goal of high economic growth as a means of poverty alleviation
we will need to reiterate in our actions the primacy of environmental
concerns."   (Para 47)
16. It is needless to point out that the State Government Departments mandated to
assume the preservation of environment in the context of urban planning will need to
ensure overall responsibility and must at same time be entrusted with enabling powers
and authority to discharge their mandate effectively. The functioning of the Pollution
Control Boards in the States needs to be made more purposive and accountable
alongwith departments/municipalities concerned with the various facets of urban
planning and renewal.   (Para 48)
16

MINUTES

XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2:30 P.M. on Thursday, the 9th July, 2015 in Room
No.139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C.P. Narayanan
3. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Ninog Ering
5. Dr. K. Gopal
6. Shri Daddan Mishra
7. Shri Nana Patole
8. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
9. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
10. Shri Vikram Usendi
11. Shri Chirag Paswan
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
19

20
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
1. Shri Ashok Lavasa, Secretary
2. Shri Susheel Kumar, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad, Joint Secretary
4 Shri  A.K. Mehta, Joint Secretary and Chairman, CPCB
5. Dr. Rashid Hasan, Advisor
6. Dr. J.R.Bhatt, Advisor
7. Dr. A.B. Aholkar, Member Secretary, CPCB
Representatives of Central Ground Water Board
1. Shri K.B. Biswas, Chairman
2. Dr. Dipankar Saha, Member
3. Shri G.C. Pati, Member
2. At the outset, The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised
them that the Committee inter alia  proposed to consider and adopt two draft reports in the
meeting. The Committee thereafter, considered the draft 264th Report on 'Environmental Issues
of Mumbai and Vishakhapatanam' * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. * * *
16. * * *
*** Relate to other matters.

21
17. * * *
18. * * *
19. * * *
20. * * *
21. * * *
22. A  Verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
23. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.10 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE -I
Civil Society Organisations/NGOs and Individuals Present at Meeting
of the Committee in Mumbai
1. Ms. Anjali, The Energy Research Institute
2. Ms. Poonam Singhvi, Hariyali
3. World Wild Life Fund
4. Sahyadri Nisarg Mitra
5. Ela Foundation
6. Hafeez Contractor, Architect
7. Ms. Meher Rafaat, NAGAR
8. Shri Prasad Date, Paryavaran Dakshata Manch
9. Shri Ulhas Paranjpe, Jal Vardinin
10. Ms. Sumaira Abdulali, Awaaz Foundation
11. Shri Debi Goenka, Conservation Action Trust
12. Kavita, Nisarg Mitra
13. Shri Joking Arputham, SPARK
14. Shri Vikas Dilawari, Mumbai Heritage Conservation Committee
15. Dr. Gajendra K. Bhanji, National Association of Fishermen
16. Dr. Damodar Tandel, Akhil Maharashtra Machchimar Kruti Society
17. Shri Vedant Katkar, Worli Koli Samaj Vividh Karyakari Sahkari Sangh Ltd.; and
18. Shri Ravindra Panchal, Machhimar Colony
25

           A NNEXURE-II
Representatives of Civil Society Organistions and NGOs at Visakhapatnam
1. Shri Ratnam Green Climate
2. Shri Hari V enkat Dharitri Social Welfare Society
3. Shri Appala Reddy Indian Youth Society
4. Shri Shan Murthy Society for Education & Environmental
Development
5. Dr. Prabhakar Green Vision
6. Prof. S. Ramakrishna Rao Consultancy Project Collaboration,
GITAM University
7. Shri N. Kalidas Institute for Solid Waste Research &
Ecological Balance (INSWAREB)
8. Shri T. Shankar Dist. Fishermen’s Youth Welfare Association
9. Smt. Shirin Rahman Chaitanya Sravanthi
10. Shri S.V . Choudary Sunkavall Foundation
11. Prof. Raj Sekhar Varma Individual
12. Prof. Bala Prasad Andhra University
26

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005