 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDIN G COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
August, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
    Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/O bservations 
contained in the Three Hundred Seventy Ninth Report of the  
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on  
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Chang e  
on the Demands for Grants (202 3-24) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  10th August, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2023) 
 
REPORT NO. 
386 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDIN G COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/O bservations 
 contained in the Three Hundred Seventy Ninth Report of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee  on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Chang e 
on the Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences  
 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  10th August, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka)


 
C O N T E N T S 
 
   
  PAGES 
   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION  (ii) 
 3. ACRONYMS  (iii) 
4. REPORT  1-9 
 Chapter I.      Recommendations/Observations which  have been                    
accepted by the Government:  
2-3 
 Chapter II.   Recommendations/Obs ervations which the Committee   does      
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
4-7 
 Chapter III.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  
of the Government have not been accepted  by the     
Committee  
 
8 
 
  
 Chapter IV.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of w hich Final 
                       Replies of the Government are still awaited  
 
9 
 5. MINUTES  10-12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(2022-23) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022)  
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh -    Chairman 
 
         RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Shri Niranjan Bishi  
4. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
6. Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar  
7. Shri Jose K. Mani 
8. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
9. Shri Nabam Rebia   
10. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  
         LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
12. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
13. Shri Jashwantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
14. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
15. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16. Shri Sunny Deol 
17. Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
18. Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
19. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj  
20. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
21. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
22. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
23. Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
24. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
25. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha  
26. Shri Anurag Sharma 
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
28. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
29. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava  
30. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma  
31. *Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
    
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Joint Secretary  
Shri Narendra Kumar, Director 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary  
Shri Rama Nand, Committee Officer 
       
__________________________________________________________________  
* Shri S. Jagathrakshakan ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 8th December, 2022 
 
 
 
 (i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Chang e, having been authorised 
by the Committee to present the Report on its beha lf, present this Three Hundred Eighty 
Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the  recommendations/observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Seventy Ninth Report  of th e Committee on  Demands for 
Grants (202 3-2024) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences, which was presented to the Rajya 
Sabha on the 15th March, 2023 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20 th March, 2023.  
2.   There were 14 recommendations/observations in the  Three Hundred Seventy Ninth  
Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of the 
Committee were received from the Ministry on 5th June, 2023.   
3.   In the meeting held on 9th August, 2023, the Committee considered the dr aft Report 
and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
 
 
  (JAIRAM RAMESH) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
09 August, 2023    Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Sravana 18, 1945 (Saka)                                                    Committee on Science and Technology,  
                                             Environment, Forests and  Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 

ACRONYMS 
 
ACROSS Atmosphere & Climate Research-Modelling Observing Systems & Services  
ATN Action Taken Note 
ATR Action Taken Report 
BE                   Budget Estimate 
DOM Deep Ocean Mission 
HPC High Performance Computing system  
INSAT Indian National Satellite System  
IMD India Meteorological  Department  
MAGIC Marine Gate Incubation Centre  
MoES Ministry of Earth Sciences 
NCS National Centre for Seismology  
NIOT               National Institute of Ocean Technology  
O-SMART Ocean Services, Modelling, Applications, Resources and Technology  
RE                   Revised Estimate 
REACHOUT Research, Education and Training Outreach 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)      

1 
 
 
REPORT 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee 
contained in its ‘Three Hundred Seventy Ninth Report’ on “Demands for Grants (202 3-24) of the 
Ministry of Earth Scienc es”.  The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha on the 15th March, 2023 
and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 20th March, 2023. 
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from Ministry of Earth Sciences  (MoES) 
in respect of all the 14 recommendations/observations contained in  the ‘Three Hundred Seventy 
Ninth Report’. The replies of the Ministry of Earth Sciences have been categorized as follows:- 
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: Para Nos.:- 2.8, 2.10, 2.11 and 2.21  
 Total recommendations – 04 
Chapter II: Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
  Para Nos.:- 2.9, 2.17, 2.19, 2.20, 2.22, 2.27, 3.7, 3.9, 3.10 and 4.2 
  Total recommendations – 10  
Chapter III:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: NIL 
Chapter IV:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: NIL 
3. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters.  
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
OVERALL BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022-23 (BE, RE & 
ACTUAL EXPENDITURE) AND ALLOCATION FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2023-24 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.1 Not being able to procure critical components such as high power computing devices, 
research vessels and other infrastructure has led to a reduction in allocation at the R.E. 2022 -23 
stage. This reflects poorly on the Ministry’s commitments towards its obj ectives. Further, the 
Ministry’s response that most of these schemes have a long term horizon and hence any missed 
opportunities shall be compensated for in the coming years is not satisfactory. The Committee 
therefore recommends that the Ministry should t ake all necessary steps towards dissolution of 
such hurdles and ensure that the progress on its various initiatives is not compromised. 
(Para 2.8 of the 379th Report) 
Action Taken 
1.2 Noted for compliance. The annual acquisition plan under all the schemes has been 
finalized. The order for the procurement of High Performance Computing (HPC) system has been 
placed in May 2023. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.3 Chart 2 depicts the variation in Capital Expenditure and Overall Budget in B.E. & R.E. 
2022-23 and B.E.  allocations for 2023-24. The Committee observes that the Capital expenditure 
in B.E. 2022 -23 was Rs. 450 crore which was revised down by about 59 per cent to Rs. 188.65 
crore at R.E. 2022 -23 stage. The allocation for Capital expenditure in R.E. 2022 -23 w as Rs. 
188.65 crore which has been substantially increased by about 257 percent to Rs. 673.81 crore in 
B.E. 2023 -24. The Ministry, while replying to a query of the Committee submitted that the 
increased Capital allocations during B.E. 2023 -24 will be used in Procurement of HPC, 
Acquiring of Land for setting up of Advanced Marine Biology Station and Construction of NCS 
building.                                                                                                                     (Para 2.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.4 Noted. The order for the procurement of High Performance Computing (HPC) system has 
been placed in May 2023. The design of the NCS building has been completed and will be 
submitted to the concerned authority for approval. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.5 The Committee notes the reasons for increase in capital expenditure as well as overall 
budgetary allocation for B.E. 2023 -24 and recommends that the Ministry should take all steps 
possible in ensuring the procurement of high performance co mputing devices and other such 
infrastructure necessary for achieving the desired outcomes under the flagship schemes of the 
Ministry. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should actively pursue with the 
Department of Space to ensure timely c ompletion and launch of the INSAT 3D satellite and that 
any value added –data based services that can be made available to the general public, service 
delivery institutions, government and law enforcement, etc., shall be done with priority.  
 (Para 2.11 ibid) 
  

3 
 
Action Taken 
1.6 Noted for compliance. The order for the procurement of High Performance Computing 
(HPC) system has been placed in May 2023. The Ministry will actively pursue with the 
Department of Space to ensure timely completion and launch of the INSAT 3D satellite. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.7 The Committee therefore strongly recommends that the Ministry should do a thorough 
analysis of the reasons and areas of improvement to ensure that t he funds available to the 
Ministry are deployed towards achievement of the physical targets set and that the flagship 
schemes of the Ministry do not lose its objective and importance due to these inordinate delays. 
Further, the requirements in terms of Com puting Capacity, vessel related equipment and other 
research related inventory should be planned and orders be placed well in advance, so that the 
crucial initiatives of the Ministry are not stalled.                                                      (Para 2.21 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.8 Noted for compliance. The annual acquisition plan under all the schemes has been 
finalized. The order for the procurement of High Performance Computing (HPC) system has been 
placed in May 2023. 
 
  

4 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.1 As regards B.E. 2023 -24 allocations, the Committee observes that the Ministry has been 
given Rs. 3319.88 crore for  2023-24 which is about 25 percent more than the corresponding 
allocation in 2022 -3. To understand the reason for this substantial increase, the Committee 
sought details from the Department. In a written reply, Committee was informed that that the 
increased allocation under the sub -head Secretariat is for the rental charges of about Rs.520 
crore for the INSAT 3D satellite charges to be given to Department of Space for making and 
launching the satellite.                                                                         (Para 2.9 of the 379th Report) 
Action Taken 
2.2 Noted. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.3 The Committee emboldens the fact that the role of Ministry of Earth sciences has become 
more profound in the current context of climate change as well as in acting as an enabler of the 
Blue Economy through access to the vast oceanic resources and knowledge. Further, the 
increasing number of episodes of extreme weather phenomena has further highlighted the need 
for enhanced accuracy in prediction and diss emination of weather updates. The quest for 
knowledge concealed in the Polar Regions, is not just crucial for maintaining scientific database 
but also of great interest in protecting and furthering for India’s security interests. The deep 
ocean preserves i n itself vast resources which can be boon for our country’s economic progress 
and can prove to be a substitute for many imports which cost dearly to the country’s foreign 
reserves. In this backdrop, it is of utmost importance that the tasks at hand with th e Ministry be 
executed with great vigour and efficiency.                                                                (Para 2.17 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
2.4 The Ministry thanks the Committee for its advice. All efforts will be made during 2023 -24 
to improve the weather, climate and ocean services. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.5 The Committee observes, with dismay, that under the head ‘O -SMART’ the Ministry was 
granted Rs. 340 crore in R.E. 2022-23 against which it could spend only Rs. 143.48 crore, thereby 
achieving only 29 percent utilisation (till January 2023). Similarly under another flagship scheme 
of the Ministry –REACHOUT, a sum of Rs. 63.13 crore was allocated in R.E. 2022 -23 against 
which the Ministry could utilise only Rs. 27.43 crore or just 43 pe rcent. Deep Ocean Mission, for 
which the Ministry was granted Rs. 300 crore during R.E. 2022 -23, it is observed that the 
Ministry could spend 61 percent of the allocation i.e. Rs. 184.39 crore. Further, as against an 
R.E. allocation of Rs. 400 crore the Ministry could spend Rs. 209 crore only, about 52 percent. 
(Para 2.19 ibid)  
Action Taken 
2.6 At the end of the FY 2022 -23, the expenditure under O -SMART was Rs. 250.20 (73.59% 
of the RE) and under REACHOUT was Rs. 60.55 Cr (95.91% of RE). 
 

5 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.7 The Committee is disheartened to see such drastic under -utilisation of allocations made to 
the Ministry under all of its flagship schemes. The severe utilisation across all flagship schemes of 
the Ministry is indicative of the fact that the  Ministry has not been able to achieve its physical 
targets that it had earlier set out. Further, the Ministry’s explanation to the Committee’s concern 
on such gross under -utilisation and subsequent reduction is not reassuring and recommends the 
Ministry to ensure optimal utilisation of funds for allocation made in F.Y. 2022 -23 as well as in 
2023-24.                                                                                                                     (Para 2.20 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.8 Noted for compliance. All efforts will be made during 2023 -24 for the optimal utilization 
of funds and achieve the physical targets. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.9 The Committee would also like to emphasize that the Ministry should chart out a detailed 
action plan  on integrating with the private sector in augmenting the reach and efficacy of the 
services offered by the Ministry especially in the field of weather forecast, disaster management, 
fisheries, etc. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should ex plore the possibilities 
of manufacturing crucial equipments domestically so that the dependencies on import and 
therefore the lead time as well as the cost, may be reduced. This shall also strengthen the Indian 
industry in manufacturing high end telemetric  equipments which shall have a huge spin -off 
advantage for other sectors as well.                                                                          (Para 2.22 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.10 Noted for compliance. India Meteorological Department (IMD), under  MoES is exploring 
the possibilities of engaging Start-ups for the development of met sensors/ software/ application/ 
dissemination tools through an MoU. The National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) till date 
has signed 32 technology licensing agreements with Indian industries and is in the process of few 
more agreements in the current financial year NIOT is in the process of forming a Section 8 
Company, The proposed Marine Gate Incubation Centre (MAGIC) by NIOT will be first in the 
country which will deal exclusively in the area of ocean/marine technology. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.11 The Committee notes the physical targets set in by the Ministry under its flagship Scheme 
ACROSS and acknowledges that Atmospheric modelling and observation systems are crucial for the 
country in terms of accurately predicting weather patterns not just for  the benefit of the farming 
community but also for city administration. The increasing instances of flash floods, long dry spells, 
rapid temperature change has put pressure on the city administration since they are now tasked with 
making adequate arrangeme nts for mitigation. In such a scenario, advance forecasts shall be of 
utmost importance and should enable farmers, service providers, first responders as well as the 
general public to accordingly plan and minimize inconvenience and losses.                 (Para 2.27 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.12 The Ministry thanks the Committee for its advice. All efforts will be made during 2023 -24 
to improve the weather and climate services. 
  

6 
 
DEEP OCEAN MISSION 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.13 As regards physical targets and achievement, the Committee observed that the physical 
performance of the Ministry has been extremely disheartening. The Ministry could achieve only 7 
per cent against 15 per cent physical targets proposed for Deep Ocean Surv ey and Exploration. 
The Ministry has also achieved only 5 per cent against 20 per cent physical targets proposed for 
Establishment of an Advanced Marine Station for Ocean Biology. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry to revisit its performance in terms of  realisation of physical and financial targets set 
under Deep Ocean Mission Scheme and strive hard to improve it. Steps taken in this regard may 
be intimated to the Committee. The Committee also hopes that the Ministry, with the help of its 
periodic review s of the financial and physical performance of this Scheme, will strive hard to 
achieve the targets set for the year 2023-24.                                                               (Para 3.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.14 The physical and financial targets  couldn’t be achieved due to effect of Pandemic in 
realization of certain components and challenges in demonstration of technologies due to ocean 
weather. All efforts will be made during 2023-24 to achieve physical and financial targets. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.15 The Committee is constrained to take serious note of the reasons provided by the Ministry 
for sub -optimal utilisation of funds and recommends the Ministry to expedite the process of 
tendering with an aim of materializing the tender in this  financial year itself. The Committee also 
expresses its concern over the missed opportunity during the year and recommends that the 
Ministry should ensure that any loss in achievements of physical targets for the year 2022 -23 is 
compensated for in 2023 -24. Further, the Ministry should take all necessary steps to ensure that 
targets set for a particular year are met in that year itself, without having to be carried over to the 
next year.                                                                                                                      (Para 3.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.16 Noted for compliance. The annual acquisition plans under all the schemes have been 
finalized. All efforts will be made during 2023-24 to achieve physical and financial targets. 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.17 Blue Economy is crucial for India’s position as the net security as well as prosperity 
provider in the Indian Ocean region and therefore, the Committee while emboldening the 
importance of the Deep Ocean Mission, re commends the Ministry to play a larger role in acting 
as the backbone of this cause.                                                                                    (Para 3.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.18 The Ministry thanks the Committee for its advice and recommendation. 
  

7 
 
INITIATIVES FOR SOCIETAL BENEFITS 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.19 The Committee underlines the priceless services that the Ministry provides in the interest 
of the Nation. These services are crucial not just for the common citizen to lead a more 
productive, safe and prosperous life but also essential for the protection of environment and vast 
natural resources of the country. The Committee also acknowledges the value addition the 
Ministry has provided over the years to a plethora of se ctors including agriculture & fisheries, 
weather forecast and early warning systems, survey of mineral resources, coastal and oceanic 
research, etc.                                                                                                                (Para 4.2 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.20 The Ministry thanks the Committee for its advice and recommendation. 
 
 
 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
  

9 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

11 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT -RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
(2023-24) 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 3:30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 9 th August, 2023 in 
Room No. 67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav - in the Chair 
2. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
3. Shri Jose K. Mani 
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
5. Shri Nabam Rebia 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
7. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
8. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
9. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
10. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
11. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani 
12. Shri Anurag Sharma 
13. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi 
 SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. K.S. Somasekhar, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Narendra Kumar, Director 
 Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
          Shri Rama Nand, Committee Officer 
  

12 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee and informed them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to consider and 
adopt the draft Reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on 
the recommendations/observations of the Commi ttee contained in Reports of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the Ministries/Departments under 
its purview. 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 380 th, 381 st, 382 nd, 
383rd, 384 th, 385 th and 386 th Reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in 
Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the 
Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy; Biotechnology; Scientific  & Industrial 
Research; Science & Technology; Space; Environment, Forest & Climate Change; 
and Earth Sciences, respectively and adopted the same unanimously without any 
change. 
4. Thereafter the Committee discussed its future programme and decided to 
undertake a Study visit in the month of September, 2023. The Committee authorised 
its Chairman to finalise the tour programme. 
5. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.00 p.m. 
 
 
NEW DELHI NARENDRA KUMAR 
09.08.2023 DIRECTOR 
 