PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 186
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY , 
ENVIRONMENT  AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-2009) 
OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
(DEMAND NO. 84)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-2009)
OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
(DEMAND NO. 84)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 TH APRIL, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 TH APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/V AISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—13
4S UMMARY OF R ECOMMENDATIONS .......................................................................................... 14—17
5. A NNEXURE .............................................................................................................................. 1 9—22
6. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................ 23—27

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2007-2008)
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
**2. V acant
3. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
4. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
5. Shri Kamal Akhtar
6. Shri Saman Pathak
7. Shri Jabir Husain
**8. V acant
9. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
*10. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
12. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
13. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
14. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
15. Shri Francis Fanthome
16. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
17. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
18. Shri Brahmananda Panda
19. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
20. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
21. Shri Pratik P. Patil
22. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
23. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
#25. V acant
26. Shri Rampal Singh
27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
28. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
29. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
30. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
31. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
** Dr. Prabha Thakur and Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of
their term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9th April, 2008.
* Nominated w.e.f. 28th August, 2007.
# Shri Rakesh Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 1st December, 2007 on his resignation from
the Membership of the Committee.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred Eighty-sixth Report of the Committee. This Report
deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research (Ministry of Science and Technology) (Demand No.84).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on the 25th March, 2008, the Secretary and other
Officers of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research gave an overview of the various
activities of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the
performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee express its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the
clarifications sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 23rd April, 2008.
DR. V . MAITREYAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
April 23, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests

1
REPORT
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) is one of the Departments
under the Ministry of Science and Technology. The main objective of the Department is to promote
research and development by the industries to increase their share in R&D expenditure, support a
larger cross section of small and medium industrial units to develop state-of-the-art globally
competitive technology, catalyze faster commercialization of lab scale R&D, increase the share of
technology exports, strengthen industrial consultancy and technology management capabilities and
establish user friendly information networks to facilitate scientiftc research in the country. Apart
from this the Department also extends host facilities and specific assistance to Asia Pacific Centre
for Transfer of Technology (APCTT). The Department acts as an administrative link between the
Government of India and the CSIR society.
1.1 There are two public sector undertakings under the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research namely, the National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) and Central Electronics
Limited (CEL). The Department has two autonomous organizations viz., Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR) and Consultancy Development Centre (CDC).
l.2 The detailed budget allocation of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for
the financial year 2008-09 was considered by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests at its meeting held on
25th March, 2008 and the Demands for Grants of the Department provided the following
provisions:
2. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
2.1 The total plan budgetary allocation for the Department for Eleventh Five Year Plan
(2007-2012) is Rs. 9000.00 crores as against Rs. 6300 crores in the Tenth Plan. The projected
demand of the Department for 2008-09 was Rs. 3239.42 crores comprising of Rs. 2327.00 crores
for Plan and Rs. 912.42 crores for Non-plan expenditure (Annexure-I) . As against this, the
allocated funds are Rs. 2078.00 crores (Rs.1200.00 crores for Plan and Rs. 878.00 crores for Non
Plan). The Committee was informed that the Department has made a proposal for higher budgetary
allocations specially for Public Private Partnership, New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership
Initiative (NMITLI) and National Laboratories, etc. and expected 35-40 per cent rise in the
allocation as compared to the last year (l070 crores under plan and 832 crores under Non-plan).
The Committee was further informed that while the present allocation would be just sufficient to
pursue plan activities initiated during 2007-2008 under various schemes in the Eleventh Five Year
Plan, but it would preclude CSIR to launch full scale activities under mega projects on ‘Climate
Change’, Energy and other crucial and critical sectors. The non-plan component would also be
under great constraint, mainly due to increased requirement arising out of revision of rates of
fellowships made during 2007-08 and other routine requirements.
2.2 When the Committee enquired about the pattern of utilization of fund during the during the
last Secretary informed that they had lot of difficulties but were able to absorb the allocated fund.
2.3 The Committee expresses serious concern over the token hike in the allocation for
the Department. It feels that this hike is basically no hike if the growth rate of 9 per cent
and the inflation of 5 per cent is taken into consideration. It only shows the amount of
importance that the Government today attaches to scientific organization like DSIR. The
Committee is of the opinion that the axe of routine cut should not fall on Scientific
Departments as it would adversely affect research and development which is vital for the
development of the nation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the well thought

2
out projected demand of scientific departments should be honoured and accepted by the
planning commission, more so when the department has the capacity and the readiness to
absorb additional funds.
3. MECHANISM DEVELOPED TO MONITOR AND REVIEW THE ONGOING SCHEMES
3.1 At the beginning of Eleventh Five Year Plan, DSIR got an assessment of the impact of
DSIR programmes in the Tenth Five Year Plan done from IIM, Bangalore. Based on this study,
Eleventh Five Year Plan of the Department was formulated. Each scheme in the Department also
has an inter-departmental Technical Advisory Committee which monitors and reviews periodically
the progress of on-going projects and recommends new projects and programmes.
3.2 The monitoring and review of the ongoing schemes at CSIR is undertaken through
Empowered Monitoring Committees, Task Forces, Research Councils of the respective laboratories
at the project management level. At the organizational level peers from Academia, Industrial
enterprises and other Technical agencies are involved and based on peer reviews, proposals for
budgetary support are formulated.
3.3 The Committee is pleased to know that a Mechanism to monitor and review the
ongoing schemes has been put in place by the Department. The Committee hopes that the
Department will further strengthen this mechanism for effective implementation of its
programmes.
4. PROGRAMMES OF THE DEPAR TMENT OF  SCIENTIFIC AND  INDUSTRIAL
RESEARCH
4.1 Technology Promotion, Development and Utilisation Programme
The main objectives of Technology Promotion, Development and Utilisation Programme
(TPDU) are:
• To promote and support industry efforts towards R&D.
• To encourage R&D system-industry cooperation.
• To support industry for technology development, demonstration and absorption of
imported technology.
• To build indigenous capabilities for development and commercialization of contemporary
products and processes of high impact.
• To evaluate the status and performance of technology in selected sectors/areas.
• To facilitate effective transfer and management of technology.
• To promote international technology trade including export of technology projects,
services and technology intensive products.
• To promote and strengthen consultancy capabilities for domestic use and export
requirements.
• To support and use mechanisms, both national and international, towards transfer of
technology, both within and outside the country.
• Generate endogenous capacities for the development and utilization of digital information
resources for providing inputs to scientific and industrial research in the country.

3
4.2 TPDU programmes consist of following components :
(i) Industrial R&D Promotion Programme: This programme aims mainly at supporting
small and medium industrial units to develop cutting edge and globally competitive
Technologies. National awards for outstanding R&D achievements to nine companies;
recognition to 92 in-house R&D units, bringing out of 10 publication, etc., are some
of the major achievements made under this programme during the year 2007-08. The
estimated man power at present for 1253 in-house R&D units is around 65 thousands
out of which around 20000 personnel are employed in public sector and the rest of
about 45000 in private sector.
(ii) Technology Development and Innovation Programme:  Two programmes viz.
Technology Development and Demonstration Programme (TDDP) and Technopreneur
Promotion Programme (TePP) have been brought under this umbrella programme. The
main thrust under this programme is on supporting research, development, design and
engineering projects for absorption, adaptation and upgradation of imported technology
as well as development and demonstration of new and improved technology. About 193
R&D projects covering products and processes in various important industries such as
meteorology, electrical, electronic, instrumentation, mechanical, engineering, earth
moving and industrial machinery, chemical and explosives etc. have so far been
supported under this programme. One hundred and eleven projects have been
completed and over 35 technologies developed under this programme have been
commercialized or are under the process of commercialization. 56 ongoing projects are
being monitored for progress.
Technoprenuer Promotion Programme (TePP): jointly operated by DSIR and Technology
Information Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC) of the Department of Science and
Technology, this programme aims at tapping and harnassing the vast innovative potentials of the
citizens of the country. Under this programme, financial assistance is extended to individuals having
original innovative ideas for converting them into working prototypes. In all 209 projects of
individual innovators have been supported as of now out of which DSIR has supported 127 and
TIFAC 82. Some of the successfully completed projects under this programme include devise for
treatment of sleep apnea, camera mouse for visually handicapped, tractor mounted pulveriser, etc.
Ten TePP outreach centres have been setup to expand the reach of the programme among
common masses. In order to scrutinise larger mass nine TePP innovation funding camps were
organized during the year 2007-08.
(iii) Technology Management Programme (TMP): The major objective of the programme
is to enhance knowledge and skills for efficient management in transfer of technology.
The programme aims at enhancing technology management capability in industry, R&D
and consultancy organizations, academic institutes and other establishments. Centres
for Technology and Innovation Management have been setup in Coimbatore, Bhopal,
Mumbai, Bangalore, Hyderbad, Palampur, Patna and New Delhi under this programme.
(iv) International Technology Transfer Programme (ITTP):  The programme focuses on
promotion of transfer of technologies, projects and services to extend the reach of
Indian industries abroad as also to bring technologies from other countries to India.
Participation in India fare, Melbourne, Australia and Technology Trade Pavilion, 2007
at New Delhi are some of the highlights of the programme.
(v) Consultancy Promotion Programme:  The programme aims at strengthening and
promoting consultancy services for import and export of technologies; development

4
and transfer of technologies from R&D institutes and strengthening linkages of R&D
system with industry; Consultancies for new and emerging areas of national interests
etc. Documentation of consultancy capabilities and experiences and promotion of
design engineering service centres and consultancy clinics are some of the ongoing
activities under this programme. IT consultancy clinics for SMEs in Noida, three such
clinics on housing industry at Kanpur, jute and jute diversified products at Kolkata and
design and engineering centre for automotive and consumer good at Coimbatore are
progressing satisfactorily. Two studies on export of consultancy services in four
African countries viz.  South Africa, Mozambique, Ethopia, Botswana and four
European countries viz. Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary and Czeckoslovakia have been
initiated in the year 2007-08.
(vi) Technology Information Facilitation Programme (TIFP): Recognizing that a strong
back up support of information services is required, a component on ‘‘Technology
Information Facilitation Programme (TIFP)’’ has been included in the TPDU
Programme. The TIFP has broader objectives of generating capacities for the
development and utilization of digital information resources and facilitate accelerated
S&T research. The strategy concentrates on facilitation of Indian content on S&T,
avoid duplication of efforts, allow minimum overlap and maximum utilization of
existing facilities. The projects under TIFP aim at developing appropriate endogenous
information capacities to support R&D activities, production of local content and
capture of indigenous knowledge base, promotion of information and knowledge
networking thus facilitating flow and sharing of information resources. Emphasis has
been given to content development activities and 48 projects have been supported on
traditional knowledge, database development, Open Archives, training courses on
content development, electronic thesis (ETDS), Website/Portals, etc. In addition seven
sensitization-cum awareness programmes were conducted in major cities. The major
achievements during the 2007-2008 include establishment of a Virtual Iniormation
Centre for providing a gateway to existing Information Centres and provide fast and
reliable access to information among industries, academia and public research
institutions in the area of science and technology; Reviewing the progress of 25 on
going projects and successful completion 20 on-going projects; Support to and
participation in 3 international conferences such as International Conference on Future
of Knowledge Organization in the Network Environment at Bangalore, International
workshop on Digital Preservation of Heritage at Kolkatta, the InfoVision 2007 — the
Knowledge Summit during December 17-18, 2007 at Mumbai; Workshop on Building
Digital Libraries using Green Stone in December, 2007 at IISc, Bangalore; Support to
new projects on Development of Indian Wood Insect Database, etc.
(vii) Technology Development and Utilization Programme for Women: Technology
Development and Utilization Programme for Women (TDUPW) was initiated in
2005-06 which aimed to provide assistance for those projects which are relevant to
meet the specific needs of women and to enhance their contribution towards
technology capability building. Since its inception eighteen projects have supported
under this programme. During the year 2007-2008, two new projects namely primary
processing and value addition of sweet potato and yarns for self employment
generation by women and training program for metropolitan unemployed women to
establish their own consultancy cells for food processing and quality control were
approved .The Department has adopted a pro-active approach by giving wide publicity
to the programme and encouraging institutions and voluntary organizations working in
the field of empowerment of women to take up more projects of significant nature and
beneficial to women.

5
4.3 Allocations for Technology Promotion Development and Utilization Programmes (TPDU),
to the tune of Rs. 24 crores was made at the B.E. stage in 2007-08 which was scaled down
to Rs. 18.80 crores at the R.E. stage in 2007-08. The allocation has been now increased to
Rs. 26 crores in Budget 2008-09. When the Committee enquired about under utilization of funds
allocated during the year 2007-08 for Technology Promotion Development and Utilization
Programme (TPDU) programmes, the Department informed that it was due to non-receipt of fund
utilization certificates from the beneficiaries. However, the Committee was informed that action has
been initiated to monitor the progress of projects strictly with the help of Project Monitoring
Committee. The Committee was further informed that the budgetary allocation for 2007-08 has
been released under various R&D projects under National Laboratories Scheme.
4.4 The Committee takes serious note of such laxity on the part of the Department in
utilization of funds and recommends that the Department should make full use of its
Project Monitoring Committee so that funds could be utilized substantially for the purpose
intended and within the time-frame set for the same. The Committee also recommends that
optimum utilization of the enhanced budgetary allocation this year should be made by the
Department.
4.5 The Committee is of the view that small and medium industrial units should be
encouraged to develop competitive technologies, as innovations are not necessarily
dependent on huge funding and many a times break-through comes from small and medium
research units. What is more required is the right guidance by the Department to
researchers and their organizations on commercial issues so that results of their efforts are
not made use of by other market predators.
5. PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES
5.1 (a) National Research Development Corporation (NRDC)
5.2 The NRDC is a commercial but non-dividend disbursing Government of India enterprise
established to commercialize the R&D results of public funded institutes. The Department informed
that the NRDC would continue its invention Promotion Programme through prize awards for
meritorious inventions, publications and patents. The Technology Promotion programme is sought
to be strengthened through development and promotion of Rural and Household Technologies. The
following new programmes of significance are also envisaged-coir cluster, participation in
exhibitions/fairs, market survey for assigned technology, networking with foreign agencies for
technology export, programme for North East States, and Women Entrepreneurship Development
Programmes.
5.3 The budgetary allocations for 2008-2009 for this programme is Rs. 10 crores as against
Rs. 8.00 crores during the year 2007-08. The Committee feels that this is a very useful and
important programme of the Department which encourages meritorious inventions having
commercial potential by giving awards, provide technical and financial assistance for filing
patents in India and abroad for protecting intellectual property and also helps in
dissemination of information on rural technologies and promotion of entrepreneurship
among rural masses. The Committee is of the opinion that this programme needs to be
strengthened and intensified. The Department should think in terms of providing more
funds for this programme.
5.4 The Committee was informed that there is a rural show case centre of the
Department which helps in disseminating appropriate rural technology to the rural masses.
The Committee of the view that rural show casing of scientific achievements is of immense
importance, as progress in scientific research should be shared with the rural population

6
and through an interactive process local knowledge should be harnessed in the larger
interest. The Committee would like the Department to have more such rural show case
centres to inculcate scientific temper among the masses.
5.5 (b) Central Electronics Ltd. (CEL)
5.6 CEL is engaged in the field of Solar Photovoltaic Cells, supply and commissioning of
signalling and safety equipments to Indian Railways, etc. It has made significant achievements in
the above fields during the year 2007-08. It is envisaged that CEL would continue its growth path
in its areas of activities.
5.7 CEL is engaged mainly in research to improve large area crystalline and multi-crystalline
silicon solar cells (efficiency 10-20%), create Solar Cell Characterization Facility for R&D and
industrial use, develop large area a-Si/ μ c-Si monolithic 10% stable solar cell on low-cost
substrates, develop conjugated polymers based solar and polymer based super capacitor as storage
device, develop nano-structured meso-porous films of transition metal oxides, polymers and
synthesis of organic electro-chromes for electro-chromic and photo-electro-chemical applications,
prepare phosphors suitable for absorbing UV-Green part of solar spectrum and emitting in red and
their application in solar cells, Solar selective coatings and development of CdSe and CdTe quantum
dot solar cell using meso-porous TCOs.
5.8 Anticipated Deliverables for 2007-08
• Creation of new facilities including characterization and clean room complex.
• Synthesis and characterization of potential host for polymer solar cells
• Development of micro-crystalline films and their characterization for PV applications
5.9 The Committee has been informed that the Department is striving to develop
photovoltaic cells through which solar energy could be used on a large scale. For this
purpose it is working on nano-material which has high absorption capacity per unit area and
can go a long way in making storage devices small and portable. The Committee observes
that the Department should explore the possibilities of exploiting more and more solar
energy and in the long run it should aim at replacing the conventional source of energy
with solar energy. To achieve this objective it should look for technologies like nano-
technology to improve storage and conversion of solar energy into usable energy sources.
The Committee is of the opinion that the Department should make all out efforts in this
direction more so because conventional source of energy are regarded as adding to the
environmental pollution and global warming.
5.9.1 The Committee has also been informed that it is possible to run some water pumping
sets on solar energy. The Committee is of the view that such possibilities should be fully
explored as they have a great potential to solve irrigation problems and raise farm incomes
particularly in the rural areas where there is lack of electricity.
5.10 Solar power operated reverse osmosis desalination unit
5.10.1 The social work and research centre (Barefoot college) Tilonia, Rajasthan and CSMCRI,
Bhavnagar have jointly developed a solar powered community scale RO desalination unit which has
been installed in the Sambhar Lake area of Rajasthan. The unit is producing 700 litres per hour
drinking water from brackish water containing excess fluoride and catering to the requirement of
the entire area. The electricity to power the unit is generated by 2.5 KW solar panels. This is the
first community scale solar powered unit set up in India. Efforts are under way to raise the output
of the unit to 1000 LPH. The people in the rural areas where electricity is not available are
expected to be benefited the most.

7
5.10.2 The Committee has been informed that converting saline water to drinking water is costly
as it creates waste which is not easy to dispose but converting saline water to irrigation water is
low cost because it can be done in the coastal areas by putting waste back into the sea.
5.10.3 The Committee is of the opinion that the Department in co-ordination with other
departments and agencies should also explore possibilities of converting saline water to
drinking water while working on technologies to convert saline water to irrigation water at
low cost. The Committee also feels that the network of such plan should be expanded so
that more and more people could be benefited by it.
AUTONOMOUS ORGANISATIONS
6. (a) Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
6.1 The largest publicly funded industrial R&D organization of the world with multi-disciplinary,
multi-locational network of 38 national laboratories rich in talent, technology and infrastructure and
39 out-reach centres, CSIR over the years has matured into a performance driven and knowledge
centric organization. The primary objective of CSIR is to under take research in diverse fields of
Science and Technology through a well-established network of national laboratories/institutes in
different parts of the country. Some of the key areas of activities of CSIR and the significant
achievements are given below:
• Aerospace- CSIR has been a major player in the country's aerospace programmes. The
NAL, Banglore has developed world class capacity for design, development and
fabrication of components for civilian and combat aircraft.
• Biology and Biotechnology- CSIR laboratories have made significant contribution in the
areas of genomic, proteomics, molecular biology, immuniology, etc.
• In the field of Chemical Science and Technology a significant amount of work has
been carried out on nanocrystal shapes, solar power operated RO desalination unit,
conversion of methane and methanol into gas, etc.
6.2 Under the Earth Resources and Natural Hazards Assessment sector, R&D work is carried
out on new hydrocarban resources location, estimation of recharge of ground water systems,
coastal and ocean Science, Mineral explorations, seismic studies, etc.
6.3 With regard to Ecology and Environment significant S&T inputs are provided to evolve
national policies and to ameliorate environmental problems. Special projects on multi scale
environmental modeling and forecast platform, solar photocatalytic treatment of textile waste water
and portable instant water filter have been some major achievements.
6.4 The other sphere of activity in which CSIR is engaged are - energy, food and food
processing, healthcare, drugs and pharmaceuticals, housing and construction information
dissemmation and products, leather, and minerals and metals.
6.5 During the Eleventh plan, CSIR proposes to implement the following six plan schemes-
• National laboratories
• S&T human Resources Devlopment
• Intellectual property and technology mandgement
• R&D management support
• New Millenium Industrial Technology leadership intiative and
• Setting up of a Translational Research Institute
While the first five are ongoing schemes, the sixth one is a new scheme.

8
6.6 The Committee is aware that CSIR is involved in developing cost effective generic
drugs and standardization of Herbal and Ayurvedic drugs. It is also engaged in development
of commercially viable technologies for life saving drugs such as anti virals, anti cancer,
anti bacterial, cardio-vascular, etc. It is also designing and developing instrumentation for
diagnostics, therapeutics and life supporting system among others. But the fact remains that
diseases like malaria, polio, diabeties, tuberculosis, cancer, etc. are still rampant in the
country and are taking a heavy toll. Treatment of some of these diseases are still beyond
the reach of common man. The benefit of scientific research is yet to percolate down to
the society. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the department should seriously
make an introspection and try to address these issues on priority basis in a time bound
manner.
6.7 The Committee is also aware that the department is engaged in developing
technology and know-how for environment friendly conversion and utilization of bio mass
to fuels. The Committee has been informed that during 2008-09 the Department has
targeted to make preliminary experiments on bio fuels and has developed heterogeneous
catalyst for bio diesel production, process for production of bio ethanol from cellulose and
starch. The Committee feels that fossil fuel, besides being costly, is a major source of
pollution in the environment. There is an urgent need to seek an economically viable and
environment friendly alternative. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the tempo of
research and development should be accelerated so that the country could reap the benefits
at the earliest. The Committee, however, desires that while developing bio fuels, care should
be taken not to use edible cereals as it may affect the poor adversely.
6.8 The phenomena of global warming and climate change are emerging as one of the
greatest and most formidable challenges of the 21st century which are stated to have the
potential of pushing the world to the brink of Catastrophe. Adaptation and mitigation are
the two possible ways and means identified to counter their effects. But these are not so
easy solutions as they appear to be. Science has to play a pivotal role in this direction.
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research with its vast network of multi disciplinary
laboratories and huge resource of competent and expert manpower has to take a lead role
in galvanizing and dovetailing its activities and resources to find viable solutions to provide
relief to the nation and the world from this impending calamity. It can address scientific
issues relevant to atmoshphere, geosphere, hydrosphere as well as biosphere. It can assume
the responsibility of standardizing all measurement of global change with international
traceability. The Committee is happy to note that CSIR is contemplating to initiate a mega
R&D programme on climate change covering various dimensions such as assessment,
adaptatation, mitigation, alternate energy sources, etc. Since this has to be addressed on an
urgent and immediate basis, the Committee is of the opinion that the department should
start working on this at the earliest without losing any time, in a time bound manner,
efficacy of which may be reviewed annually. Progress made in this regard may be brought
before the public in the form of a white paper or in any form the Department deems
appropriate so that people could not only feel assured but also come to know how real and
formidable is the threat posed by global warming and climate change. The Committee also
feels that separate budgetary provisions for this purpose could be made.
7. NATIONAL LABORATORIES
7.1 Under the scheme National Laboratories the programmes are more specifically addressed as:
(a) Supra Institutional Projects
Each laboratory has a balanced portfolio of projects in the ‘knowledge-market’ space.
Keeping in view its R&D domain, it has formulated at least one overarching programme drawing

9
strength and participation from a majority of the groups within the laboratory. This has been termed
as Supra-Institutional project.
(b) Network Projects
CSIR has endeavoured to carve out a niche for itself by working through network projects
in the Tenth Plan. The emphasis was laid on networking on expertise, resources and facilities
targeting substantial increase in value of inputs of Science and Technology in knowledge driven
areas. In the Eleventh Plan, experience drawn from the Tenth Plan has emboldened CSIR to launch
yet another set of network projects of multi disciplinary nature. The output of network projects
is expected to bring in a new direction and also generate new areas of business for CSIR.
(c) Inter-agency Projects
The present day process of knowledge generation and diffusion is characterized by a shift
from research based stand alone scientific disciplines to trans-disciplinary and inter-institutional
networking. CSIR is synergising with academia, industry and Government to build World Class
facilities and identify, niche areas where CSIR as a part of ‘Team India’ can make a major impact.
(d) Facilities
CSIR has planned, consciously to develop and sustain select laboratories to maintain
internationally competitive knowledge generation capabilities in key technology areas and proposes
to build World Class facilities.
7.2 The programmes and projects under National Laboratories have been classified in sixteen
sectors. A total of 94 projects have been identified as priority-1 for implementation during the
Eleventh Plan, out of these 32 as Supra-institutional projects, 48 as Network projects, 5 as Inter-
agency projects and 9 as creation of Facilities.
7.3 In addition to the above CSIR would complete 16 projects of the Tenth Plan which have
spilled over to the Eleventh plan. The other programmes under National Laboratories would be for:
Creating, nurturing and sustaining the knowledge frontier; Laboratory modernization for eco-friendly
sustainable growth; and Civil infrastructure renovation, staff quarters and amenities.
7.4 When the Committee enquired about the marginal increase in the allocation from
Rs. 1303.50 crores RE in Budget 2007-08 to Rs. 1431.00 crores in Budget 2008-09, the
Department informed that on plan side under the National Laboratories Scheme, out of 94 priority
projects only 76 projects were initiated during 2007-08. Majority of them has a projection of
enhanced activities in 2008-09. In addition, some other priority projects have been planned to be
initiated during 2008-09. Under Non Plan, additional funds are required for maintance of
infrastructure and establishment of CSIR. Hence there is an increase in the demand from
Rs. 1303.50 crore in RE in 2007-08 to 1431.00 crore in 2008-09. The Secretary however informed
that this is only a symbolic enhancement and they would require more funds under this programme.
7.5 The Committee feels that the R&D activities can be undertaken only in laboratories
and unless we have a network of rich and sophisticated labs we can not make advancement
in the field of science. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the budgetary demands
of the Department for such crucial programme needs to be fully met and they should be
provided enhanced funds at RE stage in case, they demand. The Committee has taken note
that the Department could initiate only 76 out of 94 priority projects, under the National
Laboratories Scheme, during 2007-08. The Committee would have been happy if all the
priority projects could have been initiated during the period they were intended.
7.6 The Committee has been informed that some of the CSIR laboratories like those in
Kolkata and Hyderabad are facing difficulty in expansion as they are located in the heart

10
of city with very little space. The Committee is of the opinion that these premier
organisations need new buildings for better functioning. The Committee suggests that the
Department may take up the matter with the concerned State Governments to acquire land
for the said purpose.
8. RESEARCH SCHEMES, SCHOLARSHIPS AND FELLOWSHIPS
8.1 Human Resource Development is of paramount importance in the nation building process
and creating a knowledge society. CSIR has been rendering yeoman service by fostering, sustaining
and helping the specialist scientists in diverse disciplines of S&T in the country. In the era of
globalization, recognizing the changing context of the scientific enterprise and to present national
needs, there is need to vigorously foster scientific research in universities and other academic,
scientific and engineering institutions, and attract the brightest young persons to careers in Science
and Technology.
In the eleventh plan CSIR is executing following programmes:
CSIR Programme on Youth for Leadership in Science (CPYLS); Technological
Entrepreneurship Programme for Research Scholars; Trans Disciplinary Fellowship Scheme;
Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Fellowship Scheme (SPMF); Faculty training and motivation and
adoption of schools and colleges by CSIR laboratories; Research Fellowships in Basic Sciences and
Interdisciplinary areas; Conduct of JRF NET and SPM Examination; GATE qualified Junior
Research Fellowship (JRF-GATE) Scheme; Adjunct/Visiting Scientist Scheme for CSIR. Labs;
CSIR-NIF Innovation Fellowship Scheme; Setting up of Centres for Knowledge/Innovation/R&D/
Technology Management; Training program on Knowledge and R & D Management; Special
assistance scheme to promote research in universities; Floating Faculty Scheme; Project Interns
Award Schemes for CSIR Labs; Research Schemes in Emerging, Critical and Thrust Areas.
8.2 Allocation for Research Schemes, Scholarships and Fellowships has been increased from
Rs. 185.00 crores at RE stage in 2007-08 to Rs. 201.00 crores in budget 2008-09. The increased
budget is required to sustain the existing level of fellowships of the Tenth plan and to initiate new
schemes during Eleventh Plan. The fellowship amount has been enhanced with respect to Junior
Research Fellows (JRF), Senior Research Fellows (SRF) and Research Associates (RA). The
fellowship amount has been increased by 50 per cent from Rs. 8000/- pm to Rs. 12000/- pm for
JRF and from Rs. 9000/- to Rs. 14000/- pm for SRF to bring it at par with that of UGC. Since
CSIR is supporting about 6700 Research Fellows (JRF ISRF) and Research Associate (RA) and
about 900 Research Fellows in Research Schemes, additional allocation of Rs. 16.00 crore would
be required to take care of the increase in the fellowship amount. Department may require higher
amount at RE stage.
8.3 The Committee welcomes the enhancement in allocations for Research Schemes,
Scholarships and Fellowships. It also welcomes the fact that in the Eleventh Plan, emphasis
is being laid on promotion of R&D in Basic Sciences, Engineering Sciences and Inter-
disciplinary areas. It is of the opinion that paradigmatic breakthrough in science can be
possible only if there is progress in basic sciences which ultimately get translated to state-
of-art technologies.
8.4 Human Resource Development is the buzzword today in every sector of economy as
it is of paramount importance in the Nation building process and creating a knowledge
society. But the shortage of qualified, competent and dedicated manpower in the field of
science is being felt not only in India but the world over. This shortfall is such which cannot
be bridged overnight. To catch young students, nurture, groom and develop them into
budding scientists, it is imperative that a concerted and coordinated strategy is made on a
long-term basis. Since CSIR has vast array of labs and is one of the biggest public sector

11
employer of scientists, it has to actively play a major role in this effort. Merely by awarding
some scholarships or awards, this daunting task is not going to be accomplished. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that DSIR must come out with some concrete proposals
to trap, harness and retain human resource in the field of science by earmarking sufficient
fund for the purpose.
9. INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT
9.1 CSIR under the EIeventh Plan will meet the challenges of Intelluctual Property Rights (IPR)
by Selecting Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) and R&D Projects based on sectoral IP trends and
Developing linkages through IP creation, protection and diffusion. In addition continued efforts will
be made to promote IPR through patent awareness and human resource development, patent
acquisition portfolio, IP analysis as tool, promoting techno-prenuership, and support to industry for
innovation.
Encompassing the above, the programmes proposed for the Eleventh Five Year Plan are
listed below:
• Filing, capturing, prosecution and maintaining of IPR for CSIR R&D outputs;
• Valuation and valorization of patent and IP portfolios;
• Surveillance for infringement and enforcement of IPR;
• Human Resource in IP cells of CSIR laboratories; and
• Modernization of computing, communication and related facilities and infrastructure.
9.2 When enquired about reduced allocation to Intellectual Property and Technology
Management from Rs.36.20 crores at RE stage in 2007-08 to Rs.34.00 crores in budget
2008-09, the Committee has been informed that the Tenth Plan Intellectual Property Right (IPR)
strategy of CSlR was to create greater awareness among CSIR laboratories in IPR while in the
Eleventh Plan the strategy is to focus on to file only commercially and strategically important
patents. Commercial viability will be ensured by stronger IP protection. There would thus, be a
change in the strategy of the past i.e., from reactive to proactive IP protection by random patenting
to planned patenting and designing patenting portfolios based on business plan with commercial and
strategic consideration. It is thus envisaged that an outlay of Rs. 34.00 crore would be adequate
for 2008-09.
9.3 The Committee feels that there is still a lot to be done to improve awareness about
patents in the country, especially among the scientist and other innovators so that the
valuable intellectual property earned by them is commercial1y protected. It is of the opinion
that the Department should make more efforts to increase the reach of such awareness
programmes.
10. NEW MILLENNIUM INDIA TECHNOLOGY  LEADERSHIP INITIATIVE
10.1 During the Tenth Plan, New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative (NMITLI)
has created a brand image and is viewed today as a benchmark of PPP schemes which is
being emulated by various other Government departments. The partners especially from the
industry, were of the view that industries which partnered NMITLI projects have highly benefited
not only in terms of the hard objectives and achievements in the project wherein they participated
but also in terms of other associated gains such as high quality technical inputs etc. As India is
entering into a new era of R&D, more such newer approaches of innovation development need
to be evolved and experimented. Following are among other concepts to enlarge under NMITLI:

12
Pre and post NMITLI; Funding with industry (50:50 Initiative); Co-financing with V enture Capital
funds; Long term sustained efforts in selected areas (NMITLI innovation centres); and Acquisition
of early stage relevant knowledge/IP for portfolio building.
10.2 Allocation made for ‘New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative’ has been
increased from Rs. 55 crores at BE and RE stage in 2007-08 to Rs. 60 crores in 2008-09.
10.3 NMITLI has developed 10 new projects during 2007-08 at an estimated cost of Rs. 110.60
crore to be spent over 3 to 4 years period. The first year outgo for these projects is expected to
be more than the budget provided under the scheme. Any shortfall in allocation would be taken up
at RE stage.
10.4 The Committee is pleased to learn that ‘industries which partnered NMITLI projects
have been highly benefited not only in terms of the objectives and achievements in the
project wherein they participated but also in terms of other associated gains such as high
quality technical inputs’. It is also heartening to know that during the Tenth Plan the New
Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative (NMITLI) has created a brand image
and is viewed today as a benchmark of Public-Private Partnership (PPP) schemes which is
being emulated by various other Government Departments. The Committee is of the view
that the Public-Private Partnership is the kind of research model that can successfully work
in today's world where commercial viability of research and its self-sustaining nature is as
important as the research itself.
11. (B) CONSULTANCY DEVELOPMENT CENTRE (CDC)
11.1 The Consultancy Development Centre came into existence in January 1986 as a registered
society and was approved as an autonomous Institutions of DSIR in December, 2004. The centre
is managed and run by a governing council with the Secretary, DSIR as its head. The council
comprises of representatives of consultancy organizations, R&D institutions, Government
departments, Academic institution, PSUs, etc. Educational programmes in consultancy management,
capability enhancement through training and skill building programmes, development of young
professionals and women to opt for consultancy as a career form some of the major activities of
CDC. The centre runs a two year Masters Degree Programme in colIaboration with BITS Pilani
and modalities for extending this collaborative MS degree programme to Chennai, Hyderabad and
Bangalore have been finalized. It has also initiated a proposal for collaborative MBA programme in
consultancy management with IGNOU. The proposed programme would cover certificate, PG
diploma and degree programmes. CDC is also the Secretariat of the Technical Consultancy
Development programme of Asia and Pacific (TCDPAP) for promoting consultancy and service
exports in the Asia Pacific region.
11.2 Financial support is given to CDC by DSIR each year based on performance and review.
During 2006-07 DSIR provided a financial support of Rs.60.00 lakhs while it generated revenue
of Rs.332.72 lakhs from assignments, services rendered to various agencies etc. However,
budgetary assistance earmarked for this programme this year is Rs.2 crores.
12. PLAN OUT LAY FOR ‘OTHER SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH’
12.1 Plan out lay for ‘other Scientific Research’ has been hiked from Rs. 1060.00 crores at the
RE stage in Budget 2007-08 to Rs. 1196 crores in Budget 2008-09. In the Eleventh Plan
Government has assigned the higher priority to Science and Technology and has accordingly
provide the plan support of higher level (9%) to the Department essentially to initiate new
programmes and complete the ongoing Commitments of the Tenth Five Year Plan. During Tenth
Plan, CSIR had operated 56 research projects, which now have gone upto 76 during 2007-08 and

13
another 18 projects may be funded during the year 2008-09. In view of increase activities the
allocation is not on a higher side.
12.2 The Committee, in view of the increased responsibilities and activities of the
Department, supports the rise in allocation for ‘other Scientific Research’ and hopes the
Department would be able to meet its commitments.
12.3 After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research assessing the progress of various important programmes and projects
administered by it, the Committee recommends that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 2078.00
crores under Demand No. 84 (Department of Scientific and Industrial Research) as sought
by the Department for the year 2008-09 may be approved.

14
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Committee expresses serious concern over the token hike in the allocation for
the Department. It feels that this hike is basically no hike if the growth rate of 9 per cent
and the inflation of 5 per cent is taken into consideration. It only shows the amount of
importance that the Government today attaches to scientific organization like DSIR. The
Committee is of the opinion that the axe of routine cut should not fall on scientific
Departments as it would adversely affect research and development which is vital for the
development of the nation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the well thought
out projected demand of scientific departments should be honoured and accepted by the
planning commission, more so when the department has the capacity and the readiness to
absorb additional funds. (Para2.3)
2. The Committee is pleased to know that a Mechanism to monitor and review the
ongoing schemes has been put in place by the Department. The Committee hopes that the
Department will further strengthen this mechanism for effective implementation of its
programmes. (Para 3.3)
3. The Committee takes serious note of such laxity on the part of the Department in
utilization of funds and recommends that the Department should make full use of its
Project Monitoring Committee so that funds could be utilized substantially for the purpose
intended and within the time frame set for the same. The Committee also recommends that
optimum utilization of the enhanced budgetary allocation this year should be made by the
Department. (Para 4.4)
4. The Committee is of the view that small and medium industrial units should be
encouraged to develop competitive technologies, as innovations are not necessarily
dependent on huge funding and many a times break-through comes from small and medium
research units. What is more required is the right guidance by the Department to
researchers and their organizations on commercial issues so that results of their efforts are
not made use of by other market predators. (Para 4.5)
5. The budgetary allocations for 2008-2009 for this programme is Rs.I0 crores as
against Rs.8.00 crores during the year 2007-2008. The Committee feels that this is a very
useful and important programme of the Department which encourages meritorious
inventions having commercial potential by giving awards, provide technical and financial
assistance for filing patents in India and abroad for protecting intellectual property and also
helps in dissemination of information on rural technologies and promotion of
entrepreneurship among rural masses. The Committee is of the opinion that this
programme needs to be strengthened and intensified. The Department should think in
terms of providing more funds for this programme. (Para 5.3)
6. The Committee was informed that there is a rural show case centre of the
Department which helps in disseminating appropriate rural technology to the rural masses.
The Committee of the view that rural show casing of scientific achievements is of immense
importance, as progress in scientific research should be shared with the rural population
and through an interactive process local knowledge should be harnessed in the larger
interest. The Committee would like the Department to have more such rural show case
centres to inculcate scientific temper among the masses. (Para 5.4)
14

15
7. The Committee has been informed that the Department is striving to develop
photovoltaic cells through which solar energy could be used on a large scale. For this
purpose it is working on nano-material which has high absorption capacity per unit area and
can go a long way in making storage devices small and portable. The Committee observes
that the Department should explore the possibilities of exploiting more and more solar
energy and in the long run it should aim at replacing the conventional source of energy
with solar energy. To achieve this objective it should look for technologies like nano-
technology to improve storage and conversion of solar energy into usable energy sources.
The Committee is of the opinion that the Department should make all out efforts in this
direction more so because conventional source of energy are regarded as adding to the
environmental pollution and global warming. (Para 5.9)
8. The Committee has also been informed that it is possible to run some water pumping
sets on solar energy. The Committee is of the view that such possibilities should be fully
explored as they have a great potential to solve irrigation problems and raise farm incomes
particularly in the rural areas where there is lack of electricity. (Para 5.9.1)
9. The Committee is of the opinion that the Department in co-ordination with other
departments and agencies should also explore possibilities of converting saline water to
drinking water while working on technologies to convert saline water to irrigation water at
low cost. The Committee also feels that the network of such plan should be expanded so
that more and more people could be benefited by it. (Para 5.10.3)
10. The Committee is aware that CSIR is involved in developing cost effective generic
drugs and standardization of Herbal and Ayurvedic drugs. It is also engaged in development
of commercially viable technologies for life saving drugs such as anti virals, anti cancer,
anti bacterial, cardio- vascular, etc. It is also designing and developing instrumentation for
diagnostics, therapeutics and life supporting system among others. But the fact remains that
diseases like malaria, polio, diabeties, tuberculosis, cancer, etc. are still rampant in the
country and are taking a heavy toll. Treatment of some of these diseases are still beyond
the reach of common man. The benefit of scientific research is yet to percolate down to the
society. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the department should seriously make
an introspection and try to address these issues on priority basis in a time bound manner
(Para 6.6)
11. The Committee is also aware that the department is engaged in developing
technology and know-how for environment friendly conversion and utilization of bio mass
to fuels. The Committee has been informed that during 2008-09 the Department has
targeted to make preliminary experiments on bio fuels and has developed heterogeneous
catalyst for bio diesel production, process for production of bio ethanol from cellulose and
starch. The Committee feels that fossil fuel, besides being costly, is a major source of
pollution in the environment. There is an urgent need to seek an economically viable and
environment friendly alternative. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the tempo of
research and development should be accelerated so that the country could reap the benefits
at the earliest. The Committee, however, desires that while developing bio fuels, care should
be taken not to use edible cereals as it may affect the poor adversely. (Para 6.7)
12. The phenomena of Global warming and climate change are emerging as one of the
greatest and most formidable challenges of the 21st century which are stated to have the
potential of pushing the world to the brink of Catastrophe. Adaptation and mitigation are
the two possible ways and means identified to counter their effects. But these are not so
easy solutions as they appear to be. Science has to play a pivotal role in this direction.
Department of Scientific and Industrial research with its vast network of multi disciplinary

16
laboratories and huge resource of competent and expert man power has to take a lead role
in galvanizing and dovetailing its activities and resources to find viable solutions to provide
relief to the nation and the world from this impending calamity. It can address scientific
issues relevant to atmosphere, geosphere, hydrosphere as well as biosphere. It can assume
the responsibility of standardizing all measurement of global change with international
traceability. The Committee is happy to note that CSIR is contemplating to initiate a mega
R&D programme on climate change covering various dimensions such as assessment,
adaptatation , mitigation, alternate energy sources, etc. Since this has to be addressed on
an urgent and immediate basis, the committee is of the opinion that the department should
start working on this at the earliest without losing any time, in a time bound manner,
efficacy of which may be reviewed annually. Progress made in this regard may be brought
before the public in the form of a white paper or in any form the Department deems
appropriate so that people could not only feel assured but also come to know how real and
formidable is the threat posed by global warming and climate change. The Committee also
feels that separate budgetary provisions for this purpose could be made. (Para 6.8)
13. The Committee feels that the R&D activities can be undertaken only in laboratories
and unless we have a network of rich and sophisticated labs we can not make advancement
in the field of science. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the budgetary demands
of the Department for such crucial programme needs to be fully met and they should be
provided enhanced funds at RE stage in case, they demand. The Committee has taken note
that the Department could initiate only 76 out of 94 priority projects, under the National
Laboratories Scheme, during 2007-08. The Committee would have been happy if all the
priority projects could have been initiated during the period they were intended.
(para 7.5)
14. The Committee has been informed that some of the CSIR laboratories like those in
Kolkata and Hyderabad are facing difficulty in expansion as they are located in the heart
of city with very little space. The Committee is of the opinion that these premier
organisations need new buildings for better functioning. The Committee suggests that the
Department may take up the matter with the concerned State Governments to acquire land
for the said purpose. (Para 7.6)
15. The Committee welcomes the enhancement in allocations for Research Schemes,
Scholarships and Fellowships. It also welcomes the fact that in the Eleventh Plan, emphasis
is being laid on promotion of R&D in Basic Sciences, Engineering Sciences and Inter-
disciplinary areas. It is of the opinion that paradigmatic breakthrough in science can be
possible only if there is progress in basic sciences which ultimately get translated to state-
of-art technologies. (Para 8.3)
16. Human Resource Development is the buzzword today in every sector of economy as
it is of paramount importance in the Nation building process and creating a knowledge
society. But the shortage of qualified, competent and dedicated manpower in the field of
science is being felt not only in India but the world over. This shortfall is such which cannot
be bridged overnight. To catch young students, nurture, groom and develop them into
budding scientists, it is imperative that a concerted and coordinated strategy is made on a
long-term basis. Since CSIR has vast array of labs and is one of the biggest public sector
employer of scientists, it has to actively play a major role in this effort. Merely by awarding
some scholarships or awards, this daunting task is not going to be accomplished. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that DSIR must come out with some concrete proposals
to trap, harness and retain human resource in the field of science by earmarking sufficient
fund for the purpose. (Para 8.4)

17
17. The Committee feels that there is still a lot to be done to improve awareness about
patents in the country, especially among the scientist and other innovators so that the
valuable intellectual property earned by them is commercially protected. It is of the opinion
that the Department should make more efforts to increase the reach of such awareness
programmes. (Para 9.3)
18. The Committee is pleased to learn that ‘industries which partnered NMITLI projects
have been highly benefited not only in terms of the objectives and achievements in the
project wherein they participated but also in terms of other associated gains such as high
quality technical inputs’. It is also heartening to know that during the Tenth Plan the New
Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative (NMITLI) has created a brand image
and is viewed today as a benchmark of Public-Private Partnership (PPP) schemes which is
being emulated by various other Government Departments. The Committee is of the view
that the public-private partnership is the kind of research model that can successfully work
in today's world where commercial viability of research and its self-sustaining nature is as
important as the research itself. (Para 10.4)
19. The Committee, in view of the increased responsibilities and activities of the
Department, supports the rise in allocation for ‘other Scientific Research’ and hopes the
Department would be able to meet its commitments. (Para 12.1)
20. After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research assessing the progress of various important programmes and projects
administered by it, the Committee recommends that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 2078.00
crores under Demand No. 84 (Department of Scientific and Industrial Research) as sought
by the Department for the year 2008-09 may be approved. (Para 12.3)

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-I
FINANCIAL SUMMARY FOR 2008-09 PLAN AND NON-PLAN
A break-up of the financial allocation of CSIR, DSIR and Public Sector enterprises is given
below:
(Rs. in crore)
Deptt. Plan Non-Plan Total
Demands Approved Demands Approved Demands Approved
made made made
A. CSIR 2200.00 1155.00 907.00 873.00 3107.00 2028.00
B. DSIR 95.00 28.00 5.42 5.00 100.42 33.00
C. PSE 30.00 15.00 0.00 0.00 30.00 15.00
D. CDC 2.00 2.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 2.00
T
OTAL: 2327.00 1200.00 912.42 878.00 3239.42 2078.00
21

22
ANNEXURE-II
The major schemes of the Department identified for the year 2008-09 alongwith the
projected plan demand and allocation thereto are as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Schemes Projected Allocation
Demand
A. DSIR Schemes
•  TPDU 95.00 28.00
•  PSE 30.00 15.00
•  CDC 2.00 2.00
SUB-TOTAL (A) 127.00 45.00
B. CSIR
National Labs. 1860.00 960.00
National S&T Human 100.00 75.00
Resource Development
R&D Management Support 40.00 25.00
Intellectual Property & 40.00 34.00
Tech. Management
New Millennium Indian 150.00 60.00
Technology
Leadership Initiative
Institute of Translational 10.00 1.00
Research
S
UB-TOTAL (B) 2200.00 1155.00
GRAND T OTAL (A+B) 2327.00 1200.00

23
MINUTES

24

25
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. and at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 25th March, 2008 in
Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabha Thakur
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar
5. Shri Jabir Husain
6. Shri Ravula Chandra Seker Reddy
LOK  SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
9. Shri Brahmananda Panda
10. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
12. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
13. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
** *
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL
RESEARCH
1. Prof. S.K. Brahmachari, Secretary & Director General, CSIR
2. Ms. Sheila Sangwan, Joint Secretary (Admn.)
3. Shri V . K. Gupta, Head, Information Technology
4. Dr. Naresh Kumar, Head, RDPD, CSIR
5. Shri Ashwani Gupta, Scientist ‘G’
6. Dr. D. Yogeswara Rao, Head, TNBD, CSIR
25
*** Relates to other matter.

26
7. Shri Somnath Ghosh, Managing Director, NRDC
8. Dr. G.N. Qazi, Director, Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine
9. Dr. H.S. Maiti, Director, Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute
10. Dr. Rajesh Luthra, Head, HRDG, CSIR
11. Shri C.S. Mallik, Sr. Dy. FA
12. Shri R.K. Sinha, Scientist
13. Shri A. Wahid, Scientist
2. * * *
3. The Committee, *** re-assembled at 3.00 
P.M. to hear the Secretary, Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research.
4. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research and requested the Secretary to make a brief presentation regarding the
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department. Thereafter, the Secretary made a visual
presentation regarding the major activities formulated for the year 2008-09 and achievements of the
Department during the year 2007-08. The Secretary also mentioned about the budgetary allocations
under different heads as also the functioning of the Department. The Members then sought
clarifications on the points that emerged out of the presentation of the Secretary.
The officials then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the
1st April, 2008.
*** Relates to other matters.

27
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 23rd April, 2008 in Room No. ‘139’,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Saman Pathak
4. Shri Jabir Husain
5. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK  SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
9. Shri Francis Fanthome
10. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
11. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
12. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
2. The Committee took-up for consideration its draft ***, 186th, ***, ***, ***, *** and ***.
Reports on the Demands for Grants (2008-09) pertaining to the Departments of ***, Scientific and
Industrial Research; ***, ***, ***, *** and *** respectively.
3. * * *
4. The Committee decided to present all the seven reports (185th to 191st) on 29th April, 2008
in both the Houses of Parliament. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence
Dr. Barun Mukherjee to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and to lay the copies of the reports
on the Table of Lok Sabha by Dr. Sujan Chakraborty and in his absence by Shri Francis Fanthome.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.
27

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.