158thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/158theport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:19]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-2007) OF THE
MINISTRY OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT
 (DEMAND NO.  66)
_______
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 18TH MAY, 2006)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 18TH MAY, 2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2006/VAISAKHA, 1928  (SAKA)
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                            
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                                  
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                              
4.SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS    
5.ANNEXURE                                                                                                                                               
6.MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                  
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2006)
----------
Shri P.G. Narayanan  –– Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Dr.Prabha Thakur
Shri Dilip Singh Judev
Shri Nand Kishore Yadav
Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
     #
6.   Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
     $7.   Vacant
&8.   Vacant
    *9.    Vacant
   §10.   Vacant
     LOK  SABHA
Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad            
Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
Shri Pankaj Choudhary
Shri Mohan S. Delkar  
Shri Francis Fanthome 
Shri Anantrao Gudhe
Shri Babubhai K. Katara
Shri A. Venkatesh Naik           
Shri Brahmananda Panda
Smt. Neeta Pateriya
Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil        
Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”

158thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/158theport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:19]
Shri Rakesh Singh
Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh                                              
Dr. Ramlakhan Singh   
Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar                     
Shri D. Venugopal
Shri Sita Ram Yadav
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
SECRETARIAT
            Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
            Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
            Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer   
I N T R O D U C T I O N
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment &
 Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred Fifty-eighth Report
 of the Committee.  This Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry of Ocean Development
 (Demand No.66).
 
2.         In the meeting of the Committee held on the 5
th April, 2006 the Secretary and other Officers of the Ministry of Ocean
 Development gave an overview of the various activities of the Ministry and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of
 the performance of the Ministry to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
 
3.         The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Ministry for replying to the clarifications sought by the Members
 and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Ocean
 Development.
 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 15
th  May, 2006.
NEW DELHI;  
May  15, 2006
                                         P. G. NARAYANAN,      
 Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on  Science & Technology, Environment & Forests.
 
 
REPORT
 
Oceans have always influenced the life and history of mankind. From time immemorial, man has been using oceans in several ways.
 According to our mythology, the Gods and Demons churned the ocean and extracted amrita, the elixir of life. Even in the present
 age, we get mineral, food and energy resources from the oceans.
           
2.         Due to its vastness and interplay of processes, oceans control the atmosphere and global climate, besides being a vast
 storehouse of resources necessary for sustenance of life on earth. Appreciating the importance of the subject, the Department of
 Ocean Development was created in July 1981 as a part of the Cabinet Secretariat directly under the charge of the Prime Minister and
 came into existence as a separate Department in March 1982. In February 2006, it has been notified as a Ministry. Ministry of Ocean
 Development has been functioning as a nodal Ministry for organising, coordinating and promoting ocean development activities in
 the country, in line with the Ocean Policy Statement of 1982.  The programmes pursued by the Ministry over the years have kept
 pace with developments world over and addressed national needs and priorities.
 
3.         The programmes of the Ministry are directed towards:
 
Technology Development Programmes for future applications with strategic, industrial and economic significance.
Societal Programmes with direct/indirect benefit for the community by technology applications and pilot project demonstration with
 the participation of the community for their socio-economic prosperity, and for coastal area development/management through
 scientific tools and techniques.
Marine Resource Programmes for exploration of marine living and non-living resources, techno-economic studies to evolve strategies
 for sustainable exploration and utilisation, and resource enhancement.
(iv)       Multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary Polar Science Programmes and Antarctic Expeditions with scientific and geo-
political significance.
Capacity Building Programme towards self-reliance through basic scientific research in ocean sector, human resource development
 and establishing Centres of Excellence in academic institutions.
Creation of public awareness of ocean, its potential and uses.
 
4.         The scientific research and technology development programmes are formulated, coordinated and executed through three
 autonomous institutions supported by the Ministry and two Attached offices of the Ministry. These multi-disciplinary and multi-
institutional programmes are assisted by National Research Laboratories, academic institutions and industries. Further, Marine

158thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/158theport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:19]
 Research and Capacity Building is one of the key programme areas of the Ministry to promote basic research in marine science and
 establish centres of excellence in academic institutions and for self-reliance. The oceanographic programmes have national, regional
 and global importance. With the ratification of the UN Convention on Law of the Sea, a new international order has been established
 for the oceans. India is represented in almost all the important bodies on oceans. India will stand to benefit enormously by provisions
 of the convention, if we can build an integrated approach for scientific planning, formulation, implementation and overall
 management of the programmes with a comprehensive organisational and institutional back up. The Ministry is the nodal agency for
 international programmes in the ocean sector and representing the country in Inter-governmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC)
 of UNESCO, Regional Committee of IOC in Coastal Indian Ocean(IOCINDIO), South Asian Regional Seas Programme,
 Commission on the Limits of Continental Shelf (CLCS), International Sea-Bed Authority(ISBA) and the State Parties of the United
 National Convention on the Law of the Seas (UNCLOS), the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) and its scientific and managerial organs
 – Commission on Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), Council of Managers of National Antarctic
 Programme (COMNAP), Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), etc. These activities have scientific, economic and
 geopolitical impacts. Hence, the activities of the Ministry address Scientific Research and Technology Development with orientation
 towards applications, capacity building and human resource development for self-reliance, and international programmes arising out
 of International obligations and bilateral and multilateral cooperative ventures.
 
TOTAL BUDGET DEMAND FOR 2006-07 AND ALLOCATION OF FUNDS FOR THRUST AREAS
 
5.         The Plan outlay for 2006-07 has been fixed at Rs. 475.75 crores (Rs. 438 crore for Plan and 37.75 for Non-Plan expenditure)
 which is Rs. 98.75 crore more than the outlay for 2005-06.  This reflects a 26% hike in the allocation over that for the year 2005-06
 which was Rs. 377.00 crores (Plan - Rs. 340.00 crores and Non-Plan - Rs. 37.00 crores).  The Ministry has maintained that the
 allocated funds would be sufficient for carrying out its activities. The Ministry has informed that in order to be better prepared to face
 devastation like that caused by the killer tsunami in December 2004, the increased allocation is for equipping the country with proper
 warning systems and for in-depth researches. Out of the allocation, Rs. 95 crore has been earmarked for Tsunami and Storm Surge
 Warning System mainly for indigenous development of Deep Ocean Assessment and Reporting systems and setting up of INSAT
 DART & INSAT Met data Reception system at Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS).
6.         The budgetary allocation for the year 2006-07 in the tabular form is given at Annexure.
           
7.         Tsunami and Storm Surge Warning System, Polar Science, National Institute of Ocean Technology, Ocean Observation and
 Information Services, Ocean Data Buoy programme, Gas Hydrates and Polymetallic Nodules programme are the major programmes
 identified by the Ministry for implementation during 2006-07.
 
8.         The head-wise quarterly statement as well as total expenditure of the Ministry for 2005-06 can be seen from the statement
 below The Ministry informed that that enhanced quarterly expenditure in the 3
rd Quarter ending December 2005 is due to the Annual
 Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica occurring in this quarter every year.
(Rs. in crores)
No.     SCHEMES
Quarter-1
(30-6-05)
Achievement
Quarter-2
(30-9-05)
Achievement
Quarter-3
(31-12-05)
Achievement
1 Polar Science 9.53 5.33 22.28
2 Polymetallic Nodules Programme 0.83 7.41 6.06
3 Ocean Observations, and Information System (OOIS) 9.25 12.69
 
9.65
4  Marine Research and Technology Development 0.17 2.83 5.22
5  National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT)* 0 9.00
 
22.00
6 Coastal Research Vessels (CRV) 0 0 0
7 Delineation of Outer Limits of Continental Shelf 0 0 0
8 Comprehensive Swath Bathymetry of Indian EEZ 0 0 0
9
Gas Hydrates Exploration & Technology Development for
 Exploitation 0 0
 
0
10  Acquisition and Operation of New Research Vessels 0 0 0
11  Geophysical Study of Laxmi Basin 0 0 0
12 Ocean Data Buoy Programme 4.50 0 9.19
13 IT and Computers 0.01 0.09 4.05
14 Tsunami and Storm Surge Warning System 0 0 19.72
TOTAL 24.29 37.35 98.17
 
9.         The Committee while noting the reason given by the Ministry regarding the non-uniform pace of expenditure for the third
 quarter of the financial year 2005-06 would like to know the expenditure incurred by the Ministry on the Annual Indian Scientific
 Expedition to Antarctica and whether taking into consideration this expenditure, the expenditure in the third quarter is more or less
 uniform as compared to the previous two quarters. The Committee, however, finds that the pace of the expenditure by the Ministry
 has not been uniform during the first two quarters either. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must strive for the
 regular infusion of funds in various projects/schemes in all quarters of the financial year and thereby maintain the uniformity in the
 pace of expenditure throughout the year.

158thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/158theport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:19]
 
MAJOR DISPROPORTIONATE VARIATIONS AND REASONS
                       
           
10.       The Ministry has informed that during the year 2005-06, the BE of the Ministry i.e. Rs. 340 crore had been reduced to Rs. 250
 crore. Due to this, scaling down of activities had to be made under most of the programmes. The major variations, therefore, were in
 the following programmes:
(i)         Polymetallic Nodules Programme
 
                        BE  -  Rs. 22 crore                               RE  -  Rs. 20.50 crore
 
Due to non-availability of Research Vessel, ship days were reduced leading to the reduction in anticipated expenditure.
 
(ii)        Delineation of Outer Limits of Continental Shelf
 
                        BE  -  Rs. 1 crore                                 RE  -  Rs. 0.00 crore
 
Neither additional analysis and interpretation activity nor any contingent expenditure in this regard was required as anticipated,
 resulting in savings.
           
(iii)       Comprehensive Swath Bathymetric Survey of Indian EEZ
 
BE  -  Rs. 24 crore                               RE  -  Rs. 2.50 crore
 
The reduction in the requirement is due to non-availability of Ministry of Defence clearance from for undertaking surveys.
 
(iv)       Gas Hydrate Exploration and Technology Development for Exploitation
 
                        BE  -  Rs. 30 crore                               RE  -  Rs. 15 crore
 
Non-availabilty of suitable collaboration partner for technology development of coring system and non-availability of seismic vessel
 in market due to sudden spurt in hydrocarbon exploration, resulted in reduced expenditure.
 
(v)        Acquisition of new Research Vessel
 
                        BE  -  Rs. 80 crore                               RE  -  Rs. 30 crore
 
The savings is due to rescheduling of payment for acquiring the vessel in accordance with the finalized contract.
 
(vi)       Geophysical Study of Laxmi Basin
 
                        BE  -  Rs. 1 crore                                 RE  -  Rs. 0.00 crore
 
Neither additional analysis and interpretation activity nor any contingent expenditure in this regard was required as anticipated,
 resulting in savings.
 
11.       The Ministry also informed that under Delineation of the Outer Limits of Continental Shelf, the claim for extending the outer
 limits of continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles EEZ has to be made before 2009. The claim is required to be supported by
 geophysical data, viz., bathymetric, seismic, gravity and magnetic data. The seismic data was collected & post-processing work and
 analyses are in progress and the technical report is in advanced stage of preparation with all work for the claim expected to be
 completed, during 2006-07. While the geo-physical study of Laxmi Basin programme has been completed. The study helps us to
 understand the geology specially the crustal characteristics of the Laxmi Basin in the Arabian Sea. The report submitted is under
 examination.
12.       The Committee observes that the reasons advanced by the Ministry for non-utilisation of the budgetary support in respect of
 Polymetallic Nodules Programme, Comprehensive Swath Bathymetric Survey of Indian EEZ, Gas Hydrates Exploration and
 Technology Development for Exploitation and Acquisition of new Research vessel programmes mainly related to delay in acquiring
 the clearances and finalizing the contract, non-availability of vessel and other such procedural delays. The Committee expresses
 serious concern on such delays and is of the opinion that such delays could have been avoided. The Committee, therefore,
 recommends to the Ministry to evolve a suitable mechanism to monitor the budgetary planning and its allocations and so as to avoid
 such delays in future.
 
13.       The Committee has been given to understand that during the last year of the 10
th plan, all the ongoing schemes will be
 continued and additional activities relating to Exploration of Gas hydrates & EEZ surveys, acquisition of Technology Demonstration
 Vessel that are required for exploration of non-living resources; and the establishment of a Tsunami and Storm Surge Early Warning
 System to be forewarned during impending sea disasters will be undertaken. 

158thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/158theport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:19]
 
14.       Regarding the mechanism that exist in the Ministry to monitor and review the progress of ongoing schemes/projects, the
 committee has been informed that the ongoing schemes were formulated after studies/recommendations by expert groups and
 following due process of approvals of Standing Finance Committee (SFC)/Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). The approved
 schemes have clear details of overall budget, scope of work, manpower, equipment details, schedule of activity, year-wise
 expenditure etc. The progress in all areas particularly progress in implementation vis-à-vis expenditure is monitored. Similarly, the
 expenditure incurred and physical achievements vis-à-vis overall approved limit of expenditure is also periodically reviewed. Thus,
 proposals for budgetary support are formulated and finalized.
 
15.       The Ministry further informed that the progress of the ongoing schemes like Antarctica Programme, the Ocean Observing
 System, Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS), Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM),
 are  monitored through the Governing Councils/ Steering Committees of the Programmes. The recommendations of these
 Committees are taken while finalizing the budgetary requirement of the programmes.
 
16.       All the projects under PMN programme have milestones. They are monitored regularly against the milestones. In addition,
 Standing Finance Committee on Polymetallic Nodules Programme (PMN) programme reviews the progress of work for every 3-4
 months. The formulation/finalization of budgetary support is made on the basis of the progress of the programme.
 
17.       Under CLCS programme, the Steering Committee Chaired by Secretary reviews the programme against the milestones. The
 budgetary support has been finalised on the basis of the targeted work under this programme.
 
18.       The monitoring of the MRDF programme is coordinated through 9 OSTCs of the Ministry and monitoring of MRDF
 programme funded on the recommendation of OSTC is carried out by the Management Board of each OSTC. The Management
 Board, in turn, makes available the review reports and corrective action, if any, to the Ministry for formulating the budgetary support.
POLAR SCIENCE/ANTARTIC RERSEARCH
 
19.       The success of the Antarctic Programme and sustained capabilities in Antarctic science and logistics prompted the Department
 to establish the first polar research lab of the country at Goa, namely the National Centre for Antarctic Ocean Research (NCAOR) in
 1998, which is responsible for carrying out all the activities relating to Antarctic expeditions. The research on polar science and
 expeditions to Antarctica was being planned, executed and launched annually on behalf of the Department by the Centre.  The Centre
 has a specific R&D mandate in the realm of polar science and to coordinate and launch Indian Antarctic expeditions.  The Centre has
 a unique laboratory for low-temperature research on ice cores retrieved from Antarctica and the Himalayas.  It would also have the
 facility for the application of remote sensing techniques aimed at understanding the sea-ice-atmosphere interaction in the Polar
 Regions.  It would also have an Antarctic museum and a database repository on polar sciences.
           
20.       In response to a question regarding adequacy of the allocated budget to sustain the tempo of its activities during 2006-07, the
 Ministry informed that the actual project estimate as projected by NCAOR, Goa for the financial year 2006-07 for the
 implementation of Polar Science Programme and other research activities of NCAOR was Rs. 56.00 crores. However, due to
 reduction in overall allocation for the Ministry, based on the prioritised item of expenditure for Polar Science Programme and other
 research activities of NCAOR, an allocation of Rs. 41.00 crores is made for the year 2006-07. The Ministry expects that the major
 planned activities under this programme will be undertaken within this allocation and if required, allocation of additional funds will
 be taken up at RE stage. Targets set for the year 2006-07 are as follows :
Planning, co-ordination and execution of the XXVI Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica
Structural strengthening of Maitri
Revamping the summer huts and establishment of field huts in the Gruber Mountains
Continuation of work towards the establishment of the Third permanent Indian Base in the Larsemann Ranges
Establishment of a summer base in the Larsemann Hills
EIA studies at the site of the new Indian Station
Submission of the Initial Environmental Evaluation Report to ATCM and finalization of the Comprehensive Environmental
 Evaluation of the Larsemann site
Initiation of scientific programmes in Larsemann in the fields of glaciology, paleoclimatology, limnology, meteorology, and upper
 atmospheric studies
Analytical studies of the shallow ice-cores proposed to be collected during the XXV Antarctic Expedition
 
21.       The Committee is of the view that in addition to on-going programmes in various domains of polar sciences, National Centre
 for Antarctic Ocean Research (NCAOR) should also initiate cutting-edge experiments in such frontier areas as assessment of
 biotechnological potential of Antarctic microbes, biodegradation of organic wastes using microbial consortium and productivity and
 ecosystem dynamics in the Antarctic lakes. It should also envisage initiating meaningful logistics operation with other countries,
 which could lead to operational and financial cooperation.
 
22.       The Committee is of the view that the National Centre for Antarctic Ocean Research (NCAOR), being the nodal organisationt
 to execute the Antarctic Programmes should strive to further expand its infrastructure facilities for carrying out research in the realms
 of Polar Sciences and Southern Ocean Oceanography.
           
POLYMETALLIC NODULES PROGRAMME
 

158thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/158theport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:19]
23.       The Polymetallic Nodules Programme (PMN Programme) is a national programme with international commitments which
 envisage eventual exploitation of the nodules from the allotted 1,50,000 sq. km. mine site in the Central Indian Ocean Basin. The
 programme consists of four components-Survey & Exploration of Polymetallic Nodules in the Central Indian Ocean Basin (CIOB);
 Environmental Impact Assessment studies at CIOB; Technology Development for mining of nodules; and Technology Development
 for extraction of metals from nodules.
 
24.       During 2006-07, the programme is supported with an allocation of Rs. 19.00 crores. The Committee has been informed that
 the lower allocation of outlay for 2006-07 is mainly due to reduction of outlay in the Survey & Exploration component to Rs. 1.50
 crore during 2006-07 as compared to Rs. 6.00 crore during 2005-06, as only one Survey & Exploration cruise would be taken up as
 per approved programme of 10
th Five Year Plan. Hence, the provision of Rs. 19.00 cores made for 2006-07 would be sufficient to
 meet the requirements of the ongoing activities. The Ministry further informed that it has fulfilled its programme objectives and
 achieved the targeted activities during the year 2005-06. The delay in availability of Research Vessel for demonstration of mining
 system resulted in delay in Phase II of the Mining Programme. All other components viz. Survey & Exploration, EIA- monitoring,
 Technology Development (mining) & Extractive Metallurgy Programme have successfully fulfilled the target. During the year 2006-
07, major thrusts would be given to Technology Development of mining system.
 
25.       The Committee notes that the delay in availability of Research Vessel for demonstration of mining system resulted in delay in
 Phase II of the Mining Programme. The non-availability of Research Vessel, led to reduced ship days under the Polymetallic Nodules
 Programme. The Committee feels that such eventualities result in non-utilisation of the budget in fruitful manner and should be
 avoided. 
 
OCEAN OBSERVATION AND INFORMATION SERVICES
 
26.       Recognizing the need to operationalise the oceanographic services in the new areas of Science & Technology, the Ministry has
 implemented the Ocean Observation and Information Services (OOIS) programme from the beginning of the 9
th Plan.  The objective
 of the Programme is to provide ocean information services for various applications in the ocean section.  OOIS is structured around
 four major themes namely,  Ocean  Observing  Systems,  Ocean  Information Services, Satellite Coastal and Oceanographic Research
 (SATCORE) and Indian Ocean Modelling & Ocean Dynamic(INDOMOD).
27.       The Ocean Observing Systems envisage collection of sea truth campaigns using moored data buoys, expandable
 bathythermographs (XBT), current meter arrays and tide gauges, and designed particularly for acquisition of real-time sea surface,
 meteorological and upper oceanographic parameters from the coastal and deep waters.  Validation of the satellite sensors has also
 been undertaken using the sea truth data generated under this programme.  The Data Buoy Programme was initiated in 1996 with
 partial financial assistance from Norwegian Agency for Development (NORAD) and National Institute of Ocean Technology (NOIT)
 has been entrusted with the responsibilities for deployment, operation and maintenance of the data buoys.
28.       The Ocean information service envisages generation and dissemination of ocean data/data products on an operational basis. 
 The 14 National Marine Data Centres will be continued under the Ocean Information & Services. A dedicated centre “Indian
 National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS)” started functioning at Hyderabad from 1999 for efficient development
 and dissemination of data products.   INCOIS is involved to synthesis, generate, promote, provide and coordinate various endeavours
 in the field of ocean sciences, ocean observations, satellite oceanography, and ocean information and advisory services.  INCOIS has
 a vision to emerge as a knowledge and information technology enterprise for the oceanic realm.  Synergy and knowledge networking
 with centres of excellence in ocean, atmospheric sciences, space applications and information technology as well as translating this
 scientific knowledge into useful products and services comprise the cornerstone of INCOIS.
 
29.       During the X Plan, Indian Ocean Modelling & Ocean Dynamic (INDOMOD) and Satellite Coastal and Oceanographic
 Research (SATCORE) components have been integrated to development of a wide range of ocean atmosphere models for operation
 use at INCOIS.  These include development of regional algorithms, data assimilation techniques and operational models, which
 would be transferred to the Ocean Observation and Information Services (OOIS) Centre for operational use.  The ocean modeling
 and dynamics projects address basic issues on the ocean dynamic, climate variability, ocean state forecast, sea level variations, ocean
 flux studies etc.  Some of the models generated under the programme have already been made operational at INCOIS.
 
30.       The Ministry has been given a budgetary allocation of Rs. 25.00 crores for 2006-07,as compared to last year’s Rs. 17.00
 crores. The Committee has been informed that the proposed increase in the budget allocation of Ocean Observation & Information
 Services (OOIS) for the year 2006-07 is primarily for acquiring High-Performance Computing System at an estimated cost of Rs.10
 crore for Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS), Hyderabad, to run the ocean models for providing better
 ocean information services. The Centre is implementing these programmes through a network of reputed national research institutes.
 The ocean-atmosphere models being developed by these institutes, after validation and calibration would be transferred to INCOIS
 for making them operational for providing a variety of reliable ocean information services. In meeting the major aims of acquiring
 data from the sea for the use of various operational and research purposes, infrastructure is established at INCOIS by way of new
 campus and setting up of Satellite Data Acquisition System for real-time reception of satellite data for operational services such as
 generation and dissemination of Potential Fishing Zone information to the fisherman community.
 
31.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the programmes under the Ocean Observation Information Service have been
 progressing in the right track. However, the Committee feels that the National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS),
 being the nodal agency for providing coastal and ocean data and value added products to the users should monitor its performance
 and work-mechanism to process and disseminate ocean data and data products to user communities like fisheries, weather, climate,

158thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/158theport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:19]
 ports, shipping etc. on a regular basis so that ocean weather forecasting is timely and precise. The Committee hopes that the High
 Performance Computing System at INCOIS, Hyderabad would be in place at the earliest for which a budgetary allocation of Rs. 10
 crores has been made for the year 2006-07.
MARINE RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
 
32.       The objectives of the programme are to foster the concept of stewardship through education, training and human resource
 development and increasing awareness at all levels. The activities proposed in the programme include promotion of research under
 the basic categories of marine ecology, marine biology, marine microbiology, marine benthos, coastal marine culture systems, marine
 geology/geophysics and ocean engineering & underwater robotics.  Besides the ongoing programme of award of fellowships to
 students for pursuing higher studies in academic/educational institutions in various disciplines of ocean science and technology,
 organizing exhibitions and fairs to create awareness among the public on the oceans would continue.
 
33.       The Scientific Research and Technology Development programmes for exploration and sustainable use of the marine
 resources are multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional.  Basic research and developments are required in a wide spectrum of areas to
 gain adequate knowledge and expertise.  Required infrastructure and trained personnel are essential for successfully implementing
 different programmes.  There is need for effective interaction between R&D institutions, academicians and industries.  The sub-
programmes under this programme are as under :
(i)         Assessment of Marine Living Resources and FORV
 
(ii)        Drugs from Sea
 
(iii) Assistance for Research Projects and Manpower Training
 
(iv)       Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS)
 
(v)        Ocean Awareness (Exhibitions & Fairs, Seminars/Symposia)
(vi)       Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM)
(vii) Deep Sea Mineral Exploration
 
(viii) BENFAN – project related to Bay of Bengal
 
 
34.       The Ministry has sought an enhanced budgetary allocation of Rs.1.00 crore for the Drugs from Sea programme during 2006-
07 as compared to the year 2005-06. It has been informed by the Ministry that it is projected to meet the demand for ongoing projects,
 which are being implemented at 10 different research laboratories/ Universities. There has been continuous interaction with
 pharmaceutical industry for transfer of technology towards commercialization of products. There are two new compounds discovered
 recently under this programme for anti-diabetic and anti-hyperlipidemic activities. The Phase-I clinical Trial of CDR-134, an anti-
diabetic compound, has been completed and Phase-II is under commencement. The second preparation has been found safe in the
 subacute monkeys chronic toxicity. The negotiations are progressing well with (Indian & Foreign) pharmaceutical industries towards
 technology transfer of these new products.
 
35.       Under the Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS) Programme, the Ministry of Ocean Development
 takes up scientific monitoring of pollution at different locations. The programme aims at assesing the status and likely trends in
 coastal marine environment quality and contribute directly to the development of strategies for maximising the economic benefits
 derived from the intelligent and sustainable use of marine environment and resources. The programme envisages systematic
 collection of data on pollutants such as heavy metals and pesticide residue in water, sediment and biological organisms at 82 stations
 along the coastline of the country. The data collected under the programme is made available to the Pollution Control Boards and
 periodically discussed with them. Any significant increase in pollutants at a particular location is brought to the notice of the Central
 Pollution Control Board for control as well as remedial actions.  The main objective of the Programme is to constantly assess the
 health of India’s marine environment and indicate areas that needed immediate and long-term remedial action. 
 
36.       In response to reduced budget for the programme COMAPS, the Ministry maintained that the Departmental Committee during
 its review, suggested to restrict monitoring of all the stations as there is no change in the water quality but these stations are only to
 be monitored once in two years. Hence, the expenditure has been reduced by Rs.30.00 lakh. However, only the hot spots would be
 now monitored intensively. The reduction in allocation does not reflect reduced priority and the Coastal Ocean Monitoring and
 Prediction System programme continues to be a key programme to assess the health of the entire Indian Coastal waters and needs
 long-term monitoring. Based on the data collected, the water quality along the coast is found clean and healthy beyond 2 km from the
 shore except Mumbai, where it is beyond 5 km.
 
37.       The Committee observes that the efforts of the Ministry to monitor pollution in the coastal areas on vigorous basis should not
 be restricted to hot spots only. The Ministry should keep on identifying locations for periodical monitoring alongwith stipulated
 parameters for diffusion and dispersion characteristics. Besides, the samples collected at these locations should be forwarded to State
 Pollution Control Boards for taking remedial measures.
 
38.       The Committee feels that the Ministry should also focus its efforts in assisting Universities to create infrastructure facilities
 and building up a skilled human resource base in Marine Sciences. Besides, the Ministry should also participate and showcase its

158thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/158theport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:19]
 activities in national and international level exposition, exhibition, fairs etc. from time to time. Inter-active computer generated
 information on Ocean Science & Technology could perhaps help educate the public on the ocean and its resources.
 
39.       The Committee observes that the sea's potential as a medicine storehouse remains largely in the realm of experimentation. It
 commends the Ministry’s ongoing efforts towards transferring the technology to pharmaceutical industry for commercialization of
 the products. The Committee recommends that under this programme, the extraction and development of other potential drugs and
 chemicals from the depth of the ocean should be the priority of the Ministry.
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF OCEAN TECHNOLOGY (NIOT)
 
40.       NIOT was established in 1993, as a society, under the Ministry, for development of ocean related technologies. The activities
 of NIOT cover five missions, viz. Energy and Freshwater from the Sea, Deep Sea Technology and Ocean Mining, Coastal and
 Environmental Engineering, Marine Instrumentation and Ocean Science and Technology for Islands. NIOT is also the nodal agency
 for deploying floats under the Indian ARGO programme, for implementing the National Data Buoy programme, and for running and
 maintenance of two Coastal Research Vessels. NIOT is entrusted with implementing mining technology development work under
 Polymetallic Nodules programme, development of Submersibles, and with part of the work under Drugs from Sea scheme. It has
 commissioned on May 25, 2005 a one lakh litres of drinking water/day capacity desalination plant at Kavaratti, Lakshadweep and a
 floating, barge-based 10 MLD demonstration plant off Chennai/ Ennore is being designed for main land requirement.
 
41.       During the year 2005-06, NIOT has successfully commissioned the first ever Desalination Plant in India to produce one lakh
 litres per day freshwater based on Low Temperature Thermal Desalination principle at Kavaratti, Lakshadweep islands. The plant has
 produced close to 2 crore litres of water so far and distributed to the Island community by Lakshadweep Public Works Department,
 Kavaratti. The plant also achieved the production rate of 130% during the campaign. In addition, NIOT is working on development
 of desalination plant with a higher capacity of 1 million litres per day and 10 million litres per day during the year 2006-07. NIOT
 would also be developing the wave front facility as a part of capacity building measure during the year 2006-07. The enhanced
 allocation during the year 2006-07 is primarily on these accounts.
42.       The thrust areas under this programme for the year 2006-07 are as under :
(i)         Technology Development for Energy and Freshwater from sea (Desalination)
(ii)        Deep-sea Technology including mining (funded partly under PMN programme)
(iii)       Technology for Coastal and Offshore applications including Environmental Engineering
(iv)       Technology for Marine Instrumentation System
(v)        Ocean Science and Technology for Islands
43.       The Committee commends the efforts of the Ministry on the successful commissioning of the first ever Low Thermal
 Desalination Plant in Kavaratti, Lakshadweep by National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT). The Committee, however feels
 that despite above initiatives by the Ministry, there is still enough scope left to commission such Plants in other coastal areas of the
 country. The Committee, therefore, feels that it should be one of the prioritized areas of the Ministry.
44.       The Committee observes that Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) has a rich potential to provide pollution free
 renewable energy to meet the power needs of coastal region as well as island groups. Therefore, it recommends to the Ministry to
 build energy plants of higher capacity as this might lessen the demand on fossil fuel for power generation. 
45.       The Committee would like the National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) to ensure that its activities especially in the
 area of Deep Sea Mining should not pollute the ocean floor and depletion of fish stocks from their habitats, which could affect the
 fishing communities.
 
COASTAL RESEARCH VESSELS
 
46.       Two research ships ORV Sagar Purvi and FORV Sagar Paschimi have been carrying out oceanographic surveys for the
 exploration of non-living and living resources in the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and beyond, around Indian Ocean region since
 1984.  These vessels were being utilised for multi-disciplinary research on the physical, chemical, geological and biological aspects
 of the Indian Ocean.  The vessels were also engaged in campaigns for validating satellite oceanographic data, assessment of marine
 living resources and for various technology demonstration activities. The vessels facilitate systematic collection of samples and
 immediate analysis of the mandatory parameters like nitrate, phosphate etc. for the Coastal Ocean Monitoring  & Prediction   System 
 (COMAPS) programme.   Both    the   vessels   are equipped with sophisticated scientific facilities for onboard analysis and
 navigational equipments along with communication facilities. In order to strengthen the programme on monitoring of marine
 pollution along the coastal waters of the country and to promote research on near shore phenomena, the two vessels do sampling at
 desired locations of the transects identified for potential hot spots. The National Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai through its
 Vessel Management Cell is maintaining these vessels. During the year 2006-07 an allocation of Rs. 5.00 crores has been earmarked
 for the programme. Sagar Purvi and Sagar Paschimi will undertake cruises for COMAPS (Pollution monitoring) across the eastern
 and western coasts of India and the physical oceanographic observations & microbiological studies for the waste load allocation
 project under ICMAM will continue during this year. The proposed activities under the programme for the year 2006-07 are as
 follows :
Sagar Purvi and Sagar Paschimi will undertake cruises for COMAPS (Pollution monitoring) across the eastern and western coasts of
 India
Continuation of physical oceanographic observations & microbiological studies for the waste load allocation project under
 ICMAM      
Monitoring of pollution in the hot spots
Continuation of Consultancy works for public and private sector undertakings using the vessel

158thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/158theport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:19]
Deployment of vessel for testing of in house developed instruments and support various projects of NIOT
 
47.       The Committee would like to suggest that since the assessment of the sea pollution and subsequent action plan for dealing
 with the level of pollution is extremely important from the point of view of maintaining an optimal sea ecology, it is necessary that
 indepth research should be undertaken for a complete monitoring of the ocean pollution and initiating subsequent steps to control the
 same.   The Committee, therefore, strongly advocates the Ministry to initiate comprehensive programme under ocean pollution
 studies and control.
ACQUISITION OF NEW RESEARCH VESSELS
           
48.       During the year 2006-07, an allocation of Rs. 70.00 crores has been earmarked for this programme.  The Committee during its
 interaction with the Secretary, Ministry of Ocean Development was informed that the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs’
 approval had been obtained and contract had been awarded in this regard. A new Research Vessel Sagar Nidhi would be launched in
 September 2007. The Ministry’s focus in the next five years would be to develop sustainable technology for the exploitation of
 various non-living resources. The Committee was also informed that under vessel for technology services and demonstration
 programme, suitable platform was required to replace the vessels and crafts chartered by the MOD at present, which catered to the
 above demand. Without such facility, the implementation of the technology development programme would be delayed. For initial
 expenditure on design etc. the proposed sum of funds was essential and programme would be initiated upon obtaining requisite
 approvals. The proposed targets under this programme for the year 2006-07 are as follows :
 
Under Vessel for technology services and demonstration programme, suitable platform is required to replace the ageing vessels and
 crafts of the Ministry
Design of the new Research Vessel, tendering, finalisation and award of building contract for vessel, etc.
Major portion of the vessel construction is expected to be completed
Major scientific equipments and facilities are expected to be purchased and installed
 
49.       The Committee has been recommending for a Research Vessel for the Ministry and, therefore, notes with satisfaction that
 sustained efforts of the Ministry helped the project to be approved.  The Committee hopes that the new Research Vessel, Sagar Nidhi,
 which is amultipurpose vessel for technology services and demonstration, acquired to cater to the ongoing and the new program, such
 as Deep Sea Mining, OTEC, Remotely Operated Vehicle, Autonomous underwater Vehicle, supporting underwater observation
 system and instrumentation, to support technology demonstration program and to act as support platform for various research
 activities will be launched as per schedule and will enable the Ministry to carry out its important task of ocean development.
 
GAS-HYDRATE EXPLORATION AND TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT FOR EXPLOITATION
 
50.       With ever increasing gap between demand and indigenous production of natural gas and the huge import bill incurred by
 India, it is necessary to look for alternative resources and Gas hydrates have the potential in this direction.  The Gas hydrates
 programme consists of both scientific & technology development for gas hydrates. The steps in this programme will be to understand
 the generation and accumulation of hydrates in sediments, estimate impact of gas dissolution on geological environment and climate,
 develop or adopt environmentally safe technology for production and transportation of gas from hydrates, draw up plans to monitor
 and manage environmental perturbation during hydrate harvesting. The allocation of Rs.30.00 crores during the 2006-07 is required
 to continue with survey and fine tuning the SS2500 at gas hydrate site in Krishna - Godhavari and Mahanadi basin  and design of
 ACS for gas hydrates sampling.
 
51.       The Committee during its interaction with the Secretary, Ministry of Ocean Development had observed that the country
 needed alternative sources of energy and gas hydrate was an important discovery. To which the Secretary replied….. “We believe gas
 hydrate is a kind of intermediate solution to energy in the world. When I say that, I mean that once the gas and petroleum are over,
 then gas hydrate will get before the so-called non-conventional and non-hydrocarbon kind of alternative energies, maybe by 2050.
 Now, in this area, we are keeping track of what others are doing. We are not far behind the world. We have not done much research
 because we could not get the permission to use foreign vessels for gas hydrates. We have now got the clearance form the Ministry of
 Defence. Technology development is important and we are concentrating on that like development of remotely operated vehicle. This
 is essentially to further the science of gas hydrate because then equipment will actually be going near to the sea surface and take
 measurements. We know from the science that in case there is a gas hydrate present, we should have significantly very low
 concentration of oxygen locally. We cannot do this unless we have a moving laboratory inside the ocean. We are not far behind from
 rest of the world”.
52.       The Committee is of the view that Fossil Fuel reserves are continuously depleting and will not last long. However, Gas
 Hydrates have the potential of providing energy security to the country, as it is an alternative source of energy. The Committee is
 however, constrained to observe that budget that was allocated under this programme was not fully utilized. The Ministry should
 encourage excellence in national laboratories to focus on niche areas of hydrate research with special emphasis on resource extent
 evaluation and environmental impacts and development of technology for detection of gas hydrates in sediments. The Committee,
 therefore, feels that this programme should be a high priority area for the Ministry in the years to come.
 
TSUNAMI & STORM SURGE WARNING SYSTEM
 
53.       The unforeseen events of the killer tsunami on 26
th December, 2004 led to introduction of the Tsunami & Storm Surge
 Warning System during the year 2005-06. The objective of the project is to establish a warning system for the oceanogenic disasters

158thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/158theport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:19]
 caused by tsunami and storm surges, which is one of the worst natural calamities in the recent past.  The project would be
 implemented with active participation of other concerned departments, such as Department of Science & Technology (DST), Centre
 for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Department of Space (DOS). The project is expected to strengthen the seven seismic
 observation stations of DST, establishment of 8-10 DART Observation Network, instillation of real time tide gauge monitoring
 stations etc., 24-hour monitoring of the systems for generation of timely warning.
 
54.       The activities proposed under the `Tsunami and Storm Surge Warning System' programme for which an enhanced allocation
 of Rs. 95 crores has been made during 2006-07 bear the following components:
Strengthening of the existing seismological network to indicate near real-time occurrence of a tsunamigenic earthquake
Installation of tsunami warning sensors close to the ocean bottom at appropriate locales in the Indian Ocean, with real-time
 connectivity
Tide gauge and data buoys networking
Modeling of the inundation scenarios for the entire coast
Establishment of a centre for collection of the information, analysis and generating status advisories
 
55.       The Ministry informed the Committee that the proposed warning system will be installed in about 2½ years at an estimated
 cost of Rs. 125 crores. A dedicated 24 X 7 Tsunami Warning Centre is proposed at Indian National Centre for Ocean Information
 Services, Hyderabad, an autonomous institute under Department of Ocean Development. Plans to spend the allocation up to the
 optimum level include indigenous development of Deep Ocean Assessment and Reporting (DART) systems and setting up of INSAT
 DART & INSAT Met data Reception system at INCOIS, Hyderabad. The key components of the programme, namely installation of
 bottom pressure sensors, tide gauges, seismological network with near-real time connectivity are envisaged to be in place during
 2006-07. Computational and analytical facilities with appropriate interface software for handling the large amount of real-time data
 directly coming to INCOIS Tsunami Warning Centre shall be established during the year.
 
56.       The Committee commends that the Tsunami & Storm Surge Warning System is proposed to be implemented with active
 participation of other concerned Departments, such as DST, CSIR, DOS. However, the Committee expresses its concern over the
 timely completion of the project because last year (2005-06) also, the Ministry had informed the Committee that the proposed
 warning system would be installed in 2 ½ years at an estimated cost of Rs. 125 crores. After one year, the Ministry maintains the
 same position with regard to time and cost of the project. The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised specifically about the
 time frame for completion of the project and whether the project is progressing as per the schedule.
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
 
1.         The Committee while noting the reason given by the Ministry regarding the non-uniform pace of expenditure for the third
 quarter of the financial year 2005-06 would like to know the expenditure incurred by the Ministry on the Annual Indian Scientific
 Expedition to Antarctica and whether taking into consideration this expenditure, the expenditure in the third quarter is more or less
 uniform as compared to the previous two quarters. The Committee, however, finds that the pace of the expenditure by the Ministry
 has not been uniform during the first two quarters either. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must strive for the
 regular infusion of funds in various projects/schemes in all quarters of the financial year and thereby maintain the uniformity in the
 pace of expenditure throughout the year.
(Para 9)
2.         The Committee observes that the reasons advanced by the Ministry for non-utilisation of the budgetary support in respect of
 Polymetallic Nodules Programme, Comprehensive Swath Bathymetric Survey of Indian EEZ, Gas Hydrates Exploration and
 Technology Development for Exploitation and Acquisition of new Research vessel programmes mainly related to delay in acquiring
 the clearances and finalizing the contract, non-availability of vessel and other such procedural delays. The Committee expresses
 serious concern on such delays and is of the opinion that such delays could have been avoided. The Committee, therefore,
 recommends to the Ministry to evolve a suitable mechanism to monitor the budgetary planning and its allocations and so as to avoid
 such delays in future.                                          (Para 12)
 
3.         The Committee is of the view that in addition to on-going programmes in various domains of polar sciences, National Centre
 for Antarctic Ocean Research (NCAOR) should also initiate cutting-edge experiments in such frontier areas as assessment of
 biotechnological potential of Antarctic microbes, biodegradation of organic wastes using microbial consortium and productivity and
 ecosystem dynamics in the Antarctic lakes. It should also envisage initiating meaningful logistics operation with other countries,
 which could lead to operational and financial cooperation. (Para 21)
 
4.         The Committee is of the view that the National Centre for Antarctic Ocean Research (NCAOR), being the nodal organisationt
 to execute the Antarctic Programmes should strive to further expand its infrastructure facilities for carrying out research in the realms
 of Polar Sciences and Southern Ocean Oceanography.
(Para 22)
5.         The Committee notes that the delay in availability of Research Vessel for demonstration of mining system resulted in delay in
 Phase II of the Mining Programme. The non-availability of Research Vessel, led to reduced ship days under the Polymetallic Nodules
 Programme. The Committee feels that such eventualities result in non-utilisation of the budget in fruitful manner and should be
 avoided.(Para 25) 
6.         The Committee notes with satisfaction that the programmes under the Ocean Observation Information Service have been
 progressing in the right track. However, the Committee feels that the National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS),
 being the nodal agency for providing coastal and ocean data and value added products to the users should monitor its performance
 and work-mechanism to process and disseminate ocean data and data products to user communities like fisheries, weather, climate,

158thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/158theport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:19]
S.No. Name of the Scheme 2006-07
1. Polar Science 41.00
2. Polymetallic Nodules Programme 19.00
3. Ocean Observation and Information Services 25.00
4. Marine Research & Technology Development 29.00
 ports, shipping etc. on a regular basis so that ocean weather forecasting is timely and precise. The Committee hopes that the High
 Performance Computing System at INCOIS, Hyderabad would be in place at the earliest for which a budgetary allocation of Rs. 10
 crores has been made for the year 2006-07.   (Para 31)
7.         The Committee observes that the efforts of the Ministry to monitor pollution in the coastal areas on vigorous basis should not
 be restricted to hot spots only. The Ministry should keep on identifying locations for periodical monitoring alongwith stipulated
 parameters for diffusion and dispersion characteristics. Besides, the samples collected at these locations should be forwarded to State
 Pollution Control Boards for taking remedial measures. (Para 37)
 
8.         The Committee feels that the Ministry should also focus its efforts in assisting Universities to create infrastructure facilities
 and building up a skilled human resource base in Marine Sciences. Besides, the Ministry should also participate and showcase its
 activities in national and international level exposition, exhibition, fairs etc. from time to time. Inter-active computer generated
 information on Ocean Science & Technology could perhaps help educate the public on the ocean and its resources.   (Para 38)
 
9.         The Committee observes that the sea's potential as a medicine storehouse remains largely in the realm of experimentation. It
 commends the Ministry’s ongoing efforts towards transferring the technology to pharmaceutical industry for commercialization of
 the products. The Committee recommends that under this programme, the extraction and development of other potential drugs and
 chemicals from the depth of the ocean should be the priority of the Ministry.                    (Para 39)
 
10.       The Committee commends the efforts of the Ministry on the successful commissioning of the first ever Low Thermal
 Desalination Plant in Kavaratti, Lakshadweep by National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT). The Committee, however feels
 that despite above initiatives by the Ministry, there is still enough scope left to commission such Plants in other coastal areas of the
 country. The Committee, therefore, feels that it should be one of the prioritized areas of the Ministry.   (Para 43)
11.       The Committee observes that Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) has a rich potential to provide pollution free
 renewable energy to meet the power needs of coastal region as well as island groups. Therefore, it recommends to the Ministry to
 build energy plants of higher capacity as this might lessen the demand on fossil fuel for power generation.                        (Para 44)
12.       The Committee would like the National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) to ensure that its activities especially in the
 area of Deep Sea Mining should not pollute the ocean floor and depletion of fish stocks from their habitats, which could affect the
 fishing communities.                                               (Para 45)
 
13.       The Committee would like to suggest that since the assessment of the sea pollution and subsequent action plan for dealing
 with the level of pollution is extremely important from the point of view of maintaining an optimal sea ecology, it is necessary that
 indepth research should be undertaken for a complete monitoring of the ocean pollution and initiating subsequent steps to control the
 same.   The Committee, therefore, strongly advocates the Ministry to initiate comprehensive programme under ocean pollution
 studies and control.                                      (Para 47)
14.       The Committee has been recommending for a Research Vessel for the Ministry and, therefore, notes with satisfaction that
 sustained efforts of the Ministry helped the project to be approved.  The Committee hopes that the new Research Vessel, Sagar Nidhi,
 which is amultipurpose vessel for technology services and demonstration, acquired to cater to the ongoing and the new program, such
 as Deep Sea Mining, OTEC, Remotely Operated Vehicle, Autonomous underwater Vehicle, supporting underwater observation
 system and instrumentation, to support technology demonstration program and to act as support platform for various research
 activities will be launched as per schedule and will enable the Ministry to carry out its important task of ocean development.
                                    (Para 49)
 
15.       The Committee is of the view that Fossil Fuel reserves are continuously depleting and will not last long. However, Gas
 Hydrates have the potential of providing energy security to the country, as it is an alternative source of energy. The Committee is
 however, constrained to observe that budget that was allocated under this programme was not fully utilized. The Ministry should
 encourage excellence in national laboratories to focus on niche areas of hydrate research with special emphasis on resource extent
 evaluation and environmental impacts and development of technology for detection of gas hydrates in sediments. The Committee,
 therefore, feels that this programme should be a high priority area for the Ministry in the years to
 come.                                                                                                              (Para 52)
16.       The Committee commends that the Tsunami & Storm Surge Warning System is proposed to be implemented with active
 participation of other concerned Departments, such as DST, CSIR, DOS. However, the Committee expresses its concern over the
 timely completion of the project because last year (2005-06) also, the Ministry had informed the Committee that the proposed
 warning system would be installed in 2 ½ years at an estimated cost of Rs. 125 crores. After one year, the Ministry maintains the
 same position with regard to time and cost of the project. The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised specifically about the
 time frame for completion of the project and whether the project is progressing as per the schedule.                    (Para 56)
Annexure
Budgetary allocations for the year 2006-07                                                     (Rs.in crore)

158thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/158theport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:19]
4.1 Fisheries Oceanographic Research Vessel (FORV) and MLR  8.00
4.2 Drugs from Sea  5.50
4.3 Assistance for Research Projects  4.00
4.4 Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS)  2.20
4.5 Ocean Awareness  1.00
4.6 Manpower Training  0.30
4.7 Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM)  5.00
4.8 Deep Sea Mineral Exploration  2.00
4.9 BENFAN  1.00
5. National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) 87.00
6. Coastal Research Vessel (CRV) 5.00
7. Delineation of Outer Limits of Continental Shelf 0.00
8. Comprehensive Swath Bathymetric Survey of Indian EEZ 9.00
9. Gas-hydrate Exploration & Technology Development for Exploitation 30.00
10. Acquisition of new Research Vessels 70.00
11 Geo-physical Study of Laxmi Basin 0.00
12 Ocean Data Buoy Programme 25.00
13 IT and Computers 3.00
14 Tsunami and Storm Surge Warning System 95.00
                                          Total 438.00
 
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 5th April, 2006 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
                       
PRESENT
 
1.         Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
 
LOK  SABHA
 
Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
Dr. Sujan Chakraborty  
Shri Francis Fanthome
Shri Anant Gudhe
Shri Babubhai Katara
Shri Brahmananda Panda
Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
Smt. Jayaben Thakkar
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
 

158thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/158theport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:19]
SECRETARIAT
                       
Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
            Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Ministry of Ocean Development
Dr. P.S. Goel, Secretary
Dr. B.R. Subramaniam, Scientist ‘G’
 Shri V. Ravindranathan, Scientist ‘G’ 
Shri Rasik Ravindera, Director, NCAOR
Dr. V.S. Rao Chintala, Scientist ‘G’
Shri Ajai Saxena, Director
Dr. K. Prem Kumar, Director, NIOT
Shri R.K. Sharma, Scientist ‘F’
Shri T.V. Bhaskara Rao, Scientist ‘F’
Shri Deepak Das, CCA
Shri Ruchika C. Govil, Director
Shri Dinesh Kumar, Deputy Secretary (F)
Shri M.L. Sharma, Deputy Secretary
Shri  Jung Bahadur, Scientist ‘D’
Shri P. Madeswaran, Scientist ‘D’
Shri A.B. Choudhury, Scientist ‘D’
Shri P.G. Ghosh Dastidar, Scientist ‘D’
Dr. V. N. Sanjeevan, Scientist ‘D’
Dr. S.A.S. Naqvi, Scientist ‘D’
 
*                                              *                                                          *
2.         The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Ministry of Ocean Development and requested the Secretary
 to make a brief presentation regarding the Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry. Thereafter, the Secretary made a visual
 presentation regarding the major activities formulated for the year 2006-07 and achievements of the Ministry during the year 2005-
06. He also mentioned about the budgetary allocations under different heads as also the functioning of the Ministry.  The Members
 then sought clarifications on points arising out of the presentation. The Secretary replied to them.
 
*                                              *                                                                      *
*                                              *                                                                      *
*                                              *                                                                      *
4A.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.           
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 04.45 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on Friday, the 7
th April, 2006.
 
***Related  to other matters.
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
XXII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING
 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 15th May, 2006 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe ,
 New Delhi.
                       
PRESENT
 
1.         Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Dr. Prabha Thakur
Shri Dilip Singh Judev
Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
 
LOK  SABHA
 
Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
Shri Francis Fanthome
Shri Brahmananda Panda

158thReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/158theport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:19]
Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
11.       Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
12. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
      Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty                 
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
2.               The Committee took-up for consideration its draft ***, ***, ***, 158
th, ***, ***,  and *** Reports on Demands for Grants
 (2006-07) pertaining to the ***, ***, ***, Ministry of Ocean Development, ***, *** and *** respectively. After some discussion, it
 adopted all the reports without any modification.
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman, and in his absence, Dr. Prabha Thakur to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and
 Dr. Sujan Chakraborty, and in his absence, Shri Francis Fanthome to lay the same on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Thursday, the
 18
th May, 2006.
 4.        The Committee, then, adjourned at 4.20 p.m. to meet again at 3.30 p.m. on Monday, the 22nd May, 2006.
 
***Related  to other matters.
 
# Nominated w.e.f. 24th  March, 2006.
$ Dr. Chhattarapal Singh Lodha ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 23rd December, 2005 consequent upon his expulsion from the  Rajya Sabha.
& Prof. Saif-Ud-Din Soz ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 29th January, 2006 on being  inducted into the Union Council of Ministers.
* Smt. Kum Kum Rai ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of  her  term in the Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 2nd April, 2006.
§ Shri Birabhadra Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of his term in the Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 2nd April, 2006.
(i)