Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
REPORT NO.
291
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on st December, )1 2016
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on st December, )1 2016
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FIRST REPORT
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Eighty-fourth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
on the Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the
Ministry of Earth Sciences


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

15
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FIRST REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Eighty-fourth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
 on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
on the Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the
Ministry of Earth Sciences
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-9
5. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 11-14

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-17)
 (Constituted on 1st September, 2016)
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury    —   Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
5. Shri C.P. Narayanan
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
7. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
8. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
9. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
10. Shri Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
31. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Ninety-first Report on the Action Taken by the
Ministry of Earth Sciences on the recommendations contained in Two Hundred Eighty-fourth
Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences,
which was presented laid in the both the Houses of Parliament on 9th May, 2016.
2. There were eighteen recommendations in the Two Hundred Sixtieth Report of the Committee.
Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Ministry
on 14th June, 2016.
4. In the meeting held on 29th November, 2016, the Committee considered the Draft Report and
adopted the same.
RENUKA CHOWDHURY
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
29 December , 2016 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Agrahayana 10, 1938  Science & Technology, Environment & Forests,
Rajya Sabha
(iii)

ACRONYMS
SAGE : Seisomolgical and Geoscience
O-STORMS : Ocean Services, Technology Observations, Resources Modelling and Science
HPC : High Performance Computing
WMO : World Meteorological Office
UKMO : United Kingdom Meteorological Office
NCEP : National Centre for Environmental Prediction
GEF : Global Environment Facility
NAAQI : National Ambient Air Quality Index
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Earth Sciences
on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Eighty-fourth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences, which was presented to both
the Houses of Parliament on 9th May, 2016. There were eighteen recommendations in the Report
of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee was received
from the Ministry on 14th June, 2016. The Committee, on examination of Action Taken Notes, is
not satisfied with action taken by the Ministry in respect of five recommendations (para 4.6, 8.2,
9.2, 12.5 and 15.3) and would like the Ministry to take further action in respect of such
recommendations as indicated in the Report.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on
the action taken by the Ministry of Earth Sciences are set out in the succeeding paragraphs:-
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE MINISTRY AND BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR
2016-17
Recommendation
The Committee notes that although there has been a reduction in the budgetary allocation at
RE stage in 2015-16, the Ministry has not been able to utilize the allocated amount optimally and
much amount had remained unspent. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such
underutilization by the Ministry should be avoided and whatever amount is allocated should be
utilized to the fullest extent. (Para 4.2)
Action Taken by Government
Ministry noted the recommendation and will make every effort to utilize fully the allocated
funds.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the steps taken in this
direction.
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the Ministry still requires additional funds in the ‘Plan’ component
in order to pursue important programmes and activities in 2016-17 which had been deferred
previously due to paucity of funds. The Committee also notes that the ‘Plan’ component in any
budgetary allocation is important to carry out programmes and activities. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the additional funds for the flagship programmes of the Ministry should be
allocated to the Ministry. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should be provided
adequate additional amount, as requested by the Ministry, so that the critical programmes are not
adversely affected. (Para 4.6)

2
Action Taken by Government
Ministry would like to thank the Committee for making a recommendation for additional fund
allocation for implementation of the flagship programmes and to meet the critical minimum
requirement without adversely affecting the programmes.
Comments
The Committee notes that the reply of the Ministry does not indicate whether it has
taken any action on the recommendation of the Committee.  The Committee would like to
know the action taken by the Ministry in pursuance of the Committee’s recommendations.
POLAR SCIENCES AND CRYOSPHERE
Recommendation
The Committee feels that the programme is extremely significant from the environmental
aspect as it is through this programme that India’ s presence in Arctic and Antarctica region will
be felt. Further, the study of climate of Polar regions will help in its research of understanding
the climate of cold and fragile region of Himalayas in the wake of climate change. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should undertake more studies and activities in the Polar
regions and should take up this programme sincerely. (Para 6.5)
Action Taken by Government
Ministry of Earth Sciences would like to thank the Committee for the encouragement and
would like to assure that the more studies and activities will be taken up in Polar regions.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
roadmap, if any, prepared by the Ministry in this direction and the strategic policy
interventions being contemplated thereon.
Recommendation
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should undertake a realistic assessment
of all the formalities involved in the programme and take action accordingly so that
underutilization of funds is avoided. The Committee notes that the budgetary allocation to the new
rationalized programme, ‘P ACER’  has been reduced in 2016-17 and hopes that the reduction would
not affect the targets of the programme. (Para 6.6)
Action Taken by Government
It may kindly be noted that the reduction in the funds for 2016-17 is primarily due to
postponement of acquisition of Polar Research Vessels in view of technical difficulties.  However,
the reduction does not affect the ongoing scientific programmes of PACER being carried out
currently with the existing infrastructural facilities.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.

3
SEISOMOLGICAL AND GEOSCIENCE (SAGE) PROGRAMME
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the funds were underutilized in 2015-16 primarily due to
postponement of construction of building of National Centre for Seismology. The Committee feels
that the Ministry should not have postponed the construction of National Centre for Seismology
causing underutilization of funds which could have been avoided and the progress of projects would
not have been affected. (Para 7.6)
Action Taken by Government
Ministry noted the recommendation and will make every effort to utilize fully the allocated
funds.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply and also would like the Ministry to constantly
monitor the utilization of the funds.
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the activities in the main phase have been initiated by the Ministry
and hopes that the drilling process would be started. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
should complete the drilling process within the scheduled time period to enrich its prediction of the
regular occurrence of the earthquake in the region. The Committee also recommends to undertake
scientific drilling programme in other parts of India facing regular occurrence of earthquakes.
(Para 7.11)
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry will make every effort to complete the planned scientific drilling of boreholes
in the Koyna area within the scheduled period. After successful completion of borehole
measurements, instrumentation of the borehole with multiple sensors, and studies on cores/cuttings
in the Koyna region, the expertise thus acquired will be utilized to conduct such activities in other
parts of the country. In the interim, efforts will be made to identify and prioritize other areas in
India where scientific drilling would be necessary.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised about the progress made
by the Ministry in the matter.
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR SEISMOLOGY
Recommendation
In its previous reports (Report Nos. 243 and 260), the Committee had recommended for early
creation of manpower, posts, infrastructure etc. for National Centre for Seismology. The Committee,
however, notes that even after a period of more than four years, the Ministry is still in process
of creation of manpower . Although the land for the construction of building has been identified,
the construction of the building is yet to be taken up. The Committee finds that the approach of

4
the Ministry in the matter is extremely lethargic. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry should initiate the process of construction of the building of National Centre for
Seismology without any further delay. (Para 8.2)
Action Taken by Government
Soon after setting up of National Centre for Seismology in October 2014, a proposal was
prepared and submitted to Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for creation of
manpower. The proposal is under consideration of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.
Ministry noted the recommendation. Ministry has initiated the process to identify the related agency
for construction of National Centre for Seismology building.
Comments
The Committee is at a loss to decipher the delay being caused in the creation of
manpower and recommends that the Ministry should actively pursue the matter with the
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.  The Committee also recommends that the
Ministry should setup a time frame by which the construction of National Centre for
Seismology building is to be completed.
MICROZONATION OF CITIES
Recommendation
The Committee observes that the Microzonation of cities falling in seismic zone of V , IV and
III has been taken up by the Ministry and is working in coordination with GSI. The Committee
recommends that Microzonation of these cities should be carried out expeditiously in view of the
vulnerability of India to severe earthquakes. (Para 9.2)
Action Taken by Government
Ministry has noted the recommendation and would make every effort to complete the
microzonation work in selected most vulnerable areas of the country.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know what concrete action has been
taken by the Ministry to carry out the above task.  Also, the Ministry should fix a timeline
for completing this task.
OCEAN SERVICES, TECHNOLOGY  OBSERV ATIONS, RESOURCES MODELLING AND
SCIENCE (O-STORMS)
Recommendation
The Committee notes the initiatives planned to be taken by the Ministry in 2016-17 and the
amount of expenditure incurred in 2015-16. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would diligently
and prudently work towards these initiatives. The Committee also notes that the Ministry has failed
to acquire Ocean Research Vessels in last four years which is significant for conducting oceanic
research despite the Committee’ s repeated recommendations in its previous reports (Report Nos. 243
and Report No. 260). The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should make all out
efforts to ensure that such vessels are acquired at the earliest. (Para 10.4)

5
Action Taken by Government
Ministry has noted the recommendations and will explore the possibility of acquisition of
research vessels towards replacement of the existing vessels as proposed in the 12th Five Year
Plan.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed of the progress made
in the matter.
POLYMETALLIC NODULES AND GAS HYDERATES
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the progress made in harnessing polymetallic nodules and the
explorations being carried out by the Ministry which is significant for economic and strategic
purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should continue with the
exploration and also to develop the deep sea mining system. The Committee also notes the
experiment being carried out for feasibility of extracting gas from gas hydrates and recommends
that the Ministry should continue with experiments in this field. (Para 11.5)
Action Taken by Government
Ministry has noted the recommendation and would continue with exploration of nodules and
phase-wise development of mining system. Similarly, the Ministry will continue its effort for
experimentation towards extraction of gas from hydrates.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee observes that not much progress has been made by the Ministry in acquiring new
dedicated research vessels for the exploration. The Committee also notes that only one research vessel
i.e. Samudra Ratnakar has been deployed. The Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry
should prudently undertake the acquiring of new vessel and these vessel(s) should be deployed,
without which the exploration of poly metallic sulphides is not feasible. (Para 11.7)
Action Taken by Government
Ministry has noted the recommendations and will explore the possibility of acquisition of
research vessels towards replacement of the existing vessels as proposed in the 12th Five Year
Plan.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed of the progress made
in the matter.
Recommendation
The Committee notes the increase in allocation at R.E. stage in 2015-16 and in B.E. 2016-

6
17 and exhorts the Ministry to achieves its targets and undertake the schemes/programmes essential
for studying monsoon and climate change and for forecasting experiments. (Para 12.5)
Acton Taken by the Department
Noted.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed of the action taken in
the matter.
HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING (HPC)
Recommendation
The Committee notes that on the one hand, the available BE of
 ` 10 crore for the programme
in 2015-16 was reduced to  ` 0.50 crore at RE stage and on the other hand the Ministry is not able
to upscale the High Performance Computing due to non-availability of funds. The Committee is of
the view that replies given by the Ministry are contradictory and recommends that the Ministry should
first utilize the funds available at its disposal and then complain about the lack of funds. The
Committee also recommends that sincere efforts be made for achieving augmentation of High
Performance Computing to the level of 10 Peta flop in time bound manner . (Para 13.7)
Action Taken by Government
Noted the recommendations of the Committee towards augmentation of High Performance
Computing Systems. Since HPC Augmentation program of MoES requires  ` 517.47 crores, the
necessary steps are being undertaken to procure the system in a phased manner.  As each step
requires several rounds of deliberations, therefore only  ` 10 crores was budgeted at BE stage of
2015-16 primarily for purchase of diesel for running HPC (24 X 7) at NCMWF due to the
inadequate power load. As the power load was increased from 1MW to 2MW, the requirement of
diesel was not felt leading to inadequate expenditure.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like the Ministry to make realistic
assessment of funds so that underutilization of funds is avoided.
ACCURACY IN WEATHER FORECASTING
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the efforts being made by the Ministry to improve its efficiency
in weather forecasting which is essential in the wake of climate change and unpredictable weather
phenomena. The Committee, however , feels that much more still needs to be done to improve the
accuracy and to bring it at par with international standards. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry should improve its weather forecasting capacities and the upscaling of High
Performance Computing and should also go for collaboration with other nations having well
equipped and advanced weather forecasting systems. (Para 14.5)

7
Action Taken by Government
Noted. Efforts are continuously made to optimize the level of efficiency of the forecasting
system services in terms of accuracy, lead time and associated impact. Government has initiated
a comprehensive Program by upgradation of (i) observation systems (ii) advanced data assimilation
tools (iii) advanced communication and IT infrastructure (iv) high performance computing systems
and (v) intensive/sophisticated training of ESSO- IMD personnel to facilitate the implementation of
advanced global/regional/ meso-scale prediction models for improving the accuracy of weather
forecasts. The performance evaluation of the updated global/meso-scale forecast systems for the
past 5 years have demonstrated enhanced forecast skill. India is a member of World Meteorological
Organisation (WMO) which is a specialised agency of United Nation wherein collaborative
mechanism with international organisations like   UK Meteorological Office (UKMO), National
Centre for Environmental Prediction (NCEP), USA etc. exists for technological exchange to
operational forecasts.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
WATER DESALINATION PLANTS
Recommendation
The Committee commends the establishment of water desalination plants by MoES-NIOT in
Kavaratti, Minicoy and Agatti islands of UT of Lakshadweep, constructed with indigenous
components by using limited infrastructure available in these remote islands. These plants are
greatly catering to the need of fresh quality drinking water in these remote islands and are
extremely cost effective. However , the projects for similar plants at other six islands i.e. Amini,
Chetlet, Kadamat, Kalpeni, Kiltan and Androth, which were conceptualised in the year 2013, are
still hanging fire and mired in administrative procedures. Keeping in view the need for fresh water
in these remote islands for human consumption, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should
coordinate with all the concerned Ministries so that all procedural formalities for the establishment
of the water desalination plants at the six islands are completed at the earliest and the work on
the projects begins without any further delay. (Para 15.3)
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry would endeavor that no delay occurs from NIOT in providing technical support
and expediting the approval process.
Comments
The Committee finds the reply of the Ministry evasive and lacking information on any
concrete action taken by it for coordinating with other concerned Ministries for
completation of formalities for establishment of water desalination plants at the other six
islands.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress in the matter during
examination of Demands for Grants 2017-18 of the Ministry.

8
AGRO-METEOROLOGICAL SERVICES
Recommendation
The Committee observes that the number of farmers receiving agro-meteorological advisories
is still small as compared to the total number of farmers in the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that efforts should be made in increasing the number of farmers benefiting from
meteorological advisories and enhancing dissemination through various media channels. The
Committee feels that awareness about the agro-met services is necessary and recommends to
continue creating awareness so that more and more farmers get benefited. (Para 16.4)
Action Taken by Government
Ministry would like to thank the Committee for encouragement and would make every effort
to increase the awareness of agro-met services. We are preparing a road map and strategy to
improve on dissemination process and to reach more and more farmers with our forecasts and
warnings.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the developments in
the matter.
RESEARCH, EDUCATION AND TRAINING OUTREACH
Recommendation
The Committee notes the significance of creating specialized manpower in the field of Earth
System Science and conducting training programmes with participants from across the globe. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should create world class infrastructure
including training schools and hostels and complete the construction of International student Hostel
within the scheduled time frame. The Committee further recommends to enhance extramural
activities and fulfilling the objectives of the programme. (Para 17.5)
Action Taken by Government
The International training hostel to be jointly used by IITM and IMD is being constructed and
will be completed by July 2016. Towards strengthening the training programmes for the scientists
in India and other countries, apart from the WMO Training Schools at IMD and IITM, an
International Training Centre for Operational Oceanography has been established at INCOIS
Hyderabad.  The Centre will be strengthened with more infrastructural facilities.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
ENVIRONMENT MONITORING AND RESEARCH
Recommendation
The Committee observes that not much has been done by the Ministry to bridge the
substantial research gaps between SAFAR and CPCB. The Committee feels that the coordination

9
between different Ministries is important and therefore recommends to ensure coordination among
concerned Institutions and Ministries which would boost studies and research specially in environment-
related research and development. The Committee also feels that inter-Ministry coordination is
essential without which the benefits of any research activity will not be able to reach the citizens and
to contribute to socio-economic development of the country. (Para 18.3)
Action Taken by Government
Several initiatives have been taken to closely link the science based outcome of SAFAR with
CPCB. In this direction, a joint initiative has been taken by MoES and CPCB/MoEF with other
organizations under the Global Environment Facility (GEF) program which will lead to science
based air quality action plan for selected Metropolitan cities in India. In addition, SAFAR experts
also participated in development of NAQI (National Ambient Air Quality Index) of CPCB. It has also
been discussed that air quality forecasting system of SAFAR system can be adopted by CPCB to
strengthen the Indian Air Quality information Services.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the developments in
the matter.

MINUTES

V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3,00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 29th November, 2016 in Room No. ‘67’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury  —  Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
6. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOKSABHA
7. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
8. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
9. Kum. Sushmita Dev
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Shri Laxman Giluwa
12. Shri Daddan Mishra
13. Shri Chirag Paswan
14. Shri Nana Patole
15. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
16. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
17. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
18. Shri Vikram Usendi
19. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. She
informed the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 286th,
287th, 288th 289th, 290th and 291st reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations/observations contained in reports of the Committee on the Demands for
13

14
Grants (2016-17) pertaining to Departments of Biotechnology, Space, Scientific and Industrial
Research, Science & Technology, Atomic Energy and Ministry of Earth Sciences. The Committee
then considered the draft 286th to 291st Reports and after some deliberations adopted the same.
3. The Committee also decided to present/lay its 286th to 291st reports to both the Houses of
Parliament on 1st December, 2016. The Committee authorised the Chairperson and, in her absence,
Shri Prasanna Acharya and in his absence Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan to present the reports in the
Rajya Sabha and Shri Vikram Usendi and, in his absence, Shri Laxman Giluwa, to lay the reports
on the Table of Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.05 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.