PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Three Hundredth Report of the Department-Related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2017-18) of the Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th January, 2018 )
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)
308
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Three Hundredth Report of the Department-Related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2017-18) of the Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th January, 2018 )
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-22
5. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 23-26
6. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................... 27-43

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
(Constituted on 1st September , 2017)
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
5. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
6. Shri C. P. Narayanan
7. Shri Parimal Nathwani
8. Shri Sharad Pawar
9. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri P. P. Chauhan
16. Kumari Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20 Shrimati V asanthi M.
21. Shri Daddan Mishra
22. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
23. Shri Chirag Paswan

(ii)
24. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
130. Vacant
231. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
1 Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan ceased to be a member of the Committee  w.e.f. 12th December, 2017.
2 Shri Nana Patole ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from the Lok Sabha w.e.f.
 14th December, 2017

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report
on its behalf, present this Three Hundred Eighth Report on Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change on the recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundredth
Report of the Committee on Demands for Grant (2017-18) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change, which was presented/laid in both the Houses of Parliament on 31st March, 2017.
2. There were 30 recommendations/observations in the Three Hundredth Report of the Committee.
Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of the Committee were received from the
Ministry on 14th August, 2017.
3. In the meeting held 1st January, 2018 the Committee considered the Report and adopted the same.
  N
EW D ELHI; ANAND SHARMA
1 January, 2018 Chairman,
Pausa 11, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests
Rajya Sabha

ACRONMYS
B E : Budget Estimate
BSI : Botanical Survey of India
CAMPA : Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning
Authority
CAF : Compensatory Afforestation Fund
CoE : Center of Excellence
CETP ; Common Effluent Treatment Plant
CPCB : Central Pollution Control Board
ESZ : Eco Sensitive Zones
GBPNIHESD : G. B. Pant National Institute of Himalayan Environment and
Sustainable Development
IDWH : Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitat
IUCN : International Union for Conservation of Nature
IFS : Indian Forest Service
MEP : Monthly Expenditure Plan
MTEF : Medium Term Expenditure Framework
NANP : National Ambient Noise Programme
NWMP : National Water Quality Monitoring Programme
NRCD : National River Conservation Directorate
NBWL : National Board for Wildlife
NTFP : Non-Timber Forest Products
NMHS : National Mission on Himalayan Studies
NTCA : National Tiger Conservation Authority
PCCs : Pollution Control Committees
QEA : Quarterly Expenditure Allocation
RE : Revised Estimate
STAG : Scientific and Technical Advisory Group
SPCBs : State Pollution Control Boards
SOM : Senior Officers Meeting
ZSI : Zoological Survey of India
(iv)

REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change on the recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundredth Report of
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry, which was presented to both the Houses
of Parliament on 31st March, 2017. There were Thirty recommendations/observations in the Three
Hundredth Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of the
Committee were received from the Ministry on 14th August, 2017.
The Committee's recommendations/observations/conclusions, action taken thereon and comments
of the Committee on the action taken by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change are
set out in the subsequent paragraphs:–
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE IN 12TH FIVE YEAR PLAN (2012-17)
Recommendation
The Committee observes that against the approved 12th Plan Outlay of 
`17874 crore., Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change has been initially allocated only `10459.60 crore, during the
Five Years, further reduced to ` 8953.92 crore at RE stage, which is only 50.09 per cent of the approved
allocation. Allocations were reduced at RE stage in 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15. However, in
2015-16 and 2016-17, RE is higher than BE. Further, out of RE allocation of 
` 8953.92 crore during
the 12th Plan period, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change could utilise only `8036.78
crore. i.e. 89.76% of RE allocation. (Para 3.2)
Action Taken
The utilization of budgetary allocation during 12th Plan period is as per the table below:–
(` in crore)
Financial Budget Revised Actual %Utilization
Y ear Estimates Estimates Expenditure of RE
2012-13 2430.00 1800.00 1636.18 90.90%
2013-14 2430.00 1850.00 1811.34 97.90%
2014-15 2043.00 1550.00 1513.82 98.28%
2015-16 1556.60 1693.69 1615.86 95.40 %
2016-17 2000.00 2060.23 1995.00 96.83%
T
OTAL 10459.60 8953.92 8572.20 95.74%

2
Ministry has utilized ` 8572.20 crore i.e. 95.74% of RE allocation during financial year 2016-17.
However, instructions have been issued to Programme Divisions/Autonomous Bodies/Attached Offices
from time to time to ensure that pace of utilization is as per the Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) and
Quarterly Expenditure Allocation (QEA).
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee feels that Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change had been approved
a certain amount of Plan outlay for execution/implementation of its policies/schemes/programmes. However,
the Ministry was provided only 50.09% of the promised plan outlay. No schemes/programme can be
successful unless adequate funds are made available for their effective implementation. The Committee
is of the view that Government must provide the requisite funds for all schemes/programmes so that they
proceed smoothly and are not adversely affected. (Para 3.3)
Action Taken
In 2015-16 and 2016-17, RE was higher than BE. For 2017-18 Ministry had proposed ` 3291.12
crore but under the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) only 10% increase was allowed.
Ministry is making efforts to enhance budget support for schemes/programmes and taking up the matter
with Ministry of Finance at appropriate level.
However, the observations of the Committee may be considered by Ministry of Finance for higher
allocation of funds to the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change would take up the matter with Ministry of Finance at appropriate levels.
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE IN 2016-17
Recommendation
The Committee notes that against the RE allocation of 
` 2060.23 crore in 2016-17, the Ministry
has been able to spend only `1459.58 crore upto 13th February, 2017, which is nearly 71%. Since the
Ministry will be required to utilize nearly 29% of the Budget allocation in about one and a half months
time left in the completion of financial year, the Committee is afraid that the Ministry will not be able
to fully utilize the amount allocated to it for the financial year 2016-17. (Para 4.1)
Action Taken
Against the BE allocation of ` 2000.00 crore and RE of ` 2060.23 crore the expenditure upto 31st
March, 2017 was `1995.00 crore. Overall, the Ministry utilized 99.75% of the BE Allocation and
96.83 % of RE allocation upto 31st March, 2017 during the financial year 2016-17. The details are given
below:

3
(` in crore)
BE (Plan) RE (Plan) Actual % Ex penditure % Expenditure
Expenditure of BE of RE
2000.00 2060.23 1995.00 99.75 96.83
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
Recommendation
The Committee notes the reasons for shortfall in utilization of funds furnished by Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change. The Committee had come across identical reasons for under-
utilization while examining the Demands for Grants 2016-17 of Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change and had recommended the Ministry to take a review of its financial performance. In
this context, the Committee would like to reiterate the recommendation made in its 283rd Report on
Demands for Grants (2016-17) of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change which is as
under:–
"Most of the reasons cited by the Ministry for under-utilisation of funds are administrative and
procedural which could have been avoided. This also shows lack of planning and foresightedness
on part of the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should undertake
a review of its financial performance during the last few years and try to identify the bottlenecks
responsible for not being able to optimally utilise the funds at its disposal so as to improve its
performance on this front in the future". (Para 4.3)
Action Taken
Observations and recommendations of the Committee (including 283rd Report) have been noted for
future compliance. The periodic review for utilization of funds is carried out regularly as per MEP/QEA
to keep watch over the pace of expenditure. Besides, the review of expenditure is part of monthly Senior
Officers Meeting (SOM) chaired by Secretary (EF&CC).
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
OUTLAYS FOR NORTH EAST AND SIKKIM
Recommendation
The Committee is in agreement with the views expressed by the Secretary Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change in the preceding para and recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change must be provided increased allocation in Non-scheme budget to cater to the
requirements of the Ministry; its attached offices and its autonomous, statutory and regulatory bodies.
(Para 5.5)

4
Action Taken
The matter shall be taken-up with the Ministry of Finance in Supplementary Demand for Grants
and at RE stage for increased allocation in Non-Scheme budget for its attached offices, autonomous,
statutory/regulatory bodies.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the BE-2017-18 of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
has seen an increase in allocation of 
`615.19 crore over RE 2016-17. The Committee hopes that the
enhanced allocation will be gainfully utilized by the Ministry and all schemes/programmes would be
completed during the year. Timely completion of programmes not only augments the performance of any
organization physically as well as financially but also helps cut down the overhead costs. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should take all
necessary steps to ensure that the budget allocation of 
` 2675.42 crore. in 2017-18 is utilised optimally
and the physical and financial targets are achieved in a time-bound manner. (Para 5.6)
Action Taken
Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. Ministry will ensure that the
enhanced budgetary allocation for financial year 2017-18 is optimally utilized for achieving the envisaged
targets under the schemes/programmes. Outcome-Output Framework is being strengthened and indicators
developed for monitoring the physical and financial performances of the schemes/programmes.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry would make all out efforts to
achieve the desired results.
ANALYSIS OF THE SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES
Indira Gandhi National Forest Academy, Dehradun
Recommendation
The Committee, however, notes that none of the above mentioned major programmes have been
mentioned in the physical targets fixed for 2016-17. The Committee is at a loss to understand as to why
the above mentioned major programmes, which are likely to account for more than one-third of the
Academy's plan allocation, do not find a place in the physical targets fixed for 2016-17. In the light
of the above, the Committee expects from the Ministry a clear and correct information so as to enable
it to scrutinize the Demands for Grants of the Ministry properly. (Para 7.5)

5
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee have been noted for future compliance. The physical targets,
objective/outcome, target and achievements for IGNFA for the FY 2016-17 are as under:–
(` in crore)
Objective/Outcome Ta rgets Achievements
1. To impart training to
IFS probationers.
2. To conduct in-service
training courses and
workshop of in service
officers like Mid Career
Training Programmes,
Senior Foresters' Workshop
and course to members of
Higher Judiciary etc.
1. To impart training to IFS
Probationer and Foreign
Trainees of 2014, 2015 and
2016 batches.
1. Total 200 IFS probationers and 6
Foreign Trainees from Royal Govt. of
Bhutan attended in 2014, 2015 and 2016
batches.
2. To conduct 4 nos. Mid Career
Training Programmes one each
of Phase I and III and two of
Phase II.
2. Total 48 participants have attended
Phase I, 109 attended Phase II and
46 attended Phase III of Mid Career
Training Programme.
3. To conduct 3 days course to
members of Higher Judiciary.
3. 26 participants have attended 3 days
course of Higher Judiciary.
4. To conduct one week
compulsory course sponsored
by MoEF&CC Equipping
Forestry for Future Forest
Management.
4. 21 participants have attended one
week compulsory course sponsored by
MoEF&CC Equipping Forestry for
Future Forest Management.
5. To conduct 4 nos. of Senior
Foresters Workshops for
Officers of 25, 30, 35 and 50
year of service.
5. 233 participants have attended 4 nos.
of Senior Foresters Workshops for
Officers of 25, 30, 35 and 50 year of
service.
The Financial performance of the Academy is as under:–
(
` in crore)
BE 2016-17 RE 2016-17     Expenditure 2016-17
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan
32.00 15.90 24.00 14.16 23.61 14.21
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and expects the Ministry to provide correct information to
the committee in future.
ANIMAL WELFARE
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that animal welfare must get due attention of the Ministry. The
Committee notes the reply of the Ministry for under-utilisation of funds and recommends that while

6
following due procedure for release of funds, the Ministry should ensure that there is no shortfall in the
funds meant for preventing the infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering on animals. (Para 8.3)
Action Taken
Recommendation of the Committee have been noted for future compliances. Programme Division
is making efforts to get the UCs for earlier releases. Ministry would ensure the proper utilization of funds
for the welfare of animals and also will ensure that there is no shortfall in the funds meant for preventing
infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering on animals.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
NATIONAL COORDINATED PROGRAMME FOR ASSESSMENT OF NON-TIMBER FOREST
PRODUCT RESOURCES
Recommendation
The Committee notes the dismal performance of the scheme since 2008-09. Not even a penny could
be spent in the scheme for the first two financial years inspite of an allocation of ` 50.00 lakhs during
both the financial years. The performance, both physical as well as financial, of the scheme during the
remaining years of the scheme has been equally disappointing. The reply of the Ministry does not indicate
whether the study on ensuring fair returns to primary collectors of Non-Timber Forest Produce granted
to FRI, Dehradun, for which an amount of `16.01 lakhs was incurred in 2011-12 could be completed
or not. After investing eight crucial years and expending approximately ` 65 lakhs, the scheme has been
closed. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should make a realistic assessment of its schemes
and embark upon them only if the Ministry is convinced of its utility and success in future.
(Para 9.3)
Action Taken
Ministry has Scheme for National Coordinated Programme for Assessment of Non-Timber Forest
Product Resources, which was introduced in the year 2008-09 in the 11th Five Year Plan Period. The
main objective of the scheme was to carry out assessment, monitoring and evaluation studies in the broad
areas of forest trade, production and disposal of NTFP in the country. Forest Research Institute,
Dehradun has completed study namely 'National Study on Commercial Production of Non-timber Forest
Products for ensuring Fair returns to Primary collectors' and has submitted the draft report to Ministry.
The summary of the study along with key findings and recommendations in the report were presented
by the Principal Investigator of the Project, FRI, Dehradun on 14.06.2017. The observations/comments
made during the meeting have been conveyed to Principal Investigator of the Project, FRI, Dehradun to
incorporate in the final report and to submit to the Ministry. The same is awaited. As the Ministry had
not received good research proposal on NTFP and it was not able to fully utilize the amount allocated
in the above scheme, therefore, the allocation in the scheme was reduced gradually and ultimately scheme
has been closed. However, the view of the Committee regarding making the realistic assessment of the
scheme is noted.

7
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry would make realistic assessment
about its schemes in future.
ZOOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should
look into all the above issues that emerged during the meeting with the representatives of ZSI and take
necessary action thereon, as the Committee feels that all these issues merit full consideration.
(Para 10.5)
Action Taken
The Ministry has taken necessary action on the issues mentioned in Para 10.4. These are as
follows:–
(i) Ministry is in the process of recruiting 40 posts of various grades of Scientists (Group-A) in
ZSI and offer of appointment has been issued to 36 candidates. Three vacancies have been
held in abeyance due to filing of Court cases and one vacancy has been re-advertised. As far
as proposal for appointment of taxonomists is concerned, the comments are noted for necessary
action.
(ii) As far the setting up of Wildlife forensic laboratories is concerned, ZSI has been directed to
furnish the proposal as a part of the Annual Plan of Operations.
(iii) All the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests/Chief Secretaries of various States and Union
Territories have been asked for facilitating necessary entry permission to ZSI officers and for
better coordination.
(iv) The feasibility for setting up of separate wing to study and conserve the bio-resources of
marine realm/oceans will be prepared in consultation with Department of Expenditure, as per
availability of budget.
(v) The Budget provision for 2016-17 was ` 41.40 crore (inclusive of Plan and Non-Plan) and
BE provision for 2017-18 is ` 49.81 crore. The comments are noted and will be taken up with
Ministry of Finance during budget exercise.
(vi) The proposals for framing up short-term courses of training to IAS/IFS on faunal diversity
including the course content, venue and duration for a calendar year, is noted.
(vii) A concept note for setting up of DNA banks submitted by Joint Regional Centre of Zoological
Survey of India and Botanical Survey of India at Botanical Garden, Noida is noted.
(viii) The concept notes for setting up of New Regional Centres at Bhuj, Kutch in Gujarat and
Gangtok in Sikkim and setting up of Tunnel Aquarium at Digha is noted.
(ix) The proposal for Atoll Centre at Lakshadweep has been received and necessary provision in
the budget will be made in consultation with Ministry of Finance.

8
(x) Ministry is exploring option for identifying suitable land for accommodating precious collection
of holding of faunal repository.
Comments
The Committee notes the response of the Ministry and recommends that follow up action
on all the above issues should be taken up by the Ministry in right earnest and periodic assessment
of the progress made in this regard should be done at appropriate levels.
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that certain specimens conserved in ZSI are irreplaceable and some
of them have even become extinct in our country. The specimens are our national assets and they should
be conserved befittingly. It is sad and alarming to note that due to resource constraints, the concerned
authorities are unable to preserve the specimen with modern technologies. The Committee recommends
that the entire building of ZSI should be upgraded and modernized in a time bound manner, on a top
priority basis. The rooms/boxes where the specimens are kept should be temperature controlled. The
modernization of the building would also enable the specimens to be displayed in a way so that visitors
could have a good look at them. ZSI is one the country's most valuable resource centers and therefore,
the building and the conservation areas should be modernized in a manner reflecting their importance
and their place in Indian history. The Committee also recommends that adequate budgetary allocation
should be made for the renovation and modernization of the building and the specimen conserving/
preserving areas. (Para 10.7)
Action Taken
An amount of ` 16.65 crore was released vide Ministry order dated 27.02.2015 specifically for the
works in relation to modernization of ZSI. The various activities are in progress. The other capital works
for modernization of ZSI are considered by the Ministry, as and when the proposal is received. The
allocation for the Capital during 2016-17 was `10.00 crore and allocation for 2017-18 is ` 9.09 crore.
ZSI is an attached office of the Ministry and is under Non-Schemes, and additional funds can be
provided at RE stage, keeping in view the progress of the existing works and requirements of the funds,
and after utilization of the funds already granted.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that there would be no let up in projects being
undertaken for modernization of ZSI and adequate funds will be made available for the execution
of these projects.
BOTANICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
Recommendation
The Committee is in agreement with the view that the knowledge of Taxonomy was deteriorating
fast in the country. The Committee observes that the existing staff in BSI is only 55% of the sanctioned
strength, which includes huge vacancies in almost all the categories of posts. The Committee is at a loss

9
to understand as to how, with a highly depleted manpower strength, the organisation would be able to
perform its constitutional obligations. The Committee also notes that the BSI has been able to expend
only nearly 55% of the budgetary allocation upto January, 2017. The Committee recommends that
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should take all necessary action, on priority basis,
to ensure that the huge number of vacancies in different categories of posts, are filled up at the earliest.
The Committee also recommends that the BSI should be strengthened both by infrastructure as well as
by trained manpower and the skills of rapidly declining number of taxonomists should be augmented to
meet the enormous task of documenting the plant and animal resources of the country. Adequate funds
should also be made available to the BSI for the purpose. (Para 11.5)
Action Taken
The Ministry has taken appropriate action on all proposals for filling up the vacancies in all
categories of posts including the posts of Scientists.
Proposal for nine posts of LDC (Hindi Typist) have already been communicated to SSC. Proposal
for nine posts of Library and Information Assistant and 31 posts of Botanical Assistant is under examination
of the Ministry for onward communication to SSC.
Proposal for posts of LDC has been communicated to SSC already. For filling up posts of scientists
necessary steps have been initiated.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee was also informed that the persons holding senior positions in BSI would be retiring
shortly and the new recruitment would be done at a junior level only. This would result in a huge gap
in the talent available in the Institution. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change should devise measures to improve the capacity building in the
Institution by temporarily utilising the talent presently available till such time the gap in talent requirement
is reduced. (Para 11.6)
Action Taken
The Ministry is taking appropriate action to maintain availability of talent in the Institute. After
retirement of the persons holding senior positions, their services can be availed of by re-engaging them
as consultants so that the knowledge acquired and experience gained over the period of time could be
utilized at the advantage of BSI. Ministry would ensure that no compromise is made in quality of services
rendered and core functions of the BSI.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

10
NATIONAL MISSION ON HIMALAYAN STUDIES
Recommendation
As regard the financial performance of the scheme, the Committee notes that out of the RE
allocation of ` 46.50 crore. in 2016-17, not even a penny was spent upto 31st January, 2017. The
Committee apprehends that there has not been any physical progress in the scheme in 2016-17. The
Committee is at a loss to understand as to why there has been no utilisation of funds under the scheme
which aims at conservation of Himalayan Ecosystem and sustainable development of the region. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the role and opinion of the Expert Scientific and Technical
Advisory Group, which is supposed to periodically review the performance of the Mission activities in
this matter . (Para 12.3)
Action Taken
The NMHS scheme primarily for R&D activities was started in December, 2015 with total Revised
Budget Estimate of ` 63.45 crore in financial year 2015-16. After the release of 1st installment of ` 32.65
crore to GBPNIHESD, three Scientific and Technical Advisory Group (STAG) meetings and two Steering
Committee meetings have been conducted. Following due deliberations, 27 study projects and
119 fellowships were approved by the 2nd Steering Committee held on 29th March, 2016. The total
expenditure of ` 28.24 crore was incurred by NMHS-PMU in financial year 2015-16 out of `32.65 crore
available. The Institute has utilized 86% budget for FY 2015-16. The 2nd installment of ` 30.80 crore
was received by the GBPNIHESD on 02.04.2016 in FY 2016-17. In 2016-17, 15 new study projects
were started with the approval of the Steering Committee and ` 8.37 crore was released as 1st installment
of grant to project proponents. The unspent balance available from the previous financial year will be
utilized for meeting the committed expenditure of ` 47.44 crore as 2nd and 3rd installment of 42 ongoing
study projects and 119 fellowships.
The role of the Scientific and Technical Advisor Group (STAG) is to provide scientific and technical
guidance for assessing project proposals and invite studies as well as suo-moto developed studies; Site-
specific targeted pilot projects would be suggested; Appraise and recommend case study proposals
ensuring multi-disciplinarily and cross-sectoral integration; Advice study teams on assessment frameworks
and methodologies for conducting the studies; Review progress of the studies on a periodic basis and
recommend necessary mid-course correction options; Provide scientific and technical expert advice and
recommendations to the Project Steering Committee; and advise the Project Management Team on
stakeholder engagement and capacity development areas.
STAG reviewed the NMHS in the 4th Meeting of STAG and appreciated the overall progress of the
Mission and suggested ways for more effective implementation of the Mission in a time-bound manner:
STAG recommended 13 Projects for the consideration of the Steering Committee under different thematic
areas with the total project cost of about ` 15.84 crore.
Role of Steering Committee is to provide overall guidance and direction to the Project Management
Team, including approval and review of Project Operational Plan and Annual Work Plans; Periodic review
of progress in project implementation, including taking appropriate decisions on the recommendations of

11
the Scientific and Technical Advisory Group; and Review and approval of assessment findings and
outcomes of the NMHS.
3rd Steering Committee of NMHS was held under the Chairmanshithp of Secretary (EF&CC) on
March 3rd 2017 at MoEF&CC. 13 proposals recommended by the 4th STAG and three proposals
deferred by the 2nd Steering Committee were placed in the present meeting. Steering Committee approved
15 proposals. Steering Committee suggested Brainstorming Session may be organised by inviting 10-15
members experts/other stakeholders, i.e. institutions, organisations, universities, industries, etc. from IHR
to identify and determine the critical intervention areas to be addressed for the Himalayas. Based on the
outcome of the Brainstorming Session, Mission milestones and crucial strategic steps can further be
discussed in the next SC meeting for finalizing the Action Plan of NMHS with specific set of activities
proactively.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and recommend that the Ministry should clearly reflect the
financial performance of its various schemes/programmes in the documents to the Committee.
POLLUTION ABATEMENT
Recommendation
The Committee notes the reasons furnished by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
for low utilisation of funds under the scheme. At the same time, the Committee is surprised to note that
the Ministry chose not to respond to the Committee's query regarding the reasons for reduction in the
allocation for the scheme at RE stage. The Committee is of the view that high level of pollution across
the county has been engaging the attention of all concerned and abating pollution has become one of
the gravest challenges today. In such a scenario, if funds earmarked for assistance of Abetment of
Pollution remain partially utilised, that speaks volumes about the sincerity and the capabilities of the
concerned agencies. The Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change should seriously ponder over the reasons for underutilization and also impress upon all
the concerned agencies to ensure that funds earmarked for the scheme are utilized in a time-bound
manner . The Committee had also dwelt upon this issue in its 283rd Report on Demands for Grants 2016-
17 of the Ministry and would also like to reiterate the recommendation made therein, which is reproduced
below:
"At a time when the Ministry is required to address the grave and critical challenge of deteriorating
air and water quality and increasing noise pollution, the Ministry has not been able to fully utilise
the allocations made for a scheme providing assistance for abatement of pollution. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take a serious note of its performance under this
scheme and take all necessary measures to ensure that the targets under the scheme are achieved
in future and funds allocated are optimally utilised". (Para 13.7)
Action Taken
The reasons for underutilization under the pollution abatement scheme are as under: (1) Non receipt
of competitive proposals meeting criteria for funding under the scheme; (2) Duplication of schemes in

12
other Ministries; (3) Funding under the scheme was not attractive for the investors; (4) Non-receipt of
utilization from State organizations and State boards. During 2016-17 the scheme was under restructuring
and the focus was on completion of ongoing projects which could not be funded due to non-receipt of
complete documents and Utilization Certificates and the previous releases. The cumulative impact resulted
in less than 50% expenditure resulting in the reduction of RE 2016-17.
Ministry and Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) a Statutory Regulatory Body under the Ministry
have taken a number of steps to deal with the challenges of environmental pollution in a holistic manner.
The steps taken are :–
1. The Government has laid down national Ambient Air Quality standards and has notified
115 emission/effluent standards for 104 different sectors of industries besides 32 general
standards for ambient air, noise and water discharge.
2. Directions have been issued for effective management of solid waste and municipal sewage
to 184 towns.
3. CPCB has issued a comprehensive set of directions under Section 18 (1) (b) of Air (Prevention
and control of Pollution) Act, 1986 for implementation of 42 measures to mitigate air pollution
in major cities.
4. CPCB in association with State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs)/Pollution Control Committees
(PCCs) is monitoring air, noise and water quality across the country under National Ambient
Noise Programme (NANP) and National Water Quality Monitoring Programme (NWMP).
5. Directions have been issued for installation of online (24x7) monitoring devices, adoption of
water conservation practices, etc.
6. Categorization of industrial sectors has been revised under Red, Orange, Green or White
categories based on the concept of pollution index which is a function of emission, effluent,
hazardous waste generated and consumption of resources.
In order to address the issues of underutilization under the scheme, the scheme has been reviewed
and accordingly revamped by merger of schemes namely Assistance for Abatement of Pollution, CETP
and Clean Technology (CT) scheme into single scheme of pollution abatement i.e. 'The new proposed
scheme of pollution abatement.' The new proposed scheme now also lays emphasis on awareness,
capacity building activities, demonstration projects for upcoming technologies, result oriented and time
bound R&D studies for control and abatement of Pollution.
Comments
The Committee notes that reply of the Ministry and hopes that the steps taken would help
address the challenges of environmental pollution in a holistic manner. The Ministry should also
focus on initiating necessary steps to avoid underutilisation of funds.

13
NATIONAL  RIVER CONSERV ATION PLAN - NATIONAL  RIVER CONSERV ATION
DIRECTORATE (NRCD)
Recommendation
The Committee is surprised and dismayed that instead of furnishing the updated financial figures
for the year 2016-17, the Ministry has, in its background note and other documents submitted to the
Committee, furnished more than one year old information. Although the Committee takes note of the
physical achievements of the Scheme during 2016-17, the Committee cannot assess the utilisation of
funds by the Ministry during the year. The Committee advises the Ministry to be careful in future while
submitting information for the consideration of the Committee. (Para 14.5)
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee have been noted for strict compliance and not submitting the
updated information for Financial Year 2016-17 is regretted. However, the updated financial status of the
scheme for 2016-17 is as under:–
(
` in crore)
Scheme BE 2016-17 RE 2016-17 Expenditure 2016-17
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan
NRCD 7.00 0.00 7.80 0.00 6.87 0.00
NRCP 95.00 0.00 101.00 0.00 98.99 0.00
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that such lapses would not be
repeated in future.
CHIRU GOAT (TIBETAN ANTELOPE)
Recommendation
The Committee feels that Jammu and Kashmir has been the conflict region for long and many
women there are unable to leave their homes and go out for livelihood. The shawl walas who live there
have been accused of killing the chiru goat in order to procure the wool for making a shahtoosh shawl.
However, the shawl makers say that they do not kill the goats because if they kill a goat for every shawl,
where will the shawls be produced from. The Committee understands that China and Mongolia are
breeding the chiru goats and Mongolia is known for its finest wool. The Committee feels that livelihood
opportunities are very low for the people of Jammu and Kashmir because of the extreme climatic
conditions there and shawl making contributes a lot towards sustainable livelihoods of these people. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should
conserve and breed the chiru goat and vast tract of land should be utilized for conserving the chiru
goats. These goats can then be given to the shawl makers for collecting hair. This would not only increase
the number of these goats but would also add to the sustainable livelihood opportunities of the people
of Jammu and Kashmir, who are a lot dependant on the handicraft of embroidered shawls.    (Para 15.2)

14
Action Taken
Chiru have long been hunted for their underfur - shahtoosh, which is renowned for its quality and
has traditionally been transported to Srinagar, where it is woven into an extremely fine fabric used to
make shawls. However, it takes 3-5 hides to make a single shawl, and the wool cannot be sheared or
combed, so to collect the fur the animals have to be killed.
It is assessed as ‘Near Threatened’  by IUCN (2017), because the current status can only be
maintained with continued high levels of protection in its natural range and strict controls on trade and
manufacture of the shawls made from its underfur: any relaxation in the protection regime are predicted
to result in a rapid population decline due to commercial poaching at a rate meeting the threshold for
a threatened category.
There have been representations from weavers/traders in J and K for the removal of ban on trade
in shatoosh through amendments in the Wildlife Acts of India, J and K State, China, and the CITES in
order to benefit the Shatoosh weaving industry in Kashmir. The feasibility of farming the Chiru or
Tibetan Antelope (Pantholops hodgsonii) for its wool was proposed as an alternative to protect already
depleted wild populations of this species.
Chiru inhabits high altitude Tibetan Plateau and requires large expanse of land for its movement and
ranging patterns to fulfil its feeding and breeding requirements and therefore rearing in captivity is
extremely difficult. The quality of wool depends on the cold and harsh climatic factors operating at high
altitudes (3,800m up to 5,500m) where this animal occurs in nature. It therefore, may not serve the
purpose, if it is kept in captivity below this altitude. As per unconfirmed reports, the Chinese failed to
keep Chiru in captivity due to its poor survival rates. Any attempt to do conservation breeding of Chiru
at very high altitude regions of Ladakh (> 3800m) may neither be economical nor feasible as humans
cannot be posted there continuously for more than 2-3 months to manage the resources due to high rate
of casualties. Prior to the assessment of the technical feasibility and economic viability of captive rearing
or farming of Chiru by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, the issues dealing with
the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 will have to be examined first as Chiru is listed under Schedule-I.
Captive rearing of Chiru or Tibetan antelope will neither serve the purpose of conservation nor can
provide raw material for weavers as these animals cannot be bred in captivity and animals have to be
killed to collect their wool to make the shawls.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
THE CAMPA FUNDS
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change is in the process
of framing rules in consultation with the State Governments and concerned stakeholders for the utilisation
of the CAMPA Funds. The Committee is perturbed to note the reports emanating from various quarters

15
that the CAMP A funds are being utilized for purposes other than they are intended for. The Committee
recommends that while framing the rules, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change must
ensure that the rules do not give any scope for mis-utilisation or embezzlement of the funds by the States
or any other stakeholders. The Ministry must also devise a stringent monitoring mechanism to ensure that
the CAMP A funds are utilized for the intended purposes only. (Para 16.3)
Action Taken
The Ministry assures the Committee that the observations/recommendations of the Committee will
be kept in view while finalizing the Rules for operational of the Compensatory Afforestation Fund (CAF)
Act 2016. The CAF Act, 2016 has not come into force as provided in Section I (3) of the Act. A
notification for commencement of the CAF Act will be made after the CAF Rule is finalized and
approved. Presently the extension of the time for finalizing the rules has been granted till 03.01.2018.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
LEAPFROGGING FROM BS-IV TO BS-VI STANDARDS OF EMISSION FOR FUEL VEHICLES
Recommendation
Vehicles are the largest single source of air pollution in most urban areas of the country. Air
pollution from motor vehicles is not only emitted directly into the atmosphere but also from chemical
reactions between pollutants after they have been released into the air. The Committee notes the initiatives
taken by the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change on leapfrogging from BS-IV to Bharat
Stage-VI norms. The Committee recommends that there should be no let up in the efforts of the Ministry
of Environment, Forest & Climate Change relating to leapfrogging to Bharat Stage-VI standards of
emission and fuel for vehicles. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should also proactively
coordinate and impress upon the other concerned Ministries of the Government of India to make all out
efforts to ensure that the target of implementing the BS-VI standards of emission for fuel and vehicles
by the year 2020 is achieved. (Para 17.2)
Action Taken
Ministry has already initiated actions to achieve target of BS-VI standards of emission and fuel for
vehicles by the year 2020. Some of the initiatives were already submitted to the Committee. Committee's
recommendations have been noted.
Comments
The Committee recommends that there should be no let up in the efforts of the Ministry
in achieving its targets in this direction.
CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE - CENTRE FOR ECOLOGICAL SCIENCES, (INDIAN INSTITUTE OF
SCIENCE), BENGALURU
Recommendation
The Committee notes the various activities and high quality original research on the biodiversity
of the Western Ghats being undertaken by the Centre for Ecological Sciences. However, the Committee

16
is at a loss to understand as to why, inspite of the increased financial requirements of the Centre and
the fact that the Centre had been able to utilize the allocations made, the annual allocations from the
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change have gone down during the last few years and
have, infact been, almost halved in 2015-16 with respect to the year 2012-13. The Centre was not
provided with any funds in 2016-17 till the end of August. The Committee recommends that the Centre
should be provided the requisite financial allocations by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change as per the requirements of the Centre. (Para 18.11)
Action Taken
The Ministry has released an amount of ` 1,74,27,844/- to Centre for Ecological Sciences (CES),
IISc Bangalore during 2016-17. CES is one of the CoE of the Ministry. The Institute submits project
proposals and after examination as per the guidelines of the scheme, the funds are released to the Institute
after receiving utilization of certificate of the previous grants.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
INTEGRATED  DEVELOPMENT  OF  WILDLIFE  HABITATS
Recommendation
The Committee notes the reasons furnished by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change for reduction in allocation of Project Tiger and Project Elephant at RE stage in 2016-17.
Getting funds at RE stage for projects of national importance and then surrendering the funds on account
of low-expenditure incurred by the concerned State Governments is really disappointing. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change must impress upon the
concerned State Governments to proactively plan their Annual Plan of Operations and release the funds
to implementation agencies so that the funds could be utilized timely, so that the budget allocations made
are not reduced. (Para 19.8)
Action Taken
Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. Ministry is regularly pursuing
submission of Annual Plan of Operation as well as expenditure progress with concerned State Governments.
There is an addition of one more tiger reserve, namely 'Kamlang Tiger Reserve' in State of Arunachal
Pradesh. States have been requested to make proper provisions as per available budget. States have been
advised to optimally utilize budget and this is being monitored in meetings and by Regional Offices of
NTCA.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
Lion is known as the King of the Forest. Today the number of lions in the country has decreased
and the need of the hour is to come forward to protect them and increase their number. The Committee

17
commends the role of the State Government of Gujarat for having taken timely and prompt conservation
efforts whereby the population of Asiatic lion has increased. However, the Committee is also of the view
that the Asiatic lion is still endangered on account of its low population. The Committee is of the view
that already a mechanism is in place for providing statutory support for protecting Tigers and Elephants.
In view of the reducing number of the Lions, the Committee recommends that Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change must take necessary steps for providing statutory support for strengthening
lion conservation and, on the lines of Project Tiger and Project Elephant, come up with a 'Project Lion'
to protect Lions and their habitat. (Para 19.18)
Action Taken
The population of Elephant and Tiger is spread across the country but same is not in case of Lion.
However sufficient support for conservation of Lion has been provided to States under the Integrated
Development of Wildlife Habitat (IDWH) Scheme since Lion is also one of the species specified for
recovery plan. Due to the efforts made in this scheme number of lions have been increased from 411
in 2010 to 523 in 2015. The evaluation of existing habitats of Lion is undertaken in IDWH Scheme.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
ISSUES RELATING TO GIR FOREST
Recommendation
In view of the above, the Committee strongly recommends to the Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change not to reduce the guidelines of eco-sensitive zone from existing 10 kms. to proposed
500 meters by the State Government, as it will surely destroy the Lion habitat. The Committee recommends
that there should be uniformity regarding the declaration of Eco-Sensitive Zones around National Parks
and Wildlife Sanctuaries. (Para 20.5)
Action Taken
During the XXI meeting of the Indian Board for Wildlife held on 21st January, 2002, a 'Wildlife
Conservation Strategy-2002' was adopted wherein point no.9 envisaged that "lands falling within 10 Kms
of the boundaries of National Parks and Sanctuaries should be notified as eco-fragile zones under
Section 3 (v) of the Environment (Protection) Act and Rule 5 Sub-rule (viii) and (x) of the Environment
(Protection) Rules".  This was communicated to all State Governments by the Ministry. However, some
of the State Governments had raised concern over applicability of the 10 Kms. range from the Protected
Area boundary and informed that most of the human habitation and other areas including important cities
in these States would come under the purview of eco-sensitive zone and will adversely affect the
development.
Considering the constraints communicated by the States, the proposal was re-examined by the
National Board for Wildlife in its 2nd meeting held on 17th March, 2005 and it was decided that the
‘delineation of eco-sensitive zones would have to be si te specific and relate to regulation, rather than

18
prohibition, of specific activities'. This decision was also communicated to all the State Governments for
compliance vide letter dated 27th May, 2005.
In response, the Government of Gujarat had submitted proposals for declaration of Eco-Sensitive
Zone around Gir National Park, Gir Sanctuary, Matiyala Sanctuary and Paniya Sanctuary to the Ministry.
The draft notification of ESZ around Gir National Park, Gir Sanctuary, Matiyala Sanctuary and Paniya
Sanctuary was issued by the Ministry on 25th October, 2016.
Subsequently, in the 25th Meeting of the ESZ Expert Committee held on 11th April, 2017 in
MoEFCC under the Chairmanship of the Additional Secretary, MoEFCC, the proposal for ESZ around
Gir Landscape was considered and after deliberations, the Committee recommended the proposal for
Final Notification with minimum distance of 500 meter and upto a distance of 9.4 Km. so as to have
minimum adverse affect.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee also recommends that Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
and Government of Gujarat should look into the issues brought out above which were raised by the
members of the Civil Society and local representatives during the meeting. Further, the Committee
observes that Gir National Park is very poorly connected by air. The Committee recommends that Union
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Government should take up the matter with
the concerned Central and State Government agencies so that air connectivity to Gir Forest can be
improved. Further, the Committee is of the view that policy of granting license to dhabas/hotels being
run near the national park needs to be reviewed keeping in view of the fact that lot of garbage is
generated and thrown by these dhabas/hotels etc. in the area. The Committee also recommends that illegal
construction or encroachment in and around the national park should be viewed seriously and stringent
steps must be taken in this direction. (Para 20.6)
Action Taken
Encroachment and construction around the National Parks and Sanctuaries is in purview of States.
In so far as Gir National Park is concerned, State Government of Gujarat has been communicated to
take action according to the recommendations of Committee. Ministry has also taken up the matter with
Ministry of Civil Aviation regarding poor air connectivity of Gir National Park and requested for improving
air connectivity.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee is of the view that although encroachment
and construction around National Parks and Sanctuaries is in the purview of the States, the
Ministry can always impress upon the concerned State Governments to comply with the laws in
this regards.

19
Recommendation
The Committee also agrees with the apprehension expressed that making 'Girnar Ropeway' for the
visiting tourists is likely to affect the vulture nesting/breeding. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Central Government should review the matter and take a decision in the matter only after it
has examined the report of the expert Committee threadbare. (Para 20.7)
Action Taken
The proposal of 'Girnar Ropeway' has been approved in 22nd meeting of National Board for Wildlife
(NBWL) held on 25th April, 2011. The matter for review is considered by Standing Committee of NBWL
and the comments of committee are noted.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed of the developments in the
matter.
ENVIRONMENTAL  ISSUES  OF  RANN  OF  KUTCH/BHUJ
Recommendation
The Committee feels that the local people of Kutch deserve appreciation for their contribution in
developing and preserving whole landscape of the Rann of Kutch and congratulates them for their
dedication and commitment for preserving the landscape of Rann of Kutch. (Para 21.11)
Action Taken
Ministry has conveyed the appreciation by the Committee for the efforts of local people of Rann
of Kutch for their dedication and commitment for preserving the landscape.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee feels that all the issues brought out in the preceding paragraphs deserve attention
and recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Government of Gujarat
to consider these issues and take necessary action. The Committee also notes that a large number of
tourists come to visit the Rann of Kutch and leave behind a lot of garbage including plastic wrappers
and bottles that lie scattered in that area. The Committee is of the view that there is a need to ban the
use of plastic wrappers. The Committee recommends that heavy penalties should be imposed on violators
and those found littering garbage. The tourists visiting the place should also be sensitized about the need
for maintain cleanliness in the area. The Committee also feels that there is scarcity of water in the area.
Although local people of the area are doing their bit for water conservation and have even created pond
having recharging capacity using local traditional methods, the Committee recommends that the State
Government authorities must take necessary action for water harvesting so that the issue of water scarcity
in the area is resolved.

20
Action Taken
The observations and recommendations of the Committee has been forwarded to the State Government
of Gujarat for action at their end.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee also recommends that the State Government of Gujarat must look into the matter
relating to transfer of the land adjoining the sanctuary to Forest Department of the State Government
in order to protect and preserve the endangered species of birds, especially Great Indian Bustard and
other animals. The State Government should also look into the matter regarding wasteland management
in the area, as requested by some local people there. Further, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change should also undertake study on bio-diversity of the entire Bhuj region and take necessary
actions to preserve them. (Para 21.13)
Action Taken
The matter has been taken up with the State Government of the Gujarat for necessary action at
their end. The recommendation of the Committee to undertake study on bio-diversity of the entire Bhuj
region is noted.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Ministry in the matter.
PRIV ATE LAND PARTICIPATION IN PRESERV ATION AND CONSERV ATION OF FORESTS
Recommendation
The Committee feels that as the forest cover of the country has been drastically and constantly
depleting, there is a need to involve private sector in increasing the forest cover of the country by
encouraging private land participation in preservation and conservation of forests. There are a lot of
people in the country who are having large landholdings and that they would be happy to contribute to
increasing the forest cover of the country. This would also give a boost to the shrinking forest cover of
the country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
should consider the suggestions received by the Committee as mentioned above. The Committee also
recommends that the Ministry should consider giving tax exemptions and compensations to those who
proposed to raise forests on the big areas of land available with them. They should be incentivized only
when the land available with them grows as forest, so that the green area cover of the country grows.
This will not only increase India's forest cover, meet some of the Green India Mission requirements but
also bring in much needed private participation in conservation and preservation of forests.
(Para 22.3)

21
Action Taken
The Ministry accepts the recommendations of the Committee as the same would encourage the
people for taking up plantation on private lands owned by them on voluntary basis. It will help in
increasing the green cover of the country and enhancing carbon stock. The suggestions of the Committee
such as Tax exemption, exemption from application of the restriction of Rural Land Ceiling to the private
land have been sent to Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Rural Development for necessary action.
Restriction on area that can be developed (Not exceeding 5% for instance) attracts the provision of
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 as this would involve land use change.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like the Ministry to inform the Committee of the
development in the matter.
GENERAL  OBSERV ATION
Recommendation
The Committee notes that in the various documents furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change has not provided the status of the achievements of the targets
in respect of schemes/programmes/institutions of the Ministry for the year 2016-17 such as Animal
Welfare, Forest Survey of India, National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board, National Natural
Resource Management System, Pollution Abatement, Hazardous Substances Management, Conservation
of Corals and Mangroves, G .B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment and Development etc., in the
absence of which the Committee cannot make a realistic assessment of the performance of the Ministry
on various counts during the said year. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change should invariably provide the said information to the Committee
in future during examination of Demands for Grants of the Ministry so that the Committee's examination
is not hindered in the absence of such information. (Para 23.1)
Action Taken
Due to the pre-ponement of the budgetary cycle, the details of few schemes/programmes/institutions
of the Ministry for the year 2016-17 could not be submitted to the Committee. Ministry assures to submit
timely inputs to the Committee in future. The targets and achievements of the schemes/programmes/
institutions as mentioned below are placed at Annexure.
(i) Animal Welfare Board
(ii) Forest Survey of India
(iii) National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board
(iv) National Natural Resource Management System
(v) Pollution Abatement
(vi) Hazardous Substances Management

22
(vii) Conservation of Corals and Mangroves
(viii) GB Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment and Development
(ix) National Mission on Himalayan Studies
(x) Project Elephant
(xi) National Mission for Green India
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

23
MINUTES

II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 1st January, 2018 in Room No. '63', First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
5. Kum. Sushmita Dev
6. Dr. K. Gopal
7. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
8. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
9. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
10. Shri Nagendra Singh
11. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and wished
them a happy and prosperous new year. He informed the Members that the meeting had been convened
to consider and adopt the draft 302nd to 308th reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in reports of the Committee on the Demands
for Grants (2017-18) pertaining to Ministry of Earth Sciences, Departments of Biotechnology, Science
and Technology, Scientific and Industrial Research, Space, Atomic Energy and Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change respectively. The Committee, then, considered the draft 302nd to 308th
Reports and adopted the same.
25

26
3. The Committee also decided to present/lay its 302nd to 308th reports to both the Houses of
Parliament on the 4th January, 2018. The Committee authorised the Chairman and, in his absence, Shri
S. R. Balasubramoniyan, M.P . and Shri Prasanna Acharya, M.P . respectively to present the reports in the
Rajya Sabha and Shri Shivaji A. Patil, M.P. and in his absence, Kumari Sushmita Dev, M.P. to lay the
reports on the Table of Lok Sabha.
4. ***     *** ***
5. ***     *** ***
6. ***     *** ***
7. ***     *** ***
8. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3:45 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

27
ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE
i.  Animal Welfare Board
Sl. Name of the Objective/Outcome Ta rgets Achievements Remarks
No. Scheme/
Programme
1. Animal Welfare Financial assistance to 527 AWOs 431 AWOs During the year 2016-
Board of India AWOs for maintenance 17, funds could not
(AWBI) Plan of shelter house, water be released under the
Scheme troughs, medicines rescue Animal welfare schemes
operations, medical due to the condition that
equipments, establishment, funds can be released to
humane education, other those Animal Welfare
animal welfare measures Organizations only who
are registered with NITI
Aayog portal and
against whom no UC is
pending.
2. Scheme for Financial assistance to 6 AWOs or Nil
Provision of awos for construction of 3 shelters
Shelter House shelter houses for animals
for Looking after
the Animals
3. Scheme for Financial assistance to 12 Nil
Ambulance AWOs for provision of ambulances
Services for ambulance services to
Animals in animals in distress
Distress
4. Scheme for Birth Financial assistance to 20588 7261
Control and AWOs for carrying out operations operations
Immunization of animal birth control
stray Dogs programme on dogs
5. Scheme for Relief Financial assistance to NA Nil
to Animals during AWOs during natural
natural calamities calamities and
and unforeseen unforeseen
circumstances circumstances
29

30
Name of the Committe : Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervision of
Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA)
Y ear Objectives/Outcome Targets Achievements
2016-17 CPCSEA was established under
Chapter 4, Section 15(1) of the
Prevention of Cruelty of Animals
Act 1960. CPCSEA is a
statutory Committee, which is
duty bound to take all such
measures as may be necessary
to ensure that animals are not
subjected to unnecessary pains
or suffering before, during or
after performance of
experiments on them. For this
purpose, the Committee
formulated the "Breeding of and
Experiments on Animals
(Control and Supervision) Rules,
1998" (amended in 2001 and
2006) to regulate the
experimentation on animals.
No target has been fixed.
However, attempts will be
made to register all the
untapped biomedical
research establishments who
have not yet registered with
CPCSEA
(i) To promote Digital India
Programme of Government
of India and ensure timely
and transparent disposal of
work of CPCSEA in a broad
manner, the applications/
requests related to New
Registration, Renewal of
Registration/Reconstitution
of IAEC meetings,
Submission of Annual
Inspection Reports,
Submission of Research
Protocols of CPCSEA is nw
being processed through
Website of CPCSEA
effectively and smoothly.
(ii) As a result, revenue
earned ` 59.10 lakhs through
Registrations/Renewals of
establishments.
(iii) 245 nominees were
trained at NIAW before
induction in IAEC.
(iv) 176 nominees have been
trained at Indira Paryavaran
Bhawan, MoEF&CC before
induction in IAEC.
(v) Advertisement through
DAVP for issue of Public
Notice in the Electronic and
Print Media for Registration
of the establishments who
have not yet registered with
CPCSEA has been published
in National Dailies.

31
Y ear Objectives/Outcome Targets Achievements
(vi) Registration of 75
establishments and
constitutions of their
Institutional animals
Ethics Committees
(IAECs).
(vii) 406 project proposal
relating to
experimentation on large
animals examined by
CPCSEA.
(viii) 230 Research
Protocols on large
animals approved.
(ix) 6 large Animal House
Facilities registered.
(x) Registration of 340
establishments renewed.
(xi) Institutional Animals
Ethics Committees
(IAECs) of 319 esta-
blishments reconstituted.
(xii) In nutshell, Total
1665 establishments
were registered with
CPCSEA. Renewal
period was extended to
5 years instead of 3
years, while scrutinizing
Registrations and
constitution of IAEC,
which facilitates
establishments', function
uninterruptedly.

32
Name of Institute: National Institute of Animal Welfare (NIAW)
Y ear Objectives/Outcome Targets Achievements
2016-17 National Institute of Animal
Welfare is a premier training
institute of the Government
of India under the Ministry
of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change functioning
with the mandate of
organizing and imparting
training on diversified
subjects in animal welfare.
The main objective is to
create a pool of qualified and
technical personnel at each
level to ensure proper
implementation of the
welfare of animal scheme
and for fulfillment of the
requirements and rules
framed under the "Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals Act, 59
of 1960. The trainings enable
strict enforcement of the
PCA Act at every level, be it
in Animal welfare or in
animal experimentation in
Bio-medical field.
The various subjects covered
in Animal Welfare include
Principles of Animal Welfare,
their Management, Animal
Behavior, their Social
Relationships and Ethics, PCA
Act and Rules, Psychology,
shelter Management, Disaster
management and Management
of Animals during Disaster,
Nutrition of Farm Animals,
their diseases, animal
Transportation, Slaughter of
Animals and Rules thereof,
Animal birth control and AR
V accination, Lab Animal
Management and
Experimentation, Pain and
Stress Management, Humane
End Points, Role of Animals
in Drug Development, Food
Practices in Animal House
Facilities, Role and Guidelines
of CPCSEA, Zoonotic
Diseases and Their Preventive
Measures, Euthanasia, Wild
Life Protection Act and their
management and Crime
Control there in etc., Zoo
Animal Management. Briefing
about CPCSEA, IAEC, Ethical
Principles adopted by
CPCSEA, Record Keeping
Ethical and Regulatory Issues,
Guidelines on Experimentation,
Import and Export of
Laboratory Animals and
Alternatives to Animal
Experimentation, 4R Concepts
and so on.
National Institute of Animal
Welfare (NIAW) has signed
a MoA on 29th June, 2016
with Jawaharlal Nehru
University (JNU) New Delhi
to run the academic
activities of NIAW.
NIAW has conducted 22
Nos. of training programme
and trained 507 Nos. of
participants during the mid
of year 2016-17 (April to
October, 2016). Total 36
Nos. of training programme
were conducted and trained
680 Nos. of participants
were trained during the year
2015-16. However, in 2013-
14 and 2014-15 NIAW has
conducted 27 Nos. of
training for 285 Participants
and 22 Nos. of training for
318 participants
respectively. Training
programmers for fresh
CPCSEA Nominees were
conducted in four batches
in the month of October,
2016. A total 249 persons
who were identified by
CPCSEA contacted, 170
persons were registered for
the same. 169 persons have
successfully attended the
course and were awarded
with certificates.
JNU has operated the
smooth running of
academic activities from
November, 2016 and from
February, 2017 and

33
Year Objectives/Outcome Targets Achievements
efficiently 97 participants
have been awarded with
the certificates of
participation and
performance in 3
different courses.
JNU has developed
different training
modules for different
certificate courses.
Three certificate courses
viz.  Applied Animal
Welfare in Dairy
Farming, Animal Welfare
in Rural Self-owned
Farms and Management
and Ethical use of
Laboratory Animals in
Research have been
conducted from 13th
February to 25th March,
2017.
ii. Forest Survey of India
Progress report for the year 2016-17
Sl. No. Objectives/Outcome Ta rget Achievements Remarks
1. Forest Cover Assessment
(a) Procurement of cloud free 309 Satellite scenes (LISS 309
Satellite Data III Resource Sat1/II for
393 1x1 degree Top sheets
of Survey of India)
(b) Rectification of Satellite 393 1x1 degree Top sheets 393
Data Geo-referencing with of Survey of India
Survey of India top sheets
(c) Interpretation (Classification) 393 1x1 degree Top sheets 393
of Satellite data through Digital of Survey of India
Image Processing (DIP)
techniques.
d) Ground Verification 393 1x1 degree Top sheets 341
of Survey of India
As per updated estimate,
total 311 Satellite Scenes
(LISS III Resource Sat
I/II) are required in 15th
cycle Forest Cover
Mapping (ISFR 2017)
for entire nation. Till date
309 scenes have been
received from NRSC.

34
Sl. No. Objectives/Outcome Ta rget Achievements Remarks
e) Incorporation of corrections, 68
change detection and area
calculation.
2. Forest Inventory
(i) Inventory Data 6800 Plots 4960 (i) As new National
   Collection Forest Inventory
(ii) Data Entry 2800 Plots - (NFI) design is Grid
based and was
(iii) Data Checking - launched recently,
    and Processing there is slight
shortfall in date
collection, which
would be covered
during 2017-18.
(ii) Data entry
software application
has been prepared
and data entry work
has started.
(iii) After the data
entry, data checking
and processing work
will begin.
2a. Inventory of TOF (Rural and Urban)
(i) Inventory Data Collection 10,000 Plots 8790 (i)As new National
(ii) Data Entry 4000 Plots Forest Inventory
(iii) Data Checking and (NFI) design is Grid
    Processing based and was
launched recently,
there is slight
shortfall in date
collection, which
would be covered
during 2017-18
(ii) Data entry
software application
has been prepared
and data entry work
has started.
(iii) After the data
entry, data checking
and processing work
will begin.
3. Training of Forestry 150 Persons 250

35
iii. National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board
National Afforestation Programme (NAP)
Y ear Objective/Outcome Targets Achievements
2016-17 Increase Forest and Tree
cover, improve the quality
of forests.
2016-17
2359 has Advance Work
plantation was sanctioned in
respect of State of Andhra
Pradesh and Sikkim.
2015-16
35986 ha. Advance Work was
sanctioned.
Target for Andhra Pradesh was
445 ha. it has reported 420 ha.,
as physical achievement.
Achievement in respect of
Sikkim has not been yet
received.
During the year 2016-17
around 76% (26989 ha.)
physical achievement of
sanctioned Advance work
sanctioned in 2015-16 (New
area for Plantation) has been
reported.
iv. National Natural Resource Management System
Year Objective/Outcome Targets Achievements
2016-17 1. The main objective of
PC-NNRMS is utilization
of remote sensing
technology for inventori-
sation, assessment and
monitoring of country's
natural resources.
2. The outcomes/
outputs includes in
identifying and addressing
the GIS and Remote
Sensing data and
knowledge gaps in various
multiple scientific
disciplines for
conservation and
sustainable utilization of
To provide funds to State/
Central Universities, Indian
Space Research Organization
(ISRO) National Remote
Sensing Centres (NRSCs) Space
Applications Centre (SAC),
R&D Institutions, etc.
Ongoing projects-22
Most of the projects have
generated information/data
related to the important
environmental issues, which
were not available to the
country. Following three
projects have been completed
during the F.Y .
Monitoring of Snow and
Glaciers of Himalayan Region -
Phase-II (A joint programme of
MoEF and DOS) (FTR
submitted).
To develop a management
systems of wildlife sanctuaries
and national parks-Arunachal

36
Y ear Objective/Outcome Targets Achievements
bio resources and
environment, strengthening
of scientific manpower in the
GIS and RS and promotion
of infrastructure facilities in
the scientific organizations for
undertaking research and
generation of documents/
information for taking policy
decisions relating to
environment and natural
resources. The scheme also
expected to generate time
series geo-spatial data on
different environmental
variables, which could be
used in policy formation and
devising effective strategies
for conservation of bio
resources and addressing the
key environmental issues of
the country.
Pradesh using remote
sensing and GIS
technology (phase-II)
(FTR submitted).
Desertification Status
Mapping of India (FTR
yet to be submitted).
*A Book on "Monitoring
Snow and Glaciers of
Himalayan Region-Phase
II", funded jointly by
MoEF&CC and ISRO/
DOS.
v. Pollution Abatement
Objective/Outcome Ta rgets Achievements
To strengthen weaker PCBs/PCCs
and provide training to staff of
SPCBs/PCCs for capacity building.
Provide funding to PCBs/PCCs
for strengthening as per
guidelines of the Scheme. Fund
new projects relating to
Environmental Health.
Provided funding to 2SPCBs/
PCCs Sanctioned 6 new
projects under Environmental
Health and funded 3
proposals.
vi. Hazardous Substances Management
Y ear Objective/Outcome Targets Achievements
2016-17
1. (i) Prevention and
management of chemical
accidents.
Release of Financial Assistance
for setting up of new/ongoing
treatment, storage and disposal
Creation of facilities for
treatment and environmentally
sound disposal of hazardous

37
Y ear Objective/Outcome Targets Achievements
2016-17
(ii) Proper handling
and disposal of
wastes.
(iii) Creation of
management structure
for hazardous
substances in States.
facilities for hazardous wastes or
one new/ongoing common bio-
medical waste treatment storage
and disposal facility and
integrated e-waste treatment
recycling facility subject to
receipt of proposals and
matching grants from the States.
The target for the FY 2016-17
was `1.75 crore.
and bio-medical wastes. An
amount of ` 1.75 crore was
spent during the FY 2016-17
for creation of Treatment,
Storage and Disposal Facilities
in Solan, Himachal Pradesh and
Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh.
Financial assistance for
awareness and training
programmers for hazardous
waste management, e-waste, bio-
medical waste management,
municipal solid and plastic waste
management, fly ash and
chemical safety. The target for
the FY 2016-17 was ` 1 crore.
Workshops and training
programme are funded to
ensure proper handling and
disposal of wastes for capacity
building in the field of
Hazardous substances
management. An amount of
` 22.84 lakh was spent during
the FY 2016-17 for training
programmers for hazardous
waste management, e-waste to
PHD Chamber of Commerce,
New Delhi.
Revision of Municipal Solid
Waste (Management and
Handling) Rules.
Revised notification finalized
and notified vide  Gazette
Notification S.O. 1357(E) dated
08/04/2016.
Finalization of notification of
draft Hazardous and Other
Waste (Management, and Trans
boundary Movements) Rules,
2015.
Amended notification finalized
and notified vide  Gazette
Notification GSR No. 395(E)
dated 04/04/2016.
Facilitating the Government of
MP in disposal of Toxic waste at
erstwhile Union Carbide of India
Limited (UCIL) premises in
Bhopal.
Proper handling and disposal of
wastes.

38
2. To Improve
Management of
Hazardous Substance.
Y ear Objective/Outcome Targets Achievements
2016-17
Preparation of Detailed Project
Reports (DPRs) under National
Clean Energy Fund (NCEF) for
Remediation of 10 Contaminated
Sites in Six (6) identified States.
Detailed Project Report (DPR)
for remediation of priority
hazardous waste contaminated
dump sites in first phase and
subsequently undertaking
environmentally sound
remediation of the contaminated
sites in the second phase is in
progress.
vii. Conservation of Corals and Management
Year Objective/Outcome Targets Achievements
2016-17 Conservation and
management of man-
groves and coral reefs;
Eco-restoration and
afforestation in potential
and also in degraded
coastal areas;
Maintenance of genetic
diversity especially of
threatened and endemic
species;
Creation of awareness
on importance of these.
eco-systems leading to
their conservation.
The State Forests Department of
all the coastal States/UTs is
responsible to implement the
Management Action Plans (MAP)
being funded under the CSS on
Conservation and Management of
Mangroves and Coral Reefs.
To scrutinise and implement 15
MAPs received from States/UTs
for conservation and management
of mangrove and coral reefs.
To sanction academic research
projects on mangroves and coral
reefs.
Review and Monitoring of annual
report of the onging research
projects.
Implementation and Monitoring of
multi-disciplinary research
projects on mangroves, coral
Reefs and Coastal and Marine
Biodiversity.
Review and Monitoring of
ongoing MAPs
Strengthening of regulatory
mechanism for conservation of
Coral Reefs.
Fourteen Management Action
Plans (MAPs) have been
approved.
Eight ongoing research projects
have been approved.
Total allocated amount of
` 18.00 crore. ` 16.37 crore
has been released to various
coastal States/UTs.
According to the Forest Survey
of India (FSI) Report titled
'India State of Forest Report
2015', the mangrove cover in
the country is 4740 km2 which
is nearly 3% of the world's
mangrove vegetation. There is
a net increase of 112 km2
mangrove cover in 2015 as
compared to 2013 assessment.

39
viii. GB Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment and Development
Y ear Objective/Outcome Targets Achievements
2016-17 To undertake in-depth
research and development
studies on environmental
problems of the Indian
Himalayan region.
To identify and strengthen
the local knowledge of the
environment and contribute
towards strengthening
researches of regional
relevance in the scientific
institutions, Universities /
NGOs, voluntary agencies
working in the Himalayan
region, through interactive
networking; and  to evolve
and demonstrate suitable
technology packages and
delivery systems for
sustainable development of
the region in harmony with
the local perceptions.
1. Developmental Research
(a) Socio - economic develop-
ment Project -New a Nos.
(including Phase II for moni-
toring at HQs. and 1 unit)
(b) Knowledge Product and
Capacity building - 1Nos.
(including HQs. and 2 units UK
and Sikkim)
(c) Watershed process/
Management Project-2 Nos. (2
ongoing projects for monitoring
at HQs. and in 2 units)
(d) Environment assessment
and Management and env. Policy
and Governance: Projects
ongoing - 2 Nos. (1 in HQs and
1 in HP and NE units)
(e) Biodiversity Conservation
and Management-Ongoing 2
Nos. (in HQs. and 2 units)
(f) Ecosystem Services
Projects and Climate Change
(O1 No. in HQs.
(g) Biotechnological applications
and environmental physiology-
1 No. (includes monitoring at
HQs. and 1 in Sikkim unit)
All 9 in-house were completed
in time with the approval of
SAC.
(a) Compilation of date on
ecotourism and commercial
tourism done in 3 towns of NE,
Sikkim and Uttarakhand
Himalaya.
(b) All 3 RTCs were
strengthened with 6 new
technologies in Uttarakhand and
Sikkim Himalaya.
(c) 2 watersheds (Kosi and
Mohalkhad) were monitored and
date analysed for WEAP for
Uttarakhand and HP Himalaya.
(d) Status report submitted for
3 sites in Uttarakhand, HP and
Sikkim.
(e) Date collected from 2 river
basins (Beas and Ranga) in HP
and Arunachal Pradesh
completed.
(f) Species distribution
documented in all 3 sites of the
project located in Uttarakhand,
HP and Sikkim Himalaya.
(g) Quantification of
ecosystem services initiated at
3 sites of oak and pine forests
in Uttarakhand.
(h) Characterization of
extremophiles done from 2 hot
water springs and 2 glaciers and
2 desert sites.

40
Y ear Objectives/Outcomes Targets Achievements
2. Demonstrations
(a) Village Models-3 programs
(b) IERP program-execution/
completion of 39 Ongoing
projects
(a) 3 villages selected for
model strengthening in
Uttarakhand and HP .
(b) 39 projects on-going in
IERP.
3. Dissemination/Training
(a) RTC training Programmes-
50 nos. (1-3 days) 5 No (5 or
more days)
(b) Publications-08 and 22
papers
(c) 8 New Initiatives to
continue
(d) Consultation meetings - 3
No.
(e) Knowledge forum and
Assessment studies - 10 studies
(a) 50 trainings organized
(1-3 days)/ 5nos. for 5 or
more days at RTC.
(b) 08 Publications released
36 papers published.
(c) Meet of Parliament
Members organized and all 8
initiatives operational 5 events
organized.
(d) 3 Consultation meetings
organized with ICIMCD
(e) 10 Studies progressing
in IHR through HJRFs and
HRAs.
ix. National Mission on Himalayan Studies
Y ear Objectives/Outcomes Targets Achievements
2016-17 1. To build a body of
scientific and traditional
knowledge on the aforesaid
indicative thematic areas
2. To build a network of
practitioners (individual and
institutions) engaged in
working solutions to
problems in the thematic
areas.
3. To demonstrate
workable/ implementations/
1. Setting up of the Project
Management Unit (PMU) and
Data base Centre at GBPIHED
2. Studies and interventions
on thematic areas of work in
IHR in 27 projects/ start of 12
new projects
3. Strengthening of research
facilities in key Institute
including GBPIHED and
continuation of 89 JRFs and30
RAs
1. A Fully functional
Project Management Unit
(PMU) of NMHS has been
established worth dedicated
NMHS staff in GBPNIHESD,
Almora with a Database
Management Centre.
2. NMHS website (http;//
nmhs.ord.in/) has been created
which has been linked with
MoEF&CC website (In Major
Initiatives)

41
Year Objectives/Outcomes Targets Achievements
replicable solutions to the
problems in the thematic
areas.
3. Himalayan Research
Fellowship were given to 119
scholars (89 JRFs and 30RAs)
in F.Y . 2015-16.
4. The 3rd Steering
Committee Meeting was held
on 3rd March, 2017 wherein
15 new project proposals were
approved for F.Y. 2016-17.
5. The progress of NMHS
for the first 6 months is shown
below.
6. 27 projects have
completed 1 year and their
detailed annual progress reports
are available at NMHS website.
Progress of NMHS projects in first 6 Months
Indicator T otal Description
No. of Patents Filed: 1 Patent filed on "Process of manufacturing Graphene" N.G. Sahooetal.
(2016), Application No. 201611016081.
New Method/ Models: 4 Ecological Niche Modeling (1) methods developed, Low-cost model
for biowaste conversion to be constructed at Guraz and Tulail, J&K:
Uttarakhand-Alpine Information System (UK-AIS): Timberline and
communication method.
No. of Trainings (765) 4 T raining  on  Food  Processing  Technologies:  3  Training  on
workshops (No. of Bio-briquetting: 20 progressive farmers were indentified and convened
Beneficiaries): for biowaste conversion and its utilizaion for crop production and
soil health: 3 awareness camps conducted engaging more than 100
hill farm households.
Demonstration Models 14 4 protected Cultivation Models: 10 Vermi-compost models;
Livelihood Options 45 45 Households have started income generation from bio-briquetting.
Training Manuals 1 One (1) on Bio-briquetting.
Processing Units 4 Chir-Pine Needles Processing Unit (1): Bio-Briquetting Processing
Unit (1): Biowaste Conversion Units in J&K: One inline electrolysis
unit.

42
Indicator T otal Description
Species Collection 78 78 specimens of angiosperms (c. 29 families), 2 specimens of
gymnosperms (2 families) and 42 specimens of lichens (c. 15 families).
Species identified 5 Five (5) species identified in valley of Flowers National Park.
Database/ Images/ 4 (9200 LULC maps of Kosi and Sainj watersheds: Spatial distribution map
GIS Maps (data datapoints) of sampling sites: Representative image of isolated DNA samples.
volume)
x. Project Elephant
Y ear Objectives/Outcomes Targets Achievements
2016-17 To conserve and protect viable population
of wild elephants in their natural habitats
in the country.
To conserve and protect and, where
necessary, to restore natural habitats and
traditional corridors/migratory routes or
movement paths used by the elephants-
through eco-restoration, acquisition etc.
To take concrete measures to protect the
elephants from poaching and other threats
by taking suitable measures like
deployment of patrolling squads,
intelligence gathering etc.
To create a viable mechanism to ensure
Inter-State and Regional and national Level
coordination in protecting and conserving
the elephant and its ranges.
To create infrastructure and other facilities
for conservation support activities like
veterinary care, management training,
humane methods of capture, tranquilizing
and translocation etc. to wild elephants,
as and when required.
To improve and create infrastructure for
the welfare of elephants in domestic use,
including their veterinary care, training
of mahouts and supervisory staff in
To assist States having
free ranging population
of wild elephants to
ensure long term
survival of identified
viable population of
elephant habitats in their
natural habitats and also
for welfare of captive
elephants.
Elephant habitats in the
17 elephant range
States improved.
Welfare of Captive
Elephant in 5 States
promoted.
Project co-ordination at
MoEF & CC is
strengthened.
International cooperation
with elephant countries
improved.

43
Year Objectives/Outcomes Targets Achievements
proper treatment of elephants in captivity.
To encourage and create facilities for
research related to the management and
ecology of elephant and also with respect
to its veterinary care.
To take appropriate steps to mitigate man-
elephant conflict through suitable measures,
such as eco-development, public education
and awareness programmers, scientific
management, ex-gratia payments,
deployment of anti-depredation teams etc.
To take measures for detection and
prevention of diseases in wild elephants
xi. National Mission for Green India
Year Objective/Outcome Targets Achievement
2016-17 Improvement in Quality of Forests 49406 32830
Increase in Forest Cover 18245.4 10930
Promoting alternate fuel energy for Households 25090 0