 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
May, 2013/ Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 
Web site: http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-Mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-2014) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SPACE 
(DEMAND NO. 90) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th May, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th May, 2013) 
REPORT 
NO. 
242

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS  
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
Demands for Grants (2013-2014) 
of the Department of Space 
(Demand no. 90) 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8TH MAY, 2013) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 8TH MAY, 2013) 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
MAY, 2013/VAISAKHA, 1935 (SAKA) 
C O N T E N T S 
   
         PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE       (i) – (ii)   
2.     PREFACE                                                                                                                             (iii) 
3.      ACRONYMS  
4. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                                             
●5. SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS  
●6. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE         
    
                                                 
● To be appended at printing stage 
 
 


MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS (2012-13) 
 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy  –– Chairman  
 RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Anil H. Lad 
3. Smt. Maya Singh 
4. Shri M. Rama Jois 
5. Shri Alok Tiwari 
6. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
7. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra 
8. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian 
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
10. Vacant 
 LOK SABHA 
11. Shri K.C. Singh "Baba"    
12. Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
13. Shri Vincent H. Pala 
14. Vacant 
15. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde 
16. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
17. Dr. Ajay Kumar 
18. Shri O.S. Manian 
19. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
20. Shri Basori Singh Masram 
21. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
22. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
23. Shri Ramashanakar Rajbhar 
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
25. Shri Yshvir Singh 
26. Smt. Supriya Sule 
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
28. Shri Joseph Toppo 
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava 
30. Shri Ramaknt Yadav 
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
           SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary 
 Shri  Alok Chatterjee, Director 
 Shri  V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri  Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director 
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer  
                                                 
 Prof. M.S. Swaminathan ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 9th April, 2013. 
 Nominated w.e.f 9th January, 2013. 
 Nominated w.e.f. 1st May, 2013 

Preface 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee on Science & 
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been  authorised by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundr ed Forty second Report of the Committee. This 
Report deals with the detailed Demands for Gran ts (2013-2014) of the Department of Space 
(Demand No.90). 
2.   In the meeting of the Committee held on the 16
th April, 2013 the Secretary and other Officers 
of the Department of Space gave an overview of  the various activities of the Department and the 
Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Department to enable 
it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants. 
3.   The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the 
clarifications sought by the Members and placing  before it the required material to enable the 
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Space. 
4.    The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 7th May, 2013. 
 
NEW DELHI; 
May, 2013, 
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
                                 Chairman,  
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests.
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ATS   : Aero Thermo-structure  
CUS    : Cryogenic Upper Stage  
DAE    : Department of Atomic Energy  
DECU    : Development and Educational Communication Unit  
ECLSS   : Environment Cont rol & Life Support System  
FSAT    : Final System Acceptance Test  
GSLV   : Geo Stationary Satellite Launch Vehicle  
GSO    : Geo Synchronous Orbit  
GTO   : Geosynchronous Transfer Orbit  
IIRS   : Indian Institute of Remote Sensing  
IIST   : Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology  
IISU   : ISRO Inertial Systems Unit  
INCOSPAR   : Indian National Comm ittee for Space Research        
ISAC   :  ISRO Satellite Centre  
ISRO     : Indian Space Research Organisation  
LEO    : Low Earth Orbit  
LEOS    : Laboratory for Electro-Optics Systems  
LPSC    : Liquid Prop ulsion Systems Centre  
MCF    : Master Control Facility  
NARL    : National Atmospheric Research Laboratory  
NE-SAC  : North-Eastern Space Applications Centre  
NNRMS  : National Natural Re sources Management System 
NRSC   : National Remote Sensing Centre  
PMC/PMB/PEX  : Programme Mana gement Council and Project  
Management Board/Project Executive Committee  
PRL    : Physical Research Laboratory  

PSLV   : Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle’s  
R&D    : Research & Development  
RLV-TD   Reusable Launch Vehi cle Technology Demonstrator  
RRSSCs  : Regional Remote Sensing Service Centres  
SAC    : Space Applications Centre  
SBAS   : Satellite Based Augmentation System  
SDSC    : Satish Dhawan Space Centre  
SPS   : Standard Positioning Service  
TSTO    : Two Stage To Orbit  
            VSSC    : Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre  
  
REPORT 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 Indian Space Programme had its modest be ginning with the setting up of Indian 
National Committee for Space Research (INCOSPAR) in 1962 and launching of a 
sounding rocket from Thumba on November 21, 1963 was the first milestone in Indian 
space programme.  With the establishment of  the Indian Space Re search Organisation 
(ISRO) under the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) in November 1969, Indian Space 
Programme became institutionalised.    The Space programme got a fillip in June, 1972 
when the Government of India constituted the Space Commission and established the 
Department of Space (DoS) and ISRO becoming a part of the DoS.   
2. Over the last five decades, Indi an Space Programme has achieved many 
landmarks and   won laurels. In 2012, India added another glorious feat to its ongoing 
Space programme by launching its 100
th mission in space with the successful launch of 
the Radar Imaging Satellite -1, French Remote Sensing Satellite SPOT-6, and the 
Japanese satellite PROITERES through Pola r Satellite launch Vehicles -C21 from 
Sriharikota. A number of satellites launche d in 2012-13 have significantly enhanced our 
capabilities for space applications.    
3. OBJECTIVES OF INDIAN SPACE PROGRAMME 
The primary objective of the Indian Space Programme is to promote the 
development and application of space technology and space science for the socio-
economic benefits of the nation through estab lishment of operational space services in a 
self-reliant manner. The main thrust areas of the programme are: 
 Satellite-based communication and navigation for various applications. 
 Satellite-based resources survey and management and environmental 
monitoring. 
 Meteorological applications. 
 Space Science Research and Planetary Exploration, and 
 Development and operationalisation of indigenously built satellites, launch 
vehicles  
and associated ground segment for providing these space-based services. 
4. ORGANISATIONAL SETUP 
4.1 The DoS is responsible for implementing the policies framed by the Space 
Commission.  The space programme is execu ted through ISRO and Grant-in-aid 
institutions.  ISRO is the research wing of  the DoS and is responsible for executing the 
Research & Development (R&D) programme s and schemes of the Department in 

accordance with the directives  and policies that are laid  down by the Space Commission 
and the DoS. 
4.2 The DoS Secretariat and the Headquarter s of ISRO are located in Bengaluru, 
Karnataka. The Programme offices at IS RO Headquarters co-ordinate the overall 
programmes including satellite communication,  satellite navigation, earth observation, 
launch vehicle, space science, atmospheric science, space industry development, disaster 
management support, international co-operation, publications and public relations, budget 
and economic analyses and human resource development.  
4.3 The major centres, units and establishments of DoS/ISRO, responsible for 
carrying out R&D activities as well as for unde rtaking various projects and programmes, 
are as under:- 
i) Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC ), Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala 
provides the technology base for the country’s indigenous launch vehicle 
(rocket) development; 
ii) Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre (LPSC), with its facilities at 
Bengaluru, Thiruvananthapuram and Ma hendragiri in Tamil Nadu is 
responsible for development of liqui d propulsion and cryogenic propulsion 
systems for satellite launch vehicles; 
iii) Satish Dhawan Space Centre (SDSC-SHAR) at Sriharikota, Andhra 
Pradesh, is the launch base and also provi des the facilities for processing of 
solid rocket motors; 
iv) ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC), Bengalu ru, Karnataka is entrusted with the 
prime responsibility of the satellite development;      
v) Laboratory for Electro-Optics System s (LEOS), Bengaluru, Karnataka is 
responsible for  development and produc tion of electro optical sensors for 
satellites; 
vi) Space Applications Centre (SAC), Ahmedabad, Gujarat carries out R&D 
in space applications as well as development of application payloads; 
vii) Development and Educationa l Communication Unit (DECU), 
Ahmedabad, Gujarat is involved in th e conception, definition, planning and 
socio/techno-economic evaluation of developmental space applications; 
viii) National Remote Sensing Centre (N RSC), Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh 
is responsible for satellite data acquisition and processing, data dissemination, 
aerial remote sensing and decision support for disaster management;  
ix) Indian Institute of Remote Sens ing (IIRS), Dehradun, Uttrakhand is a 
premier training and educational institute set up for honing skills of trained 
professional in the field of Remote  Sensing, Geoinformatics and Global 
Positioning System (GPS) Technology for Natural Resources, Environmental 
and Disaster Management; 
x) ISRO Telemetry, Tracking & Command Network (ISTRAC), with its 
ground stations at Bengaluru, Srihari kota, Lucknow, Bearslake(USA), Biak 
(Indonesia), Brunei and Mauritius provide s the telemetry, track and command 
support and spacecraft mission management for Indian remote sensing 
satellite missions, space science mi ssions and satellite launch vehicle 
programmes; 
xi) Master Control Facility (MCF) with its main facility at Hassan, Karnataka 
and backup facility at Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh have the responsibility for 
control and operation of INSAT/GSAT/METSAT satellites; and 

xii) ISRO Inertial Systems Unit (IISU), Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala carries 
out research and development in the area of inertial systems for satellites and 
launch vehicles. 
4.4 A National Natural Resour ces Management System (NNRMS), with DoS as the 
nodal agency, has been establis hed to ensure optimal manage ment/utilisation of natural 
resources using remote sensing data in c onjunction with conventional techniques. Under 
NNRMS, five Regional Remote Sensing Se rvice Centres (RRSSCs) at Bengaluru, 
Dehradun, Jodhpur, Kharagpur and Nagpur have also been set up for the execution of 
remote sensing application programmes in the respective regions. With effect from 
December 2009, four out of five RRSSCs have  been re-designated as Regional Remote 
Sensing Centres (RRSCs), while RRSSC, De hradun has been merged with Indian 
Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS).     
4.5 Apart from above-mentioned units/in stitutes the DoS has the following 
organisations as well which receive Grants-in-aid from the Department: 
i) Physical Research Laboratory (P RL), Ahmedabad, an autonomous 
institution supported mainly by the Depart ment of Space, carries out research 
in space sciences; 
ii) The National Atmospheric Research  Laboratory (NARL), set up at 
Gadanki near Tirupati, conducts atmospheric research; 
iii) The North-Eastern Space Applications Centre (NE-SAC), established as an 
autonomous body under the Department of Space, provides space technology 
inputs for developmental activities in the North-Eastern Region; 
iv) The Semi-conductor Laboratory, Chandi garh, an  R&D society, is 
entrusted with the design and developm ent of Very Large Scale Integrated 
Circuit (VLSI) devices and development of micro-electronic systems to meet 
the strategic needs of the country; and 
v) The Indian Institute of Space Sc ience and Technology (IIST), an 
autonomous body under the Department, aims at creating quality human 
resources tuned to suit the requiremen ts of state-of-a rt space research 
programme.  The Institute offers graduate, post-graduate and doctoral 
programmes in the area of space sc ience, technology and applications. 
Initially, IIST started the courses from the academic year 2007-08 with the 
existing infrastructure at Thiruvananthapuram.   
 
4.6 The ANTRIX Corporation Limited, Bengalu ru, established in September, 1992, a 
private Limited Company under the administrativ e control of DoS, is a marketing arm of 
ISRO for promotion and commercial ex ploitation of Space products, technical 
consultancy services and transfer of technol ogies developed by ISRO. It also facilitates 
development of Space related capabilities in India. 
4.7 Over and above the aforementioned, th e RESPOND programme of ISRO supports 
sponsored research activities in space science, space applications and space technology in 
several national academic/research instituti ons and Space Technology Cells in premier 
technological institutes of the country through grants-in-aid.  
4.8 The detailed budget allocation of the DoS for the year 2013-2014 was considered 
by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, 
Environment & Forests in its meeting held on the April 16, 2013. 

5. THRUST AREAS IN THE TW ELFTH FIVE YEAR PLAN  
5.1 The major thrust of Indian Space progr amme during the XII Five Year Plan 2012-
17 will be on augmentation INSAT/GSAT cap acity to meet demand for transponders, 
establishment of the Indian Regional Naviga tional Satellite System over Indian region, 
continuation of established services with impr oved capabilities with thematic series of 
Indian Earth Orbiting satellites, expansion of satellite based applications including 
societal applications, strengt hening of Polar satellite La unch Vehicle (PSLV) and Geo-
synchronous Launch Vehicle (GSLV) as th e workhorse vehicle, Realisation of 
developmental flights of next generati on launch vehicle (GSLV MK III) capable of 
launching 4 Tonne class INSAT satellites; pur suance of semi-cryo engine development, 
undertaking space science and planetary explorat ion; strengthening space-based Disaster 
Management Support and developing critical  technologies for the human spaceflight 
programme.   
5.2 In the area of Satellite Communicati ons, it has been planned to augment the 
INSAT capacity  to br idge the gap between the demand and supply of the transponders 
for meeting all the requirements of the count ry and also to maintain sufficient spare 
capacity to meet contingencies. Development of  state-of-the-art tec hnologies and latest 
applications areas is also to be pursued.   
5.3 The continuing programmes during the XII Five Year Plan include PSLV 
Continuation, GSLV Operati onal, GSLV Mk III Developm ent, Cryogenic Upper Stage 
Project, Semi-Cryogenic Engine Developmen t, Space Capsule Recovery Experiment-II, 
Satellite with Argos and Altika (SARAL), Indian Regional Navigational Satellite System, 
INSAT/GSAT satellites, Adva nced Communication Satellite  (GSAT-11), Geo-Imaging 
Satellite (GISAT), Chandrayaan-2, Astr osat, Aditya, Development of Critical 
Technologies for Human Spaceflight and vari ous Space Applications such as National 
Natural Resources Management System, Di saster Management Support, Atmospheric 
Research and Initiatives on Climate Change & Environment Studies.  The Committee has 
also been informed that during the XI Plan  period 29 missions (16 Satellite missions and 
13 Launch Vehicle Missions) were accomplis hed and during the XII Plan period, 58 
space missions are planned to be realised including 33 satellite missions and 25 Launch 
Vehicle missions.  
5.4 The Committee is happy to note that during the XII Five Year Plan period 
2012-17, the main driving force of the I ndian Space programme will be to carry 
forward and further strengthen space base d services aimed at socio-economic 
development of the country.  The Committee  hopes that as a part of the ongoing 
space programmes and efforts to develop advanced launch vehicles, the Department 
would also strive for mastering critical t echnologies so as to reduce the chances of 
failures of important missions.  
5.5 The Committee notes with happiness that  satellite launching target set for 
the XII Five Year Plan is 58, just double the XI Five Year Plan of  29.  Increased 
number of satellites would further stren gthen our capabilities in using space 
technology for benefit of our people and country.     
6. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FO R THE XII FIVE YEAR PLAN  
6.1 As regards budgetary allocations in the XII Plan, the Committee was informed 
that the Department had proposed a Plan outlay of 47,500 Crores against which an 
indicative outlay of 39,750 Crores has been approved.  The proposed Plan demand has 
thus been reduced by 8, 750 Crores.  The Non-Plan budgetary support during the XII 
Five Year Plan is expected to be 7500.00 Crores approximately.  

 A Chart showing the projected and approved outlay for XII Five Year Plan is 
given on the following page:- 
Financial Outlay of the XII Five Year Plan 
                            (in Crores) 
Sl. 
No. 
Schemes/Programmes Total Projected 
XII Plan Outlay 
XII Plan 
Outlay 
Approved to 
the 
Department 
A. Central Sector Schemes    
1. Launch Vehicle Missions 6642.00 6642.00 
2. Earth Observation Missions 2845.25 2070.25 
3. Space Science Mission 1400.40 1300.40 
4. INSAT Satellites 11421.50 8867.40 
5. Satellite Navigation System 1440.00 1440.00 
6. Advanced Launch Vehicle 
Development 
2381.00 2016.00 
7. Major Space Applications and 
Space Science Research 
2381.00 2016.00 
8. Information Technology Related 
Applications 
820.00 820.00 
9. R&D, Technology & process 
development 
4340.00 3434.10 
10. Infrastructure/auxiliary 
facilities/capacity building for 
space programme 
11480.00 9380.00 
 Grand Total 47500.00 39750.00 
6.2 The Committee is happy to note that Planning Commission has accepted in 
toto the outlays projected by the Department pertaining to Launch Vehicle Missions, 
Satellite Navigation System and Informat ion Technology Related Applications and 
hopes that the Department would make opti mum utilisation of approved outlays for 
these projects.  The Committee, however,  notes with concern overall reduction of   
 875.00 Crores in the Plan outlay projec ted by the Department. Considering 
India’s rise as the sixth most powerful na tion in the world in the field of space 
technology  and the immense potential of sp ace technology for societal benefits, the 
Committee is of the opinion that adequate funds should be allocated to the 
Department so that India's leading position  in this area is further strengthened and 
improved and India's capabilities in space technology are fully utilised for benefit of 
its people.  The Committee recommends that  the Planning Commission should not  
further reduce Plan allocation of the De partment on any pretext so that its 
important programmes do not suffer for want of funds. 

7. PHYSICAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT IN 2012-13 
7.1 Following were the main achievements of the Department in 2012-13:-  
i) During the first year of the XII Pl an, three operationa l flights of PSLV 
have been successfully conducted i. e. operational flights of PSLV C19 
carrying RISAT-1 sate llite (on April 26, 20 12), PSLV C21 carrying 
French Remote Sensing Satellite- SP OT-6 and Japanese microsatellite – 
PROITERES - on commercial basi s (on September 9, 2012), PSLV C20 
carrying Indo-French joint mission SARAL along with 6 micro/nano 
satellites (on February 25, 2013). 
ii) The acceptance test of Indigenous Cr yogenic Upper stage for the next 
developmental flight of GSLV (G SLV-D5) has been completed. Stage 
preparation, integration & testing activ ities of the stages of the launch 
vehicle are progressing well. The la unch of GSLV-D5 is scheduled for 
May-June, 2013 which will carry GSAT-14 communication satellite with 
12 transponders            (6 Ku and 6 Ext-C) and a Ka band beacon.   
iii) Significant progress has been made towards the development of GSLV 
Mk III, capable of placing 4 Ton clas s of communication satellite in Geo-
Transfer orbit.  Preparations to un dertake the first experimental mission 
(X- Mission) of GSLV-Mk III using th e flight units of two S200 solid 
strap-on motors and L110 liquid core  stage along with a passive C25 
cryogenic stage is progressing well. The Experimental X- Mission, during 
2013 is slated for launch in 2013. 
iv) Considerable progress has been made towards development of Semi-
Cryogenic Engine. The design of the e ngine has been successfully carried 
out. Work towards, establishment of speci alised test facilities and material 
development has also been initiated.   
v) R & D activities on ad vanced launch vehicle technologies including Air 
breathing propulsion and Reus able Launch vehicles ar e progressing well.  
As a first step towards realising a Tw o Stage To Orbit (TSTO), a series of 
technology demonstration missions ha ve been conceived.  For this 
purpose, a winged Reusable Launch Vehicle Technology Demonstrator 
(RLV-TD) has been configured.  Rea lisation of flight hardware for the 
RLV-TD mission is also underway.  The first technology demonstrator 
mission of Reusable Launch Vehicle is slated for the year 2013-14. 
vi) The Department has developed Geo St ationary Satellite Launch Vehicle 
(GSLV) to lift its co mmunication satellites weighing two tonnes and 
above to a distance of 36,000 km from  earth. After a mixed bag of seven 
launches since 2001, four of them failure s, ISRO is perfecting this rocket 
and also coming out with a four-tonne version, the GSLV Mk III.  
7.2 The Committee takes note of the achiev ements of the Department in 2012-13. 
The Department  has not only successfully  launched its state-of- the-art technology 
satellites such as Indian Radar Imaging Satellite (RISAT-1), Indian Communication 
Satellite (GSAT-10), etc. but has also launche d satellites for foreign customers viz.,  
France (Sport-6),  Japan (PROITERS) , Canada (SAPHIRE) and the United 
Kingdom (STRaND). The Department has also  entered into successful international 
collaborations such as Saral and Megha-Tro piques with France which is already an 
established power in space technology.  These achievements show that the credibility 
and reliability of Indian Space programme  is now firmly and well established 

internationally. The Committee congratula tes the Department for taking Indian 
Space programme to such glorious heights.    
 7.3 The Committee hopes that the Department would not only continue to 
maintain the same level of performance but endeavour to perform better and better 
in the remaining years of XII Five Year Plan so that  our space programme in its all 
dimensions achieves a position  that is second to none in the world.     
8. FINANCIAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF DEPARTMENT:- AN ANALYSIS OF 
TREND OF UTILISATION 
8.1 A comparison of the B.E., R.E allocation made and actuals expenditure incurred 
by the Department for the years 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 is given below: 
Head 2010-11 
(in  crores) 
2011-12 
(in . crores) 
2012-13 
( in . crores) 
Budget Estimates 5778.04 6626.00 6715.04 
Revised Estimates 4880.04 4432.00 4880.03 
Actual Expenditure 4482.23 3784.27 awaited 
% Budget utilization 
with respect to R.E. 
91.85% 85.38 % awaited 
 
8.2 Scrutiny of B.E. and R.E. allocations vi s-à-vis actuals for the financial year 2010-
11, 2011-12 and B.E. & R.E. for the financial year 2012-13 of the Department of Space, 
reveals that underutilisation of approved outla y has been a recurring  problem with the 
Department.  
8.3 In the financial year 2010-11, the tota l B.E. allocation including Plan and Non-
Plan was  .5778.04 Crores, which got reduced to 4880.04 Crores at the R.E. Stage and 
the actual expenditure incurred was only Rs. 4482.23 crores i.e. less by Rs. 397.81 crores.  
Similarly, the total B.E. outlay of  6626.04 Crores for the financial year 2011-12 was 
reduced to 4432.04 Crores at the R.E. Stage, while  the actual utilisation was only  
3784.27 Crores i.e.  648 Crores less than the RE allocation.   
8.4   The Committee finds that some of the reasons for underutilisation in 2010-11 
and 2011-12 are common and mostly of admini strative nature viz. non approval/delay in 
approval of Manned Mission Initiative; phasi ng out expenditure on Semi-Cryogenic tests 
facilities based on procurement status; phasing  out payments on procurement, etc. In 
2011-12, one of the reasons given is non-releas e or less release of grants-in-aid to 
autonomous bodies due to availa bility of un-utilised funds.  All this suggests that the 
projections for budgetary allocation by the Department are not based on realistic 
assessments of actual requirements.  
8.5 The Committee takes strong exception to  such a casual approach adopted by 
the Department in earmarking of funds  which results in precious and scarce 
resource remaining unutilised. Budgetary resou rces are very scarce and it is the 
duty of the Department to make optimum uti lisation of funds allocated, both 
qualitatively and quantitatively. Underu tilisation of allocated funds for 
consecutively three years does paint a dismal picture of the capability of the 
Department to properly plan, monitor and execute its spending.    
8.6 The Committee finds that th e total budgetary allocation in 2012-13 both Plan and 
Non Plan of  . 6715.04 crores made available to the Department at the B.E. stage was 
reduced to  4880.00 Crores at R.E. stage out of which,  4439.19 Crores i.e. 91 per 
cent of RE allocation was utilised by the Department till 28.2.2013. 

8.7 The Committee finds that the BE 2012-13 al location made to the Department 
was reduced at the RE Stage due to poor spendability of the Department, besides for 
meeting the ceilings communicated by th e Ministry of Finance. The Committee 
expresses its concern over the poor fina ncial performance of the Department 
reflected by non utilisation of  . 1835.04 crores during the year 2012-13, out of 
which the major share belonged to Plan a llocations to the tune of . 1815.01 crores.  
The Committee feels that this is not a health y trend especially if seen in the context 
of the claim of the Department of h aving a very sound and robust monitoring 
mechanism.  The Committee is not at all am used by the figure of 91% utilisation of 
R.E. allocation in 2012-13 as given by th e Department.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterates that the Department should ma ke sincere and serious efforts to fully 
utilise allocated resources in the year 2013-14. 
8.8 The Committee is constrained to observe that the Department appears to 
have a strong, monitoring mechanism only on paper as it has failed to produce 
satisfactory and desired target of ensuring  full utilisation of allocated resources.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends th at the Department should further 
strengthen its monitoring mechanism and make it more robust to ensure full and 
effective utilisation of allocated funds.   
9. BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FO R THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013-14  
9.1 The Department informed that it had proposed an outlay of   . 7500.00 Crores 
for 2013-14 consisting of plan component of . 6250 crores and Non-Plan Component of 
. 1250.00 crores.  However, an outlay of  only Rs. 6792.00 Crores has been approved 
thereby showing a reduction is of Rs. 708.00 Crores. Out of this, Rs. 5615.04 Crores had 
been allocated under Plan head and 1177.00 Cror es  under non-plan head.  There is no 
increase in the Plan allocation in comparison to the last year.  
9.2 When the Committee enquired from the De partment whether the allocated funds 
were sufficient to carry out the activities, the Department informed that B.E. 2013-14, 
allocation  under the Plan Head of  5615.04 Crores, was based on the programmatic 
milestones/targets envisaged for 2013-14 under the overall framework of XII Five Year 
Plan.  The Department further informed  that the funding required for all the 
ongoing/approved projects/schemes had been fu lly provided in the allocated fund, while 
the funding for some of the new projects/sch emes such as additional flights for Polar 
Satellite Launch Vehicle, Scatt Sat, Ri sat-1A, INSAT/GSAT follow-on missions and 
Launch Services for GSAT-11 had been phase d out to subsequent years in order to 
contain the funding within the allocated funds during 2013-14. 
9.3 The Committee finds that the Department has been allocated an amount of 
. 39750 crores for the XII Five Year Plan.  On uniformly spreading out the total 
allocated fund to five years, the amount  comes to . 7950 crores per year.  The 
Committee feels that the projected demand of  the Department of . 7500 crores for 
B.E. 2013-14, was . 450 crores less than its proportional annual share per year for 
XII Plan.  However, the actual B.E. allocation for 2013-14 was only . 6792.00 
crores, . 1158 crores less than the due am ount and . 708 crores less than the 
amount projected by the Department and if this trend of  allocation continues, the 
Department would ultimately get  reduced allocation at the end of  the Plan Period. 
The Committee strongly recommends that the Department should be provided its 
full approved allocation in terms of the total outlay for XII Plan without any cuts.  
 

10. MAJOR PROGRAMMES AND SCHEMES 
 The programmes/projects of the Departme nt of Space can be classified into 
following broad categories:- 
I Space Technology; 
II  Space Applications;  
III Space Sciences; 
IV INSAT operational; and  
V  Direction and Administ ration/other programmes. 
 The details of the pr ojects/programmes, A nnual Plan allocations vis-à-vis their 
utilisation, etc. are discussed in the succeeding  paragraphs:- 
I   SPACE TECHNOLOGY   
Space Technology consists of two components viz. Launch Vehicle Technology 
and Satellite Technology.  
11.    LAUNCH VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY 
11.1 The main focus of the Space Transporta tion Systems during XII plan period will 
be towards achieving self-sufficiency in la unching satellites, deve loping launch vehicles 
for enhanced payload capability, adopting ap propriate outsourcing strategies for assuring 
production of launch vehicles, stepping up of infrastructure  for launch vehicles and 
developing advanced technologies for the fu ture. Towards that end, enhancement of 
production limits of PSLV Vehicle systems with vigorous indus try participation, 
completion of qualification of indigenous Cryogenic Upper Stage (CUS), proving GSLV 
with indigenous cryogenic stage, as a reliable  workhorse launch vehicle,  completion of 
development and qualification of C25 Engine & Stage, completion of one experimental 
and one developmental flight of GSLV Mk III with 4.0 T GTO capability, progress on 
the development of Semi cryogenic engine w ith the establishment of test facilities, 
augmentation of spaceport infrastructure to meet the launch vehicle requirements shall be 
pursued. During the XII Plan period, 17 PSL V missions, 6 GSLV MK-II missions and 2 
GSLV MK-III missions (including one e xperimental mission) are aimed for 
accomplishment.   
11.2 GEOSTATIONARY SATELLITE LA UNCH VEHICLE (GSLV) 
11.2.1 GSLV programme is intended to de sign and develop an operational launch 
vehicle capable of placing 2 - 5 Ton and a bove capacity communicatio n satellites into 
Geosynchronous Transfer Orbit (GTO). The fi rst flight of GSLV took place from SDSC-
SHAR on April 18, 2001 by la unching 1540 kg GSAT-1. It was followed by six more 
launches , GSLV-D2 on May 8, 2003 (GSAT- 2  1825 kg), GSLV-F01 on September 20, 
2004 (EDUSAT 1950 kg), GSLV-F02 on July  10, 2006, GSLV-F04 on September 2, 
2007 (INSAT-4CR   2130 kg), GSLV-D3 on April 15, 2010 and GSLV-F06 on 
December 25, 2010.  GSLV-MK III Developmen t programme was approved in April 
2002 with total approved cost of .2498 Crores.  The cumulative expenditure up to 
March, 2012 has been  2304.44 Crores which is about 92 per cent of the total approved 
cost.     
11.2.2 The DoS was inquired by the Committ ee about the progress made in the 
development and operationalisation of the thir d stage, indigenously built liquid-fuelled 
Cryogenic Engine in the light of  the fact that in itially ISRO had planned a GSLV-MKIII 
launch with an indigenous upper Cryogeni c Engine during 2012 but later on it was 
rescheduled to 2013.  Explaini ng the reasons for extending th e deadline, the Department 
informed that time schedule was deferred due to incorporation and implementation of all 

recommendations of Failure Analysis Committ ees set up after failure of GSLV-F06 and 
GSLV-D3 IN 2010 in the indigenous cryogenic stage for the next flight of GSLV.  
11.2.3 Informing about progress made in launc h of GSLV Mark-III, the Department 
submitted that major qualification tests such as  lower shroud structural qualification test, 
Acoustic test in wind tunnel, Steering engine Actuator test, Flight acceptance tests of 
Main engine & Steering engines and flight acceptance test of Fuel Booster Turbo Pump 
(FBTP) & Oxidiser Booster Turbo Pump (O BTP) were  successfully completed. The 
integration of the indigenous cryogenic stage identified for the next launch of GSLV is in 
advanced stage at the LPSC facilities, Mahendragiri near Nagercoil in Tamil Nadu. 
11.2.4 The Department further informed that during the deliberations on the 
development of indigenous cryogenic stage,  it was assessed that demonstration of 
vacuum ignition of cryogenic engine on gr ound as well as in vacuum condition would 
provide sufficient confidence for the next flight. The ground test of the cryogenic engine 
under vacuum conditions was planned in March 2013. In view of these technical reasons, 
the next launch of GSLV (GSLV D5) with  indigenous cryo stage was rescheduled to 
sometime in 2013.   
11.2.5 In view of the good progress of the programme, the Planning Commission has 
also adequately funded the programme of GSLV MK-III development as the amount 
allocated for the same has been almost doubled from .72.09 Crores at B.E. 2012-13 to 
.139.53 Crores i.e. an increase of  .67.44 Crores this year.   The Committee is happy 
to note that the Planning Co mmission has provided adequate  funds for the development 
of GSLV MK-III and hope that Department w ould be able to successfully develop it in 
this year. 
11.2.6 The Committee understands that the ad vancement of Indian Space Mission 
depends mainly on the upgradation of Spa ce transportation vehicles for launching 
Satellites having a payload capacity of 4-5 tonnes for applicat ion in Manned Space 
Mission/Mars Orbiter Mission and Cha ndrayaan-2. Keeping this in view, the 
Committee feels that all out e fforts should be made by the Department to upgrade 
the performance of the GSLV technology and make it perfectly reliable and full 
proof.   
11.2.7 The Committee, therefore, recommends  that Department should endeavour 
to achieve the above goal as early as possi ble.  The Committee would also like the 
DoS to ensure successful test ing of vacuum ignition of cryogenic engine on ground 
as well as in vacuum condition with i ndigenous cryo stage, which was earlier 
scheduled for March, 2013, at the earliest an d positively by the end of the current 
Fiscal. The Committee further recommends that the enhanced allocation of 139.53 
Crores for the project in 2013-14 must be fully utilized by the Department.  
11.3 SPACE CAPSULE RECOVERY EXPERIMENT (SRE) 
11.3.1 Space Capsule Recovery Experiment-II (SRE-II) Project is being implemented 
with the primary objective of realising a fully recoverable capsule. It shall also provide a 
platform to conduct micro-gravity experiment s.  SRE capsule has four major hardware, 
namely, Aero Thermo-structure (ATS), Sp acecraft platform, deceleration and floatation 
system and payloads.   
11.3.2 SRE-II project was approved after the su ccessful launch of SRE-I in January 2007 
with an approved cost of . 42.00 Crores. The cumulative expenditure was 39.83 
Crores till March 31, 2012 which was about 95 per cent of the approved cost.  
11.3.3 The Committee inquired from the Depa rtment about the revised target of 
launching SRE-II and factors that led to th e revision of the target. The Department 

affirmed that the target of launching SRE -II had been revised as the optimum usage of 
Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle’ s (PSLV) payload capability a nd a suitable co-passenger 
for SRE-II was to be identified. The  indi genous Carbon-Carbon flight model Nose cap 
for the SRE-II was under progress and was expected to be realised by the end of 2013. As 
per the Department's version, SRE-II would be flown onboard PSLV by 2014.  
11.3.4 Coming to the budgetary allocation, the Committee finds that while an amount of 
. 4.40 Crores was allocated for this project  at B.E. 2011-12, it was reduced to . 2.20 
crores at the R.E. and only .  1.73 crores could be actually spent.   At B.E. 2012-13, 
SRE-II was allocated . 2.20 Crores which wa s reduced to .1.00 Crore at R.E. stage. 
In, 2013-14, however, the programme has been  allocated a meagre amount of . 0.50 
Crores.  The Committee is given to understand th at this is because of delay in launching 
of another companion satellite scheduled to be launched through PSLV with a payload of 
1200-1300 kgs, while SRE just weighs 650 kgs. The Secretary mentioned that SRE-II 
mission, in all likelihood, will be accomplished by 2014. He, further, remarked that the 
launch of SRE-II would be juxtaposed with the launch of CARTOSAT-II.  
11.3.5 The Committee expresses its concern over the tardy progress of SRE-II 
project. Even after utilising 95 per cent,  (. 39.83 Crores) of the total approved 
outlay (Rs. 42 crores) of the SRE-II ti ll March 31, 2012, the SRE-II programme has 
not yet taken off. The Committee, however,  hopes that the two problems plaguing 
the programme, namely delayed identification of suitable co-passenger for optimal 
usage of PSLV payload capability  and th e indigenous Carbon-Carbon flight model 
Nose cap for SRE-II would be addressed at the earliest and the scheduled launching 
of SRE-II in 2014 will be adhered to. 
11.4 MANNED MISSION/HUMAN SPACE FLIGHT PROGRAMME 
11.4.1 The objective of Human Spaceflight Programme is to undertake a human 
spaceflight mission to Low Earth Orbit (LEO) carrying a crew of two and return them 
safely to a predefined destination on earth.  The Committee desired to know the reasons 
behind fluctuations in allocation to manne d Mission Initiatives/Human Space Flight 
Programme, which had been the flagship programme of the Department.  The programme 
was allocated . 150.00 crores at B.E. level in 2010-11 but the actual expenditure 
incurred was only . 19.26 crores. Rs. 98.81 Crores was allocate d at B.E. 2011-12 but 
drastically reduced to . 13.77 Crores at R.E. stage and the actual expenditure in 2011-12 
was merely . 11.17 crores. Similarly, in 2 012-13, the B.E. allocation of 60.46 Crores 
was reduced to . 14.00 Crores at the R.E. stage, out of which only an amount of . 6.14 
crores was actually utilized  till January, 2013.  .27.00 Crores has been allocated to this 
programme in 2013-14.  
11.4.2 The Department informed the Committee that the budget allocated for manned 
Mission initiatives/Human Space Flight Progr amme has two components- One approved 
by the Government but still in its Pre-pr oject phase of deve lopment of critical 
technologies, but other one was  yet to be approved by the Government i.e. Phase-I 
towards design development, flight testing of crew module, PS4 augmented service 
module and development of crew escape sy stem.  Explaining the reason behind lower 
allocation at RE stage, the Department apprised that as Phase-I of the Programme was not 
yet approved, the RE provision had been reduced limiting the expenditure only to Pre-
project phase.  The provision of . 27.00 Crores in B.E. 2013-14 is limited to pre-project 
phase of development of critical technologi es for Human Space Flight Programme. The 
allocations made under manned mission initiative are as per the targets envisaged for the 
year 2013-14.   

11.4.3 The Committee also inquired from the De partment about the proposals of sending 
a Human Space Mission to Moon and whether ISRO had adequate infrastructure and 
required capabilities for accomplishing th is challenging mission. Responding to the 
queries the Department elucidated that as a part of pre-project act ivities; a few critical 
technologies needed for Human Spaceflight Programme had been taken up.  Significant 
progress had been made in a few critical  technological areas su ch as Crew Module 
development, Environment Control & Life  Support System (ECLSS), Space suit and 
various similar areas which were undertaken during pre-project activities phase. The first 
development model of cabin lighting system was realised and tested as well.  The 
Department further emphasised that, ISRO had the capability to carry on with the Human 
Space Flight Programme, however, the infrastruc ture required for this programme has to 
be built up and the process of acquiring infrastructure will  only be embarked on after 
obtaining approval of the project from the Government. 
11.4.4 The Committee is happy to know that the Department has the requisite 
potential and required capabilities to conduct the manned mission and has made 
significant progress in some critical tec hnologies like crew module development, 
environmental control and life support system , space suite, etc. which  have been 
taken up as pre-project activities.  The Committee knows that this is a very sensitive 
and delicate mission and hence the Departme nt needs to tread very cautiously and 
carefully in this mission.  The Committe e further recommends that as considerable 
progress has been made towards this missi on, the Department should expeditiously 
obtain Government approval for the phase-I project of design development and new 
module testing, etc.    
12.     SATELLITE TECHNOLOGY 
12.1 RADAR IMAGING SATELLITE - RISAT- 1A    
12.1.1 RISAT-1, the first state- of- the art remo te sensing Satellite to provide data to 
Indian user community, was successfully launched on 26 April, 2012.  It was the first 
microwave Radar Imaging Satellite built by ISRO. 
12.1.2 RISAT- 1A Programme of the Department  aims to build a follow-on mission to 
RISAT-1 with C-band multi-polarised Synthe tic Aperture Radar having capability of 
imaging under all weather conditions.  Th e target for launch of RISAT-1A with 
indigenous PSLV rocket is scheduled fo r 2017-18.  In 2012-13, RISAT-1A was not 
allocated any amount; however, an allocation of . 1.00 Crore has been made to this 
programme in 2013-14. 
12.1.3 The Committee is aware that RISAT, an op tical satellite that relies on sunlight to 
illuminate the ground below has certain advantag es over Radar Satellite. It could prove 
useful in studying glaciers in  the Himalayas, figuring out the amount of snow melting in 
summers, establishing ways to monitor crops techniques, etc. RISAT-1's radar data is 
likely to find many applications, including in geology, terrain mapping and forestry and 
oceanography.   
12.1.4 While the Committee is happy to note the successful launch of India's first 
indigenous Radar satellite, RISAT-1 in April,  2012, it finds that there is hardly any 
progress as far as development of RISAT- 1A is concerned.  Given that Radar 
satellite technology is tremendously be neficial not only for flood mapping, 
agriculture but also, for glacial st udies, the Committee recommends that 
Department take up in right earnest expe ditious building of RISAT-IA well before 
its targeted launch in 2017-18. The Committe e, also recommends that adequate 

funds be made available for this Mission so that funds crunch does not adversely 
impact the expeditious completion of the Mission. 
12.2 SATELLITE BASED NAVIGATION  
12.2.1 Satellite based Navigation service is an  emerging satellite based system with 
commercial and applications. Establishmen t of an independent Indian Regional 
Navigation Satellite System (IRNSS) over In dian region with a constellation of 7 
satellites was planned to be realised during the XII Five Year Plan. Considerable progress 
has been achieved in realising the various  subsystems of these satellites and the 
constellation shall be completed during th e XII Plan. Implementation of the final 
operational phase for satellite based augmen tation system (SBAS) GAGAN (GPS Aided 
Geo Augmented Navigation) over the Indian Airs pace is also an important target for XII 
Plan.  Formulation of Indian Satellite Naviga tion Policy to facilitate growth of Satellite 
based navigation application will also be  pursued.  Work towards augmentation of 
IRNSS system with 4 additional satellites shall also be initiated during the XII Plan. 
12.3     INDIAN REGIONAL NAVIGATIONAL SATELLITE SYSTEM (IRNSS) 
12.3.1 In response to a query by the Committee regarding the progress made by the 
Department in developing the IRNSS and te ntative schedule for launching  the first 
satellite of IRNSS constellation, i. e.,  IRNSS-R-1A  along with roadmap for 
operationalising full constellation, the Depa rtment informed that out of the seven 
satellites, three satellites are to be put in Geo stationary Orbit (GEO) and four satellites in 
Geo Synchronous Orbit (GSO) to provide two kinds of services, a Standard Positioning 
Service (SPS) for common civilian users an d a Restricted Service (RS) for special 
authorised users in L5 and S bands. The gr ound system consists of IRNSS Navigation 
Centre (INC) and IRNSS Satellite Contro l Facility (IRSCF) and the associated 
Navigational software development.  
12.3.2 The Department apprised the Committee th at the final integration and testing of 
the first IRNSS spacecraft (IRNSS-R1A) have b een completed and it is proposed to be 
launched in June 2013. After evaluating the performance of the first satellite, the 
subsequent satellites would be launched at regular intervals. IS RO has also drawn a 
roadmap for realisation of the IRNSS constellation by the end of 2015.  
12.3.3 In reply to a query as to what extent  launch of seven sa tellites of the IRNSS 
constellation would help reduc ing India's dependence on GPS System and in location 
identification for launching precision weapons, the Department informed that the IRNSS 
being independent satellite navigation system, the receivers capable of utilising the 
signals of IRNSS can provide the position so lution even in the absence of GPS (Global 
Positioning system) with position accuracy equi valent to that of the position solution 
provided by the use of GPS si gnals. All GPS applications in position determination and 
the location identification for launching precision weapons will be supported by IRNSS. 
12.3.4 The Committee feels that the Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System 
(IRNSS) has very useful application and th erefore, all out efforts must be made to 
see that it becomes operational at the earliest and any case within the stipulated time 
so that the nation is able to reap it s benefits.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department should pursue this programme with all 
seriousness and sincerity so that there is no time and cost overrun and its benefits 
start accruing to the nation as soon as possible.     
12.4 GPS AIDED GEO- AUGUMENTED NAVIGATION SYSTEM (GAGAN) 
12.4.1 The Committee desired to know about the progress made so far with regard to  
GPS aided Geo-Augmented Navigation Syst em (GAGAN) and bene fits that would 

accrue  from it. The Department informed that final Operation Phase known as GAGAN-
FOP was in progress while GAGAN Final System Acceptance Test (FSAT) was 
successfully completed on July 16-17, 2012. After the recent launch of GAGAN Payload 
on-board GSAT-10 and subsequent integration with ground system, two satellites GSAT-
8 and GSAT-10 Signal in Space are available ove r Indian Sub-continent. All the sectors 
where GPS standalone system works woul d get benefited by the GAGAN system. The 
GAGAN system though primarily intended for pr oviding precision navigation service for 
civil aviation, would in additi on, provide enormous applicati ons in the field of location 
based services, intelligent transportation syst em (Air, Sea, and Land), survey involving 
positioning and timing applications. 
12.4.2 The Committee feels that with the operationalisation of GAGAN, Indian 
space programme would reach a phase when India can become a major hub of air 
navigation through operation of air services  from India. This achievement is more 
significant at a time when superior space based navigation is in greater demand. 
India can reap its advantage being placed at the axis of routes connecting Europe 
with Southeast Asia.  Further, by having an  indigenous Satellite, based on Regional 
GPS Augmentation System India can gain bo th in terms of market and strategic 
importance. The Committee, therefore, re commends that GAGAN should be made 
operational as soon as possible so that its benefits could become available to the 
country and its people at the earliest. 
III SPACE APPLICATIONS 
12.5 National Remote Sensing Centre  
12.5.1 National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), Hyderabad is responsible for satellite 
data acquisition and processing,  data dissemination, aerial remote sensing and decision 
support for disaster management.  Under 'National Remote Sensing Centre' B.E. 
allocation of 273.52 Crores in 2012-13 has been reduced to  214.87 Crores at R.E. stage 
i.e., a reduction of  58.65 Crores. The B.E. 2013-14 allocations has been further 
reduced to 199.00 Crores.  
12.5.2 When the Committee desired to know the reasons for such a substantial reduction 
in allocation, the Department informed that  the B.E. 2012-13 prov isions for National 
Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) of  273.52 Crores also included an allocation of 50.00 
Crores towards the construction activities for new campus at Regional Remote Sensing 
Centre (West), Jodhpur. However, due to  extensive planning efforts involved in 
designing a new campus, the amount could not be  utilised.  Hence, allocation to NRSC 
was reduced to  214.87 Crores at RE stage. B.E. allocation in 2013-14 to NRSC has 
been kept at 199.00 Crores as the major fundi ng requirements towards the establishment 
of Antarctica Ground Station for Earth Observ ation Satellites have been met during the 
financial year 2012-13.  
12.5.3 The Committee expresses its serious displeasure over the fact that the 
Department earmarked an amount of Rs. 50.00 crores in the year 2012-13 for 
constructing a campus, design of which is  yet to be finalised.  This resulted in 
avoidable non utilisation of the allocated outlay which could have been gainfully 
utilised in some other sche mes/projects. Secondly, non-co mpletion of the campus 
hampers the functioning of the Regional  Remote Sensing Centre, Jodhpur.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that such incidents of underutilisation purely on 
administrative grounds should be strict ly avoided and the construction of the 
proposed campus must be expedited.   

12.5.4 Providing the details of the progress made in the field of  remote sensing in India 
vis-à-vis other developed count ries, it has been informed that Indian Remote Sensing 
programme marked the completion of its 25 years on March 17, 2013. In the last 25 years 
Indian Remote sensing programme has made tremendous progress and has become a role 
model among comity of space fairing nations in  operational utilisation of remote sensing 
data for various applications of importan ce to the nation. In fact, India has made 
significant progress in the fiel d of remote sensing in comp arison to other developed 
countries. Remote sensing data from Indian sa tellites is made available to the global 
community through six active International Gr ound Stations (IGS) in Algeria, China, 
Germany and Myanmar and through re-seller network from 20 countries.   
12.5.5 The Committee congratulates the Department on completion of 25 years of 
its Remote Sensing Programme.  It is a matter of pride that this programme has 
become a role model among comity of nations pursuing space programme 
particularly in operational utilisation  of remote sensing data for various 
applications of greater importance to th e nation. The Committee is confident that 
the Department would continue to excel in the field of Remote Sensing applications. 
IV SPACE SCIENCES 
12.6 ASTROSAT I & II 
12.6.1 The ASTROSAT programme of the Depart ment is aimed at design, development, 
fabrication and launch of an astronomical observa tory of cosmic studies.  It is envisaged 
to be a national observatory for astronomical  observations by resear chers in India.  
ASTROSAT I & II was al located an amount of  10.00 crores at B.E. 2011-12 out of 
which the actual utilisation was only. 6.49 Crores.  The B.E. allocation in 2012-13 was 
reduced to Rs. 6 Crores which at R.E. Stage was further reduced to  2.55 Crores.  The 
allocation has been kept at .5.00 Crores for BE 2013-14. 
12.6.2 "ASTROSAT, a multi-wavelength space bor ne satellite was scheduled to be 
launched during 2009-10".  However, for r easons best known to the Department, the 
project was deferred.  As per the programmatic  physical target set by the Department for 
2012-13, ASTROSAT was scheduled to be la unched and operationalised through PSLV-
C22. Providing details regarding the progress of the project, the Department stated that 
assembly, integration and testing of vari ous sub-systems are progressing well.  
Development of flight models of payloa ds is nearing completion.  Based on the 
developmental status, the launch of ASTROSAT has been slated for 2014-15. 
12.6.3 In response to a query raised by the Co mmittee regarding the postponement of the 
target for launch of ASTROSAT, the Depart ment stated that si nce ASTROSAT has a 
scientific Mission that involved complex research in Space sciences, it was bound to take 
time. Another reason cited by the Department, for such inordinate delay was involvement 
of fellow scientists from countries across th e world. The Secretary informed that work 
was now progressing well with instrumentation part ready and reiterated that by 2014-15, 
the Department would be able to achieve the target.  The Committee, however, finds that 
integration of the instruments is yet to be done and is expected to be ready for launch by 
2014. 
12.6.4 The Committee understands that ASTROSAT is a complex scientific satellite 
in nature but notes that the even after almost ten years, this project is yet to be given 
a concrete shape. The Committ ee is of the opinion that Department should set its 
targets realistically and only after due co nsideration of complexities involved for 
repeated failure to meet targets lowers it s credibility in the ey es of public.  The 

Committee recommends that the Department  must make a sincere endeavour to 
launch the satellite as per the revised time  schedule i.e. 2014-15. 
12.7 INDIAN LUNAR MISSION -  CHANDRAYAAN-2 
12.7.1 Chandrayaan-2, a joint Space Mission with ISRO and Russian Federal Space 
Agency (ROSCOSMOS), Originally approved by Government in September, 2008 at a 
cost of . 425 crores excluding cost of GSLV and Lander, is an important step in India's 
Planetary exploration.   
12.7.2 Inter-Agency Agreement on cooperation for the joint mission was signed on 
November 12, 2007, between the two agencies. In February 2010, an amendment to the 
earlier agreement was agreed upon, wherein wh ile ISRO had the responsibility for the 
Rover Module, orbiter and the launch by GSLV. ROSCOSMOS was responsible for 
Moon  Lander module.  
12.7.3 Consequent to the failure  of the Russia-led inter-planetary mission, Phobos-Grunt, 
a sample return mission to Phobos (one of the moons of Mars), ROSCOSMOS decided to 
increase the reliability of their planetary mi ssions, for which increase in the mass of the 
Moon Lander by 250 kg. was required.  In May 2012, ROSCOSMOS suggested two 
options. First, a demonstration mission onboard  SOYUZ-2 launcher in the year 2015 and 
secondly a full scale science mission on-board SOYUZ-2 in 2017. ROSCOSMOS 
proposed that ISRO may provide  Indian Rover for launch sc heduled in 2015 or in 2017, 
also indicating that the 2015 opportunity i.e. Chandrayaan-2 involved mass limitation for 
Rover and higher risk.  
12.7.4 Based on the above inputs from Russian side and subsequent discussions held 
with them it was felt that the Mission called for a major programmatic realignment.   As 
such, an integrated programmatic review on Chandrayaan-2, chaired by Prof U.R. Rao 
carried out a critical assessment of India’s capability to desi gn and deploy a landing craft 
in a short time frame and a proposal was moot ed on the future direction of Chandrayaan-
2 Mission, concluding inter-alia that India could realise the Lander module too. 
12.7.5 With regard to progress made in th e Mission, the Committee has been informed 
that ISRO has shown its capability for Moon orbiter through CHANDRAYAAN-I and 
development of Rover Module as also a few scientific instruments to be flown on the 
orbiter and Rover had made good progress.  So me level of experimental studies for the 
Moon Lander had also been undertaken and the launch of Chandrayaan-2 by GSLV was 
planned by 2014. 
12.7.6 The Department has further informed th at due to programmatic re-adjustment, 
there could, however, be a te mporal shift in launching of  Chandrayaan-2 mission. Since 
the final configuration of the payloads is  under revision, the allo cation under the Indian 
Lunar Mission-Chandrayaan-1 & 2 has been decreased from  82.50 crores to . 56.01 
crores at R.E. stage 2012-13. This year the programme has been allocated . 78.00 crores 
at B.E. level.  
12.7.7 The Committee, in view of the subsequent developments that have taken 
place with regard to the in ter-planetary mission of Ch andrayaan-II, is of the 
opinion that ISRO should go ahead with the Mission with full confidence in its 
capabilities to achieve the mission successfu lly.  The process of indigenisation may 
take some time but it will make Indian Lunar programme, i.e., Chandrayaan -2 self-
sufficient.  India’s successf ul attempt to indigenously build cryo-technology was an 
outcome of technology denial regime wh ich proved a blessing in disguise.  The 
Committee is confident that this particular incident would give fillip to the efforts 

and resolve of the Department to work ha rder in order to overcome the challenge 
with added vigour and energy.  
12.7.8 The Committee, further, suggests that the Department should galvanise all 
the resources at its disposal and intensify it s efforts to ensure that the lunar orbiter, 
rover and Lander are developed at the ea rliest. The Committee would also like to 
caution the Department to take all nece ssary measure to make the Chandrayaan-2 
Mission a grand success learning lesso ns from Chandrayaan-1. The Committee 
further recommends that Planning Commissio n and the Ministry of Finance should 
extend all necessary financial/ budgetary support for the Mission. 
12.8 MARS ORBITER MISSION  
12.8.1 Mars Orbiter Mission is ISRO's first interplanetary mission with a spacecraft 
designed to orbit Mars in  an elliptical orbit.  India’s first mission to  Mars is proposed to 
be launched using Polar Sate llite Launch Vehicle in XL configuration (PSLV-XL) from 
Satish Dhawan Space Centre, Sriharikota in October-November 2013. The mission has 
been designated as PSLV-C25.  
12.8.2 As per information provided by the Depart ment all the four stages of the PSLV-
C25 including the strap-ons and their respective sub-systems were under various stages of 
preparation. The integr ation of the launch vehi cle was planned to commence in the first 
week of August 2013. The Space craft, Mars Orb iter, is undergoing integration and 
spacecraft level tests. It is expected to take 300 days to reach the planet Mars, after which 
it will be commanded to get inserted in the Martian orbit. This will be an orbiting mission 
around Mars. 
12.8.3 As far as budgetary allocation is con cerned, under the Mars Orbiter Mission, 
although the B.E. and R.E. allo cation in 2012-13 was kept at  125.00 Crores, the actual 
utilisation as on January, 2013 amounted to . 10.87 crores only. However, during this 
financial year, the budgetary a llocation has been increased by 42.50 Crores and has 
reached 167.50 Crores. When the Committee enqui red whether the amount allocated 
was sufficient enough to run the programme, the Department informed that the budgetary 
provision was sufficient enough to meet the pr ogrammatic requirements of Mars Orbiter 
Mission.  The Department further informed that Mars Orbiter Mission being the first 
Indian space mission to Mars, was driven primarily by technological objectives which 
included design and development of a Mars Orbiter with the capability to perform earth 
orbit manoeuvres. The scientific objectives of the mission included exploration of 
Martian surface features and study of constituen ts of Martian atmosphere using specific 
scientific instruments.  
12.8.4 The Committee notes that Mars Orbi ter Mission has several scientific 
advantages. Mars has good potential for space industrialisation and the Department 
should pursue this Mission with all earnestness and sincerity to make it successful so 
that India is able to achieve all the desired objectives from the Mission.  
12.8.5  The Committee takes note of the fact that the main objective of the Mars 
Orbiter Mission is to demonstrate India’s technological capacity to reach Martian 
orbit which would pave the way for futu re scientific exploratory Missions. The 
Committee understands that sending satel lite to Mars, involving a journey of 
millions and millions of miles and a journe y time of about 320 days, is not an easy 
task.  The Committee has further been inform ed that for such a long space journey, 
higher propulsion efficiency of the rocket is extremely essential and it is to be 
ensured that spacecraft survives the moveme nt for such long days and remains on 
the right path towards Mars. This essentia lly involves monitoring of the spacecraft 

by sending commands from the space statio n that should not be delinked at any 
stage during the journey as delinking may lead to the mission failure.  Moreover, for 
success of the mission, the Department have to ensure that all the components of the 
spacecraft continue to work efficiently th roughout the life of the mission. Keeping 
all this in view, the Committee would expect DoS to be extremely careful in planning 
and execution of  the Mission so that  th e huge sum of money involved in the project 
does not get wasted.  
12.8.6 The Committee would furth er like the Department to ensure that the Mars 
Orbiter Mission progresses as per schedule,  departing on time from the orbit of 
earth in November, 2013.  The Committee is  also hopeful that the Mars Orbiter 
would enter in the orbit of Mars by September, 2014, as per schedule taking 
advantage of earth's proximity to Mars at that point of time. 
13. SPACE PROGRAMME AND INDUSTRY PARTICIPATION 
13.1 When the Committee asked whether the De partment had any plans to set up a 
National Committee to work out modalities of hiving off producti on of Communication 
satellites and PSLV to the i ndustry and also if a  roadmap had been drawn by the 
Department to launch a satellite in collaborati on with private companies, the Department 
apprised that ISRO was making focused effort s to enhance the participation of Indian 
Space Industry in the production of Communi cation satellites, PSLV and related sub-
systems. Currently, about 500 industries pa rticipate in space pr ogrammes by supplying 
components, small structures for launch vehicl es, satellites and ro cket propellants. In 
addition to that, industries were  also involved in supply of some of the fully assembled 
liquid stages for launch vehicles.  Operation of complex facilities like solid propellant 
plant at Satish Dhawan Space Centre was also done by private industry. 
13.2 It was also informed that the feasibil ity studies aimed to evolve a model for 
increased participation of industry in the I ndian space programme had been initiated in 
the DoS. A National Committee was also bein g proposed to be set up to assess the 
modalities and to evolve the policy framew ork required for this, while ensuring 
inclusiveness and transparency. 
13.3 The Committee is of the view that sharing the burden of producing launch 
vehicles and satellites by pr ivate sector would help ISRO shed some of its financial 
burden, which will help release funds for ot her research-oriented activities of the 
Department.  
13.4 Additionally, large scale involvement of private sector would boost Indian 
space programme and help generate employ ment as well.  The Committee feels that 
this is a step taken in the right direction and DoS should continue to make concerted 
efforts in this direction . The Committee, accordin gly, recommends that the 
Department should make concerted efforts to encourage greater participation of 
private sector in its activities.  
14. CONTRIBUTION TO THE SOCIETY  
14.1 The Committee is aware that DoS has developed valuable spin-off technologies 
which are proving to be beneficial for the society in general and rural, far flung and 
backward areas of the country in particular.  Some of the noteworthy societal applications 
benefiting the Indian Society are given below:  
 INSAT operational system has facilitated telecommunications, TV 
broadcast, providing access to TV fo r 850 million Indians. INSAT has also 
played an important role in the country’s social development with exclusive 
channels for vocational training and distant development education.   

 ISRO has successfully demonstrated the capability of application of 
satellite technology in  the health sect or through tale-medicine programme. 
Tele-medicine review supported through INSAT-3A and GSAT-12 satellites, 
has established networks to take supe r-specialist medical services to the 
remote and rural population. Tele-medicin e facilitates medi cal consultations 
between specialist doctors in the cities and local doctors at Rural/Primary 
Health Centers in the villages, there by strengthening the healthcare related 
service/training in the rural areas.   
 Tele-education enables informal e ducation, strengthens teaching 
mechanisms, and facilitates interactive training and skill development 
processes at the Panchayat/ village community levels, directly.   
 INSAT system has helped in impr oving the meteorological services, 
cyclone monitoring and issuing warn ing on impending cyclones through 
disaster warning receivers installed along the east and west coasts of the 
country.  
 Indian Remote Sensing satellites ha ve been the workhorse for several 
applications - encompassing the various sectors such as agriculture, land and 
water resources, forestry, environment, natural disasters, urban planning and 
infrastructure development, rural deve lopment, and forecasting of potential 
fishing zones. 
 The value-added, high-resolution sate llite images provide community-
centric, geo-referenced spatial information relevant to management of natural 
resources - like land use/ land cover,  terrain morphology, surface water and 
groundwater, soil characteristics, environment and infrastructure.   
 Satellite communications and Earth observation segments together provide 
support to disaster management at communities level - like stockpiling 
emergency communication equipments, vulnerability and risk related 
information, early warning and extreme weather information dissemination 
mechanisms. 
 With well-knit institutional arrangement s to integrate space applications 
emanating from INSAT and IRS systems towards societal development, ISRO 
has positioned itself to provide some of  the valuable services of direct 
relevance at the grassroots.  
14.2 The Committee commends the Department  for making very good use of its 
spin off technologies for soci ally useful purposes such as tele-medicine, tele-education 
networks, Village Resource Centres, Fo restry mapping, assisting  disaster 
management efforts, locating natural resour ces as also keeping a check on insurgent 
activities in the country, etc. 
14.3 The Committee, however, feels that a lo t more needs to be done by DoS  to 
fully realise the vision of Dr. Sarabhai "to play a meaningful role nationally and in 
Comity of nations, we must be second to none in the application of advanced 
technologies to the real problems of ma n and society".  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the DoS should make con certed efforts to try to live up-to the 
expectations of the society, the people and provide them with greater facilities and 
benefits.   

 
 
15. CONCLUDING REMARKS  
15.1 Keeping in view the outstanding work that the Department of Space has 
undertaken, the kind of professionalism an d competence it has exhibited and the 
kind of core and critical programmes it ha s envisaged for future, the Committee is 
confident that the Department would contin ue to bring glory to the country by its 
achievements. 
15.2 The Committee is of the view that, in an age when cost benefit analysis has 
become an integral part of public spendin g, the Department of Space, must set an 
example for others to emulate by providing high returns in the form of concrete 
benefits to the country and its people on  every rupee invested in its programme.  
The Committee is confident that the Department  has the capabilities to do so and it 
will not betray the trust reposed by the Committee in its capabilities.   
       
 
 
 