 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTY THIRD REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three  Hundred Seventy Sixth Report of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment,  
Forests and Climate Change on the Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the 
Department of Science and Technology 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2023) 
 
REPORT NO. 
383 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTY THIRD REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Three  Hundred Seventy Sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment,  Forests and Climate Change on the 
Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Department of Science and Technology 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August,  2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 

 
C O N T E N T S   
            
  PAGES 
   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION  (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS  (iii)  
4. REPORT         1-9 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been  
                       accepted by the Government 
 
2-3 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the   Committee does not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
4-7 
 Chapter III.   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
                      of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
8 
 Chapter IV.   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
                      Replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
9 
5. Minutes 10-12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2022-23) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022) 
 
 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh - Chairman 
 
         RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Shri Niranjan Bishi  
4. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
6. Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
7. Shri Jose K. Mani 
8. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
9. Shri Nabam Rebia   
10. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  
         LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
12. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
13. Shri Jashwantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
14. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
15. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16. Shri Sunny Deol 
17. Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
18. Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
19. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
20. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
21. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
22. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
23. Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
24. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
25. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha  
26. Shri Anurag Sharma 
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
28. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
29. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava  
30. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Narendra Kumar, Director 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
       Shri Thangzasiam Paite, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
(i) 
                                                
 Shri S. Jagathrakshakan ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 8th December, 2022 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present thi s Three Hundred Eighty Third Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the  recommendations/observations contained in the Three 
Hundred Seventy Sixth  Report  of the Committee  on  Demands for Grants (20 23-2024) of the 
Department of Science and Technology,  which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on the             
15th March, 2023 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th March, 2023.  
 
2.   There were 10 recommendations/observations in the Three Hundred Seventy Sixth Report of 
the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of the Committee were 
received from the Department on 22nd June, 2023.   
3.   In the meeting held on 9th August, 2023, the Committee considered the draft Report and 
adopted the same 
   
 
 
 
 (JAIRAM RAMESH) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
09 August, 2023   Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Sravana 18, 1945 (Saka)  Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

ACRONYMS 
 
ATN Action Taken Note 
ATR Action Taken Report 
CAWACH Centre for Augmenting WAR with COVID-19 Health Crisis 
CURIE Consolidation of University Research For Innovation And Excellence 
INSPIRE Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research 
IPR Intellectual Property Rights 
MANAK Million Minds Augmenting National Aspiration and Knowledge 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
NIT National Institute of Technology 
NM-ICPS National Mission on Inter-disciplinary Cyber Physical Cyber System  
NRF National Research Foundation 
OOMF Output Outcome Monitoring Framework 
SATHI Sophisticated Analytical and Technical Help Institutes  
SHE Scholarship for Higher Education  
SMEs Small and Medium Enterprises 
SMIT Sikkim Manipal Institute of Technology 
STEM Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics 
TIHs Technology Innovation Hubs 
WIDUSHI 
Fellowship 
Women’s Instinct for Developing and Ushering in Scientific Heights and 
Innovation Fellowship 
WINGS Women’s International Grant Support  
WISE Women in Science & Engineering  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change deals with the action taken by  
the Government  on the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its ‘Three 
Hundred Seventy Sixth Report’ on ‘Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the Department of Science and 
Technology’. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha on the 15 th March, 2023 and laid on the Table 
of Lok Sabha on the 20th March, 2023.  
2. Action Taken Note s (ATNs) ha ve been received from the Department of Science and 
Technology in respect of  all the 10 recommendations/observations contained in the ‘Three Hundred 
Seventy Sixth Report’. The r eplies of the Department of Science and  Technology have been 
categorized as follows:-  
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos. 2.4, 2.12 and 7.7 
 Total recommendations – 03  
 
Chapter II:    Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do es not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: 
Para Nos. 2.8, 2.17, 3.2, 4.4, 4.5 and 6.4 
 Total recommendations – 06   
 
Chapter III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Para No. 5.5 
Total recommendations – 01  
 
Chapter IV:   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: ‘Nil’ 
 
3. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters. 

2 
 
CHAPTER – I  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
OVERALL BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022 -23 (BE, RE & ACTUAL 
EXPENDITURE) AND ALLOCATION FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2023-24. 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.1 The Committe e duly takes note of the reason cited by the Department regarding the under -
utilization of the budgetary allocations, and the adverse affect of introduction of the new payment 
system on implementation of its various activities/projects, as also achievement  of their physical and 
financial targets. However, the Committee is constrained to observe that the ground cited by the 
Department is primarily administrative and procedural in nature. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that the matter should be  addressed with utmost urgency and the system streamlined at 
the earliest, so that no further negative impact percolates to the next financial year.  
          (Para 2.4 of the 376th Report)  
Action Taken 
1.2 The issues r elated to new payment system have  already been sorted out. Further, despite the 
adverse effect of introduction and implementation of the new payment system, Department of Science 
and Technology was able to spend  ₹ 4744.78 crore against the RE of  ₹ 4907.17 crore, which is 
96.69% of RE for FY 2022 -23, by taking various proactive initiatives and concerted monitoring of 
expenditure. However, the recommendations of Committee are noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.3 The Committee notes the overall increase in the budgetary all ocation of the Department for the 
financial year 2023 -24, and urges the Department to ensure optimal utilization of funds during this 
period. To achieve this, the Committee recommends that periodic monitoring of the progress w.r.t 
achievement of targets may be made at least on a quarterly basis.           (Para 2.12 ibid)  
Action Taken 
1.4 On basis of recommendation of the Committee, the Department has already prepared quarterly 
plan for regular and continuous monitoring for optimal utilization of allocated  funds and to ensure 
achievement of targets and the same will be followed rigorously. 
 
NATIONAL RESEARCH FOUNDATION 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.5 The Committee takes due note of the visions, objectives and purpose of creation of the National 
Research Foundation. It believes that a centrally established NRF that transparently seeds, funds, and 
coordinates research across institutions in the country - in all disciplines, in an integrated manner, 

3 
 
with a special mandate to foster research and innovation in u niversities and colleges, including inter -
disciplinary research to provide practical solutions to societal, developmental, financial, techno -
economic challenges of the nation, is a much needed overarching mechanism. The Committee 
recommends that, in the pr ocess of implementing this programme, special consideration should be 
given towards under-funded as well as new and emerging areas of research, while also keeping under -
served regions of the country in mind.                (Para 7.7 ibid)  
Action Taken 
1.6 The National Research Foundation  (NRF) is currently under the process of approval and the 
above recommendations have been noted for compliance during implementation. 
 
 

4 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
OVERALL BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022 -23 (BE, RE & ACTUAL 
EXPENDITURE) AND ALLOCATION FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2023-24. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.1 The Committee observes that, in fact, the Departm ent has been allocated an additional amount 
of Rs. 800.25 crore over and above its demand for the year 2023-24. This amount is more than the bare 
minimum requirement (i.e, Rs.500 crore) projected by the Department, in the event of a reduction in 
the actual budgetary provision. In view thereof, the Committee feels that the Department should be in a 
comfortable position to sustain its key programmes and even take up additional projects during the 
year without seeking any further support to augment its budget.           (Para 2.8 of the 376th Report)  
Action Taken 
2.2 The Department of Science and Technology has proposed ₹ 7132.00 crore for FY 2023 -24 
wherein no budget was sought from National Research Foundation (NRF). In the allocated budget of 
₹7932.25 crore, there is provision of ₹ 2000.00 crore for National Resear ch Foundation which is 
proposed to be created during the current fiscal year. The rest of the allocation under BE, i.e., Rs. 
5932.25 for ongoing activities of the Department, is lesser than the BE projection of Rs.7132.0 crore. 
Considering the above, the D epartment will try to work to optimize its resources for the ongoing 
activities and may request for additional allocation as part of RE allocation for 2023-24. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.3 The Committee expresses the view that administrative and proce dural matters do not become 
major reasons for hampering the planned activities of the Department in the long run. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Department should ensure due diligence in its management of 
expenditure to ensure optimal utilization for 2023-24 as well as achievement of set targets. Besides, the 
Committee desires that all efforts should be made during the year to compensate for the mediocre 
performance during the financial year 2022-23.              (Para 2.17 ibid)  
Action Taken 
2.4 The Department has taken necessary step to streamline the administrative and procedural issues 
and the same will not impact the performance of the Department in future to achieve the set targets. 
 
KEY ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT DURING 2022-23 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.5 The Committee notes the achievements of the Department across its various schemes and 
programmes during the year, and appreciates its varied contributions for furthering scientific and 

5 
 
technological progress of the country. Th e Committee desires that the Department should focus its 
resources on more projects and programmes which align with the national priorities. The Committee 
further desires that year-wise information/data pertaining to the targets and achievements in respect of 
each major head and the various programmes under them, should be maintained in a consolidated 
manner and updated whenever required, so as to enable a wholesome assessment of their performance 
across periods.                    (Para 3.2 ibid)  
Action Taken 
2.6 The Department has already initiated few steps towards optimizing its resources aligning with 
the national priorities. During recent years, the Department has introduced a new model of S&T 
equipment facility named SATHI, an independently operated facility accessible for all the stakeholders, 
including the industries and SMEs. Similarly, the VigyanJyoti programme has been initiated for 
empowering girl students in the underrepresented STEM areas. To deal with the COVID -19 pandemic, 
a dedicated programme called CAWACH was launched to support the entire value chain of innovations 
and start-ups that addresses COVID -19 challenges. The Department has been consolidating year -wise 
information/data pertaining to the targets and achievements under the programm es and shall put 
concerted efforts to strengthen the existing mechanism in the above regard. 
 
NATIONAL MISSION ON INTERDISCIPLINARY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS (NM-ICPS)  
Recommendations/Observations 
2.7 The Committee underlines the physical achievements of the  Department under NM -ICPS in 
almost four years of its inception. Given the fact that the Mission has been implemented with a vision 
of five years and an outlay of Rs.3660 crore, the Committee hopes that the Department will continue its 
efforts in furthering the development of Technology, Entrepreneurship and Human Resources through 
this mission.                     (Para 4.4 ibid)  
Action Taken 
2.8 The Mission is continuing its efforts in furthering the development of Technologies, 
Technology Products, Entrepreneurship and Human Resource in the areas of Cyber Physical Systems. 
Details of the achievements of the Mission till date are as follows: 
Mission outcomes 
Mission targets in 
Number (For 5 years as 
per Cabinet Note) 
Mission targets 
in Numbers for 
3 years 
Achieved targets in 
Number (as in 3rd year of 
establishment of the TIHs) 
Technologies 500 300 276 
Start-ups 800 480 339 
Increase in CPS and 
related researchers base 
2000 1200 1019 
Technology products 500 300 512 
High end skill 
development (HRD) 
12000 7200 54502 
Hubs & TTRPs 25 9 25 Hubs 

6 
 
Job creation 40000 
(short term 5 years) and 
240000 (in long term 9 
years) 
15000 
(short term) 
13259 
(short term) 
Publications, IPR and 
other intellectual 
activities 
1500 900 1128 
International 
Collaborations 
25 15 116 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.9 However, given the under -utilization of funds during 2022 -23, as has been pointed out at 
preceding paras 2.2 and 2.016, the Committee cautions the Department that the enhanced budgetary 
allocation for 2023-24 towards this Mission, which is almost double of the R.E. allocation of 2022 -23, 
should be put to optimal utilization. The Committee further recommends the Department to ensure that 
the scale of physical achievements is in line with the progress made so far and that  in no manner 
should there be any slack. The Department should also keep in sight the need to empower the 
underserved regions of the country through NM-ICPS.               (Para 4.5 ibid)  
Action Taken 
2.10 The utilization of funds given in para 2.2 is til l 31 st January 2023. Under NM -ICPS, budget 
allocated for FY 2022 -23 was Rs.300 crores and till 31 st March 2023, Rs. 299.402 crores has been 
utilized, which amounts to 99.80% expenditure. 
2.11 Under NM-ICPS, the Department is also working towards serving th e underserved regions of 
the country. The Technology Innovation Hub set up at Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee (iHUB 
DivyaSampark) under NM -ICPS has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Sikkim 
Manipal Institute of Technology (SMIT), Sikki m. The SMIT will work as a spoke of the iHUB 
DivyaSampark for serving the students and innovators in North Eastern regions especially in North 
Sikkim. This partnership fosters a spirit of innovation and creates endless opportunities for the people 
residing in these remote regions. 
2.12 Similarly, another spoke has been created at NIT Sikkim which has organized a short -term 
training program in emerging technologies for marginalized ST students under the joint initiative of 
iHUB DivyaSampark & Department of S cience &Technology. The aim is to enhance their skills in 
innovation, and product/technology development, and equip them with the necessary expertise to be 
job-ready for the future. 
 
WOMEN IN SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING (WISE) 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.13 The Committee notes the efforts being made by the Department to promote women in the area 
of science and technology through its various women centric programmes. In order to make the 
programmes more effective, the Committee recommends that the Department should clearly quantify 

7 
 
its targets in respect of each programme. As the primary focus is on improving gender parity in S&T 
through various interventions, the Department should endeavour to maintain the same enrollment rate 
of graduation level, at the higher levels.                          (Para 6.4 ibid)  
Action Taken 
2.14 The Department has quantified its targets in respect of each programme. However, it would be 
difficult to maintain the same enrolment rate of graduation level, at the higher level. The target number 
in different programmes are as follows: 
Sl. 
No. 
Programmes Objective of the Programmes Target 
Number 
(for 1 year) 
1. WISE Fellowship for Ph.D. To pursue Ph.D. in STEM 100 
2. WISE Post-Doctoral Fellowship To carry out Post -Doctoral Research 
in STEM 
150 
3. WISE Post-Doctoral Fellowship 
for Societal Benefit 
To carry out research for benefit of 
society 
60 
4. WIDUSHI (Women’s Instinct for 
Developing and Ushering in 
Scientific Heights & Innovation) 
Fellowship 
To facilitate senior women scientists  30 
5. WISE Internship in IPR To provide training in the area of 
Intellectual Property Rights 
100 
6. WINGS (Women’s International 
Grant Support) 
To provide opportunity to carry out 
research in International Labs 
30 
7. CURIE To develop infrastructure a nd research 
facilities in women institutions 
20 
8. VigyanJyoti (School Component) To encourage girls to pursue h igher 
education and research in under-
represented areas of STEM. 
30000 

8 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE  
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT AND CAPACITY BUILDING 
Recommendations/Observations 
3.1 Taking cognizance of the importance of human resource development and capacity building for 
a nation, the Committ ee commends the efforts of the Department towards this end. The Committee, 
however, feels that much more needs to be done, especially for a country like ours which is endowed 
with adequate human resource to be developed, trained, harnessed and empowered. T he Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Department should set defined targets across all its programmes, in 
quantifiable terms to the extent possible, and steadfastly work towards achieving them. The Committee 
further recommends that a robust mechanis m should be put in place for monitoring the progress of 
each programme.                 (Para 5.5 of the 376th Report) 
Action Taken 
3.2 The Department has been implementing Human Resources Development programmes at 
various levels such as the MANAK programm e (targeting students from class VI -XI), INSPIRE 
scholarship for higher education (SHE) at undergraduate level, INSPIRE fellowship for doctoral 
students, SERB-NPDF supporting the Post-doctoral students and INSPIRE Faculty for young scientists 
to start their career. The Department is making sincere efforts to increase the beneficiary base under all 
the programmes. All the programmes including the human resource development programmes of the 
Department are being monitored through an Outcome Output Monitoring Framework (OOMF) devised 
by the NITI Aayog. Targets in quantifiable terms are being defined for all the programmes and their 
achievements are monitored quarterly which is accessible through online dashboard. 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.3 While taking note of the reply of the Depar tment of Science and Technology, the 
Committee desires that a more comprehensive response detailing the various HRD programmes 
of the Department, the targets defined for each programme and the status of achievement of the 
same, may be shared in detail with the Committee.  
3.4 Further, the Committee recommends that a more holistic approach  needs to be evolved 
w.r.t the HRD programmes  encompassing not only academic education but also skill 
development, vocational training and entrepreneurship, by duly recognizing the importance of 
addressing the broader range of skills and competencies required in toda y's rapidly changing job 
market. Enhancing the reach and accessibility of these programmes should also be prioritized, so 
that beneficiaries from all socio -economic backgrounds and regions of the country have equal 
access to them. 
 

9 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 

11 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE (2023 -24) 
 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 3:30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 9 th August, 2023 in Room 
No. 67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav - in the Chair 
2. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
3. Shri Jose K. Mani 
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
5. Shri Nabam Rebia 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
7. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
8. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
9. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
10. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
11. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani 
12. Shri Anurag Sharma 
13. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi 
 SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. K.S. Somasekhar, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Narendra Kumar, Director 
 Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
          Shri Rama Nand, Committee Officer 
  

12 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee and informed them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to consider and 
adopt the draft Reports of the Committee on Action Taken  by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in Reports of the Committee 
on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministries/Departments under its purview.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 380 th, 381st, 382nd, 383rd, 
384th, 385th and 386th Reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on 
the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in Reports of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the Ministries/Departments of Atomic 
Energy; Biotechnology; Scientific & Industrial Research; Science & Technology; Space; 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, respectively and adopted 
the same unanimously without any change. 
4. Thereafter the Committee discussed its future programme and decided to 
undertake a Study visit in the month of September, 2023. The Committee authorised its 
Chairman to finalise the tour programme. 
5. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.00 p.m. 
 
 
NEW DELHI NARENDRA KUMAR 
09.08.2023 DIRECTOR 
 