20th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/20threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
 COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
 ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1995-96)
 
TWENTIETH REPORT
 
ON
THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN
DEVELOPMENT FOR THE YEAR 1993-94
 
(Marine Satellite Information Service (MARSIS), pollution Monitoring 
 Programme-Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS), 
 and National Programme for Identification of Marine Bioactive Substances for use as Drugs)
 
(Presented on May 3, 1995)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 1995/Vaisakha, 1917 (Saka)
CONTENTS
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 2. INTRODUCTION 
 3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
 4. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF COMMITTEE
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(1995-96)
 
1. Syed Sibtey Razi--Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Dr. M. Aram
3. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
4. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
5. Shri K. Rahman Khan
6. Prof. M.G.K. Menon
7. Shri Suresh Pachouri
8. Shri N. Giri Prasad
9. Shri Satchidananda
10. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
11. Dr. Ranbir Singh
12. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
 
LOK SABHA
 
13.Shri E. Ahamed
14.Shri P.C. Chacko
15.Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
16.Shri Jitendra Nath Das
17.Shri Sharad Dighe
18.Shrimati Saroj Dubey

20th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/20threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
19.Shri Oscar Fernandes
20.Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
21.Shri P. Kumarasamy
22.Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
23.Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
24.Shri M.V.V.S Murthy
25.Shri Harpal Panwar
26.Shri Balraj Pasi
27.Shri Bhim Singh Patel
28.Shri Chandresh Patel
29.Shri Vijay Naval Patil
30.Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
31.Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
32.Shri Rama Chandra Rath
33.Shri M.G. Reddy
34.Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
35.Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Si~
36.Shri Harchand Singh
37.Shri Ram Prasad S~ngh
38.Shri K.G, Shivappa
39.Shri Bapusaheb Thite
40.Kumari Sushila Tiriya
41.Kumari Frida Topno
42.Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
INTRODUCTION
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
 Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf present this Twentieth Report of the
 Committee, This Report deals with three specific areas of activity of the Department of Ocean Development, namely--0)
 Marine Satellite Information Service (MARSIS); (ii) Pollution Monitoring Programme-Coastal Ocean Monitoring and
 Prediction System (COM-PAS) and (iii) National Programme for Identification of Marine Bioactive Substances for use as
 Drugs; on the basis of its Annual Report (1993-94).
 
2. The committee held in all three meetings 6n January 23, 24 and April 27, 1995 to consider the aforementioned
 programmes of the Department. In the meeting held on January 23, 1995 the Secretary of the Department made a presentation
 about the overall activities of the Department, highlighting in particular the thrust being imparted to its programmes in the
 above three areas. On January 24, 1995 the committee further discussed these subjects and the Secretary and other officials of
 the Department of Ocean Development gave clarifications on some of the points raised by the Members.
 
3. The committee thanks the officials of the Department of Ocean Development for giving it-necessary information and
 placing before it relevant papers/background note which facilitated examination of its Annual Report for the year 1993-94.
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted this report at its meeting held on the 27th April, 19.95.
 
New Delhi;
April 27, 1995
SYED SIBTEY RAZI
Chairman,
Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests
 
 
REPORT
 
The oceans constitute a repository of living and non-living resources, which are

20th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/20threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
 particularly of value to a nation like India which has a long coastline and therefore access to these, in the Indian Ocean as a
 whole, and more specifically the Bay of Bengal and the  Arabian Sea. A substantial segment of our population depends upon
 these for their    livelihood. An increasing faction of our population, through a process f migration will move:        to the coastal
 areas, and to urban centres located in these which are likely to become mega cities, sucha vast coastline, however, is of little use
 if he country is not ableto optimallyexploit this sea wealth. The development of oceans related programmes and a cogent
 strategy for tapping the marine resource potential has therefore, to be a key element of   country's planning. Apart from the
 direct living and non-living resources, the Ocean has a   profound impact on natural life. Climate and weather, the monsoons,
 disasters such as           cyclones and tidal waves, marine transportation, direct water resources in coastal areas and
 much more, relate directly to the ocean. To understand the ocean around us and to ensure         their health is a matter of
 paramount importance. The Ocean Policy of the Government enunciated way back in 1982 lays down some well defined
 parameters of the thrust which  ocean related activities would have to take over a span of time. This effort has of necessity to be
 a multi-disciplinary and multi-agency effort, since a number of Ministries/agencies of Government are concerned and have to
 be involved; but Department of Ocean Development has been given a nodal role to co-ordinate these activities and has to
 perform this as its highest priority. The mandate of the Department includes:--
                 (i)    Promotion of Research and Development in the marine: sector.
                 (ii)    Surveys to locate and map the resources potential, living and non-living, in the Exclusive, Economic Zone.
                 (iii) Development, conservation and protection of coastal ocean.
(iv)  Marine environment on high seas.         
(v)
     Development of skills and manpower.
(vi)   Exploration and development of seabed mining.
(vii)
    Promotion and co-ordination of Antarctic Research.
(viii)   Collaboration with other agencies/countries.
(ix)  Legal regime for the oceans and Antarctica.
(x)  Matters relating to oceans not specifically allotted to any other    
       Department.
 
2. The Department of Ocean Development has, in furtherance of its mandated objectives, been carrying out various
 programmes/projectThe Committee decided to examine the following three programmes which are economically and socially
 relevant, on the basis of the Annual Report (1993-94) of the Department.
(i) Marine Satellite Information Service (MARSIS)
(ii)  Pollution Monitoring Programme Coastal Ocean Monitoring & Prediction System (COMAPS)
                  (iii) Identification of Marine Bio-active Substances for use as Drugs.
The Committee heard the "Secretary and other officials of the Department on programmes of the Department in general with
 specific focus on various aspects of the implementation of the above three Programmes.
               
I. Marine Satellite Information Service (MARSIS)
 
3. This is a National Programme of the Department of Ocean 13evelopment, in which satellite remote sensing techniques are
 employed, to generate user--friendly oceans data products, and to disseminate them on an operational basis. A three-year Phase-
I of MARSIS was launched by the Department in 1990. The Programme is structured around four major projects viz.
(i) Ocean related remote sensing application,
            (ii) Sea truth collection,
            (iii) MARSIS-Centres, and
            (iv) Ocean Modelling Studies.
 
4. The National Remote Sensing Agency Hyderabad is the nodel agency to carry this programme forward, with participation
 by Space Applications Centre, Ahmedabad, National Institute of Oceanography, Goa, Centre for Mathematical Modelling and
 Computer Simulation-NAL, Bangalore and other associated organisation. In Phase-I of the programme (1990--93) the
 following data products were made operationally available:--
 
a. Sea Surface Temperature (SST) maps.
b. Potential Fishing Zone (PFZ) maps.
   c. Coral Reef maps in respect of Gulf of Kachchh, Gulf of Manner, Palk Bay, Lakshadweep and Andaman and Nicobar
 group of Islands.
d. Shoreline changes maps for Kerala and Tamil Nadu.
e. Wetland maps for Kerala and Tamil Nadu.
 
SST is an important parameter that has wide ranging significance in the field of climatology, weather forecast, fisheries,
 predictions of cyclones, etc. PFZ advisory is an SST by-product which was made operational in 1991. SST Maps and PFZ
 advisory maps are the data products being disseminated to the user agencies through a variety of modes such as facsimiles,
 radio bulletins and local newspapers on a. regular basis, and are stated to have been well received by them. The PFZ maps are

20th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/20threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
 now being used by fishermen, and the feedback received by the Department reveals that the results are encouraging, with
 reported Catch Per Unit Effort (CPUE) being significantly higher than those obtained from non-PFZ areas. The Department
 proposes to continue dissemination of PFZ mapsto coastal fishermen till the end of the 8th Plan, after further refinement of data
 by incorporating the chlorophyll factor to provide better accuracy. Other aspects of this programme (e.g. c, d, e of para 4 ante)
 are dealt with later in this Report.
 
6. Encouraged by-the success of Phase-I of the MARSIS project, the Department of Ocean Development took up
 implementation of MARSIS Phases-II (1993---97) in July, 1993. This is expected to generate a whole series of value based
 ocean data products. The details of the sub-projects to be covered under Phase-II are as follows:---
A. Ocean-related Remote Sensing Applications:
 
i. Retrieval of SST from NOAA-AVHRR data and its applications.
  ii. Integration of Chlorophyll, primary production and sediments derived from sea viewing wide field of view sensor for
 fishery forecasting.
iii. Latent heat flux studies.                                         
iv. Coastal studies. v. Wave forecast model.
 
B. Sea Truth Data Collection: Deployment of 10---15 drifting buoys for the direct collection of sea truth data for validation of
 satellite derived data.
 
C. Ocean Modelling:
i.
         Modelling satellite SST retrieval under special atmospheric conditions.
ii.       Modelling of marine productivity.
iii.      Development of high performance computing environment and network.
7. National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA), Hyderabad is the nodel agency for co­ordinating the activities at the five
 MARSIS Centres, namely NRSA, Hyderabad, Institute of Ocean Management (IOM), Anna University, Madras, Orissa
 Remote Sensing Application Centre (ORSAC), Bhubaneswar, National Institute of Oceanography (NIP), Goa and Central
 Marine Fisheries Research Institute (CMFRI), Kochi,
 
8. In Phase-I of MARSIS a model to study the heat content from sea surface slopes of theEquatorial Indian Ocean was
 developed and tested. In Phase-II, work on the heat content, of the Bay of Bengal and Arabian sea is being attempted using SST
 data.
     
      9. As a result of the coral reef mapping undertaken using IRS-LISS II and SPOT data, a classification system to delineate
 coral categories was developed. Coral reefs in the Gulf of Kuchchh have been found to be of fringing reef type, and in a
 degraded condition, mostly devoid of live corals. Lakshadweep has mostly atolls with few coral pinnacles. The reefs are in
 good condition. The Andaman Islands contain mostly fringing reefs. New coral growth has, however, been detected in the
 Wandoor National Park Area.
 
10. In Phase-I, the Coastal Wetland Mapping of Kerala and Tamil Nadu coasts has been completed. Along the Tamil Nadu
 coast, the mangroves of Pichavaram and Vedaranyam were found to be degraded. Mangroves occupy about 20~sq. k.m.,
 lagoons occupy 157 sq. k.m., and salt pans occupy about 147 sq. k.m. area. Along the Kerala coast, there are practically no
 large tracts of wetland under mud flats and mangroves. In Phase-II of MARSIS, coastal wetland mapping for Karnataka,
 Maharashtra and Goa has been completed. Along the Karnataka Coast the mangrove areas occupy about 9 sq. k.m.
 
11. In Phase-II of MARSIS, shoreline change mapping for Karnataka, Goa and Maharashtra has been completed. Using the
 Geographical Information System (GIS), the Coastal Zone Information System (CZIS) has been created at the Institute of
 Ocean Management (IOM) and at Orissa Remote Sensing Application Centre (ORSAC). Under this programme, GIS based
 CZIS for Rameshwaram Marine Park area and Mahanadi Estuary MangroVe region (Orissa) have been developed on a pilot
 basis. During 1994, 3 met-ocean drifting buoys, one in the Central Arabian Sea on 5th May, 1994, the second in the South
 Eastern Arabian Sea on 3rd July, 1994, and the third in the Equatorial Indian Ocean on 13th August, 1994, have been deployed
 for sea truth collection.
 
12. MARSIS modelling studies viz; modelling of satellite SST retrieval under speical atmospheric conditions, coastal ocean
 modelling, system behaviour of the Indian ocean and determination of system responses to perturbation, modelling studies on
 air-sea interaction and modelling of marine productivity are in progress at Centre for Mathematical Modelling for Computer
 Simulation (CMMACS), Bangalore.
 
13. The implementation of MARSIS programme is monitored by a Steering Committee (SC) which has members from all
 major Oceanographic Instituties of the country, besides representatives of maritime States. The sub-projects are monitored by

20th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/20threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
 selYarate working groups (WG) and the overall co-ordination of the programme is done. by the Department of Ocean
 Development.
 
14. Alluding to the Committee's earlier observation that the mechanism of inter-action with the fishing community needed to
 be strengthened, so that they derived maximum benefits from the use of information about the possible location of Potential
 Fishing Zones (PFZs), the Secretary of the Department submitted that the data bases on temperature gradients obtained from
 satellite is processed by the National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad, and then the information is disseminated to shore-
based stations and fishermen's cooperatives on the distance to be travelled and direction and depth to be reached for PFZs.
 Regular evaluation of the efficacy: of the technique is undertaken on the basis of the feedback received from user agencies. The
 Department has tried to bring about certain improvements in this area. Lead boat system (with Global Positioning System-GPS)
 for reaching PFZ locations has been brought into vogue; more research is being undertaken to apply PFZ to demersal (bottom)
 fish species; more campaigns for validation of satellite derived data are under way; and more parameters such as chlorophyll,
 currents, etc. are being considered for identification of PFZs. Besides, 34 Fax machines have recently been installed to
 strengthen the network of communications; the number of awareness programmes has been significantly raised during 1994.
 There were 24 programmes in Gujarat, 17 each in Maharashtra and Karnataka, 22 in Kerala, 46 in Andhra Pradesh, 11 in Tamil
 Nadu, 10 in Orissa, 8 in Goa, and 3 each in West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The number of contact points has
 also been substantially enhanced. The Secretary informed the Committee that he had personally addressed letters to the Chief
 Secretaries of all maritime States bringing to their personal notice the details of this programme of the Department, and
 emphasising the need for inter-action With the State Governments so that necessary feedback is received from them to identify
 shortcomings, and gaps if any, and to initiate remedial action to plug them. This was followed by a meeting in Hyderabad
 recently, in which the response from State Governments was fairly good; detailed discussion took place with regard to the
 regimes where the efficacy of this technique could be demonstrated tlaore clearly, bearing in mind the limitation that it is more
 useful beyond a distance of 10 kms. In a State like Karnataka, where motorised and mechanised boats are used by and large,
 this is an aspect on which the-Department would concentrate, to obtain optimum results from the use of sea surface temperature
 based forecasts about Potential Fishing Zones.
would take this up using P.S.L.V. launch, which is capable of placing in orbit a one-tonne pay load, which is quite adequate for
 the purp6se of the Ocean Satellite, the Department of Ocean Development has already been given approval for a scheme for
 Data Buoys to be deployed in the Ocean. The use of data buoys, in conjunction with the Ocean Satellite, would :be useful for
 other applications as well.
 
15A The Committee appreciates the programme of Data Buoys initiated by the Department. It would like to emphasise that
 in order to derive fullest benefits of such a programme, this should be in consonance with of global observation systems being
 planned for deployed such as GCOS for climate; GTOS for terrestrial; and GOOS for ocean observations. The Committee trusts
 that the indigenous development of Ocean Satellite capabilities would not only reduce dependence of the country on foreign
 satellites in this regard, but would also give a boost to the efforts to diversify these approaches in relation to collection of data
 on ocean systems and climatology.
 
16. The Secretary of the Department explained that latent heat flux studies have been taken up by the Department fairly
 recently. The basic aim of this is to prepare atlases of inter-annual variations of the latent heat flux data, which would be useful
 for modelling work as well as atmospheric studies. By producing these maps, together with those relating to coral reefs, shore-
line changes, coastal wetlands (and coastal pollution), the Department would be generating quite reliable technical information
 which would be integrated in the Coastal Zone Information System and transmitted, to the State Governments who could use it
 for local area decisions. In this context, the Secretary also stated that the Department has embarked upon an exercise of
 preparing contour interval maps which are extremely important for district officials, especially when the floods occur; on the
 basis of these maps they can have fairly reasonable assessment of the extent of areas likely to be flooded or inundated. The
 exercise of drawing contour interval maps is, however, very expensive, as it involves taking low level photographs and the
 Department has spent about Rs. 1.5 to 2 crores to produce this series of maps on a contour level of 0.5 metres, on a scale of
 1:25,000, which are presently for a small stretch between Machilipatnam and Nellore in Andhra Pradesh, which remains
 periodically subject to tidal wave attacks. Responding to a query from the Committee as to whether any share was being
 contributed by the State Governments in the expenditure so incurred by the Department, more so when they themselves were
 the beneficiaries of information given by the Department, the Secretary pointed out that, on the contrary, they were coming out
 with demands for money for meeting petty expenditure such as on Foxes, GPS and direction meters to carry out the Programme
 relating to Potential Fishing Zones.
 
16.1 The Committee feels that through intensive multipurpose mapping, and related analysis the Department has been able
 to highlight areas which need immediate corrective action to maintain a healthy eco-system and for enlarging development
 activities relating to the ocean. The Coastal Zone Information System would provide a reliable base to the concerned State
 Governments for local area management. It is, therefore, imperative that the Department should have necessary interaction with
 them at the appropriate level, which should not only result In greater financial support for the programme, but also lead to the
 greater flow of Information aiming ultimately to benefit the people living in the maritime States.
 

20th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/20threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
17. The Committee wanted to know whether there was any method other than through information provided by satellite, to
 locate concentration of fish, and whether 'providing certain equipment, such as echo system and fish finders to the small
 fishermen who do not own fishing trawlers to fully exploit satellite-based information about PFZS, would solve their problem.
 The Secretary explained the problems relating to requirements during the monsoon period he said that the Department's
 research vessel "Sagar Sampada" remain constantly engaged in evaluation of fishery resources, and several institutions like the
 Fishery Survey of India and Central Marine Fishing Institute participate in its cruises. They have been quite successful in
 identifying potential grounds for different commercially important species, and a report has been brought out which contains
 well documented mapping season-wise and species-wise, arid provides a valuable base for operating during the monsoon
 season. Echo sounders and fish finders no doubt are valuable aids in locating potential fishing areas; but since they are
 expensive tools, the Department is riot in a position to arrange funds to provide these to fishermen. The Department would,
 nevertheless, be eager to encourage fishermen to procure such tools, because that would in any case make the operations more
 productive. The Department is examining as to how the cost of some of these tools can be brought down, and with that end in
 view it has a project in hand with the Department of Electronics. Already, there is a gadget available at a relatively low cost,
 somewhere in the vicinity of Rs. 12,000/-. The Department of Electronics has made some headway' in making fish finders and
 there is considerable interest in producing them. However, taking the MARSIS programme as a whole, the capabilities of the
 Department, as well as commercial possibilities resulting from this will be greatly enhanced once the Ocean Satellite, which
 will have Ocean Colour Monitor, Microwave Radiometer and Thermal Infra­red Meter, becomes operational.
 
18. The Secretary was asked as to how it was being ensured that the data products generated under MARSIS were of
 optimum benefit by the end users; how the areas of weaknesses, if any, in the generation and dissemination of data were
 identified, and whether the Department had undertaken any survey to evaluate improvements which had been brought out as a
 result of feed back on the use of data products and other information inputs provided by it to the end users. The Committee also
 wanted to be enlightened about the process of collection of sea truth for validation of satellite derived data, particularly with
 respect to reconciliation of variations, if any, between the sea truth data and the satellite derived data. The Secretary, in his
 reply, stated that at the stage of formulation of the projects of MARSIS, potential and users were identified, and frequent
 interactions with them have been and are undertaken. The process of data generation undergoes review by Experts before
 operational implementation, and above all, the users' feedback on the end products is used to fine tune the data generation and
 improvements in it. Besides, a comprehensive survey of the PFZ programme, including societal benefits, has been initiated by
 the Department. Regarding the process of collection of sea truth, the Secretary informed the Committee that the sea truth fore
 validation of satellite derived data is collected through data buoys and regular and special ship cruises, and the variation
 between the sea truth and satellite data is used to calibrate the satellite data products.
 
18.1 The Committee notes with satisfaction that ever since the MARSIS project was launched by, the Department of Ocean
 Development, it has made steady progress; and in the second phase, the scope of the project has been considerably broadened.
 Satellite remote sensing is being used effectively in diverse applications of mapping in respect of Sea surface temperature,
 Potential Fishing Zones, extent of Coral Reefs, Shore-,line changes and Wetlands. On the basis of these maps suitable actions
 can be taken by the user agencies concerned. While the Committee, notes that the information about location of PFZs in the
 most direct fall out of this programme with economic and societal significance it is at present one that benefits the better off
 fishermen, and considerable ground needs to be covered to , ensure that the much larger number of fishermen with smaller
 resources also become real beneficiaries of this programme. The Committee has noted that In some of the States, like
 Karnataka, a major initiative has been taken, and small fishermen now have access to motorlsed/mecbanised boats, with the
 help of which they can operate beyond a distance of 10 kilometers in the sea and thus make full use of information about PFZs
 to enhance their fish catch. The Committee is happy that the Department has brought about a notabie degree of improvement in
 dissemination of information about PFZs and use of, $ST based technique by user agencies. It would Like the Department to
 take suitable initiatives to encourage other maritime States to work out schemes to help smaller fishermen by providing them
 motorised/ mechanised boats to operate in a larger area for fishing. The Committee concluded that MARSIS programme has
 been well conceived and is being implemented purposefully. Overall, with the capabilities provided by the Department of Space
 and NRSA, this programme enables powerful application of remote sensing to the maritime area, The data buoy programme
 needs to be expanded fully supported.
II. Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS)
 
19. The Department of Ocean Development has been entrusted with the responsibility of protecting the marine environment
 of the country, and for preservation of the health of the sea waters, which is vital not only for the abundant living resources but
 also for all activities in the Coastal Zone. In furtherance of this objective, the Department has been carrying out scientific
 monitoring of marine pollution, and conducting studies on the level a~ source of pollutants in the coastal and offshore areas of
 the country, under a programme of Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS) since 1.990. Under this
 programme, health of Indian marine environment is constantly assessed to indicate areas that need immediate and long term
 remedial action. 13 DOD centres/units have been assigned specific areas of coastal waters for monitoring, as per the details
 given in Annexure-I. A Centre for Marine Analytical Standards has been set up at Regional Research Laboratory, Trivandrum
 to conduct inter calibration exercises, and to analyses the quality of data generated under the programme.
 

20th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/20threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
20. Under COMAPS, the monitoring of Coastal Waters from Kandla to Kanyakumari on the West Coast and thereafter upto
 the Bangladesh border on the East Coast has been taken up. This covered a distance of about 25 kms. from the shoreline, along
 predetermined transects, which were selected on the basis of the location of industries, ecologically sensitive areas end location
 of urban centres, 77 locations have been selected, where data with respect to certain well defined parameters in respect of water
 quality, sediment quality and biological characteristics are being collected. On the basis of this data, certain locations as given
 in Annexure-II are being intensively monitored, as potential hotspots, which implies that they have a very high level of
 pollution parameters. From 1994-9J onwards, the Department of Ocean Development proposes to bring physical oceanographic
 studies under, the COMAPS programme as this would help in understanding the diffusion and dispersion characteristics of the
 pollutants in our coastal waters and would reveal the transport routes ofsuch pollutants from their source. The Department has
 also placed orders for the construction of two coastal research vessels at a cost of Rs. 5 crores each, which would be equipped
 with instrument~ for collection of data on pollution; these are expected to be delivered in March, 1.996. There is a Technical
 Steering Committee under the Chairmanship of the Director, National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NF-ERI),
 Nagpur, Which has been periodically taking stock of the progress of the programme. Considerable data on levels of pollutants
 along the coastal waters of the country have been generated, even since COMAPS was launched; these are being sent regularly
 to the Central and State Pollution Control Boards.  The data reveal the status of marine pollution in the country, the details of
 which are given in Annexure-III, in terms of areas which have low, moderate and high pollution. A constant interaction
 mechanism between the Pollution Control Boards and COMAPS institutions exists, to ensure the usage of data by the former
 for taking appropriate remedial action/corrective measures. On the basis of these on going interactions a decision has been
 taken that the COMAPS institutions would help the Pollution Control Boards in tracing the sources of pollution from the
 coastal waters to the point sources; and to facilitate this task, joint sampling programmes between the COMAPS institutions
 ~and the Pollution Control Boards would be conducted. Such joint sampling programmes are already in progress in Tamil Nadu
 and Orissa; and in other States such programmes will be taken up soon.
 
21. The COMAPS programme has, on basis of the experience gained by the laboratories involved with it, resulted in
 capabilities being build up by them such that they can undertake consultancy services for industries, for investigating the
 pollution problems in the industrial areas, for locating waste disposal points and also for environmental impact assessment
 studies.
 
22. The Secretary informed the Committee that, out of the 77 locations along the coastline of the country, 47 are such as can
 be regarded as pollution free; and of the remaining 30, 10 are in the category of low pollution, 9 are in the category of moderate
 pollution and 11 are in areas of high pollution. Pursuant to the recommendation of this Committee made in its Seventh Report,
 the Department has taken steps to increase the level of interaction with the State Pollution Control Boards, and the response
 from most of them has been fairly encouraging. The Gujarat State Government has requested the Gujarat Industrial
 Development Corporation (GIDC) to provide common effluent treatment plants for industries. In Maharashtra, steps are
 proposed to be initiated for the establishment of common effluent treatment plants at several industrial estates and the first
 phase is likely to be completed by 1998. In Karnataka, notices have been issued to Mangalore Municipality and other coastal
 towns for the treatment of sewage. Responding to a query from the Committee as to whether untreated effluents released into
 sea waters affected marine life, an official clarified that when released into the sea the domestic sewage takes always oxygen
 from the water and that area becomes short of oxygen, as a result of which there is increased fish mortality. The high levels of
 pollution, are largely in the inshore creeks, as a result of substantial increase in the level of petroleum hydrocarbons and
 accumulation of heavy metals, etc. The major problem is that of industrial pollution particularly from industries located close to
 the coast; but since a large part of the nation's industry is inland, these industrial wastes do not reach into the Coastal Waters.
 Fortunately, most pathogenic bacteria do not remain alive in the sea for a long time. The Bombay Municipal Corporation is
 implementing a, programme, under world Bank aid, as a result of which the problem would be tackled at Mahim and Versova
 creeks, etc. with regard to the release of untreated sewage by the municipalities, the Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board
 informed the Committee that, CPCB has brought to the notice of the State Pollution Control Boards some of the cost effective
 technologies to minimize this problem. Industries have also come forward with proposals to decompose garbage to produce
 manure and fuel, for which municipalities would not have to pay them anything. The industries would, however, need to be
 provided the garbage and land on leasehold basis to set up such plants. The Central Pollution Control Board has, in fact, tried to
 co-ordinate this effort on the part of industries by asking them to act as agents to help municipalities in preparing such
 feasibility study reports and getting the plants installed. However, as regards waste water treatment, municipal corporation and
 civic authorities wiI1 have to mount efforts themselves, and spend the necessary money. Paucity of funds, however, continues
 to dog any initiative on their part in this regard.
 
23. The Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board informed the Committee that the number of highly polluting industries
 in the country is 1551, out of which just 119 had installed appropriate treatment facilities in 1991. This number, however, rose
 to 450 in 1992 and to-day the situation is much better as 1120 units out of 1551 have set up treatment facilities. Not much
 success has, however, been achieved in respect of aspects that fall under the purview of Municipal Committees; this continues
 to be a problem area. CPCB and the State Pollution Control Boards are partners in COMAPS, and out of 173 monitoring
 stations as many as 107 are manned by CPCB and SPCBs together. Detailed Report in respect of all these 107 stations, in terms
 of a computerised database, has been prepared; and on that basis strategies have been worked out for the coastal waters. Large

20th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/20threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
 polluting industries have also been identified. Except in Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh, all industries have installed pollution
 control systems. A question was asked from the Chairman, CPCB as to whether any noticeable change has become manifest
 following installation of pollution control systems by the industries. The Chairman, CPCB replied that this was going to be one
 of their priority programmes this year to monitor how effectively these systems are functioning. A small task force for the
 purpose has already been constituted; in addition, a small NGO has also been set up to monitor the functioning of such plants.
24. Attention of the Department was drawn to the progressive increase in the contamination of sediments in certain regions
 like the seas off major coastal cities such as Bombay, Cochin, Madras, Calcutta, etc. over a period of years, and the seabed
 environment being affected in the near shore waters by toxic metals like cadmium, mercury and arsenic in the sediment layers.
 The Committee wanted to know as to what strategy the Department had evolved to check this phenomenon. In reply the
 submission made by the Department was as follows:--
"The increase in levels of certain trace metals in sediments are localised and not on a wide scale. Also, the levels are not
 alarming. Nevertheless, it is desirable to arrest the trend of increasing concentrations. This can only be done effectively
 by identifying their anthropogenic sources and their elimination. Hence, as a first step, the sources of these metals
 should be identified. The problem is complicated because in areas where sediment contamination by toxic metals is
 noticed, several industries release their wastewaters in the same water body. Thus for instance, several hundred
 industries are located around Thana-Creek/Ulhas estuary which release their wastewaters in these creeks,"
 
25. Elaborating this point further, the Secretary of the Department stated that when the quantities of pollutants reach higher
 levels, the sharpness of COMAPS programme will be in terms of increasing the periodicity of monitoring and intensifying
 sampling. The creeks and estuaries are matters of special concern and the root cause is the discharge of untreated waters,
 sewage, domestic and industrial waste water into them. The Central Pollution Control Board and the State Pollution Control
 Boards are taking necessary steps and their efforts are directed at ensuring commissioning of more and more effluent treatment
 plants. Replying to a related query from the Committee about the present state of marine environment in the country and the
 measures the Department would like to undertake to improve it, the Secretary explained that the monitoring through COMAPS
 programme had led to the conclusion that the open sea all along the coast except off Bombay was clean; but there were
 localised areas where marine environment quality has degraded to a varying degree. The waste waters entering these water
 bodies have to be treated adequately to meet prescribed standards and released at locations in the sea to be identified after
 detailed studies to ensure that the waste assimilation capacity of the receiving water is not exceeded.
 
26. The Secretary was asked as to whether there had been any decline in the level of pollutants in sea waters following
 action taken by the State Pollution Control Boards on the basis of the data supplied by COMAPS laboratories and whether any
 snags have been found by the Technical Steering Committee in any of the areas covered under COMAPS programme. It was
 stated that, in general, marine environmental .quality of areas classified as marine environmental quality of areas classified as
 substantially. The inadequacies which have been identified by the Technical Steering Committee in the COMAPS programme
 are: non-availability of Coastal Research Vessels for sampling in near shore waters; monitoring is presently done through
 temporary staff assisting the scientists of the participating laboratories; though Hugli estuary was included under the modelling
 programme, but due to restrictions on availability of vital data, the programme could not be implemented. However, the
 Department has initiated suitable remedial action to cover these inadequacies, as orders for construction of two coastal research
 vessels have already been placed and additional regular manpower is being considered. The modelling of Hugli estuary,
 however, stands deferred because of sensitivity of data.
 
26.1 The Committee has noted that the role of the Department of Ocean Development in so far as COMAPS programme is
 concerned is confined to monitoring the extent of pollution of the marine environment of the country and making available
 relevant data to tile Pollution Control Boards of respective maritime States to initiate necessary corrective action. The
 Department, through its COMAPS laboratories, has been maintaining close inter-action with the State Pollution Control
 Boards, and the Central Pollution Control Board is also an important partner in this programme; some amount of success has
 been achieved in that quite a good number of highly polluting industries have been persuaded to set up effluent treatment
 plants. The agencies involved in this programme should, however, assess the extent to which these treatment plants have had an
 impact on the overall discharge of industrial pollutants into the sea waters.
 
26.2 It is a matter of satisfaction that out of 77 locations only 11 indicate areas of high pollution, and the marine
 environment of the country today, particularly in the open seas, is by and large pollution free. The Committee, however, feels
 that in the foreseeable future, with increase in population, pressures on the coastal areas are bound to rise posing a serious
 challenge to the health of the marine environment. There is, therefore, immense need for a perspective planning to prevent
 degradation of marine environment and the Department of Ocean Development has to adopt a well co-ordinated action
 approach in this regard along with the maritime States and the Central and State Pollution Control Board.
 
26.3 It is a happy sign that some of the State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) are coming to grips with the situation and
 getting tough with polluting industrial units, but the discharge of pollutants into sea water still continues to be a matter of
 concern. The Department of Ocean Development has itself admitted that, despite action taken by SPCBs, marine environmental
 quality of areas classified as polluted has not improved substantially. The Committee is fully conscious of the fact that the role

20th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/20threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
 of the Department of Ocean Development is that of a catalyst, in monitoring marine pollution all over the seas around the
 country bringing the information to the State authorities, mainly their Pollution Control Boards who would then have to
 implement remedial measures. The Department can, however, play a positive and promotional role as pointed out by the
 Secretary himself through the information generated by the Department about inaction by State Governments, and use this as a
 potential tool to goad them into action.
 
26.4 With the acquisition of two coastal research vessels in 1996 the COMAPS programme of the Department is likely to
 get a boost and monitoring of coastal pollution levels would improve substantially. Monitoring in itself is however, of little use
 if the remedial action taken by the authorities concerned is not reflected in the ground realities. Deterrent action has to be taken
 to preserve the health of the sea waters, and industrial and domestic waste has to be checked at its source from getting into the
 sea. There has to be a national endeavour on this front and municipalities have, in particular, to gear themselves up to cope with
 the situation. The State Governments should also extend them necessary financial help, and initiatives like the one from some
 industries to convert garbage into manure, fuel etc. have to be suitably encouraged.
 
26.5 The Committee feels that the Department of Ocean Development needs to be very cautious in dealing with the problem
 of marine pollutants, as even one significant poisonous substance carries the potential danger of affecting major elements of
 marine life. A well known example is of the Minimata disease in Japan which was caused by human consumption of fish which
 had themselves consumed mercury dischanged into the Minimata Bay.
 
27. The Committee is happy to note that the laboratories engaged in COMAPS work have developed infrastructural facilities
 and established the necessary information base. They are extending consultancy services to industries with respect to locations
 of waste disposal sites, marine environmental impact assessment studies, site selection for location of industries and coastal
 zone management. 19 projects have been sponsored by industry and 9 consultancy requests have emanated from them. The
 National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) is a major contributor in this area and its earning is about Rupees two crores per
 annum on this account. The Committee feels that this endeavour has to be given due impetus so that the COMAPS programme
 is run on a largely self sustaining basis and the fight against pollution of marine environment is pursued more vigorously.
 
III. Identification of marine bio-active substances for use as drugs--National Project on Development of Potential Drllgs from
 the Ocean
 
28. Over recent years the study of marine organisms has evoked considerable interest as an area of research to find bioactive
 substances for use as drugs; and quite a few countries have focused their biomedical research in this area. A large number of
 organisms have been Screened for anti-viral, anti-cancer, anti-hehninthic, anti-inflammatory and anti-tumor activities; one
 success hasbeen that of prostaglandins from organisms in the Caribbean Sea which has been transformed into a drug for the
 medical termination of pregnancy. Marine fauna and flora still continues to be a relatively unexplored field for new drug leads.
 Research efforts of the countries so far involved in the exercise of looking for drugs from marine organisms, however, have
 centered around organisms collected from different oceanic regions in the world, but the fauna and flora from the Indian coast
 has not attracted much attention. The Department of Ocean Development, therefore, launched a national programme of
 systematic evaluation of marine organisms of the Indian Coast and nearby islands in the year 1990-91 to isolate bioactive
 substances for use as potential drugs (This is a programme that was mooted and intensively discussed over a decade and a half
 ago for Indo-US collaboration). The present project involves 10 R & D centres including 2 universities, 3 medical colleges and
 5 CSIR laboratories spread all over the country, with the Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow being the apex institution
 for co-ordination. Samples of marine organisms are collected by each of the participating institutions from specified zones, and
 a vouche specimen is maintained at the national repository at NIO, Goa. so far 936 samples have been screened-402 in Phase-1
 and 534 in Phase-II-out of which, as per the information given to the Committee, 121 have shown different types of promising
 biological activities ranging from anti-viral, anti-bacterial and anti-implantation; etc. In addition to the extracts and fractions,
 about 40 pure compounds isolated from different organisms have also been screened for specific biological activities including
 anti-viral, HbsAg binding, hypotensive and other pharmacological activities.   The potential bioactive organism identified for
 follow up are given in Annexure-IV and the new compounds isolated under the programme are shown in Annexure-V.  In
 Phase-II of the progrmme priority has been accorded to developing leads/drugs for family planning, viral infections (anti-viral),
 diabetes (hypoglycemic),  liver disorders (hepatoprotective) and cardiovascular diseases.. The Department is laying special
 emphasis on follow up studies but fresh collections are also being continued to identify new leads/activities.
 
29.The Committee was informed that this is one area where thee is some scope for India to be globally competitive, but as at
 present only one drug (prostaglandin) has been developed, which is being marketed; one more device (Iaminaria tent-cervical
 dilator) has been found off the Japanese cost.  Though the Department’s coverage in this field is fairly large, with as many as 10
 institutions being associated with the programme, yet having regard to the investments made by other leading nations, it will
 need a Herculean effort to be internationally competitive.  The Department would, to begin with, like to develop an anti-viral or
 anti-malarial drug.  Responding to a suggestion from the Committee as to whether it would not be more desirable to explore
 and exploit the anti-amoebic area, an official replied that only one organism has shown anti-amoebic activity, and in so far as
 anti-malarial and anti-filarial activity is concerned, not a single organism has yet been found.

20th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/20threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
 
30.The attention of the Secretary of the Department of Ocean Development was drawn to the fact that even though the
 development of drugs from the sea was a national programme, no specific allocations for this programme had been made during
 the Budget for 1994-95.  The Committee wanted to know as to what was the position and how much expenditure had been
 incurred on it thus far.  The Secretary explained that the expenditure incurred on this programme during the last 3 to 4 years
 was to the tune of a little over Rs. 3.68 crores.  Responding to a pointed query from the Committee as to whether there has been
 any breakthrough in any area, he stated that there have been some positive leads.
 
31.The Secretary of the Department was asked as to whether any time-frame had been set to realize the objectives of the
 “Drugs from the Sea Programme” and whether the organism which give promising leads for bioactive substances will be
 naturally available on a sufficient scale for large scale drug extraction needed for societal use; or it would be possible to
 multiply their production through cultivation.  The information given to the Committee was that the new drug development
 involves a time and cost intensive process and that the leads which have been identified so far were anticipated to lead up multi
 centric clinical trials.  It may be possible to transform any one of these into a dug by the year 2000.  This would entail long term
 investments as well.  Regarding availability position of marine organism, the Committee was informed that they might not be
 sufficiently  available in nature to meet drug demands and even if the organisms were available, the collection would be
 restricted so as not to disturb the eco-system.  Extensive cultivation/culture will, therefore, have to be initiated to meet
 developmental demands once positive potential significance has been established.
           
            32. The Committee has noted that the National Programme on the “Development of Potential Drugs from the Sea’ is
 merely four years old.  It is a matter of satisfaction that with a modest investment the institutes involved in the programme have
 done a creditable job in screening quite a large number of marine organisms and have been successful in obtaining positive
 leads in some areas.  The programme being still in an experimental stage, it would be too early to draw any conclusion about
 drugs likely to be developed from marine sources and then potential market.  The country has strong infrastructural base in the
 area of drug development, which could be fully utilised in this effort. The Committee, however, feels that the allocations for a
 national programme of this nature are rather meagre. They do not reflect in real terms its potential, and the direction it is taking.
 The Committee recommends that a clear assessment of the priority that needs to be given to this programme must be carried
 out, and an estimate of the funds needed has to be worked out to obtain meaning results in a reasonable time frame. It is
 important to ensure that the efforts is a viable one and above the critical level of support.
 
New Delhi;
April 27, 1995
SYED SIBTEY RAZI
Chairman,
Committee on Science and Technology
Environment and Forests
 
 
MINUTES
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
 COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
 XXV
TWENTYFIFTH MEETING
 
The Committee met from 10.50 a.m to 1.05 p.m. and again from 2.15 p.m. to 4.20 p.m. on Monday, the 23rd January,
 1995 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1. Syed, Sibtey Razi     Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Dr. M. Aram
3. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
4. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
5. Shri K. Rahman Khan
6. Prof. M.G.K. Menon
7. Shri Suresh Pachouri
8. Shri N. Giri Prasad
9. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
10. Dr. Ranbir Singh

20th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/20threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
12.Shri Jitendra Nath Das
13.Shri Sharad Dighe
14.Shri Oscar Fernandes
15.Shri Promothes Mukherjee
16.Shri Harpal Panwar
17.Shri Balraj Pasi
18.Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
19.Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
20.Shri Harchand Singh
21.Shri Ram Prasad Singh
22.Shri K.G. Shivappa
23.Shri Bapusaheb Thite
24.Kumari Sushila Tiriya
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
 
Representatives of the Department of Ocean Development and some of the Scientifi Organisations/Laboratories
 
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Shri J.V.R. Prasada Rao, Joint Secretary
Shri S.W. Oak, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Dr. S.A.H. Abidi, Director
Shri Bhimsen Rao, Director      
Shri H.P. Rajah, Director
 Shri B.N. Krishnamurthy, Director
 Shri S.K. Das, Director
 Shri B.R. Subramanian, Principal Scientific Officer
 Dr. V.S. Rao Chintala, Principal Scientific Officer
Prof. B.L. Deekshatulu, Director, National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad.
Dr. M.D. Zingde, Scientist In-charge, Regional Centre of NIO, Bombay.
Shri P.K. Sen, Senior Manager (R&D), Engineers India Ltd., Gurgaon.
Dr. V.P. Kamboj, Director, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow.
Dr. D.K. Biswas, Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi.
Prof. M. Ravindran, Executive Director, National Institute of Ocean Technology, IIT Campus, Madras.
Dr. S.C. Das, Scientist, Regional Research Laboratory, Bhubaneshwar.
Prof. P. Ramachandra Rao, Director, l~ational Metallurgical Laboratoi:y, Jamshedpur. Dr. B.M. Reddy, Scientist Emeritus,
 National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi.
Dr. G.K. Patnaik, Scientist, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow.
Dr. S. Nayak, Scientist, SAC, Ahmedabad.
Dr. Chari R., Scientist, NRSA, Hyderabad.
Smt. Suchitra Goswami, Deputy Secretary
Shri Prabh Das, Deputy Secretary
Shri B.K. Mukhopadhyay, Under Secretary
 
Representatives of the Department of Science and Technology
 
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, SA to PM & Secretary DRO
Shri Y.S. Rajan, Advisor
Dr. U. Trivedi, Advisor
Dr. A.P. Kulshreshtha, Advisor
Dr. A. Chakrabarty, Advisor

20th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/20threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
Shri S. Ghose, Joint Secretary
Shri S.B. Krishnan, JS & FA
Dr. R.K. Midha, Joint Advisor
Shri V. Rao Aiyagari, Joint Advisor
Dr. Laxman Prasad, Joint Advisor
Dr. (Mrs.) Kamla Kumar, Joint Advisor
Dr. N. Sen Roy, DG, IMD
Dr. V.P. Kamble, Additional DG, IMD
Dr. S.K. Mishra, Director, NCMRWF
Dr. Harsh Gupta, Director, NGRI
Dr. J.J. Bhagat, Consultant
 
2. In the forenoon session, the Committee took up ~nsideration of the Annual Report  (1993-94) of the Department of
 Ocean Development with reference to the following topics:-
 
(i)         Marine Satellite Information Service (MAP, SIS);
(ii)        Pollution Monitoring Programme Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (OMAPS); and
(iii)       National Programme for Identification of Marine Bioactive Substances for use as Drugs.
 
The Secretary of the Department gave an overview of the programmes and initiatives being pursued by the Department
 in these areas and the Members sough, clarifications from him .on various points arising therefrom.
 
3. In the afternoon session, the Committee took up consideration of the following sabjects on the basis of the Annual
 Report (1993-94) of the Department of Science and Teakrlolog~:--
(i) Society related programmes of Department Of Science & Technology;
(ii) Science & Technology policy and Institutional mechanism relating thereto;
(iii) Technology Information, Forecasting & Assessment Council (TIFAC)
(iv) Technology Development Fund; and
(v) Seismicity.
The Secretary of the Department, assisted by other officials, briefly explained for the benefit of the Members the
 activities of the Department in these areas and the Members sought clarifications from him.
4. The discussion on the Annual Reports (1993-94) of the Department of Ocean Development and Science and
 Technology remained inconclusive.
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.20 P.M. to meet again at 10.15 a.m. on Tuesday, the 24
th ,January, 1995.
XXVI
TWENTY SIXTH MEETING
 
The Committee met from 10.15 a.m to 1.26 p.m. on Tuesday, the 24th January, 1995 in Room No; 63, Parliament
 House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1. Syed Sibtey Razi -Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Dr. M. Aram
3.         Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
4.         Shri K.Rahman Khan
5.         Prof. M.G.K. Menon
6.         Shri Suresh Pachouri
7.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
8.         Dr. Ranbir Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
9. Shri E. Ahamed

20th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/20threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
10. Shri Jitendra Nath Das
11. Shri Oscar Fernandes
12. Shri P. Kumarasamy
13. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
14. Shri Balraj Pasi
15. Shri Vijay Naval Patil
16. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
17. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
18. Shri Harchand Singh
19. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
20. Shri K.G. Shivappa
21. Shri Bapusaheb Thite
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
 
Representatives of the Department of Ocean Development and some of the Scientific Organisations/Laboratories
 
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Shri J.V.R. Prasada Rao, Joint Secretary
Shri S.W. Oak, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Shri Bhimsen Rao, Director
Shri H.P. Rajan, Director
Shri B.N. Krishnamurthy, Director
Shri S.K. Das, Director
Shri B.R. Subramanian, Principal Scientific Officer
Dr. V.S. Rao Chintala, Principal Scientific Officer
Smt. Suchitra Goswami, Deputy Secretary
Shri Prabh Das, Deputy Secretary
Dr. M.B. Zingde, Scientist In-charge, Regional Centre of NIO, Bombay.
Dr. V.P. Kamboj, Director, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow.
Prof. M. Ravindran, Executive Director, National Institute of Ocean Technology, IIT
Campus, Madras.
Prof. P. Ramachandra Rao, Director, National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur.
Dr. E. Desa, Director, National Institute of Oceanography, Dona Paula, Goa.
Dr. B.M. Reddy, Scientist Emeritus, National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi.
Dr. G.K. Patnaik, Scientist, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow.
Dr. Chari R., Scientist, NRSA, Hyderabad.
Dr. S. N,ayak, Scientist, SAC, Ahmedabad.
 
Representatives of the Department of Science and Technology
 
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Dr. Y.S. Rajan, Advisor
Dr. U. Trivedi, Advisor
Dr. A.P. Kulshreshtha, Advisor
Dr. A.K. Chakrabarty, Advisor
Shri S. Ghose, Joint Secretary
Dr. N.K. Sehgal, Joint Advisor
Dr. R.K. Midha, Joint Advisor
Shri V. Rao Aiyagari, Joint Advisor
Dr. Laxman Prasad, Joint Advisor
Dr. (Mrs.) Kamla Kumar, Joint Advisor
Dr. N. Sen Roy, DG, IMD
Dr. V.P. Kamble, Additional DG, IMD
Dr. P.K.B. Menon, Director
Dr. Harsh K. Gupta, Director, NGRI, Hyderabad

20th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/20threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
 
2. The Committee took up further consideration of the following subjects on the basis of the Annual Reports (1993-94)
 of the Department of Ocean Development and Science and Technology, respectively:-
 
            (1) Marine Satellite Information Service (MARSIS);
 
            (2) Pollution Monitoring Programme Coastal Ocean      Department of Ocean
            Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS);                         Development
 
            (3)National Programme for Identification of Marine
            Bioactive Substances for use as Drugs.
 
 
(4)  Society related Programmes of the Department of
            Science and Technology
(5)  Science & Technology policy and Institutional
            mechanism relating thereto;
(6) Technology Information, Forecasting & Assessment Department of Science and
            Council (TIFAC);                                                              Technology
       (7) T'echnology Development Fund; &
       (8) Seismicity,                                                                
 
The Secretary Department of Ocean Development and Science and Technology assisted by other officials, supplemented
 some of the points earlier n,lade before the Committee on these subjects in its meeting(s) held on January 23, 1995 and replied
 to the clarifications sought by the Members.
 
3. The discussion on the Annual Reports (1993-94) of the Departments of Ocean Development and Science and Technology
 was concluded.
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 1.26 p.m.
VI
SIXTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m on Thursday, the 27th April, 1995 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhii
 
PRESENT
 
1. Syed Sibtey RazimChairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.   Dr. K. Rahman Khan
3.   Prof. M.G.K. Menon
4.   Shri Kulabidhu Singh
5.   Dr. Ranbir Singh
 
LOK 'SABHA
 
6. Shri P.C. Chacko
7. Shri Jitendra Nath Das
8. Shri Sharad Dighe
9. Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
10. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
11. Shri M.G. Reddy
12. Shri Harchand Singh
13. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
14. Shri Bapu Saheb Thite
15. Kumari Frida Topno

20th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/20threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
2. The Committee took up consideration of its draft Nineteenth Report~'on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
 Department of Ocean Development and after some discussion, adopted the same with minor amendments.
 
3. The Committee decided to present this Report to both the Houses of Parliament on the 28th April, 1995. The Committee
 authorised its Chairman and in his absence, Prof. M.G~K. Menon to present this Report to the Rajya Sabha and Prof. Radhika
 Ranjan Pramanik and in his absence, Kumari Frida Topno to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
 
4. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration its draft Twentieth Report on the Annual Report (1993-94) of the
 Department of Ocean Development with reference to Marine Satellite Information Service (MARSIS); Pollution Monitoring
 programme Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS) and National P programme for Identification of
 Marine Bioactive Substances for use as Drugs and after some discussion, adopted the same unanimously.
 
5. The Committee decided to present this Report to both the Houses of Parliament on the 3rd May, 1995. The Committee
 authorised its Chairman and in his absence, Dr. Ranbir Singh to present this Report to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Ram Prasad
 Singh and in his absence, Shri Jitertdra Nath Das to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
 
 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.34 a.m.