RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(1995-96)

THIRTIETH REPORT
ON THE

ANNUAL REPORT OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT
AND FORESTS FOR THE YEAR 1994-95

(CONSERVATION OF FORESTS AND FORESTRY DEVELOPMENT VIS-A-VIS
NATIONAL FOREST POLICY PARTICULARLY WITH RESPECT TO AFFORES-
TATION AND REGENERATION OF DEGRADED AREAS)

(Presented on March 11, 1996)

aa

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 1996/Phalguna, 1917 (Saka)


Ye op =

CONTENTS

COMPOSITION GR THE: COMMITTEE cesiverenennerneoneneanennartenenteamenniaiennennnsernn

INTRODUCTION

Report OF THE COMMITTEE.

ANNEXURES
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE ..........-०-०००-००-०-०-००«०२«; ««२«२८ २ ० २०*

PAGES

(i)-(ii)
(iii)
1-16

1932

35—47


COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1995-96)

RAJYA SABHA

*1. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi—Chairman
2. Dr. M. Aram

३. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
4. Shri K. Rahman Khan
5. Dr. 0. Masthan

6. Prof. M.G.K. Menon

7. Shri N. Giri Prasad

8. Shri Satchidananda

9. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
10. Dr. Ranbir Singh

11. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav

LOK SABHA

12. Shri E. Ahamed

13, Shri P.C, Chacko

14. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
15. Shii Jitendra Nath Das
16. Shri Sharad Dighe

17. Shrimati Saroj Dubey

18. Shri Oscar Fernandes

19. Shri Shankarrao 0. Kale
20. Shri P. Kumarasamy

21. Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
22. Shri Pramothes Mukherjeo
23. Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy

24. Shri Harpal Panwar

25. Shri Balraj Passi

26. Shri Bheem Singh Patel
27. Shri Chandresh Patel

28. Shri Vijay Naval Patil

29. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik

* Nominated as Chairman w.e.f. October 31, 1995 vice Syed Sibtey Razi who ceased to be Chairman consequent on his
induction into the Council of Ministers.
** Nominated w.e.f. August 17, 1995.


30. Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
31. Shri Rama Chandra Rath
32. Shri M.G. Reddy

33. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
34. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
35. Shri Harchand Singh

36. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
37. Shri K.G. Shivappa

38. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

39. Kumari Sushila Tiriya

40. Kumari Frida Topno

41. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the
Committee to present the Report on its behalf present this Thirtieth Report of the
Committee. This Report deals with issues related to the conservation of forests and forestry
development vis-a-vis National Forest Policy, particularly with respect to afforestation and
regeneration of degraded areas which fall within the mandate of the Ministry of Environ-
ment and Forests.

2. The Committee held in all 5 sittings on the 4th, Sth 16th and 17th January and 7th
March, 1996. In the meetings held in the month of January, 1996, the Committee, apart
from the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, heard the views of the Secretary,
Ministry of Rural Areas and Employment (Department of Wastelands Development);
Secretaries, Forest Departments; Principal Chief Conservators of Forests and other officials
concerned of the States of Assam, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh on the
subject. Besides, the Committee also had the benefit of the views of the representatives of
Tata Steel Rural Development Society, Jamshedpur; National Centre for Human Settle-
ments and Environment, Bhopal, and Tarun Bharat Sangh, Alwar, which are the NGOs
actively involved in the forestry sector.

3. The Committee thanks the officials of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for
giving the necessary information and placing before it the relevant background note/papers
which .gave it immense help in examining the issues related to forestry sector. The
Committee also thanks the Secretary, Ministry of Rural Areas and Employment (Depart-
ment of Wastelands Development); representatives of Forest Departments of the States of
Assam, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh and Non-Governmental Organisa-
tidns, who appeared before the Committee and gave valuable suggestions. The papers/
memoranda submitted by many of them were found to be very useful by the Committee.

4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on March 7,
1996.

New Detut; AJIT P. K. JOGI,
March 7, 1996 Chairman,

Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests


REPORT

Forests play a significant role in maintaining environmental stability and ecological
balance. They also contribute immensely to the national economy and serve as a lifeline to a
large segment of population which has been traditionally dependent on them for their
requirements of minor forest produce, fuelwood, timber and fodder. As per the current
estimates, forests contribute 1.3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in the country and
nearly 60 million people are dependent on them for their livelihood. The country has a total
landmass of 329 million ha. out of which the recorded forest area is about 77 million ha. The
actual forest cover is, however, only about 64 million ha. which comes to about 20% of the
total geographical area. When the country attained independence, its forest ‘cover was
estimated to be 24% of the total landmass and the current level of forest area, which is
stated to be in the vicinity of 20%, shows that the forests have suffered serious depletion
over the years. It is somewhat disheartening that 40% areas of the actual forest cover or 64
million ha. happens to be in various stages of degradation. If 94 million ha. of non-forest
lands, which are stated to be degraded, are added to this figure, then the level of degraded
land in the country presents quite an astounding figure.

2. The Government has been seized of the magnitude of the problem and attempts have
been made through two National Forest Policies of 1952 and 1988 to preserve our heritage
of forest wealth. In these instruments of Forest Policy, the forest area was sought to be
raised to 33% of the total landmass of the country, which still holds good. One-third of the
area in the plains and two-third of the area in the hilly trac’ ught to be brought under
forest cover. The National Forest Policy of 1988 inter alia a at substantially preserving
the natural forests, increasing the forest/tree cover in the country through massive
afforestation and social forestry programmes specially on all denuded, degraded and
unproductive lands and meeting the requirements of fuelwood, fodder, small timber and
minor forest produce of the rural and tribal populations by creating a massive people’s
movement.

3. Despite the laudable objectives of the National Forest Policy of 1988, the forests in
our country have continued to remain under severe pressure and the area under forest cover
has not registered any appreciable increase. During the seven years this Forest Policy has
been in operation, the target of 33% remains elusive.and the area under forest cover has not
been restored even to the level of what it was at the time of independence. The State-wise
details of forest cover at Annexure-I will bear this out. The depletion of forests has
continued on account of relentless pressures arising from the ever increasing demand for
fuelwood, fodder and timber, inadequacy of protective measures, diversion of forest lands
for non-forest uses and the tendency to look upon forests as a revenue earning source. The
withdrawal of timber, fuelwood and minor produce from the forests is taking place at a
much higher rate vis-a-vis the rate at which plantations are being raised. Today, the forests
are under constant threat on account of rising demands of an increasing populace, mining,
industrialisation, construction of highways and other developmental activities. The country is
thus faced with a grim scenario. The Committee, therefore, decided to undertake an indepth
examination of the issues related to conservation of forests and forestry development on the
basis of the Annual Report (1994-95) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests to
ascertain what activities have been taken in hand by the Ministry to arrest the trend of
depletion of forests and to achieve the objective of bringing 33% of the total geographical
area of the country under forest cover as enshrined in the National Forest Policy of 1988.

4. The Committee heard the Secretary and officials concerned of the Ministry on the
subject. The Committee also heard the Secretary of the Ministry of Rural Areas and

ep


Employment on various aspects of wastelands development. Besides, the Committee had the
benefit of the views of the Forest Secretaries and Principal Chief Conservators of Forests of
the States of Assam and Madhya Pradesh which have shown a decline of 243 and 389 sq.
kms. respectively in their forest areas and of the States of Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh
which have shown an increase of 144 and 352 sq. kms. respectively in their forest areas. The
idea was to know the actual reasons which had contributed to the decline or the increase in
the forest area in the respective States. The Committee also had useful feedback from
representatives of some voluntary organisations, namely, Tata Steel Rural Development
Society, Jamshedpur, National Centre for Human Settlements and Environment, Bhopal,
and Tarun Bharat Sangh, Alwar, on the factors which were responsible for degradation/
denundation of forest lands; how governmental efforts to check deforestation were not
yielding results and the extent to which their organisations were involved in forestry sector.

5. The Secretary of the Ministry in his presentation acknowledged that the forests are
coming under tremendous pressure on account of rising demands and the target of bringing
33% of the landmass of the country under forest cover looks to be stupendous. Due to
several initiatives taken by his Ministry and the State Governments with the active
involvement of people and voluntary organisations, the trend of denundation of forest areas
has, however, been checked and the forest cover, as determined by satellite imageries,
shows an increase of 925 sq. kms. North-East region is severely affected in that there has
been a reduction in the forest cover by 635 sq. kms. The afforestation activities undertaken
at various levels, the wastelands development programme, strict administration of Forest
Conservation Act and increased participation of people in forest related activities such as in
schemes like Joint Forest Management (JFM) have yielded some positive results. The details
of the activities in these areas which are vital to the conservation of forests, as provided to
the Committee, are given in the succeeding paragraphs along with the views of the
Committee.

Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980

6. The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 was enacted with the basic objective of
restricting the indiscriminate diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes. Before its
enactment, diversion of staggering proportions of 43 lakh ha. of forest land had taken place
during the period 1951—80 on an annual average of 1.43 lakh ha. This trend has been
substantially arrested by enforcing statutory provisions as contained in the Act and the rate
of diversion of forest land has come down to a level of around 25 thousand ha. per annum.
The figures of diversion of forest land for different purposes during the last 5 years, as given
to the Committee, are shown in AnnexuresJI. One of the important features of the Act is
the requirement of raising of compensatory afforestation over non-forest/ degraded forest
land equivalent to the forest land released for development purposes. The prior approval of
the Central Government is necessary for diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes.

7. The Committee was informed that till June 1995, compensatory afforestation had
been stipulated over 4,66,881 ha. out of which compensatory afforestation had been carried
out over 2,09,900 ha. of land. An amount of Rs. 22,785 lakhs had been realised from the
user agencies for raising compensatory afforestation. A statement showing the position of
cases approved for diverting forest land, stipulations for compensatory afforestation under
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, compensatory afforestation actually done, funds to be
realised and actually realised in the States/Union Territories as on 30th June, 1995 is given
at Annexure-III.


8. There is no denying the fact that diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes
including mining and other developmental projects results in loss of net forest area. But, this
loss is somewhat made up by compensatory afforestation. The exception is, however, made
in that the forest land which is very rich in bio-diversity is not released for any project .
whatsoever. There are many States where land banks exist for purpose of making available
non-forest or degraded land for undertaking compensatory afforestation.

9. The Committee is happy to note that following implementation of the Forest
(Conservation) Act the pace of diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes has
considerably slowed down. The tempo, however, needs to be maintained so as to further
reduce the existing level of diversion of forest land. The Committee feels concerned that the
raising of compensatory afforestation has not matched the stipulated targets and till June
1995, compensatory afforestation had been carried out in an area of 2,09,900 ha. as against
the required area of 4,66,881 ha. The pace of realisation of money from the agencies
concerned for compensatory afforestation has also not been of a satisfactory level. What is of
paramount importance is that after the forest land is released for any developmental activity,
compensatory afforestation should not be delayed as the saplings planted on the land take
years to mature. The Committee would, therefore, like to emphasise that compensatory
afforestation should be undertaken at a pace faster than the release of forest land. The
Committee also feels that the i jive of setting up land banks which some of the States have
taken, is a laudable one as it would ensure availability of non-forest/degraded land for
plantations without any hiccups. The States which have a vast potential for exploitation of
non-forest/degraded land need to catch up with this initiative so that the objective of bringing
larger area under forest cover is realised.

Afforestation

10. The country has a total geographical area of 329 million ha. out of which nearly
50% of the lands are estimated to be waste or are degraded. More and more lands, both
forest as well as non-forest, are getting degraded every year. The average yield per hectare
in forest or even in non-forest areas is too low in productivity. The task to bring degraded
lands under vegetation and to prevent further degradation of the existing forest lands is a
mammoth one. The Secretary of the Ministry informed the Committee that the National
Wastelands Developmental Board (NWDB) was created in 1985 with the avowed aim of
developing the degraded forests and non-forest lands and an annual target of afforestation of
5 million ha. was fixed. The pautvity of funds continued to bedevil their efforts towards
afforestation as a result of which the target could never be reached. From the First to the
Sixth Five Year Plans, only about 0.39% to 0.7% of the total Plan funds were made
available for afforestation activities and it was raised to 1% during the Seventh Plan. As a
result of extremely low level of funding, only 8.2 million ha. of degraded land could be
brought under afforestation, whereas during the Seventh Plan the total area coverage was
8.8 million ha. The year-wise details of targets and achievements are given in Annexure-IV.
The afforestation efforts during the ongoing 8th Plan have suffered mainly because fund flow
from Rural Development Sector has been shrinking. In 1988-89 Rs. 230 crores were spent on
afforestation activities from the Rural Employment Generation Schemes, but in 1994-95 the
figure came down to just Rs. 38 crores. The afforestation efforts got a big boost during the
Seventh Plan partly because of higher allocations from Rural Development Sector and partly
because of the clear stipulation that 25% of the funds has to be spent on plantation
activities. The Ministry has taken up the matter with the Ministry of Rural Areas and
employment to ensure that the flow of funds for afforestation under the Rural Employment
Generation Schemes continues as before and their afforestation efforts do not suffer.

11. The Committee was informed that 6 million ha. of forest land is severely denuded
having a forest cover of just 0.1 density and efforts are being made to raise it to the level of


0.4 density. The contribution of forests to the GDP is currently at the level of 1.3% as
against 1.2% of GDP spent on them. This is a fairly low figure and in case forestry sector is
to have a faster rate of growth, investment in the forestry sector would have to be
-considerably stepped up. Hitherto the allocations in this sector have been abysmally low. A
requirement of Rs. 9950 crores for wastelands programme was projected during the 8th Five
Year Plan (1992—97), out of which the component of National Afforestation and Eco-
Development Board was to the tune of Rs. 2350 crores with the proposed area coverage of
18 million ha. under afforestation. Against this, however, the outlay for the period 1992—95
has only been of Rs. 393.59 crores. The targets for afforestation are, therefore, determined
by the financial allocations and are fixed on an annual basis.

12. The Secretary of the Ministry was pointedly asked as to how the target of raising the
forest cover of the country to a level of 33% was proposed to be achieved when the financial
constraints were of immense magnitude and whether there were any prospects of private
sector entering this area and aid being mobilised through external sources. The Committee
also drew the attention of the Secretary to the fact that requisite financial allocations are not
forth-coming from the respective State Governments for Forestry Development, more so
when the revenue from the forests is of considerable proportions and asked him what was
the approach of the Ministry in this regard and whether any concerted action has been taken
to motivate them to enhance their allocations.

13. The Committee was informed that attempts are being made to cover, in addition to
degraded forest area, degraded areas outside the forest boundary, agricultural field, bunds,
roadside, canal side through afforestation under various schemes of Central Government and
the State Government to achieve the objective of extending the forest cover to a level of
33%. The Ministry is fully conscious of the financial constraints and interaction is
continuously maintained with the external donor agencies to augment additional funds to
supplement funds available for the forestry sector under the Central Government schemes
and State Government schemes. On account of efforts made by the Ministry, the total outlay
under externally aided projects has increased from Rs. 55 crores (approx.) during 1991-92 to
Rs. 355 crores (approx.) during 1995-96. Fourteen projects are currently under
implementation in various States with financial assistance from external agencies, The status
of implementation of these ongoing projects is indicated in the statement at Annexure-V. In
addition to these ongoing projects 10 other projects are also in the pipeline. As regards the
private sector investment, a proposal for involvement of industries through Forest
Development Corporation for raising industrial plantations over degraded forest land is
under consideration of the Government. In reply to the point raised about the low priority
accorded to the forestry sector by the State Governments, the Secretary explained that as a
whole even at the central level the first 5 Five Year Plans have not made adequate provision
for forestry sector though the Plan outlays in recent years particularly in the Seventh and
Eighth Plans have shown some increases. However, they still continue to be less than 1% of
the Plan outlays. The State Governments nontheless have been approached to make
appropriate efforts for augmenting the Plan outlays for forestry sector.

14. The Committee has noted that in the course of the evidence of the Secretary of the
Ministry it was sought to be established that the forestry sector is not getting adequate
allocation of funds as a result of which the projected targets are not being achieved and it
looks somewhat difficult to achieve the objective of extending the forest cover to 33% of the
total geographical area of the country. The Committee, however, does not fully share this
perception of the things. The high level Committee on Wastelands Development headed by


Shri Mohan Dharia had gone into the entire gamut of the issues related to degraded and
wastelands in the country including forest lands and, as pointed out in that report, Rs. 5000
crores’ are being spent every year on various schemes (details at Annexure-VI) which have a
main component of afforestation and soil and water conservation. But results are not quite
discernible. Besides, huge sums are also being spent by State Govts. on similar programmes.
Bank and institutional finance is also available for farm forestry and such other operations.
There, therefore, does not appear to be any constraint of funds and what is needed is an
efficient and better management of the programmes in an integrated manner. The stand taken
by the Ministry that the progress and time-frame of bringing all the degraded/denuded lands
under forest cover would depend upon the extent of financial resources made available for the
forestry sector, seems to indicate lack of positive approach in grappling with the national
problem of great magnitude. Government by itself cannot provide the allocations of
proportions asked for by the Ministry and the strategy has to be a multi-pronged one whereby
constant flow of resources has to be ensured by involving multifarious agencies including
private sector. The question of levying some tax or cess for forestry development can also be
examined so that the efforts of conservation/extension of forests do not suffer. The real
management of forests lies with the respective State Governments concerned and they too
have to rise to the occasion by augmenting allocations to a reasonable level to sustain our
heritage of forest wealth.

15. The Committee, however, lauds the efforts of the Ministry to raise the level of
external aid for its projects and feels that the allocation of funds from the Rural Employment
Schemes for its afforestation activities should be restored. The Committee also feels that the
proposal for involvement of industries for development of degraded forest land is
praiseworthy and’ the modalities in this regard be worked out expeditiously so that the
forestry sector investments get a boost. The Govt. should also explore other possibilities for
raising the current level of investment in this sector so that our forest wealth is not only
preserved but the area under forest cover is also extended to realise the national objective of
33%.

National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board

16. National Afforestation and Eco-development Board (NAEB) is the apex agency of
the Ministry to implement its afforestation programmes. It was set up in August 1992 for
promoting afforestation, three planting, ecological restoration and eco-development activities
all over the country, giving special attention to degraded forest areas and lands adjoining
forest areas, national parks, sanctuaries and other protected areas as well as ecologically
fragile areas like the Western Himalayas, Aravallis, Western Ghats, etc. In furtherance of its
mandate, the NAEB is implementing a number of schemes, namely Integrated Afforestation
and Eco-development Project Scheme (IAEPS), Area Oriented Fuelwood and Fodder
Project Scheme (AOFFPS), Scheme for Raising of Non-timber Forest Produce including
medicinal plants, Seed Development Scheme, Grants-in-Aid Scheme and Aerial Seeding
Scheme. Other activities of NAEB include funding of the Eco Task Force (ETF) of ex-
servicemen which undertakes afforestation, pasture development, soil and water
conservation and other restorative works; technology extension programme whereunder
demonstration projects to regenerate various types of degraded lands like usar, arid and dry
areas, gullied and ravinous lands and marshy and waterlogged areas have been launched
with the asistance of various scientific and technological institutions/departments/universities
and voluntary agencies; and progressive development of new technologies and methodologies
of participatory management, eco-development and regeneration of degraded forests and

*which includes investments by farmers from their own resources on soil and moisture conservation works.


Issemination of information about these technologies. The Board has seven regional centres:
located in universities and naitonal level institutions at Bangalore, Solan, New Delhi,
Bhopal, Ahmedabad, Shillong and Calcutta which help it in promoting extension of
replicable technologies and dissemination of research findings. They also provide technical
and extension support to the State Forest Departments in preparing projects for regeneration
of degraded forests in adjoining lands with people’s participation. The targets under 20 Point
Programme for afforestation under two mutually exclusive items viz. ‘Seedling Distribution’
for planting on private lands and ‘Area Coverage’ in respect of public lands including forest
lands and the achievements during the year 1994-95 and 1995-96 are as follows:

1994-95 1995-96

Target Achievement Target Achievement
(i) Area coverage (public 10.31 9.84 11.23 4.40

lands including forest lands)
(area in lakh ha.)

(ii) Seedling distribution (for 120.85 108.10 113.54 32.83
planting private land)
(seedlings in crores)

(Upto 30.11.95)

17. Monitoring of afforestation activities is essential as they entail substantial
expenditure. The Committee was informed that two kinds of monitoring is done in respect
of afforestation activities under the Twenty Point Programme. Firstly, the State
Governments are asked to provide block and village level afforestation data annually.
Secondly, every year 10% (approx. 50) of the districts of the country are selected with
appropriate regional distribution for evaluation of afforestation activities taken up in the
previous years by autonomous institutions/NGOs/VAs/regional centres of NAEB/Retired
Forest Officials. A copy of the report is sent to the concerned State Governments and
districts for information and for taking necessary remedial measures.

18. The Committee was further informed that it is proposed to take-up second round of
evaluation in the same districts which were evaluated in 1992-93 to determine the survival
and growth of plantations over the last 3 years. There is also a provision for a concurrent
evaluation of the projects implemented under Centrally Sponsored Schemes of NAEB.
Reputed Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) and Institutions/Experts are engaged by
NAEB for carrying out these evaluations.

19. In response to a query, the Committee was informed that the evaluation reports of
all the activities under the Twenty Point Programme have shown survival rates of plantations
ranging from 50% to 90% depending on agro-climatic and other factors. The details of the
studies conducted through independent expert agencies in respect of plantations carried out
during 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94 are indicated in the Statements at Annexures-VII, VIII
and IX.

20. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the NAEB has done very useful work in
the area of afforestation through its various schemes during the short period it has been in
existence and the results which have been achieved are fairly good. During the period
1992—95, an area of 182854 ha. has been covered under the Integrated Afforestation and
Eco-development Project Scheme at a cost of Rs. 127.15 crores and during the year 1995-96


it has set a target to cover 64000 ha. at an estimated cost of Rs. 50 crores. The Area
Oriented Fuelwood and Fodder Project Scheme for raising non-timber forest produce has
also contributed immensely to meet the rising demand of these products. The Committee,
however, is of the view that pressures from the people on the forest produce will still be great
during the years to come and the answer lies in bringing more and more degraded land under
vegetation and to conserve and augment availability of bio-mass, fuelwood and fodder. There
is no denying the fact that vast majority of the people in rural areas, particularly in remote
areas, have been traditionally dependent on forest wood for their requirement of domestic fuel
and this position will continue without any material change. There has, therefore, to be a
realisation among these people that forests will not be able to sustain the burden very long
and a people’s movement has to be built to grow trees in their farms. This problem can be
addressed by giving necessary direction and thrust to social forestry which went a long way in
solving the problem of fuelwood in the State of West Bengal. Besides, there has to be a co-
ordinated approach of all the Central and State Government agencies to increase the
productivity ratio of forest wealth (Average yield per ha.).

21. The Committee also finds that the survival rate of saplings planted under various
afforestation Programmes of the Government does not look impressive. The afforestation will
be meaningful if survival rate is maintained between 90-95% on a uniform basis and remedial
action is taken in respect of the States where it is too low. Taking an overall view of the
afforestation effort as a whole, the Committee feels that it has not progressed at the desired
pace and only during the Seventh Five Year Plan a quantum jump had been made when the
total area coverage was to the tune of 8.8 million ha., a figure which is more than the area of
8.2 million ha. of degraded land which was covered during the First to Sixth Plan Periods.
During the ongoing Eighth Plan, afforestation efforts have suffered a reverse and the
Committee, therefore, urges upon the Government to identify the causes thereof and to take
suitable action including making available necessary funds to keep up the effort.

22. The Committee strongly believes that afforestation of any magnitude will be
inconsequential if the process of developing wood substitutes is not expedited so as to reduce
dependence of people on forests for their requirements of timber and fuelwood. The
Committee in this context is happy to note that the research has established multifarious uses
of eucalyptus (floor board etc. which is insect resistent) which are proposed to be got
patented. Research of this nature’needs to be pursued without any resource constraints and
due publicity to the wood substitutes which are developed, has to be given to popularise their
use and reduce dependence of people on forest timber. Social forestry, agro-industry,
individual forestry, canal bank and roadside afforestation programmes need to be given added
impetus. People should be encouraged to undertake plantations of the species of trees which
are useful to them. Industries, particularly the ones which require wood as raw material, have
to be motivated to undertake plantations on degraded lands. It is a happy sign that a scheme
to attract industry to raise commercial plantations on the degraded lands is already engaging
attention of the Government and one of the important features of this proposed scheme would
be the stipulation requiring the industry to plant 20% such species of trees which would be
beneficial to the local communities.

23. The Committee is of the view that without loss of any time a perspective plan for
the development of an estimated 175 million hectares of degraded and wastelands in the
forest and non-forest areas of the country should be prepared. The timeframe for this plan
should be 15 years. It will imply that about 12 million hectares of land will have to be
brought under green cover every year. Similarly, every State and Union Territory should be


asked to prepare a perspective plan. The mini water shed as the principle of area development
should be adopted and a village or a Panchayat should be unit for this perspective plan. This
plan should take into account all the available resources of all the governmental schemes and
ensure that there is optimum utilisation of resources available. It is heartening to note that the
Government is not oblivious of the realities of the problem and an integrated perspective
programme for long, medium and short term development of the forestry sector at national
and State level is being prepared, taking into account all aspects of forestry and people’s
welfare. This is being done under the project National Forestry Action Programme (NFAP)
with the assistance of UNDP and FAO which became operational in July 1993.

Deforestation, Forest Fires, etc.

24, Vast chunks of forests are destroyed at regular intervals every year by devastating
fires in the process reducing to naught the afforestation activities of the Government and other
agencies. Tree felling is a constant menace and timber mafia operates with impunity.
Encroachments also severely reduce the forest area. Some of the States have taken initiative
to contain the timber mafia and entry of outsiders or contractors into the forests for purposes
of removal of dead trees has been totally banned as a result of which incidence of felling of
trees has considerably come down there. The Committee, however, feels that we have to be
alive to the problem as the tree felling on a large scale still appears to be continuing, in some
cases with the connivance/collusion of the forest officials. The machinery entrusted with the
guarding of forests has to be strangthened and feasibility of delegating the powers to the forest
officials may be examined so that prompt action is taken to check this menace. The officers
who do commendable work should be suitably rewarded.

25. Encroachments on forest land no doubt have social dimensions and require a humane
approach to the problem and perhaps with this in view, the regularisation of such
encroachments, has in some cases been continuing on an on-going basis. If this trend
continues, forest area will be severely reduced. The Committee, therefore feels that
encroachments on forest lands should be severely dealt with and a clear message should go to
the encroachers that they have to vacate the forest land with all the attendant consequences.

26. A centrally sponsored scheme called ‘Modern Forest Fire Cuntrol Methods’ was
introduced in 1992-93 under which 100% financial assistance is provided to the States. The
objectives of the scheme are to protect and conserve the forests and improve their productivity
and central assistance is provided to the States for procurement of modern hand tools, fire
resistant clothing, fire finders, wireless sets, creation of fire lines, construction of watch
towers, training and for publicity purposes. The scheme has been under operation in the
States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh. In this context the Committee
asked the Secretary how this scheme could: be efficacious when the annual budgetary
allocations in this scheme have been static at a moderate level of just Rs. 2 crores. The
Committee was informed that additional plan allocation to the extent of about Rs. 12 crores
has been made to the Government of Uttar Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh by the Planning
Commission to meet the situation arising out of the recent forest fires in the Garhwal
mountains. The total area affected by the fire in Uttar Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh in the
summer of 1995 alone was estimated as 557 sq. kms. and 6220 sq. kms. respectively. The
tentative monetary loss has been estimated to be Rs. 17.45 crores. Responding to a further
query from the Committee as to whether any assessment has been made by the Ministry about
the annual loss to the forests on account of tree felling and fires, the Secretary explained that
no regular assessment of such losses is made due to various logistical difficulties in obtaining
the desired information.


27. The Committee drew the attention of the Secretary of the Ministry to the UNDP
assisted pilot project on ‘Introduction of Modern Forest Fire Control Methods’ and wanted
to know the extent to which the techniques derived therefrom had been successfully
implemented in the country and whether the forest fires had in any way been significantly
reduced or checked. The Secretary clarified that the project which was implemented in the
States of Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh had amply demonstrated the effectiveness of
modern forest fire control techniques in saving forests from fires. The study of project areas
in Maharashtra had revealed that the average extent of areas burnt due to forest fire has
been reduced from 15% in the base year of 1985 to less than 2% in 1989. Similarly, a
number of fire incidents have been reduced from 4.24% in 1984 to less than 1% in 1990 in
Uttar Pradesh. The feasibility study (1987) of the pilot project has estimated that the
economic benefits of introducing modern forest fire control methods are substantial.

28. The Secretary also stated that there are different reasons for forest fires in different
States and more often than not they are due to natural causes. Forest experts hold the view
that the fires are a way of forests, protection against competition viz. protection of certain
species against other species coming up and the forest fires are now a world wide
phenomenon. He, however, emphasised that the amount that is being given to fight the fires
is quite low. The allocations need to be augmented suitably for this purpose. A
representative of the Ministry submitted to the Committee that efforts are being made to get
a higher outlay during the 9th Plan. The Secretary further informed the Committee that a
Study Team to probe the reasons for devastating fires in the forests of Himachal Pradesh
and Uttar Pradesh had been constituted which has identified a number of reasons for these
fires and the suggestions made in its report are under examination.

29. The Committee is not inclined to fully share the perception of the Secretary that most
of the fires are due to natural causes. If this phenomenon continues, as recently witnessed in
forests in Garhwal mountains, that day is not far off when the earth will be totally devoid of
forests. Rather the Committee feels concerned that the forest fires which revage our vast
forest wealth at a tremendous cost to the nation have hitherto not got the necessary attention
and priority they should get and the allocations for this sector have been niggardly. The
Committee in its 3rd and 22nd Reports had dealt with this aspect and emphasised the need to
raise the budgetary outlays so as to provide for employment of modern methods of fire
control. Things have, however, not even marginally improved and the recent forest fires in
the States of Himachal Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh have exposed the inefficacy of the fire
fighting machinery. The Committee feels that there has to be a viable strategy to cope with
this menace and giving small sums of money for hand tools or fire resistant clothing is not
going to help solve the problem. The Committee appreciates that there are constraints of
hostility of terrain, inaccessibility to fire prone areas and once fires break out, inherent
difficulties are there in putting them out. The thrust of the Ministry on whatever measures it
takes is to be preventive and not curative. The Committee fails to understand why the benefits
derived from UNDP assisted Modern Forest Fire Control Project which, as indicated to the
Committee, have proved their efficacy, have not been applied in other forest fire prone States.
The Committee recommends that an agency be created at the apex level in the Ministry to co-
ordinate all the activities in this area with the State Governments concerned so that an
integrated approach is adopted to eliminate the monster of fires.


Wastelands Development

30. As mentioned earlier, nearly half of the total land area in the country is stated to be
suffering from degradation of some form or the other. The enormity of the problem engaged
the attention of the Government first in 1985 when the National Wastelands Development
Board (NWDB) under the Ministry of Environment and Forests was set up in the Ministry
of Environment and Forests. The strategy then adopted by the NWDB for development of
wastelands was somewhat uni-dimensional with predominant emphasis on tree planting
activities. However, since the problem of wastelands development demanded still greater
attention, particularly in view of gravity of ecological and socio-economic problems arising
out of land degradation and the need for evolving and implementing integrated strategies for
development of the vast areas of wastelands, Government set up a new Department of
Wastelands Development under the Ministry of Rural Development (now called Ministry of
Rural Areas and Employment) in July, 1992. The NWDB in the Ministry of Rural Areas
and Employment was assigned the task of regenerating degraded non-forest and private
lands and National Afforestation and Eco-development Board (NAEB), which replaced
NWDB in the Ministry of Environment and Forests, was given the mandate of promoting
afforestation of degraded forest areas and lands adjoining forest areas. The newly created
Department of Wastelands Development was entrusted with quite a wide mandate which
inter-alia included promotion of rural employment through wastelands development,
production of fuelwood, fodder and timber on non-forest lands including private lands,
research and development of appropriate low cost technologies for increasing productivity of
wastelands in sustainable ways, inter-departmental and inter-dispciplanary co-ordination in
programme planning and implemenation of the Wastelands Development Programme and
people’s participation and public co-operation and co-ordination of efforts of Panchayats and
other voluntary and non-government agencies for wastelands development. Even though the
task of wastelands development does not fall within the mandate of Ministry of Environment
and forests, but since it is inseparably connected with the issues of the extension of forest
cover, the Committee decided to have an assessment of what strategy was being adopted in
this area.

31. The Secretary of the Ministry of Rural Areas and Employment, in the course of his
evidence, apprised the Committee of the schemes which the National Wastelands
Development Board has been implementing. Under the Integrated Wastelands Development
Projects Scheme, the targets of covering 27,000, 50,000 and 62,000 ha. of wasteland during
the year 1992-93, 1993-94 and 1994-95 had been fixed and the total financial outlay was to
the tune of Rs. 114.25 crores. A very stringent system of monitoring and evaluation is
prescribed under this scheme to see that the results achieved really make an impact. The
monitoring report shows the cumulative development of 61,000 ha. of wastelands under the
IWDP Scheme upto March, 1995.

32. The Technology Development Extension and Training Scheme is aimed at
establishing technical data base and providing assistance to such projects which are required
for filling gaps existing in the present technology. In 1994-95, 34 Operation Research
Projects, Agro-forestry Projects with proven technologies were approved with the total
outlay of Rs. 638.50 lakhs and Rs. 200.80 lakhs were released.

33. Grant-in-aid Scheme of the Department seeks to elecit involvement of Voluntary
Agencies, Co-operatives, Mahila Mandals, Yuva Mandals and the other like organisations
for undertaking work directly or indirectly in the areas of afforestation and wastelands
development. Hundred per cent central grant is made available to the registered voluntary
agencies/organisation. The scope of the Scheme is proposed to be enlarged to include land


based activities for funding instead of nursery raising and tree planting activity alone.
Projects meant for awareness raising, extension and publicity will also be considered under
the Scheme. In 1994-95, a budgetary outlay of Rs. 300 lakhs for this scheme was fully
utilised on 25 on-going projects and 47 new projects. A critical analysis of the number of
projects for which funds were released has established that the projects under Grant-in-aid
Scheme are not being sponsored by voluntary agencies located in different States on a
uniform basis.

34. Investment promotional Scheme has been launched by the Department to facilitate
and mobilise resources from financial institutions, banks, corporate bodies including user
agencies and other entrepreneours for development of wastelands belonging to individual
farmers, community/Panchayats/institutions and government agencies. The guidelines for
this Scheme were finalised in May, 1994 and the Scheme is still to take off. Wastelands
Development Task Force is also proposed to be constituted under the Territorial Army
Directorate to develop inaccessible and inhospitable terrain like hills, ravines and mine areas
for sustainable uses.

35. The Secretary of the Ministry was asked as to whether any assessment had been
made about the extent of current level of wastelands in the country and what were the latest
figures of such wastelands. The Committee was informed that there are varying estimates
about the extent of degraded land were in the country. In 1976, the degraded lands
estimated to be within the vicinity of 175 million ha. The Department has undertaken an
exercise to assess the extent of wastelands in the country and a project has been given to the
National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA) to map out the wastelands using satellite data.
There are about 500 districts in the country which have been identified to have wastelands to
the extent of 5% or more of the area and NRSA has uptill now covered 241 districts. Out of
these, 146 have been identified to have more than 15% of their total geographical area as
wastelands, 95 districts are said to have 15% or less than that area as wastelands. The
geographical area which has been covered in these districts is to the extent of 203.85 million
ha. and the area of wastelands identified is 35.64 million ha. The degraded area under
forests is 10.69 million ha.

36. The Committee has noted that the tackling of the problem of wastelands
development has been at the centre of the Government policy since 1985 and the creation of
the Department of Wastelands Development in July 1992 shows that the Government
attaches great priority to this area. The schemes like Integrated Wastelands Development
Project Scheme, Grant-in-aid Scheme and Investment Promotional Scheme are a step in the
right direction and the results have been good. The Committee, however, feels that the
benefits of the Grant-in-Aid Scheme as of now are not accruing to all the States on a
uniform basis and some action is called for to involve/attract voluntary agencies from other
States as well. Similarily, Investment Promotional Scheme which appears to be dogged by
certain problems has to be made more incentive oriented and issues like providing land,
concessional finance and technology are addressed in a co-ordinated manner.

37. The magnitude of the problem of wastelands development is tremendous which
requires a herculean efforts. The problem of waste or degraded lands and their management
is a complex and multi-dimensional one specially when the exact size of the extent of the
degraded and wastelands is still to be determined. The Government felt the need to have a
comprehensive plan for development of wastelands and appointed a High Level Committee
on Wastelands Development headed by Shri Mohan Dharia on the 4th November, 1995 to
go into the entire gamut of issues and suggest among others an action plan for the
development of wastelands in non-forest areas with reference to a time-frame of 10-15 years.


The Committee has noted that the High Level Committee on Wastelands Development has
made very valuable recommendations for planned development of waste and degraded lands
in the country and the Committee trusts that they would seriously be examined and
implemented without any delay. What is needed is an integrated and co-ordinated approach
to tackle the problem of degraded and wastelands irrespective of the boundary of forest or
non-forest lands.

38. The Committee strongly feels that it is imperative to have all afforestation,
wastelands development, soil and water conservation and related projects under one
empowered coordinating authority at the centre. The same should be replicated at the State,
District and Panchayat levels. This is necessary to ensure that a commonality of approach is
evolyed for the development of all degraded and wastelands. It will ensure better
coordination amongst various departments which are responsible for implementing projects
for afforestation and for development of wastelands and degraded lands. This authority
should finalise a comprehensive perspective plan for degraded lands and wastelands both in
the forest and non-forest areas and thereafter oversee and monitor the implementation
of this plan. The central authority would also involve the State Governments and Union
Territories in the preparation and implementation of this perspective plan. This authority
should ensure better coordination between the Centre and the State Governments/Union
Territories. The authority should also take effective steps for the involvement of public in
the implementation of this perspective plan by creating awareness among them. In an overall
manner this authority would act as the custodian of the land resources of the country.

Participatory Forestry Management

39. One of the essential components of the National Forest Policy of 1988 is the
requirement of involvement of peopie in the management of the forests to obtain the desired
goals of forest conservation, extension of tree cover and meeting the needs of fuelwood of
the people. In order to translate this objective into reality, the Government of India issued
necessary guidelines to the State Governments to formulate specific schemes on involvement
of village communities and voluntary organisations in the protection and regeneration of
degraded forests on the basis of sharing of forest produce. Pursuant to these guidelines, the
concept of Joint Forest Management came into being and 15 States have issued appropriate
Government orders/resolutions enabling people’s participation in the management of forests
on usufructs sharing basis. A centrally sponsored scheme for the “Association of Scheduled
Tribes and Rural Poor” in regeneration of the degraded forests on usufructs sharing basis is
already being implemented since 1992-93. The objectives of this scheme are to associate
Scheduled Castes and the rural poor in afforestation of degraded forests and to provide
gainful employment and sustainable economic base to these people. The Scheme is being
implemented through the State Forest Departments on the basis of projects formulated for
the purpose.

40. A query was posed to the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, as to
what advantages have accrued to the States following adoption of the concept of Joint Forest
Management by them and what is the position about the other States which have yet to
adopt this concept. The Committee was informed that the studies uptill now reveal that
appropriate involvement of local people in forest protection has had a positive impact, e.g.,
the availability of fuelwood in certain villages that were studied in the Harda Forest Division
in Hoshangabad District of Madhya Pradesh, had increased 4 times. Similarly, fodder
production from the protected forest areas in Rejheria village had yielded a surplus of the
value of Rs. 20,000. In South-West Bengal, studies had shown that the net annual income
from Non-Timber Forest Produce (NTFP) to the tribal households had increased to about


Rs. 2523 per household constituting 22% of the household income. Other reports had
indicated that around 5000 ha. of both degraded forest lands and village common properties
have been covered by the Joint Forest Management in the Jammu region of J & K. The
Aravalli Afforestation Project in Haryana has been able to regenerate and plant up some
17000 ha. of village common lands without fencing by involving the people closely in the
project activities. In general, a large number of forest divisions in different States in the
country are making progress in promoting Joint Forest Management in the areas under their
charge. As regards the point about the response from other States which have yet not
adopted Joint Forest Management Programme, it was clarified that the predominantly tribal
areas in the States in North-Eastern India have substantial community-owned and managed
forests. The remaining States, i.e., Tamil Nadu and Kerala, have been requested to issue
Joint Forest Management resolutions.

41. In the course of the evidence of the Secretary, two points were specifically raised by
the Members on the issues related to people’s participation in forestry related activities. First
was that the forests have hitherto faced degradation because of tribals and local population
having been kept away from the forests, and secondly, pursuant to the Constitution (73rd)
Amendment Act, Panchayats have acquired a special status and if they are involved in
forestry sector, results will be tremendous. Responding to these points, the Secretary of
the Ministry clarified that the people who have been living in the forests for ages, have
always been treated as an integral part of forest management and the constant emphasis is
on harnessing this relationship and allowing them due share of forest produce for their
livelihood. As regards the role which Panchayats can play in forestry development, the
Secretary maintained that there already exist schemes under which Panchayats are actively
associated with afforestation activities. One of the Members of the Panchayats is designated
as Mukhiya with whom constant interaction is maintained by their representatives to
ascertain the developmental activities which can be undertaken in that area. Besides, under
the District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) Schemes, a crucial role is assigned to the
village Panchayats. There are also schemes for suitably rewarding the outstanding work in
the area of afforestation undertaken by them. The Ministry is also. contemplating having a
Consultative Committee at every Block level and every Panchayat level to have them
constantly involved in afforestation activities.

42. The Committee appreciates that the development of forestry sector has got a new
dimension with the active involvement of people and this effort has to be further strengthened.
There is, however, much still to be done in this area as the phenomenon of cutting of trees,
removal of. precious timber and mysterious forest fires continues unabated. The problem
cannot be overcome unless a consciousness is built among the people that the forests belong to
them and they belong to the forests and the feeling of alienation among the tribals and local
population goes. The Committee feels that if the tribals and the local population residing in
the forest areas are actively associated with the management of forests and are allowed to
share the usufructs, without in any way compromising on the preservation of our national
forests, many of the ills currently afflicting our forests will disappear. They can be converted
into effective instruments to have a check on the intruders, poachers and above all, timber
mafia. They can also help in preventing the deliberate forest fires besides extinguishing them
as they will have a sense of hurt once they see their own wealth being destroyed like this.
What they need is just to inculcate among them, a sense of belonging and purpose about the
forests. Such of the people as do outstanding work in their area should be suitably rewarded
and honoured at the appropriate fora.


43. The Committee has also noted that some of the Non-Governmental Organisations/
voluntary agencies have been doing pioneering work in the conservation of our forest wealth.
The Committee had an occasion to visit Sariska area of Rajasthan where it witnessed how the
substantial population of the rural areas had benefited from the activities of Tarun Bharat
Sangh, an Alwar-based NGO. This organisation had created a mass awareness among the
people about the detrimental effect cutting of trees had on environment and they were
zealously protecting the trees. Similarly, VANARAI, a Maharashtra based voluntary
organisation has done very useful work in the areas of conservation of soil and water and
development of lands through afforestation. The Committee feels that voluntary organisations
like them should serve as a model for village upliftment and forestry preservation. The better
land resource management as a matter of fact is too serious a matter to be left to the
Government alone. It is necessary that NGOs should be involved in a big way in afforestation
and other related activities. To ensure better results the Committee feels that the approval of
projects submitted by NGOs should be decentralised and as far as possible, the sanction
should be accorded at the District level. These voluntary agencies should be treated with
respect and all possible effort should be made to involve and encourage the NGOs.

44. The Committee feels that after the 73rd amendment of the Constitution the
Panchayati Raj institutions will have to play very important role in regard to the
implementation of the aforsaid perspective plan. At the District level and District Panchayats
should approve the water-shed development plan for each village or Panchayat and the
allocation of funds from the Union/State Governments should be made directly to the Zila.
Panchayats for the implementation of the perspective plan. The District Panchayats should be
adequately empowered to enable them to oversee and monitor this plan. Similar involvement
of the Block level Panchayats will also be necessary. The Gram Panchayats should play the
most dominant role in the implementation of the projects in their ares. They should be
entrusted with the operation and maintenance of the assets created. To ensure acceptability,
all decisions in regard to the planning and implementation of these projects should be
approved by the Gram Sabha. The Village Panchayats should also be made responsible for
the prevention of encnoachments on degraded and wastelands. Panchayats should also be
involved in all the works being undertaken by the NGOs.

Position in some States

45. No effort at conservation of forestry development can succeed unless the State
Governments which are prime agencies for management of forests adopt viable strategies to
meet the situation arising from increasing threat to our forest wealth. The Committee in this
context selected the States of Assam, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh to
have some assessment about the state of forests there and the policies being adopted by
them to realise the objectives enshrined in our national forest policy. The position as it
emerged on the basis of the discussions with the Forest Secretaries/Principal Chief
Conservators of Forests of these States is as follows:—

Assam

46. The forest area in the State of Assam has been reduced, that forests there are
coming under severe pressure on account of disputed border with the neighbouring States
and the increasing demand for agricultural land; there are severe financial constraints in that
even basic infrastructural facilities to guard the forests properly and to ensure speedy
movement of the forest officials have not come up to the desired level; the forests which had
very good reserve forest cover have got denuded. One of the factors which has contributed


to the loss of forest cover in the State is the practice of shifting cultivation in areas like
Sibsagar and Dibrugarh. Under the VIth Schedule of the Constitution tribals in the hilt
districts of the State have been given complete. autonomy in the management of their
forests so much so that they can make their own rules and regulations. The State Forest
Department officials no longer have any say in the management of their forests and the
District Councils in these hilly regions have absolute powers to look after their forest land.
Any attempt at co-ordination with these District Councils is liable to be misinterpreted.
The incidence of forest fires, however, is very rare because of climatic conditions in the
State. Despite all the problems, the Forest Department is seized of the gravity of the
problems, and a State Forest Policy within the broad framework of the National Forest on
the anvil; social forestry is being given added impetus and the afforestation activities have
been undertaken on.a large scale. Taking into account all categories of forests existing at
present in the State, the forest area comes to about 37 per cent and no difficulty,
therefore, is visualised by the State to fall in line with the national target of 33 per cent.

Karnataka

47, Based on the 1993 data, the forest cover in Karnataka is only 16.86 per cent of
the total geographical area out of which only 12.95 per cent is dense forest. The State has,
however, registered an increase of 144 Sq. Km. in its forest area during the period
1991-93. The streategy of the State Government in managing its forests in currently based
on 4 principles namely, conservation and protection of existing forests and its bio-diversity;
increasing the productivity of the degraded forests; increasing the area under tree cover to
the extent possible in government lands, community lands and private lands; and
promoting people’s participation in protection of forests, upgrading degraded forests and
afforestation and tree planting of Government, community and private lands. The State has
been losing on an average, 600 to 700 hectares of forests per annum and during the last 15
years, approximtely 10.000 hectares of forest area has been lost. This has, however, been
made up by undertaking plantation of trees on a massive scale which is in the vicinity of
50.000 hectares per annum. The State does not look upon the: forests as a source of
revenue and the efforts are towards their preservation. Complete ban has been imposed on
the felling of green trees with an exception in the case of bamboos, canes, acolytes,
casuarina, etc. The entry of private contractors in the forests for removing timber and
firewood has also been stopped. As a measure directed at conservation of precious forest
wealth, the trade in rosewood and sandalwood has been nationalised within the State so
much so that even the private owners of the land which has plantations of these species
cannot sell them directly. The State Forest Act has been amended to make it more
stringent. Now, the Divisional Forest Officers have been empowered to confiscate the
vehicles involved in smuggling of forest produce and to arrest the offenders without
warrant. The punishment for the offenders has also been raised to 8 years of
imprisonment. A suggestion was made for a uniform law, perhaps a Central Legislation, in
the States bordering Karnataka on the pattern of the one already existing in Karnataka to
check smuggling of sandalwood across the border of these states.

Madhya Pradesh

48. The recorded forest cover in the State of Madhya Pradesh is currently of the order
of 34 per cent which is slightly above the national target of 33%. The position in real
terms, however, speaks to the contrary. Out of 155 lakh ha. of forests, 60 lakh ha. are
degraded and even out of that 20 lakh are severely degraded. The efforts to bring
degraded area under vegetation have not moved at the desired pace on account of the


resource constraints. An amount of approximately Rs. 9000 crores would be needed to
regenerate the degraded forests. Since the funds of this magnitude will not be available, the
State has devised a three-pronged strategy, namely to involve the people in afforestation
effort on a massive scale through the Joint Forest Management Programme; strengthen
Forest Development Corporation in the State, and attract private/public sector investment in
afforestation on usufruct sharing basis. The specific steps taken by the State Government for
protection of its forests are that the felling of trees is not allowed; an action plan has been
formulated to extend the forest cover to 33% of its geographical area for which projected
requirement of funds will be to the tune of Rs. 18000 crores within a time-frame of 20 years.
For this gigantic task, resources will be mobilised from the Government, the people, public
and private sector and above all global sources. The NGOs, Gram Samitis and tribal people
will from the core group for undertaking necessary development and afforestation.

Uttar Pradesh

49. The total forest area in the State is 51502 sq. kms. which is 17.4% of its total
geographical area. Forest Survey of India Report for the year 1993 shows that there has
been an increase in the forest area to the extent of 352 sq. kms. 26.20 lakh ha. of land in the
State is degraded and 62000 ha. of land is under encroachment. The State has been
according all the necessary priority to the afforestation and during the first three years of the
8th Five Year Plan, plantations have been undertaken in an area of 183213 ha. of land. The
concept of Joint Forest Management has been accepted in principle by the State
Government and will be incorporated in the World Bank aided forestry project which is
under formulation. The forests in the State have come under severe strains on account of
illicit felling, encroachment and fires and the efforts of the State Government to cope with
these problems have been marred by financial constraints. The allocations to the forestry
sector have been fairly low and the trend has not shown any improvement over the years.
Nonetheless, despite the resource constraints, efforts are under way to strengthen the State
machinery with vehicles, wireless and fire arms to deal firmly with the forest mafia. Special
efforts are being made to remove encroachments on the forest lands and to regenerate and
rejuvenate them. Forest fires have constantly been an irritant to the State forest machinery
and projects are on the anvil to check this menace. A project with a total outlay of Rs. 8.25
crores has been approved by the Government of India for the State of Uttar Pradesh and
during the financial year 1995-96, 50% of this amount has been sanctioned. The State does
not foresee any possibility of an increase in its forest area though there is immense scope for
increasing forest cover.

50. The Committee has noted that there are peculiar problems faced by each State in the
management of its forests and the problems of encroachment, tree felling and lack of adequate
financial resources continue to bother each one of them. Despite this, some of the States like
Karnataka have done very well in managing their forests and quite good initiatives like
banning cutting of trees, restricting entry of contractors to the forests and encouraging
massive plantation on private lands have been taken. The initiative which some of them have
taken to attract private sector investment to regenerate degraded lands on usufruct sharing
basis, is quite a laudable one as this will help bridge the resource gap considerably. The
Committee recommends to the Government to devise suitable mechanism at the central level
to interact constantly with the State Governments on issues confronting them in conserving
their forests.

AJIT. P. K. JOGI,
New Detui; Chairman,
a ey ory Committee on Science and Technology,
March 7, 1996 Environment and Forests.


ANNEXURES



ANNEXURE-I

Comparative situation of Forest cover—1993 and 1991 assessment

(Sq. km.)

Sl. State/UTs 1991 Assessment Assessment
No. change in
1993

1. Andhra Pradesh 47,290 47,256 —34

2. Arunachal Pradesh 68,757 68,661 -96

3. Assam 24,751 24,508 —243

4. Bihar 26,668 26,587 -81

Ss Goa (including Daman & Diu) 1,255 1,250 -5

6. Gujarat 11,907 12,044 +137

Ts Haryana 513 513 _

8. Himachal Pradesh 11,780 12,502 +722

9. Jammu & Kashmir 20,064 20,443 +379

10. Karnataka 32,199 32,343 +144
11. Kerala 10,292 10,336 +44
12. Madhya Pradesh 135,785 135,396 —389
18. Maharashtra 44,044 43,859 -185
14. Manipur 17,685 17,621 —64
15. Meghalaya 15,875 15,769 -106
16. Mizoram 18,853 18,697 —-156
17. Nagaland 14,321 14,348 +27
18. Orissa 47,205 47,145 -60
19. Punjab 1,343 1,343 _
20. Rajasthan 12,835 13,099 +264
21. Sikkim 3,033 3,119 +86
22. Tamil Nadu 17,713 17,726 +13
23. Tripura 5,535 5,538 +3
24. Uttar Pradesh 33,609 33,961 +352
25. West Bengal 8,015 8,186 +171
26. Andaman & Nicobar 7,622 7,624 +2
2. Chandigarh 5 5 -
28. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 206 206 —
29: Delhi 22 22 -
30. Lakshadweep - — =
31: Pondicherry - — —
Tota: 639,182 640,107 +925



ANNEXURE-II
Statement showing the figures of diversion of forests land for different purposes during the

last five years
1. Construction of Hydro Electric/Irrigation Projects. — 15,840 ha.
2. Mining — 6,875 ha.
3. Rehabilitation of displaced persons/Regularisation of — 34,500 ha.

Encroachments
4. Miscellaneous — 14,740 ha.


ANNEXURE-III

Statement showing the position of cases approved for diverting Forest Land, stipulations for
compensatory afforestation under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and compensatory afforestation done,
funds to be realised and actually realised in the States/UTs as on 30.06.1995

Sl. Name of State/UT No. of Forest Comp. Comp. Com. Target. = Area Funds to Funds Quarterly
No. cases area Aff. Aff. Aff. to for 1995 identified be actually Program
approved diverted Stipu- done till be done for land realised _ realised © Report
lated 30.06.95 bank from till 30th received
User June, 95
Agency हर
for
Comp.
AH
(Rupees in lakhs and area in ha.)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 “10 वा 12
1. Andhra Pradesh 101 14231 14600 11758 3342 4000 1467 3178 3042 31.03.95
2, Arunachal Pradesh 2 76 1006 81 195 514 600 208 169 31.03.95
3. Assam 15 100 1213 578 635 635 303 9 91 31.12.92
4. Bihar 55 3158 1788 68 1720 173 173 175 32 30.09.94
5. Goa 32 115 94 93 1 1 = 13 13 30.06.95
6. Gujarat 193 19780 30563 15337 15226 2500 370 2779 1956 31.12.94
7, Haryana 55 763 59 * 61 - - 420 59 52 31.03.95
है. Himachal Pradesh lot 3388 7433 3890 3543 2650 fn 1013 817 30.06.95
9. Jammu & Kashmir 8 1286 1425 288 1137 137 - 954 ” 30.09.91
10, Karnataka 139 10525 10404 10564 * - — 580 1316 1300 31.12.94
11... Kerala 86 30263 5130 1873 5557 72 1844 105 49 31.03.95
12, Madhya Pradesh 422. 20622. 23276 8928... 14338 74000 20417 3984 3078 31.03.95
13. Maharashtra 539 28936 58446 42910 15536 4000 35821 13541 8536 30.06.95
14. Manipur 4 244 न - - न - - = 31.03.94
15. Meghalaya 18 173 249 270 - = - 1 i 31.03.94
16. Mizoram 1 3000 3030 610 2420 2000 -~ 230 या 31.12.94
व... Orissa 14 15040 15535 12157 3378 ३666 20000 1714 1224 31.12.94
18... Punjab 54 334 464 27 237 218 me 7 73 31.12.94
19, Rajasthan 82 7708 8449 3121 5328 104 ‘ssa 34 324 31.03.95
20. Sikkim 9 40 213: 1448 bent — _ 211 65 30.09.94
2. Tamil Nadu 147 4731 941 816 15 74 1046 103 96 31.12.94
2. Tripura 26 167 380 282 98 98 = 32 32 31.12.94
23. Uttar Pradesh 937 24986 16902 9866 7036 1500 17066 1843 1471 31.03.95
24. ~— West Bengal 35 8924 1s 836 279 536 210 4 93 31.03,95
25. 8 & N Islands M 2143 1994 2046 _- - - i 10 31.12.94
26. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 5 i 262 262 = जया on 44 we 31.12.94
Totat 3397 38892. 466881 209900258531 100370 ३632&6 32125 22785



ANNEXURE-IV

Year-wise targets and achievements for Afforestation/Tree Planting Activities Under 20 Point

Programme
Sl. Year Targets Achievements Targets Area Achievements
No. a Seedling Seedling (in ha.) Area
Distribution Distribution (in ha.)
{in lakhs) {in lakhs)
1. 1985-86 तन - 1454797.00 1510038.50
2. 1986-87 - - 1714226.00 1761801.00
3. 1987-88 _- - 1801960.00 1775567.50
4. 1988-89 = = 2001345.00 2118308.50
5. 1989-90 - - 1684250.00 1719824.00
6. 1990-91 25000.00 12703.81 550000.00 751714.71
nA 1991-92 15000.00 14194.81 1050000.00 1015714.10
8. 1992-93 14500.00 12450.87 1064000.00 1062225.52
9. 1993-94 13509.00 1109.61 1165300.00 963888.17
10. 1994-95 12085.00 10810.65 1031320.00 984102.05
11. 1995-96 11354.91 4648.34* 1123784.00 581693.39*
ToTaL: 91448.91 65906.09 14640982.00 14244877.44

* Upto November, 1995.


ANNEXURE-V

Statement showing the progress under the ongoing externally aided forestry projects

Si. Name of State/U.T. Aid Project Project Physical Progress upto 6/95

No. Agency Period Cost in Targets
Rs. Crores in 000 Financial Physical
(as per ha.) Achi. Achi.

APD) (Rs. in (in 000
Cr.) ha.)
i 185 Oe >> जाला का आम क% 2 आओ
पए Forestry Development WORLD 199293 छा 11470 छा छझछा कराए Forestry Development IRLD 1992-93 to 114.70 = 290 48.23 195
Project, West Bengal BANK = 1996-97
2. Forestry Sector Project, WORLD 1992-93 to 431.51 369 73.64 69
Maharashtra BANK 1997-98
3. Social Forestry Project, SIDA 1988-89 to 85.40 136 136.98 130
Tamil Nadu 1992-93
(Ext. to
95-96)
4. Social Forestry Project, SIDA 1988-89 to 78.34 334 126.88 213
Orissa 1992-93
(Ext. to
95-96)
5. Dungarpur Integrated SIDA 1992-93 to 28.14 36 4.48 5
Wastelands Development 1996-97
Project, Dungarpur
6. Aravalli Hills EEC 1990-91 to 48.15 33 52.00 24
Afforestation, Haryana 1997-98
7. Afforestation Along DECF 1990-91 to 107.50 = 38 48.22 28
IGNP, Rajasthan (Japan) 1994-95
8. Afforestation of Aravali DECF 1992-93 to 176.69 115 91.55 66
Hills, Rajasthan (Japan) 1996-97
9. Western Ghats Forestry DDA 1992-93 to 84.20 61 28.14 16
and Environment (U.K.) —_ 1996-97
Project, Karnataka
10. Forestry and Eco- FRG 1994-95 to 18.70 11 4.29 01

Development Project for 1998-99
Changar Area Himachal
Pradesh



11.

12.

13.

14.

2 क्र 4 5 6 7 8
Forestry Project, Andhra WORLD 1994-95 to 353.92 355 20.25 1
Pradesh BANK 1999-2000

Forestry Project, (Kullu- DDA 1994-95 to 13.92 _ 1.77 _
Mandi) H.P. (U.K.) 1996-1997

Madhya Pradesh Forestry WORLD 1995-96 to 245.94 235 - -
Project, BANK 1998-99

Forestry Development DECF 1995-96 to 139.18 55 - जे
Project, Rajasthan 1999-2000

Torta: 1926.29 2013.00 636.43 746.00



ANNEXURE VI
Statement showing the expenditure on various Schemes of Afforestation and soil and water

conservation

; (Rs. crores)
1. Ministry of Rural Areas & Employment 1250 per annum
2. Ministry of Environment & Forests 906% 58
3. Ministry of Agriculture & Cooperation 260 ”! ~«O”
4. Planning Commission 320" —*
5. NABARD | i
6. State Soil Conservation Departments 34140" !
7. State Land Dévelopment Banks 106 ” ?

Tora: 42795" ”



ANNEXURE-VII

Results of survival rate studies conducted through independent experts/agencies in respect of
plantation carried out during 1991-92

Sl. Name of District Evaluating Expert/Agencies Average Survival

No. Percentage*

1 2 3 4

1 West Tripura N-E Hill University, Shillong, 70.6
Regional Centre, NAEB

2 West Kamang N-E Hill University, Shillong, 80.3
Regional Centre, NAEB

3 West Khasi Hills N-E Hill University, Shillong, 65.8
Regional Centre, NAEB

Mehsana VIKSAT, Ahmedabad 70.0 & above
Koraput Treelands Development Services (P) Ltd, 85.0 — 90.0

Bangalore

6 Mandi Sh. C.M. Sethi, IFS (Retd.) 78:34
Former CCF, Punjab, Chandigarh

7. Alwar Sh. C.M. Sethi, IFS (Retd.) 88.22
Former. CCF, Punjab, Chandigarh

8  Sangrur Sh. C.M. Sethi, IFS (Retd.) 86.4
Former CCF, Punjab, Chandigarh

9 Jalaun Sh. 1४.३. Solanki, IFS (Retd.) ee 82.85
Former CCF, M.P., Bhopal

10. Bareilly Sh. R.V. Singh, Ex. Director General 74.25
ICFRE, Dehradun. हे

गए Sarguja IIFM, Bhopal, Regional Centre, NAEB 75.48

12 Jorhat Jigyanshu Tribal Research Centre, 40.0 — 50.0
New Delhi

13. Mokakchung Jigyanshu Tribal Research Centre, 80.0 — 90.0
New Delhi

14 Manipur Jigyanshu Tribal Research Centre, 70.0 — 80.0
New Delhi

15. Bahraich Indian Institute of Public Opinion, 85.2
New Delhi

16 Chandrapur Indian Institute of Public Opinion, 64.5
New Delhi

17. Chhindwara Indian Institute of Public Opinion, 61.3
New Delhi

*Subject to species-wise/location-wise variations.


27

18

19

21

33

34
35
36
37

38

39

40

41
42

2
Kapurthala
Midnapur
Nadia
Sambalpur
South Sikkim
Medak

Goa

Idduki
Kasargod
Jalgaon
Thanjavar

East Godawari
Kathua

Kolar

Bastar
Pauri Garhwal

Jamnagar
Barmer
Mandsaur
Churu

Dungarpur
Bhiwani
Nellore

Nilgiris
Gulbarga

3

Indian Institute of Public Opinion,
New Delhi

Indian Institute of Public Opinion,
New Delhi

Indian Institute of Public Opinion,
New Delhi

Indian Institute of Public Opinion,
New Delhi

Indian Institute of Public Opinion,
New Delhi

Indian Institute of Public Opinion,
New Delhi

Social & Research Institute, New Delhi
Social & Research Institute, New Delhi
Social & Research Institute, New Delhi
Social & Research Institute, New Delhi
Social & Research Institute, New Delhi
Social & Research Institute, New Delhi
UHF, Solan, Regional Centre, NAEB

Shri A.M. Mahmood Husain, IFS, (Retd.),

Madras

Centre for Rural Development &
Environment

Shri H.G. Singh, Vice Chancellor,
Pant University

VIKSAT, Ahmedabad
AFC Ltd., Bombay
Sh. R.C. Saxena NCHSE, Bhopal

Agriculture Finance Corporation
New Delhi, Regional Centre of NAEB

Agriculture Finance Corporation
New Delhi, Regional Centre of NAEB

Agriculture Finance Corporation
New Delhi, Regional Centre of NAEB

MGS Research & Development Services,
Madras

Sh. K.J. Joseph, IFS (Retd.), Trivandrum
Sh. K.J. Joseph, IFS (Retd.) Trivandrum

“Subject to species-wise/location-wise variations.

91.7

49.2

79.6

81.4

50.6

62.8

68.0
71.78
84.83
77.71

81.2
68.28
62.17

70 — 90

82.07

77.72

70.0 & above
72.0

51.43

72 to 87

65 to 85

60 to 98

82.7

70 to 90
22


1 2 3

43. Mangalore Mitraniketan, Velland, Kerala
(South Kaannara)
44 Dharampuri UAS, Bangalore Regional Centre of NAEB

87

69

“Subject to species-wise/location-wise variations.


ANNEXURE-VIII

Results of survival rate studies conducted through independent experts/agencies in respect of

plantation carried out during 1992-93

SI. Name of District

Evaluating Expert/Agencies

Average Survival

No. Percentage*

1 Mahbubnagar Dr. K. Kesava Reddy, IFS Retd. 67.17
2. Trissur Shri N.S. Adkoli 44.53
3. Shimoga Shri N.S. Adkoli 67.39
4 Khammam Shri M.S. Solanki, IFS Retd. 63.73
5 Hoshangabad Shri M.S. Solanki, IFS Retd. 84.78
6 Quilon The Institute of Rural Development, Madras 84.78
7 Baran Shri S.M. Jain 79.00
8 Bikaner Shri S.K. Verma, IFS Retd. 68.25
9 Udaipur Shri S.K. Verma, IFS Retd. 72.75
10. Singhbhum Indian Instt. of Public Opinion, New Delhi 84.85
11 West Sikkim Indian Instt. of Public Opinion, New Delhi $1.13
12 Jalpaiguri Indian Instt. of Public Opinion, New Delhi 35.5
13. Dhule Indian Instt. of Public Opinion, New Delhi 74.92
14 Salem A.M. Mahmood Hussain 72.5
15 East Khasi Hills North Eastern Hills University, Shillong 59:5
16 West Manipur North Eastern Hills University, Shillong 79.7
17 North Tripura North Eastern Hills University, Shillong 73.3
18 Karbi Anglong Jigyansu Tribal Research Centre 60
19 Aizawal Jigyansu Tribal Research Centre 55 to 65
20 Kohima Jigyansu Tribal Research Centre 70 to 80
21 West Siang Jigyansu Tribal Research Centre 60 to 70
22. Phulbani Shri R.K. Barik, IIPA 85 to 95
23 North Arcot MGS, Research & Dev. Services 84
24. Periyar MGS, Research & Dev. Services 79
25  Chhamba University of Horticulture & Forests 59.48
26 Rohtak Shri C.M. Sethi, IFS, Retd. 83.6
27... Bhatinda Shri C.M. Sethi, IFS, Retd. 80
28 Ambala Agriculture Finance Corpn. Ltd. 67 to 78
29 Hoshiarpur Agriculture Finance Corpn. Ltd. 62 to 86
30 Gorakhpur Agriculture Finance Corpn. Ltd. 63.31
३1. Pithoragarh Agriculture Finance Corpn. Ltd. 60
32 = Mirzapur Agriculture Finance Corpn. Ltd. 65
33 Shivpuri Shri I.C. Goel, IFS Retd. 78.4
34 Cuddaph Shri K.J. Joseph, IFS Retd. 60
35  Junagarh Shri R.N. Mathur, IFS Retd. 70.8
36 Bhandara Shri K.V.S. Shastri 65.93
37. Udhampur University of Horticulture & Forestry, Solan 82.1
38 © Purulia Environment Socio Eco. Data Management 0 to 90

Centre

*Subject to species-wiselocation-wise variations.


Sl. Name of District Evaluating Expert/Agencies Average Survival

No. Percentage*

39 West Champaran Environment Socio Eco. Data Management 82
Centre

40... Sirmur Eco Forest, Dehradun 67.17

41. Sundergarh Inst. of Dev. Habitat Projects, Bhubaneswar 86.7

41  Sundergarh Inst. of Dev. Habitat Projects, Bhubaneswar 86.7

42 Dhenkanal Shri C.S. Dani, IFS Retd. 80 to 93

43 Kolhapur Shri R.C. Saxena & National Centre for Human 85
Settlement & Environment, Bhopal

44 Bilaspur Madhya Pradesh Consultancy Organisation 75

*Subject to species-wise/location-wise variations.


ANNEXURE-IX

Results of survival rate studies conducted through independent experts/agencies in respect of

plantation carried out during 1993-94

Sl. Name of District Evaluating Expert/Agencies Average Survival
No. Percentage*
1 Krishna Shri K.J. Joseph, Land People, Trivandrum 63.00
2  Kurnoul Shri K.J. Joseph, Land People, Trivandrum 55.00
3 Damoh Shri D.B. Mishra, Retd. PCCF 66.50
4 Bharatpur Shri C.M. Sethi, Retd. C.C.F. 62.00
5 Madurai M/S Tree Lands Dev. Services 70.00
6 Sirsa Shri C.M. Sethi, Retd. C.C.F. 86.50
7 Patiala U.HLF., Solan 86.00
8 Hamirpur U.H.F., Solan 58.72
9 Chamoli A.F.C. Ltd. 69.16
10 Balasore Shri S. Khatua 72.00
11. Ghazipur Shri R.N. Mathur, Retd. P.C.C.F. 67.75
12 South Arcot M/s Tree Lands Development Services 79.02
13 North Goa The Indian Institute of Public Opinion, 76.08
New Delhi
14. Giridih The Indian Institute of Public Opinion, 58.88
New Delhi
15. Begusarai The Indian Institute of Public Opinion, 61.68
New Delhi
16 North Sikkim The Indian Institute of Public Opinion, 48.88
New Delhi
17 Ropar Shri $.M. Jain क़्ता
18 Solan Shri D.P. Gupta 60.35
19 Ratnagiri Shri M.S. Solanki 76.83
20 Bulandshahr Shri M.S. Solanki 67.53
21 Karnal AFC Ltd. 76.57
22. Sikar AFC Ltd. 70.03
23. Ernakulam Land People 40.00
24. Rajkot Shri R.N. Mathur 83.89
25 Tumkur UAS, Bangalore 55.00
26 © Alleppy UAS, Bangalore 51.00
27. ~Cachar M/s Jigyansu Tribal Research Centre, 55 to 60
New Delhi
28 = Phek M/s Jigyansu Tribal Research Centre, 75.00
New Delhi
29 = Lunglir M/s Jigyansu Tribal Research Centre, 61.66
New Delhi

*Subject to species-wise/ocation-wise variations.


Sl. Name of District Evaluating Expert/Agencies Average Survival
No. Percentage*

30 $000 Tripura M/s Jigyansu Tribal Research Centre, 60.00

New Delhi

३31 Bolangir Shri Sanjay Khatua 48.58
32 Vidisha Shri R.P. Sharma 48.14
33 Raichur ‘MGS R&D Services, Madras 69.60
३4. Jabalpur Shri K.V.S. Shastry 86.92
35  Badaun M/s Organisation for Applied Socio- 73.00

Economic System, New Delhi.

*Subject to species-wise/location-wise variations.


MINUTES



XXI
TWENTY-FIRST MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 4th January, 1996 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi” — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Dr. M. Aram

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
Dr. D. Masthan

Prof. M.G.K. Menon
Shri N. Giri Prasad

. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
8. Dr. Ranbir Singh

LOK SABHA

9. Shri E. Ahamed

10. Shri P. C. Chacko

11. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia

12. Shri Jitendra Nath Das

13. Shri Oscar Fernandes

14. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee

15. Shri Balraj Passi

16. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
17. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
18. Shri Harchand Singh

19, Shri Ram Prasad Singh

20. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

21. Kumari Sushila Tiriya

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary:
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer

Maven

Representatives of The Ministry of Environment and Forests

Shri N. R. Krishnan, Secretary

Shri M. F. Ahmed, Inspector General of Forests

Shri S.C. Dey, Additional Inspector General of Forests (WL)

Shri S. K. Pandey, Additional Inspector General of Forests (Forestry)
Shri Alok Jain, Joint Secretary

Shri Sarweshwar Jha, Joint Secretary

Shri K. K. Pandey, Director (NAEB)

*At 5.00 p.m. Prof. M.G.K. Menon was in the Chair.


Shri R. K. Tandon, Director

Shri I. Dhamija, Assistant Inspector General of Forests (FC)

Shri R. K. Shrivastava, Assistant Inspector General of Forests (NFAP)
Shri K. S. Achar, Under Secretary (Parl.)

2. The Committee took up for its consideration the subject ‘Conservation of forests and
forestry development vis-a-vis National Forest Policy, Particularly with respect to
afforestation and regeneration of degraded areas’ on the basis of the Annual Report (1994-
95) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests. The Secretary of the Ministry, assisted by
other officials, made a presentation in the course of which he gave an overview of the policy
perspectives, factors hindering conservation/protection of forests and the efforts being made
by the Ministry to achieve the objectives envisaged in the National Forest Policy. Thereafter,
the Members sought clarifications from him and his officials on various points.

3. The discussion on the subject remained inconclusive. A verbatim record of the
proceedings was kept.

4. The Committee considered its future programme and decided to hold its next
meetings at 3.00 p.m. on 16th January and 11.00 a.m. and 3.00 p.m. on 17th January, 1996,
to hear the Secretaries, Forest Departments and Principal Chief Conservators of Forests of
some of the States on the above subject.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on Friday,
the Sth January, 1996.


ऋधा
TWENTY-SECOND MEETING

The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. and again at 3.00 p.m. on Friday, the Sth January,
1996 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

. Prof. M.G.K. Menon

. Shri N. Giri Prasad

. Shri Satchidananda

. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
. Dr. Ranbir Singh

LOK SABHA

8. Shri E. Ahamed

9. Shri P.C. Chacko

10. Shri Jitendra Nath Das
11. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
12. Shri P. Kumarasamy

13. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
14, Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
15. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
16. Shri Harchand Singh

17. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
18. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

19. Kumari Sushila Tiriya

SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer

NANSWN

Representatives of Non-Governmental Organisations
Dr. P.K. Tripathy, Tata Steel Rural Development Society, Jamshedpur, (Bihar)

Shri Subhash Joshi, Forestry Expert, National Centre for Human Settlements and
Environment, Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh)

Shri Rajendra Singh, General Secretary, Tarun Bharat Sangh, Alwar (Rajasthan)
Dr. G.D. Aggarwal, Advisor, Tarun Bharat Sangh, Alwar (Rajasthan)

37.


Representatives of Ministry of Environment and Forests
Shri Ajay Kumar, AIGF
Shri K.K. Pandey, Director (NAEB)
Dr. M.A. Haque, Additional Director
Dr. (Mrs.) Sunita Auluck, Additional Director
Shri K.S. Achar, Under Secretary

2. The Committee took up further consideration of the issues related to conservation of
forest and forestry development vis-a-vis National Forest Policy, on the basis of the Annual
Report (1994-95) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests and heard the representatives
of the (i) Tata Steel Rural Development Society, Jamshedpur, (Bihar); (ii) National Centre
for Human Settlements and Environment, Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh) and Tarun Bharat
Sangh, Alwar (Rajasthan) in the course of which they detailed the activities being pursued
by them in the forestry sector and explained how the forest cover in the country could be
sustained and improved. The Members sought clarifications on various points from them
which were duly given.

3. The Committee took note of the details, as given by the representatives of Tarun
Bharat Sangh, Alwar, about the afforestation work done by their organisation with the
active involvement of villagers near Sariska and decided to visit Sariska and Ranthambhor
Tiger Reserves in Rajasthan to have first hand information about the state of forests there
vis-a-vis the achievements of NGOs, particularly Tarun Bharat Sangh, ‘in this area.

4. The discussion on the subject remained inconclusive. A verbatim record of the
proceedings was kept.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.25 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday,
the 16th January, 1996.


XXII

TWENTY-THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 16th January, 1996 in Room No. 63,
First floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
Dr. D. Masthan

Shri N. Giri Prasad

. Shri Satchidananda

. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
. Dr. Ranbir Singh

LOK SABHA

9. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
10. Shrimati Saroj Dubey

11. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
12. Shri Balraj Passi

13. Shri Chandresh Patel

14. Shri Vijay Naval Patil

15. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
16. Shri Harchand Singh

17. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
18. Shri K.G. Shivappa

19. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

20. Kumari Sushila Tiriya

21. Kumari Frida Topno

SECRETARIAT

9० :3 9 ७ # ५०

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer

Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Areas & Employment (Department of Wastelands
Development)

Shri Vinay Shankar, Secretary
Shri Ashok Jaitly, Addl. Secretary (Westelands Development)
Dr. S. Subramaniam, Director (Technology Extension)
Shri R.K. Goel, Dy. Inspector General of Forests
39


Shri Alinda Chandra, Dy. Inspector General of Forests

Shri Kuldip Rai, Director (Administration.)

Shri Amar Prasad, Deputy Secretary (Finance.)
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests

Shri S.C. Dey, Additional Inspector General of Forests

Shri C.S. Vedant, Deputy Inspector General of Forests

2. At the outset, the Committee reviewed the programme of its study visit as was
finalised in its meeting held on the Sth January, 1996. It was decided to undertake an on the
spot study visit to Sariska and Bharatpur in Rajasthan from Sth to 7th February, 1996, to
have first hand information about the state of forests there and to acquaint itself with the
achievements of the agencies, particularly NGOs, involved in the afforestation work in the
region. The Committee authorised its Chairman to—{i) constitute a group of 15 Members
for undertaking the visit; and (ii) seek permission of the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha,
for its proposed visit.

3. The Committee, thereafter. took up further consideration of the issues related to
conservation of forests and forestry development vis-a-vis National Forest Policy on the basis
of the Annual Report (1994-95) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests and heard the
Secretary, Ministry of Rural Areas & Employment, (Department of Wastelands
Development) and other officials of the Department on various aspects related to wastelends
development. The Members put questions and sought clarifications on various points arising
out of the submissions on the subject made by him and his officials.

4. The discussion on the subject remained inconclusive. A verbatim record of the
proceedings was kept.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.43 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on
Wednesday, the 17th January, 1996.


XXIV
TWENTY- FOURTH MEETING

The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. to 1.53 p.m. and again from 3.00 p.m. to 5.10
p-m. on Wednesday, the 17th January, 1996 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Dr. M. Aram

. Shri K. Rahman Khan
. Shri N. Giri Prasad

. Shri Satchidananda

. Dr. Ranbir Singh

LOK SABHA

7. Shri P.C. Chacko

8. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
9. Shrimati Saroj Dubey

10. Shri Balraj Passi

11. Shri M.G. Reddy

12. Shri Harchand Singh

13. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
14. Shri K.G. Shivappa

15. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

16. Kumari Frida Topno

SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, joint Secretary
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammed Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter

ANSwn

Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Government of Assam
Shri Harish Sonowal, Secretary, Forest Department
Shri R.N. Hazarika, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests
Representatives of the Government of Karnataka
Shri B.C. Thaosen, Principal Secretary, Forest, Environment and Ecblogy Department
Shri N.V. Ramachandran Chetty, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests


Representatives of the Government of Madhya Pradesh

Shri K.T. Chacko, Secretary, Forest Department

Shri D.P. Singh, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests

Shri R.C. Sharma, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests.
Representatives of the Government of Uttar Pradesh

Shri Rajendra Bhonwal, Secretary, Environment

Shri N.S. Negi, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests

Shri Vasumitra Arora, Divisional Forest Officer, Ghaziabad
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests

Shri S.C. Dey, Additional Inspector General of Forests

Shri C.S. Vedant, Dy, Inspector General (NAEB)

Shri A.C. Chaubey, Dy. Inspector General (SU)

Shri Parvez Ahmed, Dy. Inspector General (FP)

Shri R.K. Srivastava, Assistant Inspector General (NFAP)

Shri R.K. Sinha, Assistant Inspector General (Forest)

2. The Committee took up further consideration of the issues related to conservation of
forests and forestry development vis-a-vis National Forest policy and heard the Secretaries,
Forest Departments and Principal Chief Conservators of Forests of the States of Assam,
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, on the subject, particularly with respect to
policy perspectives towards management of forests in their respective States and strategy
being adopted for their conservations/protection and extension of forest cover through
afforéstation.

3. The Secretary, Forest Department, Government of Assam, in his presentation
submitted to the Committee that his Department was facing numerous problems in
maintaining and protecting vast.tracts of its forest land as the State had a common. border
with a number of States and pressure was all the time mounting from neighbouring States
for occupation of forest land for cultivation purposes so much so that reserved forests were
also threatened. His Department was nonetheless taking all the steps for conservation and
protection of these forest and a protection force had been raised for the purpose.

4. The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests of the State Government conceded that
Forest Survey of India Report had shown a decline in the total area of forest cover in the
State but the total forest cover had been shown to be on an area of over 24,000 sq. kms.
The State as of now has 22% of the geographical area under legal status of forest cover and
there are other categories of forests which taken together constitute 37% forest area.
Notwithstanding the fact that some of the areas which had very good reserve forest cover
have been denuded, the State visualises no difficulty in achieving national target of bringing
33% of its total land mass under forest cover. The major problem is, however, of their
protection partly because of pressures on land from neighbouring States and partly because
of the prevalent disturbed conditions as a result of which the forest guards come under
attack. from insurgents and their arms are taken away by them. Because of climatic
coriditions the State has been lucky in that the incidence of forest fires is very rare and there


is not much damage to the forests. He explained that in order to cope with these problems
in the management of their forests, the Department needs sufficient funds, but resource
constraints have been hampering their efforts. The budgetary allocations for their
Department have virtually remained static since 1992-93 and during the year 1995-96 there
has been an increase of just 2% nonetheless, the Department is seized of the gravity of the
problem and a State Forest Policy within the broad framework of National Forest Policy has
been prepared which is likely to be approved shortly by the Government. Social Forestry is
being given added impetus, people are being involved more and more and plantation has
been undertaken on a massive scale. Explaining a point about the forest revenue in the
State, he stated that during the year 1995-96, the revenue had come down to Rs. 15 crores
compared to Rs. 20 crores during the previous year, but the Government’s policy was not
revenue oriented.

5. The Principal Secretary, Forest Department, Government of Karnataka, informed
the Committee that the forest cover of Karnataka presently is 38,645.56 sq. kms which
constitutes 20.15% of the geographical area of the State. However, the satellite data of 1993
shows that the forest cover is on only 16.86 per cent of the total geographical area, out of
which only 12.95% is dense forest. As per the Forest Survey of India Report, there has,
however, been an increase of 144 sq. kms of forest cover in the State during the period from
1991 to 1993. The State has by and large been following the National Forest Policy of 1988
and does not have a separate forest policy of its own. The guiding principles of the Forest
policy being pursued by. the State are—(i) conservation and protection of the existing forests
and its bio-diversity; (ii) increasing the productivity of the degraded forests; (iii) increasing
the area under tree cover to the extent possible in government lands, community lands, and
private lands; and (iv) promoting people’s participation in protection of forests, upgrading
degraded forests and afforestation and free planting of government community and private
lands.

6. The Principal Secretary apprised the Committee that the loss of forests in the State
for various reasons, particularly due to growing industrialisation, was within the vicinity of
600-700 hectares per annum and during the last 15 years the State had lost about 10,000
hectares of forest area. The State was, however, very cautious in preserving its
forest wealth in that plantation of trees was taken up on a massive scale which was in the
vicinity of 50,000 hectares per annum. He, however, suggested the setting up of an agency at
the national level to finance and sustain forestry projects which needed large investments.

7. The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF) of Karnataka underlined the fact
that the policy of his Government was not revenue oriented but service oriented in the
matter of management of its forests so much so that the State and imposed a complete ban
on feeling of green trees. The relaxation of the ban is only in respect of bamboos, canes,
acolytes, casuarina, etc. Even in the matter of removing timber and firewood from forests,
private contractors, as a matter of policy have been kept out and only the State owned
Forest Corporation labour societies, and the Department are involved in this work. The
trade in rosewood and sandalwood has been nationalised within the State and private owners
of the land who have plantations of rosewood and sandalwood cannot sell them directly. The
State has amended the Forest Act empowering the Divisional Forest Officers to confiscate
the vehicles involved in smuggling and arrest the offenders without warrant. The punishment
for the offenders has also been enhanced upto eight years of imprisonment. In terms of this
amended Act, no industry is allowed lease of land for more than five years and the
Government retains the option to revise the price after every two years so that the benefits
accrue to the State in return for supply of raw material to the industry.


8. The PCCF drew particular attention of the Committee to the smuggling of
sandalwood across the borders with Karnataka which had assumed menacing proportions
and the problem was largely because the industries using sandalwood as raw material had
come up in the neighbouring States and there was no uniform law on the pattern of the one
in his State in Kerala or Tamil Nadu to regulate sale of sandalwood. He was of the view that
a central legislation in this regard perhaps could retrieve the situation.

9. The Secretary, Forest Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh, while speaking
on the subject, submitted before the Committee that the recorded forest cover in his State is
to the extent of 34%, i.e., slightly above the target of 33% stipulated in the National Forest
Policy{ but the ground realities are different. Out of 155 lakh hectares of forests 60 lakh
hectares are degraded and even out of that 20 lakh hectares are severely degraded. He
conceded that the progress in bringing degraded area under vegetation has been tardy for
the reason that the State need massive resource mobilisation to the extent of Rs. 9,000
crores for the purpose which is not available. The Department has, therefore, adopted a
three-pronged approach to solve the problem. Based on the realisation that the target of
converting degraded land into green land cannot be achieved -by governmental efforts alone,
people have to be involved in the effort on a much larger scale. The Government has
accordingly adopted the concept of Joint Forest Management and more than 2,000 Joint
Forest Management Committees have been constituted in the State.

10. On being asked as to whether the State Government had set any time-frame to
afforest its entire degraded land, the Secretary replied that the estimate as of now was that it
will be possible to achieve the target within a-span of 20—25 years.

11. The Secretary informed the Committee that his Government was according
necessary priority to the conservation of forests and as per Central Government guidelines,
felling of trees was not being allowed. He, however, expressed the view that the Central
guidelines needed to be modified to the extent that where density of forests was just 0.1 or
0.2 per cent and rest of the forest area was denuded, felling of trees should be allowed so
that planned growth of forests of such lands could be undertaken. His Department had
prepared a State Forestry Action Plan which was proposed to be implemented in a time
frame of 20 years.

12. Dwelling on the perspective plan of the State to fight the menace of denuding
forests and to achieve the national objective of bringing 33% of the geographical atea of the
State under forest cover, the Forest Secretary stated that an action plan is under way
wherein a requirement of about Rs. 18,000 crores has been projected to accomplish the task
within a time frame of 20 years. Since the money of this magnitude will be impossible to
arrange, the strategy will be multi-pronged in which resources will be mobilised from
Government, the people, public and private sector and above all, global community. Tribal
people and villagers are being increasingly associated with the task of protection of forests.
The NGOs and Gram Samitis would undertake work in nursery development and
afforestation. Indian Institute of Forest Management, Bhopal, is engaged in the task of
identifying wastelands outside forests’ for their development.

13. The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests of Uttar Pradesh informed the
Committee that the total forest area in the State is 51,502 sq. kms which is 17.4% of the
total geographical area of the State and the forest area is unevenly divided. The State has,
however, as per the Forest Survey of India Report for the year 1993, registered an increase
in forest area to the extent of 352 sq.kms. According to the PCCF, 26.20 lakh hectares of
land in the State is degraded out of which 8.11 lakh hectares is in the hilly terrain. 62,000


hectares of land, mainly in the Terai region bordering Nepal, is under encroachment. The
State had undertaken plantation in an area of 1,83,213 hectares during the first three years
of 8th Year Plan. Wastelands are proposed to be covered under various soil conservation
schemes of the Government. The concept of Joint Forest Management has been accepted in
principle by the State and will be incorporated in the World Bank aided forestry project
which is currently under formulation. Severe resource crunch is, however, hampering its
efforts in the forestry sector as the allocations since the First Five Year Plan have never
exceeded 2% of the total State plan budget. The trend during the 8th Plan has, however,
been somewhat disconcerting in that the expenditure in the forestry sector has been to the
tune of 1.47% and 1.30% of the State Plan during the years 1994-95 and 1995-96 which is
even below 2%.

14. The PCCF apprised the Committee that the problems like the illicit felling,
encroachment and forest fires have been consistently bothering the State Government which
has taken a number of steps to cope with the menace. Sensitive areas have been identified
and proposals are underway to strengthen the State Machinery with vehicles, wireless and
fire arms to come heavy on the forest mafia. Special force has been created to remove the
encroachments on the forest has been created to remove the encroachments on the forest
lands and to get them planted forthwith. Projects are underway for fire control in hills as
well as in plains. A project of Rs. 825 lakhs has been approved by the Government of India
and 50% of this amount has been sanctioned for the current financial year.

15. Speaking about the scope of attaining the national objective of bringing 33% of the
geographical area of the State under forest cover, the PCCF expressed his doubts whether
the area could be increased. He, however, was of the view that there was a possibility of
increasing the forest cover in the State. Given the steady flow of resources from the
Government of India, the State Government and the World Bank, the Department would be
able to increase the tree coverage in the farmers’ land, wastelands, road side, canal banks
and other areas.

16. Members put questions and sought clarifications on various points arising out of the
submissions made by the officials from the above States.

The discussion on the subject remained inconclusive. Verbatim record of the
proceedings was kept

18. The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 p.m.


XXV
TWENTY-FIFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 7th March, 1996 in Room No. 67,
First Floor, Parliament House. New Delhi.

PRERSENT
Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

Dr. D. Masthan

Prof. M.G.K. Menon
Shri N. Giri Prasad

. Shri Satchidananda

. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
. Dr. Ranbir Singh

LOK SABHA

9. Shri ९.९. Chacko

10. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
11. Shri Jitendra Nath Das
12. Shrimati Saroj Dubey

13. Shri Oscar Fernandes

14. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
15. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
16. Shri Balraj Passi

17. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
18. Shri Harchand Singh

19. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
20. Shri K.G. Shivappa

21. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

22. Kumari Frida Topno

23. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer

SI AARWN

2. At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee informed the Members that pursuant
to the decision taken by the Committee in its meeting held on December 7, 1995 a reference
had been made to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for advice as to whether the
Committee could take up examination of R&D aspects of atomic energy, but the idea of the
Committee proceeding with the consideration of the subject had not found favour with the
Chairman who was of the view that as another Standing Committee (on Energy) had been

46


dealing with atomic energy, it would be embarrassing to discuss the same subject in the S&T
Committee.

3. Thereafter, the Committee took up consideration of its draft Thirtieth Report on the
Annual Report (1994-95) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests with reference to
issues related to conservation of forests and forestry development vis-a-vis National Forest
Policy and adopted the same unanimously.

4. The Committee decided to present this Report to both the Houses of Parliament on
Monday, the 11th March 1996. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence,
Prof. M.G.K. Menon to present the Report to the Rajya Sabha and Shri K.G. Shivappa and
in his absence, Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok
Sabha.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 10.45 a.m. to meet again at 1.00 p.m. on Tuesday,
the 2nd April, 1996.