 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2023/ Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-2024) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
 (DEMAND NO. 90) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 15thMarch, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20thMarch, 2023) 
REPORT NO. 
374 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-2024) OF THE  
DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
 (DEMAND NO. 90) 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 15th March, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20thMarch, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2023/ Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
   
                
  PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION  (ii) 
  3. ACRONYMS  
 
(iii) 
4. REPORT 1-19 
5 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 20-23 
6. MINUTES 24-27 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2022-23) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh -    Chairman 
 
         RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Shri Niranjan Bishi  
4. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
6. Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
7. Shri Jose K. Mani 
8. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
9. Shri Nabam Rebia   
10. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  
         LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
12. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
13. Shri Jashwantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
14. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
15. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16. Shri Sunny Deol 
17. Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
18. Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
19. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
20. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
21. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
22. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
23. Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
24. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
25. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha  
26. Shri Anurag Sharma 
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
28. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
29. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava  
30. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
31. *Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
      Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
      Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
Shri Thangzasiam Paite, Committee Officer 
              Shri Rama Nand, Committee Officer 
 
 
* Shri S. Jagathrakshakan ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 8th December, 2022 
  
 
(i) 

 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change , having  been 
authorised by the Committee , present this ‘Three Hundred Seventy Fourth Report’ on 
Demands for Grants (2023-2024) of the Department of Biotechnology. 
 
2.   The Committee considered the Demands for Grants (2023 -24) pertaining to the 
Department of Biotechnology in its meeting held on the 22nd February, 202 3. It held 
detailed discussion with t he Secretary and other officers of the Department of 
Biotechnology.   
  
3.   The Committee expresses it’s thanks to the officers of the Department of 
Biotechnology for providing the material and information, to enable it to examine the 
Demands for Grants of the Department for the year 2023-24. 
 
4.    The Committee consi dered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the   
14th March, 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (JAIRAM RAMESH) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
14th March, 2023   Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
Phalguna 23, 1944  (Saka)                                   and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 

ACRONYMS 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
BIG Biotech Ignition Grant  
BioNEST Bioincubation: Nurturing Entrepreneurs for Scaling up Technology 
BIPP Biotechnology Industry Partnership Programme 
BRIC Biotechnology Research and Innovation Council  
CDSCO Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 
CoE Centres of Excellence 
CSCR Centre for Stem Cell Research 
DARE Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
DBT Department of Biotechnology 
eYUVA Encouraging Youth for Undertaking Innovative Research through Vibrant 
Acceleration 
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
JRF Junior Research Fellowship 
LSD Lumpy Skin Disease 
NER North Eastern Region 
PACE Promoting Academic Research Conversion to Enterprise 
QA/QC Quality Assurance/Quality Control 
SBIRI Small Business Innovation Research Initiative 
SITARE Students Innovations for Advancement of Research Explorations 
SPARSH Social Innovation programme for Products Affordable & Relevant to Societal 
Health  
TRPVB Translational Research Platform for Veterinary Biologicals  
ZBSA Zero Balance Subsidiary Account 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
REPORT 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1  The Department of Biotechnology was set up as an independent Board in 1982, and thereafter 
became a full -fledged Department under Ministry of Science & Technology in 1986. The mandate of 
the Department is given below: 
 
- To evolv e policies and integrated programmes in biotechnology and ensure their 
implementation and monitoring. 
- To identify specific programmes of Research and Development and manufacturing in 
biologicals and biotechnology and oversee the initiation and pursuit of r elated research and 
manufacturing activities. 
- To identify, set up and support Centers of Excellence for Research and Development in 
biotechnology and ensure proper dovetailing of their activities as per national priorities and 
objectives. 
- To act as a scree ning, advising and approving agent of the Government with regard to import 
and transfer of new technologies for the manufacture of biologicals, biotechnological products 
and their intermediates. 
- Evolve safety guidelines for Biotechnology Research and Devel opment and manufacturing in 
India. 
- To act as the central agency for the import of genetically manipulated materials, culture, cells, 
specimens, tissues and biotech products including DNA and RNA of any type or size and for 
promoting their production in the country. 
- Serve as the inter -ministerial and interagency nodal point for all specific international bilateral 
and multilateral Research and Development collaborations and agreements in the area of 
Biotechnology, act as the nodal point for all technology tr ansfers in the area of biotechnology. 
Manufacture and ensure application of recombinant, cell -based and DNA vaccines, diagnostics 
and other biotechnological products. 
- To evolve programmes for Human Resource Development in the area of biotechnology. 
- Serve a s an administrative and implementing Department of agencies, commissions, boards, 
etc. specifically formed by the Government for fulfilling the national objectives in 
biotechnology and also to serve as the nodal point for Bio -informatics including training  and 
creation of infrastructure, collection, dissemination and exchange of information relating to 
biotechnology. 
- Matters relating to the following Autonomous Institutions: 
(i) National Institute of Immunology (NII), New Delhi 
(ii) National Centre for Cell Sciences (NCCS), Pune 
(iii) Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad 
(iv) National Institute for Plant Genome Research (NIPGR), New Delhi 
(v) National Brain Research Centre (NBRC), Manesar, Gurgaon 
(vi) Institute for Bioresource and Sustainable Development (IBSD), Imphal 
(vii) Institute of Life Sciences (ILS), Bhubaneshwar 

2 
 
(viii) Translational Research in Health Science and Technology Institute, Faridabad 
(ix) Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology (RGCB), Thiruvananthapuram 
(x) UNESCO Regional Centre Biotechnology (RCB), Faridabad 
(xi) National Institute of Biomedical Genomics (NIBMG), Kolkata 
(xii) Institute for Stem Cell Science and Regenerative Medicine (InStem), Bengaluru 
(xiii) National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute (NABI), Mohali, Punjab 
(xiv) National Institute of Animal Biotechnology (NIAB), Hyderabad 
(xv) Center of Innovative and Applied Bioprocessing (CIAB), Mohali 
 
- Matters relating to International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), 
New Delhi 
- Matters relating to the following Public Sector Undertakings: 
(i) Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC), New Delhi 
(ii) Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals Corporation Limited (BIBCOL), Bulandshahr, 
UP 
(iii) Indian Vaccine Corporation Limited (IVCOL), New Delhi 
 
1.2 The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Scien ce and Technology, 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change considered the Demands for Grants (2023 -24), Demand No. 
90 of the Department of Biotechnology in its meeting held on 22nd February, 2023. 
 
2. OVERALL BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022-23 (BE, RE & 
ACTUAL EXPENDITURE) AND ALLOCATION FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR      
2023-24. 
 
2.1 The following tables show the overall budgetary details of the Department of Biotechnology for 
the years 2021-22, 2022-23 (BE, RE & actual expenditure) and allocation made for the year 2023-24:- 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
 
 
Sl. 
No. PARTICULARS 2021-22 
B.E R.E. Actual 
1. Secretariat 35.18 32.82 31.16 
2. Biotechnology Research and Development 1660.28 1494.00 1424.66 
3. Industrial and Entrepreneurship 
Development 960.00 710.00 706.43 
4. Assistance to Autonomous Institutions & 
ICGEB 806.91 697.38 664.09 
5. Biotechnology Industry Research 
Assistance Council (BIRAC) 40.00 24.80 24.80 
Grand Total  3502.37 2959.00 2581.14 

3 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
 
2.2 The Committee notes that there was a reduction of approximately 15 per cent in R.E allocation 
of ₹ 2192.92 crore, as compared to an allocation of ₹ 2581.00 crore in B.E. 2022-23. When inquired 
about the reasons for this substant ial decrease in R.E. allocation , the Department informed through 
written a reply that it was mainly due to cuts imposed by the Ministry of Finance , based, inter alia, on 
the expenditure trends of the Department and introduction of a new process for flow of fun ds by the 
Department of Expenditure––the related requirements to be fulfilled by t he grant receiving institutions, 
like opening Zero Balance Subsidiary Account (ZBSA) in a designated bank and its linkage with 
Central Nodal Agency (CNA) account and Public Fund Management System (PFMS).  
2.3 In response to query of the Committee about the impact of this reduction at R.E. stage , the 
Department informed that the major impact was the challenge to meet the fund requirements for 
existing ongoing activities and ini tiating new propositions. While stating that the physical outcomes of 
the various schemes and programmes are marginally affected, the Department expressed the confidence 
that it would be able to make substantial progress in terms of physical outcomes of it s various schemes 
and programmes by the end of the fourth quarter of the Financial Year 2022-23. 
2.4 The Committee notes the reasons cited by the Department for the reduction of allocation 
for the year 2022-23 at R.E stage. The Committee also notes that the allocation to the Department 
in B.E. 2023-24 has been marginally increased by around 4 per cent over B.E. 2022-23, which will 
be utilized for implementation of ongoing programmes and also for initiation of new activities.  
2.5 The following chart  shows a  comparison of B.E., R.E. and Actual expenditure for the years 
2021-22 and 2022-23 along with the proposed allocation demanded and actually allocated for the year 
2023-24:- 
Sl.  
No. PARTICULARS 
2022-23 
% utilization 
of R.E. 
B.E. allocated 
for 2023-24 B.E.  R.E.  Actual as on 
26.02.23 
1. Secretariat 35.18 36.85 31.21 84.7%  46.39 
2. Biotechnology Research and 
Development 1315.00 1000.00 786.32 78.6 % 1345.00 
3. Industrial and Entrepreneurship 
Development 365.00 250.00 165.68 66 % 300.00 
4. Assistance to Autonomous 
Institutions & ICGEB 830.82 866.07 741.74 85.6 % 952.47 
5. 
Biotechnology Industry 
Research Assistance Council 
(BIRAC) 
35.00 40.00 25.51 63.8 % 40.00 
Grand Total  2581.00 2192.92 
(85 % of B.E) 1750.46 79.8 % 2683.86 

4 
 
 
                                                                            Chart 1                                            * figures upto January 2023 
 
2.6 The Committee notes from Chart 1 that, during both the Financial Years 2021-22 and 2022-23, 
allocations to the Department were marked by a decreasing trend, i.e., a reduction from B.E to R.E, and 
further reduction in the Actual utilization figures, which indicate the sub-optimal utilization capacity of 
the Department during the periods in question . For 2022-23, the Committee observes  that despite the 
sizeable reduction at R.E. stage (by about 15 per cent), the Department has not been able to fully utilize 
this revised allocation; it has utilized only 80 per cent thereof.  
2.7 Two Central Sector Schemes of the Department of Biotechnology, namely „Biotechnology 
Research & Developmen t‟ and „Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development‟, constitute the major 
component of the Department. The financial performance of these schemes during the year 2022 -23 is 
illustrated in Chart 2:   
 
Chart 2 

5 
 
2.8 The Committee observes that, although the overall actual utilization of the funds given to the 
Department during 2022 -23 is about 80 per cent, the performance with respect to the two major 
schemes is unsatisfactory. Under „Biotechnology Research & Development‟, the Department has been 
able to spend about 79 per cent of the R.E. allocation in 2022-23. Similarly, utilization under „Industrial 
and Entrepreneurship Development‟ is only 66 per cent. The utilization under this head is even lesser 
when compared with B.E. 2022-23 (about 45 per cent only).    
2.9 The Committee expresses concern over the sub -optimal utilization of funds by the 
Department, particularly with respect to the two Central Sector Schemes - ‘Biotechnology 
Research & Development’ and ‘Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development’ , and urges the 
Department to fully utili ze the funds by the end  of the financial year. The Committee also 
recommends that the Department should take appropriate measures to ensure optimal utilization 
of the funds allocated to it in B.E. 2023-24.  
2.10 The Committee desired to know  about the budgetary allocation demanded by the Department 
vis-à-vis the amount actually allocated to it for the year 2023 -24. The Department informed that it has 
been allocated ₹ 2683.86 crore, against a propos ed budgetary allocation of ₹ 3320.08 crore for the 
year 2023 -24. Thus, there is an overall shortfall of ₹ 636.22 crore in the actual allocation to the 
Department, about 19 per cent lesser than its budgetary demand. The foll owing Charts depict the 
overall shortfall as well as the reduction across key schemes of the Department: 
 
 
Chart 3 

6 
 
 
Chart 4 
 
2.11 On a closer scrutiny, it is seen that as against the proposed allocation by the Department, major 
cuts have been made in respect of the actual allocations made to C entral Sector Schemes 
„Biotechnology Research and Development ' and „Assistance to Autonomous Institutions & ICGEB‟ to 
the tune of Rs. 325.00 crore and Rs. 373.44 crore, respectively. In respect of the other Central Sector 
Scheme „ Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development‟ and BIRAC, there is a deficit of  Rs. 30.58 
crore and  Rs. 7.20 crore, respectively.  
2.12 The Committee enquired about  the likely impact of this decrease in the overall budgetary 
allocation and the strategy of the Department for dealing with the challenges arising out of this shortfall 
on the implementation of the key schemes/initiatives of the Department. In its response , the 
Department submitted that the substantial difference between the budgetary proposal and the actual 
allocation for 2023-24 would make it difficult for the Department to cope up with the requirements of 
some major activities including new programmes. T he Department will, therefore, prioritize its 
activities considering the availability of actually allocated budget and would approach the Department 
of Expenditure for additional budget for implementing envisaged new programs at R.E. stage. 
2.13 Concerned about this shortfall and its impact on the Department‟s programmes and initiatives, 
the Committee inquired about the absolute bare minimum increase needed to sustain its key 
programmes. The Department submitted that a minimum additional amount of  ₹ 350 crore, over and 
above B.E. allocation for 2023 -24, would be required in order to effectively implement both the 
schemes and the new programmes envisaged.  

7 
 
 
Chart 5 
2.14 As illustrated in Chart 5 t he Department informed tha t, out of this additional bare minimum 
requirement (Rs. 350 crore), Rs. 325 crore is needed for implementation of new initiatives, ongoing 
commitments under Human Resource Development, International collaboration and Competitive 
Research Grant programme; while the remaining amount of Rs. 25 crore is required for implementation 
of programmes on Amrit Grand Challenge and Biomanufacturing. 
2.15 The Committee recognises the important contributions of the Department of 
Biotechnology across crucial sectors and the n eed for an additional allocation of at least Rs. 350 
crore, over and above to the allocation of  Rs. 2683.86 crore in B.E. 2023 -24, to sustain its key 
programmes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department may approach the 
Ministry of Finance/Department of Expenditure for seeking the requisite additional allocation of 
funds at the R.E. stage. The Committee further recommends that the Department should strive  
for greater revenue generation  in the long term , especially through equity stake in incubated 
startups and through commercialization of products developed by the Department, and explore 
options to facilitate financing of some of its important projects and schemes through them. 
 
Chart 6 

8 
 
2.16 The Committee notes, from the Chart above, that half of t he budgetary allocation for the year 
2023-24 is earmarked for the Central Sector Scheme Biotechnology Research and Development, while 
about 36 per cent of the provision has been kept for Assistance to Autonomous Institutions & ICGEB , 
indicating the thrust areas for the Department during  this period . Industrial Entrepreneurship and 
Development received 11 per cent of the total outlay, while the allocations under the Head „Secretariat‟ 
and BIRAC together constitute the remaining 3 per cent of the total budget ary allocation of the 
Department.  
2.17 The Committee also made a cursory look at the general trends in total B.E allocation of the 
Department, as well as under its key schemes since 2021-22. The following graphs depict these trends:  
 
 
 
Chart 7 
2.18 The Committee notes that , the overall B.E allocation of the Depar tment declined substantially 
from 2021 -22 to 2022 -23, then marginally increased in 2023 -24. While allocation in respect of 
Autonomous Institutions shows a continuous up ward trend, provisions towards the two major Central 
Sector Schemes show a decline during these periods, albeit a marginal increase in case of 
Biotechnology R&D for 2023-24.  
2.19 The Committee is of the considered opinion that  analysing trends in the budgetary 
allocations over t he years , the factors for variations and its implications  etc., are im portant to 
fully gauge the performance of the Department, both in terms of achieving its financial and 
physical targets. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department of Biotechnology to 
undertake a detailed analysis of its budgetary allocation and utilization trends for the last ten 
years at least, for a healthy assessment of its overall performance.    In addition, the Department 
should indicate the breakup of expenditure toward s various fields for eg. health, agriculture, 
energy and so on. 

9 
 
3. BIOTECHNOLOGY RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT – MAJOR INITIATIVES 
3.1 The Committee sought to know from the Department the major initiatives during the year in the 
field of research and development.   In response, the Department informed that the major  thrust areas 
for the year 2022 -23 and 2023 -24 include agriculture, affordable healthcare and  medical technology, 
food and nutritional security, animal biotechnology, environmental safety,  clean energy a nd bio-fuel, 
and bio-manufacturing. The research projects related to basic, discovery and translational research in 
the areas of agriculture and allied areas including Animal Biotechnology and Aquaculture, Healthcare 
including vaccine, drugs, medical devic es and implants, Bio -engineering, Food and  Nutrition, 
Environment and Clean Energy and Industrial Biotechnology have been considered for support.  
3.2 On the basis of the information provided by the Department, some of the major 
programmes/initiatives and the achievements under them are: 
- The Department in partnership with DARE/ICAR is implementing three Mission programmes, 
namely Mission programme on minor pulses, Mission programme on oilseeds of Indian  origin 
(sesame, niger, safflower and linseed) and Miss ion programme on characterization of  genetic 
resources (rice, wheat, chickpea). These programmes are aimed at screening genetic resources 
for abiotic and biotic stresses and finding new genes which can be utilized for developing 
climate and pathogen resilient varieties for future. In addition, the Department is implementing 
network projects in ICAR institution/SAU‟S in rice which have led to development of varieties 
in rice tolerant to submergence, salinity and drought. Researches supported by the Departmen t 
have led to development of varieties by various institutions, which have  been released to  small 
and marginal farmers through extension network of ICAR/SAU‟s as well as Biotech -Kisan 
programme of the Department. A programme on plant biotechnology catering to engineering of 
smart plant types for enhanced  productivity under a range of environmental conditions as 
well as R&D projects to improve stress resilience in cereals, vegetables, pulses, etc., have been 
supported. 
- Plant genome editing being amongs t one of the most promising technologies with a huge 
economic potentia l in a wide range of sectors, D BT proactively initiated the development of 
draft „Guidelines for the safety assessment of Genome Edited Plants’, which were notified in May, 
2022. The Departme nt ha s notified the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for regulatory 
review of Genome Edited Plants under Site Directed Nuclease -1 (SDN -1) and SDN -2 
categories for enabling regulatory streamlining of genome edited plants and resilient crop s for 
future. These SOPs shall be applicable to all organizations involved in R&D and handling of 
the Genome Edited Plants under these categories. 
- India‟s first  indigenously developed quadrivalent Human Papilloma Virus (qHPV) vaccine,  
CERVAVAC, against cervical cancer s upported by the Department and BIRAC through the 
pioneering partnership  programme „Grand Challenges India‟, received market authorization  
from DCGI in 12th July, 2022. The affordable vaccine is effective against HPV serotypes 6, 11, 
16, and 18, which are responsible for most of the invasive cervical cancer cases. This is fitting 
example of the Government‟s focus on „Preventive Healthcare‟. 
- Through Translational  Research Platform for Veterinary Biologicals (TRPVB), which was  
established to develop cutting ed ge technologies such as next generation  diagnostics, vectored 

10 
 
vaccines etc., a vaccine candidate for Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) virus in cattle has been 
identified. The virus isolates have been transferred to M/s  Biovet Pvt Ltd, Bangalore for 
developing a live attenuated vaccine. The live attenuated Theileria annulata vaccine technology 
which is at TRL-6 level has been transferred to M/s Hester Biosciences Pvt Ltd., Ahmedabad. 
- Study of a large  cohort of patients with Covid-19 was undertaken through the Transl ational 
Research in Health Science and Technology Institute (THSTI), Faridabad, for understanding the 
durability of immunity and risk of re -infection and long  COVID. The study establishes how 
inactivated vaccine BBV152/Covaxin induces robust immune memory to SARS -CoV-2 and 
variants of concern (VOCs) by novel mechanisms involving follicular T -helper cells having B 
cell help potential. The study revealed that majority of the participants have persistent 
antibodies for more than 8 months after vaccination/infe ction; majority of them have increased 
antibody titres post omicron which neutralize all subvariants of omicron; and T -cell responses 
persist in most even though antibody is negative.  
- Genome India, a pan India multi -institutional project, was first implemented by the Department 
in 2020 to build an exhaustive catalogue of genetic variations (common, low frequency, rare, 
SNPs and structural variations) and construct a reference genome and haplotype structure, by 
performing whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of 10,000 individuals representing the Indian 
population diversity. The project spanning across 20 institutions envisages the creation of 
national resource of  genetic information and also caters to build capacity in the country in the 
areas of whole genome  sequencing, data analysis, and methods development for high 
throughput genomic studies and  analysis. The whole genome sequencing for 6305 individuals 
has been completed and 8065  genome wide genotyping accomplished. Analyses of joint 
genetic variants calling in these genomes have been carried out for 3966 sequences. 1297 
sequences have been analyzed after joint calling using DRAGEN analysis pipeline. 
- Human Microbiome Initiative, implemented in 2020, is aimed to map the reference microbiome 
of 3400  healthy indivi duals across 11 non-tribal and 6 tribal communities spread across the 
country. Considering the geographic, ethnic and dietary diversity of Indian population, the 
study envisages  the association of „Genetics, biogeography and diet with Microbiome‟. The 
project also looks at the microbiome various with respect to Ayruvedik Prakriti. Complete 
microbiome profiling of 2181 individuals and  partial microbiome profiling of 789 subjects has 
been completed. Diet showed highest influence on microbiome followed by ethn icity and 
geography. Ayurvedic prakriti assessment of  993 subjects by  Ayurvedic physicians has also 
shown high correlation with human microbiome.  
- A network Mission Program on Pediatric Rare Genetic Disorders has been initiated to study  
disease-associated novel genetic variations and development of new genomics-based 
diagnostic tests for pediatric  rare genetic disorders  that are relatively more prevalent in  India. 
The Mission aims to analyze a total of 6000 individuals (2000 patient-parent trios) over 5 years, 
to identify the cause  of undiagnosed genetic  diseases, and to reduce the burden of genetic 
diseases in India by the joint efforts of doctors, scientists and citizens. 
- Under the programme on Energy Biosciences/Biofuels & Waste  to Value, a facility of 1,00,000 
L scale for cultivation of marine algae has been created at Mumbai coast, using a  custom-made 
sunlight-distributed algal growth system for improved algal biomass and lipid  productivity. A 

11 
 
microalgae-based sewage treatment plant (photobioreactor facility) has also been commissioned 
at BPCL Campus, Mumbai to clean sewage at 2,00,000 liter/day scale. 
 
3.3 The Committee was informed that the Department has so far sanctioned a total of 1146 new 
proposals and supported 7,056 ongoing proposals for undertaking innovative research and development 
activities in the areas of Biotechnology. This  support has resulted in about 8343 publications and 
development/commercialization of 567 technologies.  
3.4  The Committee appreciates the achievements of the Department under the various 
programmes/schemes towards Biotechnology Research and Development––especially 
development of the qHPV vaccine CERVAVAC, and hopes that the Department would be able to 
achieve its targets for 2023 -24, through judicious and efficie nt use of  the budget allocation for 
this period.  
3.5  The Committee is of the considered view that setting of realistic and achievable targets, 
both short term and long term, as well as existence of a robust monitoring mechanism to monitor 
and review the  progress of ongoing schemes and programmes, are extremely crucial. The 
Committee recommends that the Department of  Biotechnology should ensure an  effective 
monitoring and periodic review of all its schemes and programmes and take corrective measures, 
wherever required, so that they proceed as per schedule. 
3.6 The Committee recommends more collaboration with DARE/ICAR to accelerate the R&D 
in agriculture, especially plant genomes, so that more productive, drought and flood resistant 
varieties of various important crops can be developed in the next 3-5 years. 
4.  HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT AND CAPACITY BUILDING 
4.1 The Committee asked the Department about its initiatives towards development of human 
resources and capacity building. The Department informed that capacit y building, competence building 
and skill development in broad areas of biotechnology are the key verticals defining the mandate of 
Human Resource Development (HRD) programmes of the Department. Recognizing the need for 
nurturing large pool of skilled and dynamic human capital which are critical for success in building of 
Indian innovation ecosystem as well as fostering the growth of the Indian Biotechnology industry, DBT 
has been supporting several human resource development programmes for promoting and su pporting 
students, research scholars, faculty, scientists, entrepreneurs, etc. DBT‟s National Biotechnology 
Development Strategy 2021 -2025 also places strong emphasis on creating high quality scientific and 
technical human resource in the country. Accordin gly, the Department has been supporting 
programmes and taking initiatives towards human resource development and capacity building as well 
as activities of skill development and academic outreach in the areas of biotechnology under its 
umbrella scheme „Biotechnology Research & Development‟.  
4.2 Teaching and Fellowship Programmes : The following table shows some of the teaching and 
fellowship programmes of the Department, along with the physical targets achieved during the year 
2022-23: 
 

12 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Programe Physical target 
(2022-23) 
Achievements  
(2022-23) 
Teaching and Fellowship Programmes 
1. Postgraduate Teaching 
Programme (M.Sc./M.Tech./ 
M.V.Sc.) 
70  
Courses/annum 
63 PG courses supported and  
advertisement issued for inviting 
proposals for selection of 37 PG 
courses 
2. DBT-Junior Research Fellowship 
(JRF) Programme 
500 
Fellowshi ps/ 
annum 
434 candidates selected for award  of 
DBT-JRF 
150 publications till January, 2023 
3. DBT-RA Programme 100 Fellowships/ 
annum 
47 candidates   selected in first round and  
advertisement issued for second round of 
selection 
4. Ramalingaswami Re-entry 
Fellowship 
75 Selection of candidates is under  process 
5. Indo-Australia Collaboration for 
Ph.D Fellowship Programme 
(IITB-Monash) 
10 07 
6. DBT-TWAS Fellowship 
Programme 
25 Selection of candidates is under  process 
7. Khorana Programme for Scholars  75 -do- 
8. Tata Innovation Fellowship To select the 10 
Scientist/faculty 
for    award of 
fellowship 
10 Candidates selected for award  of 
fellowship 
9. Distinguished Biotechnology 
Research Professorship Award 
05 
fellowship s at 
any given time 
1 ongoing Fellow supported. Revision of 
guidelines at par with Department of 
Science and Technology, Ministry of 
Science and Technology, is under 
process. 
10. M K Bhan Young Researchers 
Fellowship Programme 
50 Fellows to be 
selected 
23 Fellows selected 
 
4.3 The Committee observes from the above table that achievement of physical targets in 
respect of Postgraduate Teaching  Programme, DBT -JRF Programme and Tata Innovation  
Fellowship are satisf actory. However, in case of DBT -Research Associateship and Bhan Young 
Researchers Fellowship, the Department has not been able to achieve even half of its physical 
targets for the year. Further, the Committee is constrained to note that, in case of at leas t three 
of its fellowship programmes, selection of candidates is still  under process even at the last 
quarter of the financial year , which does not augur well to achieve the objective of developing 
human capital for research and innovation.    
4.4 The Comm ittee strongly recommends that the Department should review its existing 
mechanism for monitoring the progress of its programmes and take appropriate measure s to 
ensure no delay whatsoever in the selection of fellows and the disbursement of fellowships. 

13 
 
4.5 The Committee was informed through a written reply, that  a unique programme called  DBT 
Star College Programme  was initiated in 2008, with a vision to improve critical thinking and 
encouraging „hands on‟ experimental science at undergraduate level in basi c science subjects. It acts 
as a catalyst in igniting young minds to  engage in networking, exposure visits to research institutes 
and industries and apply for  research grants in order to prepare them for future challenges after the 
successful completion of their undergraduate courses. Through this scheme, the Department identifies 
colleges with potential for excellence and provides support for developing  infrastructure for 
academics and laboratory activities. Starting with a meagre 30 colleges in 2008,  this pan India scheme 
has supported science departments in more than 300 colleges all over the  country till date. The  
outreach of the DBT Star College scheme shall be increased to Tier – II   and Tier - III cities. 
4.6 The Department also furnished the followi ng information pertaining to training programmes 
supported during the year 2022-23: 
Sl. 
No. 
Programs Targets Achievements 
1. Biotech Industrial 
Training Programme 
Provide hands-on Training to 
800 students per year 
(including 100 for NER) in   
industries for enhancing their 
job opportunities 
For 2022 -23, call for training 
requisition from companies has been  
published. So far, 357 requisitions 
from 30 companies have been 
received. 
2. Skill Vigyan 
Programme (Skill 
Development 
Programme) in 
Biotechnology 
Provide hands-on training to  
Biotechnology/Life Science 
students, faculty and budding 
entreprene urs 
This year , programme supported the  
Skill Vigyan activities in ongoing 
projects implemented in nine states 
viz., Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal 
Pradesh, Meghalaya, Odisha, Punjab, 
Uttarakhand, Karnataka, Telangana, 
and Andhra Pradesh. The Department 
also implemented the program in 
three more states viz., Kerala, 
Chandigarh (UT) and Gujarat, 
through their State Science and 
Technology Councils. 
3. Biotechnology 
Career 
Advancement and 
Re-orientation 
Programme 
(BioCARe) 
Provide support to women 
scientists 
 
So far, 365 women scientists have  
been supported under the programme; 
about 450 research articles published 
by BioCARe women scientists; and 
14 patents filed including  one 
international patent. 
 
4.7 On the query of the Committee relating to the overall performance of the Department in respect 
of number of publications, patents filed, technologies developed and commercialized etc., the 
Department, in its written reply, furnished the following information:  

14 
 
 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Sl. 
No. 
Indicators Annual 
Target 
Achievements Annual 
Target 
Achievements Annual 
Target 
Achievements 
1. No. of Publications 2254 2987 3800 3044 3799 2234 
2. No. of patents    filed/granted 82 188 80 199 83 120 
3. No. of products or technologies 
developed/ transferred/ 
commercialized 
124 155 120 143 119 203 
4. No. of training/workshop/ 
brainstorming organized 
335 357 483 452 197 584 
5. No. of ongoing projects 
supported 
2434 2295 2100 4554 2099 2844 
6. No. of new facilities  supported 131 29 49 57 32 108 
7. No. of CoEs supported - - 12 20 19 36 
8. Bioinformatics Centers 
supported 
- - 10 15 29 45 
9. Databases/softwares developed - - 10 10 12 19 
10. No. of Farmers beneficiaries 
(under  both Demonstration 
& Training programmes) 
- - 100000 98015 100000 134287 
11. No. of Women and    Tribal 
farmers beneficiaries 
- - 30,000 33483 29880 39400 
12. No. of successful bio-
entrepreneurs  developed 
- - 150 282 150 343 
13. No. of QA/QC Facilities set up 
in NER 
  2 2 2 2 
14. Number of NE-specific  
Germplasm collected 
- - 1,000 880 994 546 
15. No. of technologies  developed 
for utilization of Bio-resources 
of NER, including value- 
added products 
- - 15 9 10 19 
16. No. of genomes  sequenced 
under Genome India 
- - 3333 2268 3333 1881 
4.8 The Committee is pleased to note that, in as many as half of the above indicators, the 
Department has been able to consistently achieve its targets during the last three years which 
include the number of patents  filed/granted, products or  technologies d eveloped/ 
transferred/commercialized, Centres of Excellence (CoEs) and Bioinformatics Centres 
supported, Databases/softwares  developed, number of women and     tribal farmers beneficiaries, 
number of successful bio -entrepreneurs  developed and QA/QC Facilities set up in NER. The 
Committee applauds the work done and progress achieved by the Department against these 
indicators. 

15 
 
4.9 While noting  the not-so-encouraging fluctuations in figures of 2020 -21 and 2021 -22, t he 
Committee is delighted to observe that, during 2022 -23, the Department has been able achieve its 
targets against almost all of the indicators, except just three parameters  i.e., number of 
publications, number of genomes sequenced under Genome India and number of N E-specific 
germplasm collected.  The Committee, in particular, takes note of the achievements in respect of 
the number of patents filed/granted and products/technologies d eveloped, transferre d or 
commercialized, as these are an acknowledgement of the fact that expenditure on research and 
development translate into benefits for wider industry and society as a whole.  At the same time, 
the Committee underlines the importance for the Department to perform much better in 
parameters such as number of acclaimed publications and the number of genomes sequenced. 
4.10 The Committee recommends that the Department should strive hard to continue to sustain 
this momentum, intensify its R&D activities along with initiatives towards development of human 
resources and capaci ty building  during 2023 -24, and significantly focus the expansion of the 
overall network in Tier II and Tier III cities going forward. 
5. AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS 
5.1 The Committee notes that the Department provides support to 15 theme based Autonomous 
Institutions, one International Institution and 3 Public Sector Units, namely, (i) Bharat Immunologicals 
and Biologicals Corporation Limited (BIBCOL), (ii) Indian Vaccines Corporation Limited (IVCOL), 
and (iii) Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC). These autonomous institutions 
facilitate flow of knowledge from basic science to translational research in the area of  Health, 
Agriculture, Bioresource and Basic & Emerging Biotechnologies. Besides, they are responsible for 
various other activities which directly or indirectly play a role in  dissemination of knowledge to create 
interest and inclination towards biotechnology and biological sciences especially through interactions  
with school students and the public. These institutes also play an i mportant role towards  Capacity 
Building, Training and Skills upgradation of young scientists, students and researchers. 
5.2 In response to the query of the Committee on the key achievements  of these institutions and 
PSUs over the last three years, the Department submitted the following data: 
Year No. of Patent 
Filed/Granted 
No. of 
Publications 
Technology developed/ 
Transferred/Commercialized 
Manpower 
trained 
2020-21 128 927 77 1556 
2021-22 78 866 12 1245 
2022-23(till Q3) 90 900 30 1600 
 
5.3 The Committe e was informed that, apart from the R&D activities in various areas of 
Biotechnology and modern biology, the autonomous institutions and PSUs under the aegis of the DBT 
have taken initiatives to address the challenges due to Covid – 19 pandemic including efforts related to 
understanding the pathophysiology and epidemiology of the disease, and development of diagnostics, 
vaccine and therapeutics. From development of indigenous vaccines, novel point-of-care diagnostics 
and therapeutic formulations based on tr aditional knowledge, establishment of  research resources and 
offering services, these institutions of DBT and BIRAC have  worked relentlessly to develop effective 
interventions for combating the pandemic. 

16 
 
5.4 The Department submitted that a cabinet for „Rat ionalization of 14 Autonomous Institutions of 
the Department of Biotechnology, through creation of one Autonomous body viz., Biotechnology  
Research and Innovation Council (BRIC)‟ was approved on 22 nd July, 2022. Accordingly, the process 
for rationalization of these institutions by subsuming them under one apex body called – BRIC – is 
underway. 
5.5 The Committee inquired about the objectives of this restructuring, its implications on the 
existing structure, autonomy, functions/mandate, programmes and activit ies etc., of these Institutions. 
The Department, in a written reply, stated that the restructuring of DBT institutes is being carried out 
with the objective of achieving a centralized and unified governance to maximize the impact of biotech 
research. It is  being carried out with a larger goal to enhance the  scientific character and science 
outcomes at the institutes by building research synergies; new education programs in line with National 
Education Policy; improving human resource  structures across cadre s and effective management and 
monetization of assets emanating  from the research being  carried out. BRIC will build on the 
foundations developed at the DBT institutions to foster synergies  while maintaining  their distinct 
research mandates. With an emphas is on inter -disciplinary interactions that cut across institutional 
boundaries, BRIC institutes will  undertake cutting edge research addressing national priorities. 
Compliance with governmental processes and administrative issues will be centrally managed in a 
coordinated effort thereby achieving “Minimum Government, Maximum Governance”. 
5.6 The Committee acknowledges the immense contribution of the autonomous institutions 
and PSUs under the Department of Biotechnology in the advancement of biotechnology se ctor in 
the country and their crucial role in the implementation of the various policies and programmes 
of the Department towards fostering a culture of innovation and research, support and 
promotion of entrepreneurship, commercialization of biotechnological advancements, etc.  
 5.7 The Committee takes note of the restructuring process being brought in place for 
streamlining the se autonomous institut ions and expresses it s best wishes for realizing the 
objectives of this policy reform. At the same time, the Committee recommends that, as informed 
by the Department, the  distinct research mandates of these institutions are maintained and their 
capacities are not negatively impacted , but rather leveraged through the inter -disciplinary 
interactions and research sy nergies thus created. The Committee hopes that this becomes an 
important step towards catapulting the country to the position of a global leader in the field of 
biotechnology.  
6.  SUPPORT TO STARTUPS AND SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES (SMES)  
6.1 The Committ ee asked the Department about the initiatives taken  by the Department towards 
providing support to startups and SMEs  in the country. In its reply, the Department submitted that 
under the umbrella scheme „Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development‟, two ma jor programs are 
implemented, viz., (i) Biotechnology Parks/Incubators program to translate research into products and 
services across the country by providing necessary infrastructure support; and (ii) Public -Private 
Partnership Program to support startups and entrepreneurs in biotech sector across the country.        
The Department submitted the following information pertaining to startups and SMEs: 
 

17 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
 
Indicators 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Annual 
Target 
Achievements Annual 
Target 
Achievements Annual 
Target 
Achievements 
1. No. of Entrepreneurs, 
Startups/SMEs/ 
Industry supported 
550 550 850 1113 850 3251 
2. No. of startups getting 
Follow-up funding 
29 29 32 37 32 21 
 
6.2   The Committee observes with appreciation the continuous up ward trend in the number of 
startups and SMEs being supported over the yea rs. In particular, it is pleased to note that for 
2022-23, the number of startups and SMEs supported by the Department ( i.e, 3251) is nearly 
four times the annual target ( i.e, 850). Interestingly, h owever, for the same period, the target in 
respect of number of startups getting follow -up funding has not been met. The Committee hopes 
that this target will be met within the remaining quarter of the current financial year. 
6.3 The Department also submit ted that Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council 
(BIRAC), a not-for-profit PSU set up by the Department, is a  unique enabler for the  biotechnology 
ecosystem and works  as an industry-academia interface agency to promote public-private 
partnership in biotech sector with the mandate of    fostering and nurturing the Biotech Enterprises, 
specially startups and SMEs, for enhancing their  innovation research capacities and promoting 
affordable product development. 
6.4 Accordingly, BIRAC has been instr umental in creating and expanding the Biotech Startup  
ecosystem in the country and has, so far, supported technology driven 4000+ Entrepreneurs, Startups 
and SMEs, through  various operational models of cooperation. It has directly infused ₹ 3900 crore 
funds and mobilized ₹ 2400 crore funds through public -private co -funding partnerships. The 
partnership network with Public, Corporates and Philanthropic organizations at national and 
international level has been expanding to harness synergies  for the growth of Ecosystem. For instance, 
it has set up 75 specialized incubators for biotech sector creating an Incubation space of 7,13,000+ sq.ft. 
with high end infrastructure providing access to instrumentation, technical, IP, Legal and Business  
mentorship for Biotech Startups. This has helped innovators to create a pool of intellectual wealth  
(1300+ IPs filed) and in the launch  of 800+ products and technologies  in the market. Today, there are 
more than 6000+ biotech startups, 800+ biotech companies – large, small, medium  scale; and several 
thousands of entrepreneurs, mentors and experts who are a part of BIRAC‟s Innovators network 
6.5 Within its overall  mandate, BIRAC aims to undertake various activities, including ongoing 
activities and certain new ones, to further strengthen and empower the emerging Biotech enterprises 
some of which are:   
- Continue to foster innovation by promoting and nurturing entrepreneurship development  
through implementation of programs like BIRAC BioNEST  (BIRAC - Bioincubation: 
Nurturing Entrepreneurs for Scaling up Technology); Students Innovations for Advancement of 
Research Explorations (SITARE); Encouraging  Youth for Undertaking Innovative Research 
through Vibrant Acceleration (eYUVA); Social Innovation programme for Products Affordable 

18 
 
& Relevant to Societal Health (SPARSH); Biotech  Ignition Grant (BIG); Biotechnology  
Industry Partnership  Programme (BIPP); Small Business Innovation Research Initiative 
(SBIRI); Promoting Academic Research  Conversion to Enterprise  (PACE); BIRAC  SEED 
Fund; LEAP Fund; and AcE Fund. 
- Continue to support thematic programs that promote innovations in specific  biotech domains, 
niche areas like promoting women entrepreneurship (WInER), Solutions  for Community Health 
(SoCH), JanCARE and BIG for North-Eastern Region. 
- Work towards the action points of Startup India and Make in India Action plan, such as Scale 
up the number of Startups in the sector by nurturing approximately 1000+ new  Startups each 
year to have around 10,000 Startups  by 2025;  Scale up the existing network of Bio-Incubators;  
Scale up of the 5 Bio -connect offices which have been established to connect global ecosystem 
within the incubation network; scale up of the existing 7 Technology transfer offices (TTOs);  
Regional centers of BIRAC to b e supported and scaled to provide extended outreach,  support 
and mentoring to the growing ecosystem; Provide equity-based support to Startups and mobilize 
investments through private sources, etc.  
6.6 The Committee commends the work being done by BIRAC to wards promoting 
entrepreneurship by empowering start-ups and SMEs in the country. 
6.7 The Committee is of the firm belief that the development of an entrepreneurial ecosystem 
is critical for any country's economic growth and prosperity, for which support t o start-ups and 
SMEs is a must. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should make 
concerted efforts towards fostering a thriving ecosystem of entrepreneurship in the country.  The 
Department should strive towards better c ollaboration wit h other stakeholders to create a 
supportive policy environment, build a culture of innovation, provid e access to funding, develop 
infrastructure to support new ventures/ startups/SMEs, collaborat e with other incubation  and 
mentorship programmes of the gover nment etc., all of which will go a long way in achieving the 
objective of fostering a thriving ecosystem of entrepreneurship in the country.  
6.8 The Committee especially recommends that the Department should ensure equitable 
distribution of resources/init iatives across the country, so that the benefits  of its programmes 
aimed at supporting start -ups and SMEs can reach the under -served regions of the country as 
well.  
6.9 The Committee recommends that the Department must carry out a detailed analysis on 
the investment in R&D over the last 10 years, the financial value created by the products, the 
potential revenue generated and the multiplier effect in the market.  
7.   HUMAN GENETICS & GENOME ANALYSIS 
7.1. Considering the importance and scope of genetic res earch, the Committee, in its endeavour to 
know about the initiatives  taken by the Department in this direction and the progress  
made by the Department, has been given to understand that the  Department is making efforts in this 
field. The Committee was info rmed that an important programme of the Department, viz., Human  
Genetics & Genome Analysis program supports basic, translational and clinical research, to generate 
knowledge about how to use genomic information to advance medical care.  This  program, which  

19 
 
primarily addresses issues  related to inherited diseases, supports research and development activities 
across the spectrum: basic, translational and clinical research to establish how to use genomic 
information to advance medical care. The diseases which have been studied through ongoing and new 
projects under this programme include: pediatric rare genetic disorders, lysosomal storage disorders, 
Covid – 19, beta thalassaemia, schizophrenia and Parkinson‟s disease, hemophilia, congenital 
nonsyndromic deafne ss, primary cardiomyopathies, monogenic diabetes, movement disorders, celiac 
disease, etc. 
7.2 The Department submitted that, a bout 25 research publications emanated from the R&D 
activities supported under this programme, and more than 150 human resources have been trained in 
this area. It has also established research platform and National Genomics Core, to facilitate pursuit of 
biomedical genomics at the national level by opening up its core facilities of genome sequencing and 
analysis to universities and  other national labs. The Department also informed the Committee that, for 
the first time, a novel gene therapy using cutting -edge biotechnology for hemophilia A, a rare blood 
disorder, has  been developed by the team of researchers from the Centre for Stem  Cell Research 
(CSCR), Christian Medical College, Vellore. Regulatory approval for conducting Phase -I clinical trial 
of gene therapy has been given by the Central Drugs Standard Control  Organization (CDSCO), and the 
clinical trial has been initiated at CMC, Vellore with the first subject recruited in May, 2022.  
7.3 During the financial year 2023-24, the Department plans to provide continued  support to R&D 
projects under the human genetics and  genome analysis program; support cross -disciplinary proposals 
having near-term translational potential; initiate  R&D activities  and support  projects/activities in 
thematic areas and facilitate creation of biorepositories/biobank, for various human genetic disorders. 
7.4 The Committee recognizes the immense potential that genetic research and gene therapy 
hold for altering the treatment paradigm of many genetic diseases, including those that are 
currently incurable. However, as it is a relatively new field of medical science, the many 
challenges still associated with it are not lost on the Committee. Despite the existing challenges, 
such as issues regarding delivery methods, safety and effectiveness concerns, potential long -term 
effects of genetic modification, high costs of developing and administering the therapy making  it 
inaccessible to masses, etc., the potential benefits are far too significant to ignore and, therefore, 
it is highly essential to prioritize research in the area.  
7.5 The Committee appreciates the ongoing efforts of scient ists and researchers in this f ield. 
The Committee recommends the Department to undertake deeper research in collaboration with 
other institutes under the government and private sector, explore avenues for using latest 
emerging technologies including Artificial Intelligence (AI), in ord er to  fully explore the 
untapped potential of genetic research. The Committee also recommends that adequate funds be 
earmarked for the purpose, so that financial constrain ts do not hinder the much-needed R&D. 
The Committee would also like  to be kept informed about the progress made by the Department 
in this regard.  

20 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 
 
OVERALL BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022 -23 (BE, RE & 
ACTUAL EXPENDITURE) AND ALLOCATION FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2023-24. 
 
 The Committee notes the reasons cited by the Department for the reduction of allocation 
for the year 2022-23 at R.E stage. The Committee also notes that the allocation to the Department 
in B.E. 2023-24 has been marginally increased by around 4 per cent over B.E. 2022-23, which will 
be utilized for implementation of ongoing programmes and also for initiation of new activities. 
 (Para 2.4)  
The Committee expresses concern over the sub -optimal utilization of funds by the 
Department, particularly with respect to the two Centr al Sector Schemes - ‘Biotechnology 
Research & Development’ and ‘Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development’ , and urges the 
Department to fully utilize the funds by the end of the financial year. The Committee also 
recommends that the Department should take appropriate measures to ensure optimal utilization 
of the funds allocated to it in B.E. 2023-24.                                                                        (Para 2.9) 
  
The Committee recognises the important contributions of the Department of  
Biotechnology across crucial sectors and the need for an additional allocation of at least Rs. 350 
crore, over and above to the allocation of Rs. 2683.86 crore in B.E. 2023 -24, to sustain its key 
programmes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the D epartment may approach the 
Ministry of Finance/Department of Expenditure for seeking the requisite additional allocation of 
funds at the R.E. stage. The Committee further recommends that the Department should strive 
for greater revenue generation in the lo ng term, especially through equity stake in incubated 
startups and through commercialization of products developed by the Department, and explore 
options to facilitate financing of some of its important projects and schemes through them.  
(Para 2.15) 
 
 The Committee is of the considered opinion that analysing trends in the budgetary 
allocations over the years, the factors for variations and its implications etc., are important to 
fully gauge the performance of the Department, both in terms of achieving its financial and 
physical targets. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department of Biotechnology to 
undertake a detailed analysis of its budgetary allocation and utilization trends for the last ten 
years at least, for a healthy assessment of its over all performance.    In addition, the Department 
should indicate the breakup of expenditure towards various fields for eg. health, agriculture, 
energy and so on.             (Para 2.19) 
 
BIOTECHNOLOGY RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT – MAJOR INITIATIVES     
 The Comm ittee appreciates the achievements of the Department under the various 
programmes/schemes towards Biotechnology Research and Development ––especially 
development of the qHPV vaccine CERVAVAC, and hopes that the Department would be able to 
achieve its target s for 2023 -24, through judicious and efficient use of the budget allocation for 
this period.                   (Para 3.4) 
 The Committee is of the considered view that setting of realistic and achievable targets, 
both short term and long term, as well as existence of a robust monitoring mechanism to monitor 
and review the  progress of ongoing schemes and programmes, are extremely crucial. The 
Committee recommends that the Department of Biotechnology should ensure an effective 
monitoring and periodic review of all its schemes and programmes and take corrective measures, 
wherever required, so that they proceed as per schedule.         (Para 3.5) 

21 
 
 The Committee recommends more collaboration with DARE/ICAR to accelerate the R&D 
in agriculture, especially plant g enomes, so that more productive, drought and flood resistant 
varieties of various important crops can be developed in the next 3-5 years.      (Para 3.6) 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT AND CAPACITY BUILDING 
 The Committee observes from the above table that ach ievement of physical targets in 
respect of Postgraduate Teaching  Programme, DBT -JRF Programme and Tata Innovation  
Fellowship are satisfactory. However, in case of DBT -Research Associateship and Bhan Young 
Researchers Fellowship, the Department has not been  able to achieve even half of its physical 
targets for the year. Further, the Committee is constrained to note that, in case of at least three 
of its fellowship programmes, selection of candidates is still  under process even at the last 
quarter of the fina ncial year, which does not augur well to achieve the objective of developing 
human capital for research and innovation.         (Para 4.3) 
 
 The Committee strongly recommends that the Department should review its existing 
mechanism for monitoring the progr ess of its programmes and take appropriate measures to 
ensure no delay whatsoever in the selection of fellows and the disbursement of fellowships.  
(Para 4.4) 
 The Committee is pleased to note that, in as many as half of the above indicators, the 
Department has been able to consistently achieve its targets during the last three years which 
include the number of patents  filed/granted, products or  technologies d eveloped/ 
transferred/commercialized, Centres of Excellence (CoEs) and Bioinformatics Centres 
supported, Databases/softwares developed, number of women and     tribal farmers beneficiaries, 
number of successful bio -entrepreneurs  developed and QA/QC Facilities set up in NER. The 
Committee applauds the work done and progress achieved by the Department aga inst these 
indicators.                                                                                                                           (Para 4.8) 
  While noting the not-so-encouraging fluctuations in figures of 2020 -21 and 2021 -22, t he 
Committee is delighted to observe that, during 2022 -23, the Department has been able achieve its 
targets against almost all of the indicators, except just three parameters i.e., number of 
publications, number of genomes sequenced under Genome India and number of NE -specific 
germplasm collected.  The Committee, in particular, takes note of the achievements in respect of 
the number of patents filed/granted and products/technologies d eveloped, transferre d or 
commercialized, as these are an acknowledgement of the fact th at expenditure on research and 
development translate into benefits for wider industry and society as a whole. At the same time, 
the Committee underlines the importance for the Department to perform much better in 
parameters such as number of acclaimed publications and the number of genomes sequenced. 
 (Para 4.9) 
 The Committee recommends that the Department should strive hard to continue to sustain 
this momentum, intensify its R&D activities along with initiatives towards development of human 
resources and capacity building during 2023 -24, and significantly focus the expansion of the 
overall network in Tier II and Tier III cities going forward.      (Para 4.10) 
 

22 
 
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS 
 The Committee acknowledges the immense contribution of the autonomous in stitutions 
and PSUs under the Department of Biotechnology in the advancement of biotechnology sector in 
the country and their crucial role in the implementation of the various policies and programmes 
of the Department towards fostering a culture of innovat ion and research, support and 
promotion of entrepreneurship, commercialization of biotechnological advancements, etc.  
(Para 5.6)   
The Committee takes note of the restructuring process being brought in place for 
streamlining these autonomous institutions and expresses its best wishes for realizing the 
objectives of this policy reform. At the same time, the Committee recommends that, as informed 
by the Department, the  distinct research mandates of these institutions are maintained and their 
capacities are n ot negatively impacted, but rather leveraged through the inter -disciplinary 
interactions and research synergies thus created. The Committee hopes that this becomes an 
important step towards catapulting the country to the position of a global leader in the field of 
biotechnology.              (Para 5.7) 
SUPPORT TO STARTUPS AND SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES (SMES)  
 The Committee observes with appreciation the continuous up ward trend in the number of 
startups and SMEs being supported over the years. In particul ar, it is pleased to note that for 
2022-23, the number of startups and SMEs supported by the Department ( i.e, 3251) is nearly 
four times the annual target ( i.e, 850). Interestingly, however, for the same period, the target in 
respect of number of startups getting follow-up funding has not been met. The Committee hopes 
that this target will be met within the remaining quarter of the current financial year.   (Para 6.2) 
 The Committee commends the work being done by BIRAC towards promoting 
entrepreneurship by empowering start-ups and SMEs in the country.                             (Para 6.6) 
 The Committee is of the firm belief that the development of an entrepreneurial ecosystem 
is critical for any country's economic growth and prosperity, for which support to start-ups and 
SMEs is a must. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should make 
concerted efforts towards fostering a thriving ecosystem of entrepreneurship in the country.  The 
Department should strive towards better c ollaboration wi th other stakeholders to create a 
supportive policy environment, build a culture of innovation, provide access to funding, develop 
infrastructure to support new ventures/ startups/SMEs, collaborate with other incubation  and 
mentorship programmes of the gove rnment etc., all of which will go a long way in achieving the 
objective of fostering a thriving ecosystem of entrepreneurship in the country.      (Para 6.7) 
 The Committee especially recommends that the Department should ensure equitable 
distribution of r esources/initiatives across the country, so that the benefits  of its programmes 
aimed at supporting start -ups and SMEs can reach the under -served regions of the country as 
well.                                                                                                                                        (Para 6.8) 
 The Committee recommends that the Department must carry out a detailed analysis on 
the investment in R&D over the last 10 years, the financial value created by the products, the 
potential revenue generated and the multiplier effect in the market.      (Para 6.9) 
 

23 
 
HUMAN GENETICS & GENOME ANALYSIS 
 The Committee recognizes the immense potential that genetic research and gene therapy 
hold for altering the treatment paradigm of many genetic di seases, including those that are 
currently incurable. However, as it is a relatively new field of medical science, the many 
challenges still associated with it are not lost on the Committee. Despite the existing challenges, 
such as issues regarding deliver y methods, safety and effectiveness concerns, potential long -term 
effects of genetic modification, high costs of developing and administering the therapy making it 
inaccessible to masses, etc., the potential benefits are far too significant to ignore and, therefore, 
it is highly essential to prioritize research in the area.                                                           (Para 7.4) 
 The Committee appreciates the ongoing efforts of scientists and researchers in this field. 
The Committee recommends the Department to undertake deeper research in collaboration with 
other institutes under the government and private sector, explore avenues for using latest 
emerging technologies including Artificial Intelligence (AI), in order to fully explore the 
untapped potential of genetic research. The Committee also recommends that adequate funds be 
earmarked for the purpose, so that financial constraints do not hinder the much -needed R&D. 
The Committee would also like to be kept informed about the progress made by t he Department 
in this regard.                (Para 7.5) 

24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________________ 
MINUTES 
_______________________________________________________ 

25 
 
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 22nd February, 2023 in Committee Room 
4, Block A, PHAE Building, New Delhi. 
           MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh - Chairman 
            RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
4. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
            LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
6. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
7. Dr.  Swami Sakshi Ji Maharaj 
8. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
9. Shri Anurag Sharma 
10. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi 
11. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
Shri Thangzasiam Paite, Committee Officer 
Shri Rama Nand, Committee Officer 
 
Witnesses: 
Representatives of the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) 
     (i)     Dr. Rajesh S. Gokhale, Secretary 
(ii)   Shri Vishvajit Sahay, AS&FA  
(iii)   Shri Chaitanya Murti, JS 
(iv)   Dr. Sanjay Mishra, Scientist-H  
(v)   Shri M Subramanyam, JS 
(vi)   Dr. Alka Sharma, Scientist-H 
(vii)   Dr. Suchita Ninawe, Scientist-G 
   (viii)   Dr. Anamika Gambhir, Scientist-G 
    (ix)   Dr. Sundeep Sarin, Scientist-G 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them about 
agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the views of the representatives of the Department of Biotechnology 
on the Demands for Grants 2023-24 of the respective Department.  
3. *   *   *   *  
4. *   *   *   *   
5. *   *   *   * 
 
                                                           
**** Relate to other matters. 

26 
 
6. *   *   *   *  
7. *   *   *   *  
8. *   *   *   *  
9. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of Department of 
Biotechnology. He asked the Secretary to g ive a brief presentation on the Demands for Grants 2023 -24 
of the Department and inform the Committee about the areas in which the Department would want to 
draw the attention of the Committee.  Thereafter, the Secretary, made a power point presentation 
wherein the Committee was informed that the Department was allocated `2581.00 crore in B.E. 2022 -
23 which was reduced to `2192.92 crore in R.E. 2022 -23.  It was submitted that up to January, 2023, 
the Department could only utilise `1,750.46 crore.  It was als o explained that reduction in allocation in 
R.E. 2022-23 was due to cut imposed by the Ministry of Finance, based, inter alia, on the expenditure 
trends of the Department and introduction of a new process for flow of funds by the Department of 
Expenditure and the related requirements to be fulfilled by the grant receiving Institutions, like opening 
Zero Balance Subsidiary Account (ZBSA) in a designated bank and its linkage with Central Nodal 
Agency (CNA) account and Public Fund Management System (PFMS). It was brought to the notice of 
the Committee that the Department has been allocated an amount of `2,683.86 crore in B.E. 2023 -24 
against the demand of `3,320.08 crore.  The Committee was also informed about the historical 
accomplishments in the discovery and  translational research in the areas of agriculture and allied areas 
including Animal Biotechnology and Aquaculture, healthcare, vaccine, drugs, medical devices and 
implants along with development and manufacturing processes of HPV vaccine. The Committee w as 
also apprised with the roadmap prepared for implementation of major schemes and initiatives of the 
Department during the year 2023-24. 
10. The Chairman and Members then raised various queries/issues/points pertaining to the activities 
of the Department under its various programmes/schemes. The representatives of the Department, 
while presenting their views, responded to some of the queries/issues/points raised by the Chairman 
and Members of the Committee.  The Chairman directed the Secretary to furnish d etailed written 
replies to the queries/points/issues raised by the Committee to the Secretariat at the earliest.    
11.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
12.  The Committee then adjourned at 2:12 p.m. 
 
 
\ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
 Relate to other matters.  

27 
 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 14th March, 2023 in Committee Room No. 
67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
            MEMBERS PRESENT 
      1.   Shri Jairam Ramesh – Chairman  
            RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Shri Niranjan Bishi  
4. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5. Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
6. Shri Jose K. Mani 
7. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
8. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  
            LOK SABHA 
9. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
10. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
11. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
12. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
13. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
14. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
15. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
16. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
17. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
            SECRETARIAT 
        Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
        Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
        Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
        Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
        Shri Thangzasiam Paite, Committee Officer 
        Shri Rama Nand, Committee Officer          
 2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. The 
Committee then took up for consideration the draft 373 rd, 374 th, 375 th, 376 th, 377 th, 378 th, and 379 th 
Reports of the Committee on the Demands for Grants of the Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy; 
Biotechnology; Scientific and Industrial Research; Scien ce & Technology; Space; Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, respectively and adopted the same after some deliberations. 
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned Reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament on the 15th March, 2023. The Committee also decided to nominate Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav and, in 
his absence, Shrimati Seema Dwivedi to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen and , in his 
absence, Shri Ram Shiromani Verma to lay the reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
4.  *   *   *    * 
 5. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3:45 p.m. 
 
 
                                                           
**** Relate to other matters. 