 
 
  
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
  
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
       August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka)
REPORT NO. 
400 
FOUR HUNDREDTH REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Ninety Third Report of the Department - 
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests  and Climate Change on the Demands For Grants 
(2025-26) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
 CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
FOUR HUNDREDTH REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Ninety Third Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests  and Climate Change on the Demands For Grants  
(2025-26) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
   
  PAGES 
   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………… (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………… (ii) 
  3. ACRONYMS ……………………………………………………………… (iii) 
4. REPORT …………………………………………………………………... 1-12 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been  
                       accepted by the Government 
 
2-6 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee     
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
 
7-8 
 Chapter III.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted  by the     
Committee 
 
9 
 Chapter IV.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
                      Replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
10 
5. MINUTES 11-13 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita -    Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Narayanasa K. Bhandage  
3. Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
4. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
5. Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
7. Shri Sharad Pawar 
8. Shri Jairam Ramesh   
9. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
10. Vacant  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
12. Shri Alfred Kanngam S. Arthur 
13. Shri Pradyut Bordoloi  
14. Shri Phani Bhusan Choudhury 
15. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb 
16. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
17. Shri Tapir Gao 
18. Adv K. Francis George  
19. Shri Eswarasamy K. 
20. Shri Mahesh Kashyap 
21. Dr. Anand Kumar 
22. Shri Mohibbullah 
23. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
24. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva  
25. Shri Trivendra Singh Rawat 
26. Shrimati Himadri Singh 
27. Shri Tejasvi Surya  
28. Shri Durai Vaiko  
29. Shri Yaduveer Wadiyar 
30. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade  
31. Shri Akhilesh Yadav  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary  
Shri Arun Kumar, Director  
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
Ms. I. V. Rajya Laxmi, Committee Officer  
Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer  
 
     
(i) 
 
 
                                                
 Nominated w.e.f. 23rd January, 2025. 

 
      
INTRODUCTION 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Four 
Hundredth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the  
recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Ninety Third Report  of 
the Committee on  Demands for Grants (2025-2026) of the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change, which was presented to/ laid on the Table of both the Houses 
of Parliament on the 25th March, 2025.  
2.   There were 11 recommendations/observations in the Three Hundred Ninety 
Second Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/ 
observations of the Committee were received from the Ministry on 10th June, 2025.   
3.   In the meeting held on 6th August, 2025, the Committee considered the draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
 
 (BHUBANESWAR KALITA) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman,  
08 August, 2025   Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Sravana 17,  1947 (Saka)  Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
ACRONYMS 
 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
AAI Airports Authority of India 
ACROSS Atmosphere and Climate Research – Modelling, Observing Systems and 
Services 
DOM Deep Ocean Mission 
DSS Decision Support System 
EEWS Establishment of Earthquake Early Warning System 
HPCS High Performance Computing System 
IITM Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology 
IMD Indian Meteorology Department 
INCOIS Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services 
MoES Ministry of Earth Sciences 
NCCR National Centre for Coastal Research 
NCESS National Centre for Earth Science Studies 
NCMRWF National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting 
NCPOR National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research 
INCOIS Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services 
NCS National Center for Seismology 
NIOT National Institute of Ocean Technology 
NWP Numerical Weather Prediction 
PACER Polar and Cryosphere Research 
O-SMART Ocean Services, Modelling, Application, Resources and Technology 
REACHOUT Research, Education, Outreach and Training 
SAGE Seismology and Geosciences 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
1 
 
REPORT 
 
 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained 
in its ‘Three Hundred Ninety Third Report’ on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of 
Earth Sciences. The Report was presented to/laid on the Table of both the Houses of the 
Parliament on the 25th March, 2025.  
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Ministry of Earth Sciences in 
respect of all the 11 recommendations/observations contained in the ‘Three Hundred Ninety Third 
Report’. The replies of the Ministry of Earth Sciences have been categorized as follows:-  
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: Para Nos. 2.3, 2.6, 3.3, 6.5, 7.7, 8.5, 9.3, 10.5, 11.5 
 Total recommendations – 09  
Chapter II:    Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Para Nos. 5.4, 7.4 
 Total recommendations – 02 
Chapter III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: Nil 
Chapter IV:   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: Nil 
  
3. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters. 

 
2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Budgetary details for the financial year 2024-25 and allocation for 2025-26 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.1 The Committee observes that the utilization trend of the Ministry during the last three years 
has not been very encouraging.  The Ministry could utilize merely 76.8% and 83.4% of the 
allocated funds during the years 2022-23 and 2023-24. In 2024-25, against the BE allocation of 
Rs.3064.80 crore, an increased RE allocation of Rs.3632.78 crore was made to the Ministry.  
However, the Committee is constrained to note that the actual expenditure of the Ministry upto 
21.01.2025 was only Rs.1952.75 crore which is merely 53.75% of the RE allocation.  During the 
presentation made before the Committee on 20.2.2025, the Secretary of the Ministry further 
informed that the Ministry has utilized Rs.2261.69 crore as on 13.02.2025, which still remains only 
62.30% of the RE allocation.  The Committee is of the view that the utilization of funds by the 
Ministry during 2024-25 in also not satisfactory.  With hardly 40 days left in the completion of the 
financial year, the Ministry is yet to make use of nearly 38% of the funds allocated to it.   The 
Committee is of the view that the Ministry must make proactive efforts to optimally utilize the funds 
made available to it during the financial year 2024-25.     
(Para 2.3 of the 393rd Report) 
Action Taken 
1.2 As suggested by the committee, the Ministry has adopted proactive efforts and optimally 
utilised Rs. 3389.54 Crores (93.3% of RE allocation) of the funds made available during the 
financial year 2024-25. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
  
1.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry has assured that they would be able to spend a large 
chunk of amount available with them within the current financial year.  The Committee hopes that, 
as assured by the Ministry, they would be able to make use of the remaining budgetary allocation 
available with them during 2024-25.  The Committee is of the view that instead of dragging their 
activities till the end of the financial year, the Ministry must make proactive efforts to optimally 
utilize the funds made available to it well in time. 
 (Para 2.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.4 As suggested by the committee, the Ministry has adopted proactive efforts and optimally 
utilised Rs. 3389.54 Crores (93.3% of RE allocation) of the funds made available during the 
financial year 2024-25. 
 
Budgetary Allocations for 2025-26 

 
3 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.5 The Committee notes that the Ministry has been, to a large extent, able to get the allocation 
required by them for the year 2025-26.  The Committee also observes that there has been no 
reduction at all in the funds requested by the Ministry for its various Schemes and the reduction 
has only been in case of Autonomous bodies and Establishment Expenditure.  The Committee 
hopes that having been allocated the sum as desired for its various schemes,  the Ministry would 
now plan and execute all activities in respect of all its schemes with the desired outcomes and 
efficiency and make full utilization of the funds allocated to them for the next financial year.  
(Para 3.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.6 The Ministry will take all the necessary measures and will ensure the full utilization of 
funds allocated during FY 2025-26. 
 
 
Prithvi Vigyan (PRITHVI) 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.7 The Committee observes that the Ministry has been able to utilize 74.01% of the allocated 
amount upto 13th February 2025.  The Committee hopes that the Ministry will be able to optimally 
utilize the allocation made to this scheme by the end of the financial year.  The Committee is also 
of the view that the overarching scheme of Prithvi Vigyan will enable development of integrated 
multi-disciplinary earth science research and innovative programs across different MoES 
institutes and the integrated R&D efforts will help in addressing the grand challenges of weather 
and climate, ocean, cryosphere, seismological science and services and explore the living and 
non-living resources for their sustainable harnessing.  
(Para 6.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.8 Out of the total allocation of Rs. 695 Crores under PRITHVI scheme, an amount of Rs. 
667.38 Crores (97.42 %) was utilized by the end of FY 2024-25 
 
 
Mission Mausam 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.9 The Committee hopes that with the requisite budget allocation at their disposal, the 
Ministry would make all out efforts to ensure that all the objectives of the Mission planned for the 
next financial year are achieved in a time-bound manner and allocation utilized optimally.  The 
Committee feels that by improving weather prediction accuracy, Mission Mausam will have a 
profound impact on sectors like agriculture, disaster management, and transportation, enabling 
better preparedness and more effective responses to climate and weather events. The mission’s 
integrated approach will help deliver more precise, timely, and actionable forecasts, thus 
contributing to improved safety, economic stability, and climate resilience for India.  
(Para 7.7 ibid) 

 
4 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.10 Mission Mausam aims to enhance weather monitoring and forecasting across India and 
surrounding regions by leveraging state-of-art observational, computing technologies and 
advanced data assimilation and modelling techniques for improved weather and climate services. 
 
1.11 Mission Mausam will help in building the “Early Warnings For All” Initiative and mitigate 
the impact of climate change-induced extreme weather events and strengthen the resilience of the 
communities, with the ultimate goal of making Bharat a "Weather-ready and Climate-smart" 
nation. 
1.12 It will help better equip all the stakeholders, including citizens and last-mile users, to tackle 
extreme weather events and the impacts of climate change. 
 
High-Performance Computing System 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.13 The Committee is happy to note that the High Performance Computing System (HPC) was 
commissioned in September 2024 and the financial commitments for the same would also be 
completed within this financial year.  The Committee hopes that HPC would not only enable the 
institutes of the Ministry to fulfil the desired objectives of supporting numerical modelling for 
weather and climate forecasting, basic research, and data assimilation but also provide 
computational resources to the academic and R&D community, to undertake research and 
development and enable improvements in operational forecasting systems and enhance forecast 
skill.  
(Para 8.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.14 The Ministry is pleased to report that the High-Performance Computing System (HPC) was 
successfully commissioned in September 2024. A capital expenditure of approximately ₹714.31 
crore has been made in FY 2024–25 for the system. 
1.15 Currently, the National Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF), 
Noida, and the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), Pune, are in the process of 
transitioning their operational models to the new HPC infrastructure. The Ministry is ensuring that 
the system operates with an uptime of 99.99% to support continuous and reliable performance for 
weather and climate forecasting, as well as basic research and data assimilation. 
 
Autonomous Bodies 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.16 The Committee notes that the financial performance of all the autonomous institutions 
under the Ministry has been satisfactory during the years 2022-23 and 2023-24.  In 2024-25, the 
allocations made to NIOT, NCPOR and NCESS were increased at the RE stage.  The Committee 
also observes that Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS), Hyderabad 
has already fully utilised RE allocation made to it and recommends that adequate additional 
financial support should be made to Centre for the remaining part of the financial year.  
(Para 9.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 

 
5 
 
 
1.17 During the FY 24-25, the total budget for INCOIS under core grant (GIA General, GIA 
Salary and GIA capital) is Rs. 28.00 Cr and the same has been released and utilized by INCOIS. In 
this regard, for the FY 25-26, as per BE 25-26, Rs.29.00 Cr has been allocated for utilization. Any 
additional financial support, if required, will definitely be taken into consideration as suggested by 
the committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revenue generation by the Ministry 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.18 The Committee is happy to note that Ministry of Earth Sciences has, since the last few 
years, initiated the process of generating revenue from its services, products, research capacities, 
technologies developed, without compromising the public interest nature of its original mandate.  
This will not only help the Ministry to generate additional resources for augmenting important 
programmes but also transfer the benefit of these technologies to the society at large. 
 (Para 10.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.19 The Ministry gratefully acknowledges the committee’s compliments and ensures the 
continued rendering of improved services and technologies for the benefit of society, and generate 
revenue from the relevant stakeholders. 
 
Use of modern technologies  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.20 Advanced technologies, such as artificial intelligence (AI), offer potential for the 
development of solutions and improve environmental governance for more sustainable living.  AI 
algorithms process real-time data from weather sensors, radars, and stations, providing up-to-
date information on weather conditions and help generate timely forecasts, allowing for rapid 
response and decision-making in various industries. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the 
Ministry to integrate artificial intelligence (AI) technologies into weather and climate forecasting 
systems, in addition to physics-based numerical models to predict extreme weather events with 
greater precision, enabling early warnings for disasters like cyclones, floods, heatwaves etc.   The 
Committee firmly believes that by combining AI, satellite data, and advanced analytics, the 
schemes of Ministry of Earth Sciences will improve and enhance the country’s ability to make 
more accurate and efficient meteorological predictions, consequentially contributing to better 
disaster preparedness, resource management, and overall climate resilience.   
(Para 11.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 

 
6 
 
1.21 The Ministry continuously explores integrating Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies 
into weather forecasting systems. This initiative is part of a broader strategy to enhance the 
accuracy and efficiency of meteorological predictions, which are crucial for various sectors, 
including agriculture, disaster management, and urban planning.  
 
1.22 The Ministry has established a dedicated virtual center on AI/(Machine Learning)  
ML/Deep Learning (DL).This center focuses on leveraging AI, ML, and DL techniques for 
advancements in Weather and Climate services Sciences. It has already developed several AI/ML-
based applications tailored for localized predictions and the analysis of weather and climate 
patterns, which will certainly enhance the scope of improved services and better disaster resilience.

 
7 
 
 
Chapter II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
Deep Ocean Mission 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.1 The Committee observes that the utilization of funds under this ambitious scheme has not 
been to the desired level.  In 2022-23, the allocation was substantially reduced from Rs.650 crore 
(BE) to Rs.300 crore (RE).  However, the Ministry could utilize only 18.67% of the RE allocation 
during that year.  Again in 2023-24, the BE allocation was reduced from Rs.600 crore (BE) to 
Rs.450 crore (RE), out of which the Ministry could utilize only 45.37%.  In 2024-25, the utilization 
trend has improved to nearly 80% of RE allocation (upto 20.2.2025), which is much better than the 
utilization pattern for the previous two financial years.                   
(Para 5.4 of the 393rd Report) 
Action Taken 
2.2 The low expenditure in the initial years of the mission was attributed to rendering of the 
funds in February 2022 (after the launch of the mission in September 2021), impact on 
international supply chains due to COVID, delay in chartering of vessels for ocean surveys due to 
specific requirements, and procurement of high-value equipment, non-realization of milestone 
payments of the ocean research vessel due to design and identification of shipyard, and non-
procurement of land for the advanced marine station for ocean biology due to non-suitability of 
land for the intended purpose.   
 
2.3 As noted by the Committee, in FY 2024-2025, the utilisation of funds has significantly 
improved and enhanced to 98.33% (Rs 590.01 crores of the RE of Rs 600 crores).  
 
2.4 Most components of India’s flagship deep-sea human submersible (Matsya-6000) have 
been realized and integrated, orders for high-value equipment have been placed or are in advanced 
stages of realization, deep-ocean surveys at ten locations are complete, first milestone payment of 
the ocean research vessel has been completed, and land for the advanced marine station for ocean 
biology has been procured from the Tamil Nadu Govt in Nemmeli, Chennai. Although the 
financial progress seemed slow initially, significant physical targets have been 
materialized/achieved. The mission is expected to continue to progress in terms of both physical 
and financial targets. 
 
Mission Mausam  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.5 The Committee observes that, as on 20th February 2025, the Ministry has been able to 
utilise only Rs. 397.38 crores i.e. 59.22% of the allocated RE amount, which is certainly not 
satisfactory for this ambitious new project.  
           (Para 7.4 ibid)  

 
8 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.6 The Ministry acknowledges the Committee's concerns regarding the utilization of funds for 
Mission Mausam. Against a RE allocation of Rs. 671.00 crores for Mission Mausam, the Ministry 
has utilized Rs. 523.26 crores, which amounts to 77.98% of the allocated funds. While this is an 
improvement, the Ministry recognizes that this performance is still below expectations for such a 
high-priority mission. 
 
2.7 The delay in fund utilization has primarily been due to initial challenges in procurement 
and project setup. However, the Ministry is actively addressing these issues and taking corrective 
actions to expedite progress.  
 
2.8 Regular monitoring of expenditure is being conducted in line with the approved MEP/QEP 
and the Guidelines from the MoF. Furthermore, a monthly budget review meeting, chaired by the 
Secretary, MoES is being conducted to ensure continuous monitoring and timely resolution of any 
bottle necks. 
 

 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE  
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
12 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, 
FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE (2024-25) 
 
XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 6th August, 2025 in Committee 
Room No. B, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita – Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
3. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Mahesh Kashyap 
5. Dr. Anand Kumar 
6. Shri Mohibbullah 
7. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
8. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva  
9. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade  
10. Shri Yaduveer Wadiyar 
11. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
12. Shri Eswarasamy K 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary  
3. Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. I.V. Rajya Laxmi, Committee Officer 
5. Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer  
                                     
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. The 
Committee then took up consideration of the draft 394th,  395th, 396th, 397th, 398th, 399th and 400th 
Reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 

 
13 
 
recommendations/observations contained in the Reports  on  Demands for Grants (2025-2026) of 
the Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy; Biotechnology; Scientific and Industrial Research; 
Science & Technology; Space; Environment, Forest and Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, 
respectively and adopted the same after some deliberations.  
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned Reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament on the 8th August, 2025.  
4. *  *  *  *  * 
5. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 10:46 a.m. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                RAJIV SAXENA 
  06.08.2025                           DEPUTY SECRETARY 
 
 
 
 
 