4th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/4threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:51]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
FOURTH REPORT
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1993-94)
 
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS
FOR THE YEAR 1992-93
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 21ST DECEMBER, 1993)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 1993
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 C O N T E N T S
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                          
2.INTRODUCTION                                                              
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                   
4.APPENDIX                                                                                      
            MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE-ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
 ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi - Chairman
RAJYA SABBA
2.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
3.         Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
4.         Prof. M.G.K. Menon
5.         Shri Suresh Pachouri
6.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
@7.     Vacant
*8.       Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
9.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
10.       Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
LOK SABHA
11.       Shri M.G. Reddy
12.       Shri Oscar Fernandes
13.       Shri K.G. Shivappa
 14.      Shri Digvijaya Singh
15.       Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
16.       Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel

4th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/4threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:51]
17.       Shri Sharad Dighe
18.       Shri Rama Chandra Rath
**19.   Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
20.       Shri Harchand Singh
21.       Shri Yashwantrao Patil
22.       Shri Vijay Naval Patil
23.       Shri P.C. Chacko
24.       Kumari Frida Topno
25.       Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
 26.      Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
27.       Shri Chandresh Patel
28.       Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
29.       Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
30.       Shri Balraj Pasi
31.       Shrimati Bhavana Chikhalia
32.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh
33.       Shrimati Saroj Dubey
34.       Shri Harpal Panwar
35.       Prof.Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
36.       Shri Jitendra Nath Das
37.       Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
$38.     Vacant
39.       Shri Bhim Singh Patel
40.       Shri E. Ahamed
____________________________________________________________________________________
@Vacancy caused due to retirement of Dr. R.K. Poddar from the Membership of Rajya Sabha.
 *Nominated w.e.f. May 13, 1993 vice Dr. Naunihal Singh resigned.
**Nominated w.e.f. August 26, 1993 vice Shri Bhagey Gobardhan died.
$Vacancy caused due to death of Shri Nani Bhattacharya.
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS
Shri N. Vittal, the then Secretary
Shri C.K. Modi, Secretary
Dr. V.P. Kodali, Adviser
Shri K. Roy Paul, Joint Secretary
Shri N. Gopalaswami, Joint Secretary
Shri S.W. Oak, Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser
Shri J.S. Raju, DG (STQC)
Dr. Pronab Sen, Economic Adviser
Shri G. Soni, Sr. Director
Shri S. Mukhopadhyay, Sr. Director
Dr. U.P. Phadke, Sr. Director
Shri R.K. Srivastava, Sr. Director
Dr. A.K. Chakravorty, Sr. Director
Shri R.K. Arora, Director
Dr. S.L. Sarnot, Director
Shri S.N. Zindal, Director
Dr. VK. Dharmadhikari, Director

4th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/4threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:51]
Dr. K.S.K. Sai, Director
Shri B.B. Bahl, Dy. Director
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----
I N T R O D U C T I O N
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised
 by the Committee to present the report on its behalf, present this Fourth Report of the Committee. This Report deals
 with issues contained in the Annual Report of the Department of Electronics for the year 1992-93.
2. The Committee held in all four meetings on 24th, 25th June, 22nd September and 16th December, 1993
 (Appendix). In the meeting held on 24th June, 1993, the representatives of the Department of Electronics gave an
 overview of various activities of the Department. On 25th June and 22nd September, 1993 the Committee discussed in
 detail the activities of the Department.
3. The Committee expresses its appreciation for the officials of the Department for their cooperation and making
 available the material whenever required by the Committee.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the draft report at its meeting held on the 16th December, 1993.
NEW DELHI  
December 16,
 1993                                                                                                  
        SYED SIBTEY RAZI
Chairman
 Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---         
R E P O R T
Introductory
Electronics is all pervasive, ubiquitous and universal. It has become a symbol of the progress and prosperity of a
 nation. It is one of the fastest growing industries. Electronics Industry on the one hand, is concerned with inputs which
 lead to the improvement of productivity of other sectors of economy and on the other hand, provides products of direct
 benefit to the consumer. It plays a vital role in industry, agriculture, communication, strategic sectors of Security,
 atomic energy, space, transportation, education, banking and many other areas. It has a tremendous potential for
 improving the living standards of the people. In India, Electronics has been gaining momentum over the past quarter of
 a century. Today one sees extensive use of component electronics in homes in the form of consumer Electronics, in
 offices as office support systems (PCs), Fax machines, etc. and in industry in terms of measurement and control
 systems.
2.         Keeping in view the importance of Electronics Industry, the Committee decided to examine the Annual Report
 of the Department of Electronics (1992-93). The Deptt. of Electronics was created in 1971 to implement the policies
 laid down by the Electronics Commission. After the abolition of the Electronics Commission in 1989, the said
 Department has been given the responsibility of policy-making as well as implementing the same. During the course of
 its deliberations, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary and other officials of the Department of Electronics.
General Overview
3.         The Secretary of the Department of Electronics placed before the Committee a broad picture of the functioning
 of the Department and stated that electronics and information technology, with the use of computers, etc. can make
 significant contributions towards social development and national prosperity, particularly through promoting industrial
 growth in saving energy and time, and bringing about improvement in productivity. Highlighting the achievements, the
 Secretary cited the example of introduction of computerised reservation in Railways which has not only brought down
 substantially the time taken in getting the booking done but also checked corruption to a great extent and thus
 contributed to public convenience. He also informed the Committee about the implementation of another project in the

4th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/4threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:51]
 Department of the Posts for transfer of money order through satellite communication which would curtail to the extent
 of seven days the time usually taken in transmitting the money orders.
4.         As regards electronics production, the Committee was informed that consumer electronics constitutes nearly 30
 per cent, which is a substantial portion. Communication and broadcast equipments constitute about 25 per cent. During
 the Seventh Plan, the achievement of the consumer electronics industry was 170 per cent of the target. The growth of
 colour TV network, which was introduced in 1982, covered the whole country by 1984. It not only exceeded the target
 but also provided a base for the growth of the component industry of colour television during that period.
5.         It was also submitted that the share of Electronics Sector in GDP of the country is 2% it provides jobs to 4 per
 cent of the employment force; its contribution to the exports is 3 per cent which roughly comes about Rs.1260 crores.
 By 1995-96, this is likely to go up to 8 per cent. In order to develop indigenous technology, the Department has been
 operating Technology Development Council (TDC), National Radar Council (NRC), National Microelectronics
 Council (NMC) and Electronics Materials Development Council (EMDC). The TDC has so far funded 350 projects and
 quite a few of these technologies have been commercialised. Since its inception in 1974, NRC has supported 133
 Technology Development Projects in 44 institutions located in 14 States. So far 103 projects have been completed by it.
 Through NMC the Department of Electronics has sponsored R&D projects in academic institutions, laboratories and
 industries. These projects have made a positive impact on establishment of technology base, development of systems
 and trained manpower. Likewise, EMDC has also supported R&D projects in thrust areas like industry-oriented
 projects, advance material technologies and infrastructure building. During the year 1992-93, 28 projects were under
 implementation and out of which 6 projects have been completed.
6.         Government have also set up 21 laboratories for maintenance of quality of electronic goods. With a view to
 competing with foreign countries an emphasis has been given on quality control aspects, for which the Standardisation,
 Testing and Quality Control Directorate have entered into an agreement with the British Standard Institution to set up
 the ISO 9000 standard. This would help Indian Industries to get internationally recognised standard certification. The
 Centres at Bombay, Delhi and Calcutta have been authorised to give that certification. Government have also set up
 Electronics Research and Development Centres at Trivandrum and Pune. At present, the Department is implementing a
 World Bank Project of Rs.78 crores for upgrading the hardware in 32 institutions which includes about 14 electronics
 industries and about a dozen colleges and centres for electronic testing. This account represents a small part of the
 efforts of the Department of Electronics and index of the progress of electronics in India.
7.         The Committee took up for consideration the various subjects mentioned in the Annual Report (1992-93) and
 made certain recommendations thereon as per details given in the succeeding paragraphs.
Promotional Policy Measures
8.         Realising the importance of electronics in improving productivity and accelerating economic growth,
 Government have been announcing from time to time, a number of promotional policy measures and incentives for
 building a vibrant electronics industry. The most significant step taken was the introduction of Liberalised Exchange
 Rate Management System (LERMS) in place of EXIM scrip mechanism, under which certain categories of consumer
 electronics exports which had been granted flexible EXIM scrip earlier, were given special import licences.
 Simultaneously, the new Export and Import Policy simplified foreign trade regulations making it far more transparent
 than before. Promotion of electronics depends greatly on the quality of products for which the Department has launched
 its Standardisation Testing and Quality Control Programme which aims at inculcating consciousness for quality and
 reliability, thereby upgrading the overall quality of Electronic products manufactured in the country.
9.         The effect of these policy changes was felt immediately across the spectrum of electronics sector. As the import
 compression of the previous year was reduced substantially, the electronics industry started a slow recovery. The
 growth rate which had dropped to 5.7 per cent in 1991, rose to 17.2 per cent in 1992
10.       The Committee expressed concern over the slow progress in the export of electronic goods in comparison with
 other countries like Hungary, Taiwan who are exporting 20 times more than India and wanted to know the reasons for
 not capturing the export market even after the announcement of New Industrial Policy and various liberalisation
 measures. The Secretary replied that main reasons for poor performance of our export market are procedural constraints
 and tariff barriers. In July 1991, seventy such restrictions and procedural problems were identified. Some of them relate
 to the Customs and Excise, banking procedures and formalities and many other relate to State Governments. The matter
 was discussed in the meetings of Secretaries and some of the problems have been removed. Highlighting the procedural

4th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/4threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:51]
 impediments, the Secretary cited the instance of Singapore where documents for imports/exports are cleared within 15
 minutes through the introduction of Electronics Data Change Network, as against 3 days' time taken in our country.
 Similarly, the Duty Drawback is given in South Korea in 3 days whereas in our country it takes more than 3 months.
 While summing up, the Secretary submitted that India can become a super Japan provided such type of environment is
 created in our country. The Secretary also submitted that one of the basic needs for software export is High Speed Data
 Communication which was not available in our country till 1990. Now the facility has been made available and the
 Satellite Earth Station has been set up in Bangalore from where Video Conference with U.S. is possible. Hyderabad,
 Gandhinagar, Trivandrum and Bhubaneshwar are also proposed to be covered during the current year. High Speed Data
 Communication facilities are being provided in Delhi, Bombay and Madras for which the funds are being provided by
 French Government.
11.       The next area of problem relates to dealing with the State Governments where every industrialist has to go
 through the hurdles of getting so many NOCs for setting up of the industry and such formalities take about 18 months.
 With a view to overcoming such difficulties, a suggestion was made to the State Governments to give priority for the
 industry and to provide grace period of 3 years during which other formalities can be completed. But no State
 Government has responded so far.
12.       The Secretary also informed that they are in constant touch with the Ministry of Finance to reduce the Customs
 Duties on electronics goods with a view to bringing down the cost of the products. Steps are also being taken to ensure
 investment on a large scale and for that purpose, the scheme of Electronics Hardware Technology Parks (EHTPs) has
 been brought forward, which allows 40% sale in India so as to achieve globalisation. Department of Electronics has
 also taken up the task of issuing concessional customs duty certificates for raw materials, components, piece parts etc.
13.       The Committee notes that the Government have taken a number of promotional policy measures to boost exports
 and attract foreign investment in the country, but the desired results have not been achieved so far while there are
 procedural impediments as stated by the Department, this is not the whole story. Some of our electronics products are
 not as good in terms of quality compared to those which are imported from outside. The Committee recommends that
 Government should immediately strive to remove the procedural hurdles and simplify the Rules and Regulations,
 specially relating to the Customs and Excise which are creating lot of harassment to exporters. State Governments
 should be directed to ensure that the industrialists/exporters are not forced to run from pillar to post to complete
 formalities. Single window system should be introduced in order to attract foreign investment as significant expansion
 of the electronics  industry will be facilitated through foreign investment. Apart from taking these administrative
 actions, the Committee feels that the Department should make serious efforts to identify areas of its strength and
 weakness. In areas where India can easily compete in export market, we should give more attention so that the export
 potential of the country is increased. In this regard the Department can make serious efforts to improve the quality of
 electronics components. The area of weakness may also be given special treatment so that the Department of
 Electronics becomes a vital agency in developing electronics in the country.
Software Technology Parks
14.       The scheme of Software Technology Park (STP) was introduced in 1986 with the prime objective of promoting
 software exports from the country and in pursuance thereof, the first Technology Park was set up which became
 operational in 1987. Department of Electronics has so far set up 7 STPs. Till March, 1993, 71 companies were accorded
 approval to operate under the Scheme from their, own premises as private STP units. The Government of Kerala has set
 up STP which is known as Techno Park on 150 acres of land around Kerala University. The construction work is in
 progress. The State Government of Haryana have also taken some steps for setting up a STP. One STP each has been
 set up in Jaipur and Calcutta by the respective State Governments.
15.       The companies operating under the STP Scheme exported software worth Rs.16 crores up to December 1992 as
 against India's total software export of Rs.675 crores at the end of 1992-93.
16.       The Committee was informed that a scheme for allowing legal reproduction of international software has been
 devised in order to bring down the cost of software in India. The scheme envisages the import of the master copy and
 on payment of royalty, reproduction of software can be undertaken within India. Automatic approval for the royalty
 payment will be granted by the foreign exchange dealers provided the royalty payable does not exceed 30 per cent of
 the Indian published price for the software. It is stipulated that at least 75 per cent of the savings should be passed on to
 the Indian customers by the person/company authorised to reproduce software on payment of royalty. The scheme
 would enable the Indian companies to provide software approximately 40 per cent cheaper in comparison to the

4th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/4threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:51]
 international price. The Committee was further informed that as per the World Bank Report in the total software market
 of $250 b the share of countries like India is not more than 3% to 4%. The World Bank Report also suggested that it is
 possible to raise software export from $ 660 million as per present trends to lb by 1996 if the facility of High Speed
 Telecommunication and adequately trained manpower are made available.
17.       The Committee expressed its concern over the India's meagre share in the world software market and
 recommends that Government should take urgent steps to increase the domestic production. There has to be significant
 technology development of software and India should make advances in this field. We should develop our own strength
 in the area of software. We should also create suitable climate to attract NRIs for setting up industries in India. Priority
 should be given to the development of High Speed Communication System so as to enable the exporters to send out the
 products within the shortest period and interact suitably. There should be less regulation and more support so that these
 companies bring large amount of foreign exchange for the country. Besides, the software companies should not be
 asked to obtain a pollution certificate as these units do not cause any pollution. There should be an income-tax holiday
 at least for the period of five years.
Electronics Hardware Technology Park
18.       The Department of Electronics announced the Electronics Hardware Technology Park Scheme (EHTPs) to
 facilitate the transition of Indian manufacturers to a globalised environment and to attract sizeable international
 investments in the field of electronics. This Scheme is designed to correct some of the lacunae that exist in the Export
 Processing Zone/EOU policy when applied to high-tech field such as electronics. The main objective of the scheme was
 that entrepreneurs require much greater operational flexibility when operating in an industry which is characterised by
 rapidly changing technologies. This scheme has been made particularly attractive for investments in electronics raw
 materials and components, which have been a major weakness of the Indian electronics industry.
19.       The scheme provides the policy environment. The actual implementation of the Parks requires close co-
operation of State Governments. The EHTPs can be set up either by State Governments or by private or public sector
 companies. So far six proposals received from the State Governments for setting up of EHTPs have been approved and
 infrastructure is being set up there. 45 proposals have been given approval for setting up of private EHTP Units
 involving an investment of Rs.1852.4 crores with Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) of US $ 28.3 millions.
20.       The Committee hopes that under the scheme, large number of industries where value addition may be less than
 20% would be set up which would create more jobs. It would boost the production of electronics goods and enable the
 industries to compete with the foreign countries which would result in the earning of foreign exchange. The Commit,
 tee recommends that limitations like high cost, delays, red-tapism should be removed so as to enable our industries to
 operate like a unit in Singapore and Hong Kong where facilities of electronic Data Change Network and Duty
 Drawback are available for their exporters.
Technology Development
21.       The Technology Development Council (TDC) was set up in 1973 to generate indigenous technology. Since its
 inception, the Council has funded about 350 projects spread over about 100 organisations and a large number of
 technologies have been transferred to the industry during 1992-93. These include: Microprocessor Based Pan
 Monitoring System, Micro-Teimic System for Monitoring and Controlling the Temperature and MAPCON System for
 Sugar Industry, Axle Counters for Indian Railways, Zirconium Oxygen Sensor, Ultrasonic Flow Meter, Route
 Interlocking System for Indian Railways, etc.
22.       The Committee while appreciating the achievements made by the Department of Electronics in the field of
 technology development, wanted to know the details of amount spent by the Department on R & D projects like Centre
 for Materials for Electronics Technology (C-MET) alongwith the number of technologies developed by the Societies of
 the Department of Electronics. The Secretary replied that 63% of the Budgetary Grants is spent in providing assistance
 for technology research and development activities. He also submitted that 82 technologies were developed by these
 societies which have been commercialised. As regard C-MET, the Secretary replied that it is a new organisation
 operating through its Laboratories located at Pune, Thrissur and Hyderabad. The Hyderabad Laboratory has been
 assigned the task relating to high purity metals and alloys, semiconductor crystals related products. The Pune
 Laboratory deals with thick films materials, photocrests, MOS-MOCVD chemicals, basic chemicals for electronics
 components and related products. C-MET, Thrissur deals with electronic ceramics, ferrites, high purity rare earth
 materials and related products. Presently, C-MET is handling four projects with a total outlay of approximately Rs.72.5

4th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/4threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:51]
 lakhs sponsored by Government agencies such Electronics Materials Development Council (EMDC), National
 Photonics Council and Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources. C-MET has also attracted four projects with an
 outlay of Rs.7.45 lakhs from the Private Sector industries. The Secretary further submitted that assistance is provided to
 such institutions for development of indigenous technologies but they do not monitor their performance.
23.       The Committee observes that a large amount of money is being spent by the Department of Electronics on the
 funding of various societies like C-MET which are engaged in research and development but no machinery has been
 evolved to assess their performance. The Committee recommends that the Department should set up a cell to monitor
 the performance of societies and stop the funding where performance of the society is not upto the mark.
Semiconductor Complex Limited
24.       Semiconductor Complex Limited (SCL) started commercial production in 1984 and has been manufacturing
 LSI/VLSI devices and sub-systems for consumer, telecom, industrial and strategic sectors. With the liberalisation of
 Indian economy and to keep pace with the changing market scenario, SCL has been making efforts to diversify into
 new areas during the year.
25.       The Company has projected a sales turnover of Rs.65.01 crores with a cash profit of Rs.4.76 crores during 1992-
93. The company has achieved a sales turnover of Rs.51.00 crores against a target of Rs.55.71 crores till February,
 1993.
26.       VLSI Project: As part of the second phase of the project super structure of water fabrication plant has been
 constructed during the year. Work pertaining to clean room and equipment procurement has been kept in abeyance
 pending approval of the revised project proposal by the Government. Work on 66 KV sub-station, 11 KV load centre
 and Nitrogen gas plant is progressing as per the schedule. Some of the major electrical equipments are being installed
 and the 66 KV Power Transmission line is being laid. Civil construction work of Nitrogen gas plant has been going on
 parallely.
27.       On a point raised by the Committee about the availability of sufficient funds for the SCL and delay in its
 completion, the Secretary of the Department of Electronics informed the Committee that the Semiconductor Complex
 which is meant to make chips required for Defence and Space and other requirements, was set up initially at a cost of
 Rs.100 crores. In February, 1989 there was a fire in that facility. In 1990, Government agreed for Rs.183.29 crores for
 reconstruction. Then, in 1991 because of devaluation and restriction on import of components, the project cost from
 Rs.183.29 crores went up to Rs.315.13 crores which was approved on 18 March 1993. The Ministry of Finance was
 requested to provide Rs.97.09 crores during the current year for this project but the Ministry have advised the
 Department of Electronics to manage that expenditure within the budgetary grant for 1993-94 of Rs.137 crores, which
 the Department feels is not even sufficient to meet other expenditure. The Secretary submitted that this additional fund
 of Rs.97.09 crores during this year is absolutely necessary in order to enable the Department to reconstruct this facility.
 As regards the delay in the completion of project, the Committee was informed that an enquiry Committee was
 appointed to go into the cause of fire in the project. The Committee came to the conclusion that there was no sabotage
 but pointed out certain deficiencies like excess use of wood in the facility. Immediately after the submission of the
 report, Government adopted the Austrian Micro System in the foundry facility and also derided to have modern 6"
 Water facility instead of 4" Water facility. The said scheme was worked out in July 1990 but in early 1991 two major
 developments took place on the financial side. One was that Government put a lot of conditions for opening of L.C. for
 imports and secondly, the devaluation of the rupee. Since lot of imported equipments were required for the facility, the
 cost of which had substantially increased on account of devaluation of Indian currency, a revised estimate was
 submitted to the Ministry of Finance for approval which took more than a year. The Committee was further informed
 that the Company had been earning profits and whatever money was available, was utilised for civil works which is
 now, complete. The Committee was also told that the Company is functioning without a regular Chairman since June
 1989. In 1992, a lot of suggestions were made that the Government should not spend on the SCL and that the private
 sector should enter this area and the Government should not be in this business at all. In these circumstances, the matter
 could not be processed further. However, after a good deal of deliberation, Government have decided that this should
 be done through Public Investment Bureau and the revised estimates of Rs.315.13 crores was approved on 18 March,
 1993.
28.       Keeping in view the seriousness and importance of the SCL, the Committee strongly feels that inordinate delay
 has taken place in the finalisation of the project and as a result thereof cost escalation has taken place which could have
 been avoided had the decision to restructure the facility been taken promptly. The Committee wishes to emphasise that

4th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/4threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:51]
 micro-electronics is a vital area and by loosing time on this project, the Department has, in fact, lost an opportunity of
 assuming leadership in the field. The Committee recommends that an additional fund of Rs.97.09 crores which has
 already been approved by the Government, must be released during the current year in order to enable the Department
 of Electronics to complete the project by the third quarter of 1994. The Committee also feels that such an important
 public sector unit should not be kept without top executive for such a long time.
Technology Missions
29.       Government have announced a number of schemes to give filip to electronics industry. Besides enhancing the
 flow of Technology from abroad, it has been decided to launch the following eight Technology Missions, essentially to
 strengthen the technology-base infrastructure and to commercialise the indigenous technologies to improve the
 performance of selected industries :--
(1) Information Highway: To develop the technologies required for an inter-connected information highway and
 implementing the same for networking of distributed institutions in India and abroad for collaboration research and
 resource-sharing. Under this project Indian Technological Institutions are proposed to be linked by a computer network
 which will give the facility for data-base access document transfer, Electronic Mail, etc. Total cost of this project is
 Rs.100 crores and budgetary allocation during the year 1993-94 is Rs.1 crore.
(2) Future Air Navigation System (FANS): To develop and productionise all equipment needed for satellite-
based navigation system for the aviation sector. By the end of the century, the entire aviation sector, both military and
 commercial, will shift from ground-based systems to satellite-based systems. Total cost of the project is Rs.23 crores
 and the budgetary provision during the year 1993-94 is Rs.1 crore.
(3) Retrofit Automation in Economic Sectors: To improve the efficiency and competitiveness of the key
 economic sectors of the Indian economy such as fertilizers, textiles, power, paper and pulp through the application of
 electronics in high-visibility demonstration projects. Total cost of the project is Rs.21 crores and there is no allocation
 of funds during the year 1993-94.
(4) Massively Parallel Supercomputer: To develop a high performance Parallel Supercomputer in the teraflop
 range with all necessary supporting hardware and software for both strategic and commercial applications. Total cost is
 Rs.48 crores and allocation for 1993-94 is Rs.3 crores.
(5) Microelectronics: To develop and productionise microelectronics (the basic building blocks of all
 electronics) which are of critical importance for strategic and industrial requirements. Total cost is Rs.87.42 crores and
 allocation is Rs.2 crores during 1993-94.
(6) Photonics/Optoelectronics: To develop photonics/optoelectronics core technologies and applications which
 are of critical importance of present and next generation of electronics, computers and communication system. Total
 cost is Rs.116 crores and budgetary provision is Rs.1 crore for the year 1993-94.
(7) New Electronics Materials: To develop technologies for selected electronics materials which are critical for
 the electronics industry to establish a competitive edge, and also to meet strategic and futuristic requirements. Total
 cost is Rs.21 crores and allocation is Rs.2 crores during 1993-94.
(8) Special Components (Strategic & Non-Strategic):  To develop in an integrated manner certain selected
 critical components (Strategic and non-strategic). These are at the cutting edge of technology and tend to be closely
 held. Total cost is Rs.102.35 crores and there is no allocation of funds during the year 1993-94.
30.       The representative of the Department informed the Committee that only 6 Missions out of 8 have been taken up
 because funds to the extent of Rs.10 crores against the total requirement of Rs.519.17 have been made available during
 the year 1993-94. Again, because of funds restriction, even within these missions, only limited projects have been taken
 up this year for implementation.
31.       The Committee appreciated the decision of the Department of Electronics for launching of Technology Mission
 for strengthening the technology-base  infrastructure, commercialisation of indigenous technologies for improving the
 performance of selected industries and their competitiveness, etc. The Committee, however, feels that in view of the
 financial constraints it will be possible only to take up certain specific Missions. Even these can be taken up if
 minimum fund is provided. For example, the Technology Mission on Micro-electronics which is considered as heart of
 the electronics industry, a sum of Rs.2 crores has been provided during 1993-94 as against its total requirement of

4th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/4threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:51]
 Rs.87.42 crores. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a few Missions which are crucial should be identified and
 taken up first for implementation and no efforts should be spared in completing them within the prescribed time frame.
Manpower Development and Training
32.       A trained manpower is one of the basic requirements for the growth of domestic software industry and software
 exports of India. The Department of Electronics have undertaken various programmes to meet the future requirement of
 qualified technicians. Under the DOE-UGC programme, 11 Universities were approved for starting M.Sc. (Electronics
 Science) programme. 10 Universities were given the full amount of Rs.22 crores for equipments and books.
33.       The Committee was told that the Electronics Industry Development Project (Manpower Component) (IMPACT)
 assisted by the World Bank continued this year also and a sum of Rs.34.5 crores was earmarked by the Department of
 Electronics, Rs.77 crores by the World Bank and Rs.4 crores by the Government. 12 poly-technics, 14 colleges and 6
 Centres of Electronics Design and Technology (CEDTs) all over the country have been selected for improving
 infrastructural facilities. New syllabus is being chalked out and teachers are being trained in order to equip them with
 the skill to teach up-dated technology. The project was reviewed twice by the World Bank. The Government have also
 entered into an agreement with EEC and a sum of Rs.11 crores has been provided for Software Support System and
 Education Centre being set up in Bangalore where the students will be given training in Software details.
34.       The Department has also recommended for an assistance of about Rs.290 crores to the World Bank. Out of that
 Rs.175 crores will be given to different institutions like Aligarh Muslim University for improving both software and
 hardware infrastructure and for training purpose. The World Bank has already recommended the setting up of a
 Software Development Board for manpower development. Apart from that the Education Department under the
 Ministry of Human Resource Development had constituted the Reddy Committee which has made some suggestions
 for manpower development. An amount of Rs.292 crores is required for this aspect of improving educational
 infrastructure. A credit of $ 220 millions from the World Bank would also be available for the purpose.
35.       The Committee is happy to note that the Department of Electronics has drawn up a number of schemes and taken
 up programmes to provide infrastructure facilities for manpower development and training which will ensure a certain
 degree of uniformity in the standards throughout the country and improve the basic infrastructure for manpower
 development. The Committee recommends the Department of Electronics should evolve programmes which can ensure
 greater involvement of State Governments. Areas should also be identified where the Government can have the co-
operation of private sector. In view of financial constraints, the Committee feels that involvement of State Governments
 as well as of private sector would lessen the burden of the Central Government and it will also ensure the better use of
 resource with decentralised monitoring system. The Committee wishes to emphasize that India's great strength lies in
 her human resource. When we train our people, we would be getting trained manpower at relatively low cost.
 Therefore, the training of manpower in the field of electronics should be treated as thrust area by the Department. The
 Department should also develop mechanism to provide continuing education and refresher courses to its existing
 technical personnel to keep them a breast of the latest technological development in the field of electronics.
36.       The Committee was informed that Electronics is an employment oriented industry in which there is less
 investment as compared to areas like Petro-chemicals, steel, power-generation, shipbuilding, etc. It is possible to think
 of new employment opportunities by using electronics technology like Videographic Data Bases which provides
 World-wide satellite communication network system, wherein large number of educated unemployed persons can be
 engaged not only in cities but also in rural areas and small towns. The Committee, therefore, recommends that priority
 should be given to such electronics industry as would definitely solve the unemployment problem to some extent.
National HVDC Programme
37.       The National HVDC Project Stage-I 100MW/100 KV system between Lower Sileru in Andhra Pradesh and
 Barsoor in Madhya Pradesh was an R&D Project and has completed more than one year of continuous successful
 operation commercially exchanging power between the two States. This is one of the most significant achievements of
 India as the technology in this area is available with only 5 countries/consortia namely, ABB (Sweden), Seimens
 (Germany), GEC (UK) and Alsthom (France) consortium, Japan and Russia. This was an R&D project funded jointly
 by the Ministry of Defence, Department of Heavy Industry and Department of Atomic Energy. It was a fine example of
 team work.
38.       The Committee appreciated the work done by the Department of Electronics in implementing the HVDC project
 Stage-I and desired to know about its future programme in this regard. The Committee was informed that the success of

4th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/4threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:51]
 the National HVDC Project Stage-I (100MWA00KV) has paved the way for HVDC Stage-I (200MW/200KV) to be
 implemented as an operational project with concurrent Reserach & Development activities in hardware, new control
 concepts, etc. and jointly funded by the Departments of Heavy Industry, Electronics, Power, BHEL ABSEB and MPEB
 at a total cost of Rs.105 crores. An Inter-Ministerial Committee under the Chairmanship of Member, Power System,
 CEA has also recommended the entrusting of either the 500 MW Jeypore-Gazuwaha or 2×250 MW Mau Bihar Sharif
 two commercial HVDC Back to Back projects identified as 8th Plan as Projects whichever is decided earlier to BHEL
 to enable it to execute a commercial project with independent responsibility based on the strengths built through
 NHVDC Stage-I. The estimated cost of this project is approximately Rs.400 crores and funds availability is creating
 difficulties in taking a decision. Hence, Power Grid Corporation has issued a global tender for the 500 MW Jeypore-
Gazuwaha Project which calls for financial package of soft loan/grant which will inhibit BHEL to capitalise on the
 strengths built through NHVDC Stage-I. The Committee was also informed that if funds are made available for
 implementation of this project it will help India to establish the capability of independently handling commercial
 HVDC projects with associated performance guarantee. It would also increase indigenous contents in future projects
 and create an opportunity to earn foreign exchange. In case the funds are not made available, it is likely to result in the
 inability to consolidate on the strength built so far and lose the opportunity to enter global market which an HVDC
 Stage-I has got both nationally and internationally. In view of this, the Committee recommends that adequate funds
 should be made available to implement 500 MW Jeypore-Gajuwaha project independently by BHEL/Power Grid
 Corporation.
General Observations
39.       Electronics is one of the few factors which permeates Atomic energy, Defence, Railways, Industries, Chemicals
 etc. Accordingly, the Department is required to play an important role to bring about electronification and electronic
 culture in the country and if co-ordination with other Ministries like Finance, Railways, Defence, Planning
 Commission, etc. could have been better, the progress of electronics industry would have been certainly at a higher rate
 than what is it presently. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department of Electronics should
 play the promotional and catalytic role by coordinating with different Ministries and Departments which are engaged in
 the development of the new technologies and also in the production of electronics items in various hi-tech areas.
 Government should also look into the matter seriously and revive the Electronics Commission.
40.       The Committee also recommends that every Department should earmark a fixed about of budget for its
 electronification in view of the universal nature of Electronics.
Action Taken on the Recommendations Contained in the First Report of the Lok Sabha Committee on Science &
 Technology (1993-94)
41.       The First Report of the Committee on Science & Technology (1993-94) of the Lok Sabha which deals with the
 Department of Electronics focussing specially on imports and indigenisation, was presented to the Lok Sabha on 29th
 March, 1993 and recommendations of that Committee contained in the Report were referred to the Department of
 Electronics for compliance.
42.       The Committee enquired from the Secretary about the decision taken on the various recommendations contained
 in the Report.
43.       The Secretary told the Committee that out of the 85 recommendations, 60 relate to other Ministries which have
 been referred to them for necessary action, but no reply has since been received from those Ministries. The Committee
 was also informed that the Department of Electronics has accepted the remaining recommendations with the exception
 of these recommendations contained in para 3.30, 3.37 and 4.28 of the Report for which the Secretary of the
 Department explained the position to the Committee. The Committee hoped that with regard to the recommendations
 made in the First Report of the Committee on Science and Technology with which other Ministries and Departments
 are concerned, the Department of Electronics would inform the Committee about the implementation of those
 recommendations.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--
APPENDIX

4th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/4threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:51]
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
 COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
 met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 24th June, 1993 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
 New Delhi.
PRESENT
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
3.         Prof. M.G.K. Menon
4.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
5.         Dr. R.K. Poddar
6.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
LOK SABHA
7.         Shri Oscar Fernandes
8.         Shri Shankarrao J. Kale
9.         Shri Harchand Singh
10.       Shri Vijay Naval Patil
11.       Shrimati Bhavana Chikhalia
12.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh
13.       Shri M.V.V.S Murthy
14.       Shri E. Ahamed
SECRETARIAT
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS
Shri N. Vittal, Secretary
Shri N. Gopalaswamy, Jt. Secretary
Shri S.W. Oak, Jt. Secretary/Financial Adviser
Shri J.S. Raju, DG (STQC)
Dr. Pronab Sen, Economic Adviser
Shri S.S. Oberoi, Sr. Director
Shri G. Soni, Sr. Director
Dr. S.G. Patil, Sr. Director
Shri G. Mukhopadhyay, Sr. Director
Shri R.K. Srivastava, Sr. Director
 Dr. A.K. Chakraborty, Sr. Director
Shri R.K. Arora, Director
Shri S.N. Zindal, Director
Dr. V. Dharmadhikari, Director
Dr. R.G. Gupta, Addl. Director
Shri S.M. Shakil, Addl. Director
Dr. S.P. Uttam, Addl. Director
Shri R.K. Verma, Addl. Director
Shri B.B. Bahl, Dy. Director

4th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/4threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:51]
 
2.         The Committee took up for consideration the Annual Report of the Department of Electronics for the year 1992-
93.
At the outset, the Secretary of the Department gave an overview of the activities of the Department through the
 audio-visual medium. Thereafter, the Members sought clarifications from the Secretary and other representatives of the
 Department.
3.         The discussion on the Annual Report remained inconclusive.
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 25th June, 1993.
X
TENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
 met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 25th June, 1993 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
 New Delhi.
PRESENT
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi- Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
3.         Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
4.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
5.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
6.         Dr. R.K. Poddar
LOK SABHA
7.         Shri Oscar Fernandes
8.         Shri Harchand Singh
9.         Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
10.       Shri Balraj Pasi
11.       Shrimati Bhavana Chikhalia
12.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh
13.       Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
14.       Shri E. Ahamed
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Under Secretary
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS
 
Shri N. Vittal, Secretary
Shri N. Gopalaswamy, Joint Secretary
Shri J.S. Raju, DG (STQC)
Dr. Pronab Sen, Econmic Adviser
Shri G. Soni, St. Director
Dr. S.G. Patil, Dr. Director
Shri S. Mukhopadhyay, Sr. Director
Shri R.K. Srivastava, Sr. Director
Dr. A.K. Chakraborty, Sr. Director
Shri R.K. Arera, Director

4th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/4threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:51]
 
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
 met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 22nd September, 1993 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
 
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
3.         Prof. M.G.K. Menon
4.         Shri Suresh Pachouri
5.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
6.         Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
7.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
LOK SABHA
8.         Shri Oscar Fernandes
9.         Shri Sharad Dighe
10.       Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
11.       Shri Harchand Singh
12.       Shri P. C. Chacko
13.       Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
14.       Shrimati Bhavana Chikhalia
15.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh
16.       Shri Jitendra Nath Das
17.       Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
18.       Shri S. Ahamed
SECRETARIAT
Shri N. C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS
Shri C. K. Modi, Secretary
Shri V. P. Kodali, Adviser
Shri K. Roy Paul, Joint Secretary
Shri N. Gopalaswami, Joint Secretary
Shri S. W. Oak, Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser
Shri J. S. Raju, DG (STQC)
Dr. Pronab Sen, Economic Adviser
Shri G. Soni, Sr. Director
Shri S. Mukhopadhyay, Sr. Director
Dr. U. P. Phadke, Sr. Director
Shri R. K. Srivastava, Sr. Director
Dr. A. K. Chakraborty, Sr. Director

4th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/4threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:51]
Shri R. K. Arora, Director
Dr. S. L. Sarnot, Director
Shri S. M. Zindal, Director
Dr. V. K. DharmadhJkari, Director
Dr. K. S. K. Sai, Director
Shri B. B. Bahl, Dy. Director
2.         At the outset, the Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence, Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel, M.P. to
 present the Second Report of the Committee on the National Environment Tribunal, Bill, 4992, to the Rajya Sabha.
3.         The Committee further authorised S/Shri Oscar Fernandes and Sharad Dighe to lay the Report on the Table of
 the /Lok Sabha.
4.         Thereafter, the Committee took up further consideration of the Annual Report of the Department of Electronics
 for 1992-93 and heard the views of the representatives of the Department. Members also sought clarifications from the
 representatives of the Department.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5.         Thereafter, the Committee adjourned at 4.50 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 23rd
 September, 1993.
XXV
TWENTY-FIFTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology~ Environment & Forests
 met at 9.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 16th December, 1993 in Committee Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New
 Delhi.
PRESENT
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
3.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
4.         Shri Suresh Pachouri
5.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
6.         Shri Ajit P. K. Jogi
LOK SABHA
7.         Shri Oscar Fernandes
8.         Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
9.         Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
10.       Kumari Frida Topno
11.       Shrimati Bhavana Chikhalia
12.       Shri Jitendra Nath Das
13.       Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
14.       Shri E. Ahamed
SECRETARIAT
Shri N. C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary
Shri N. K. Singh, Assistant Director
2.         The Committee considered and adopted its Fourth Report on the Annual Report of the Department of Electronics
 for the year 1992-93 with minor changes.
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel to present the report to the
 Rajya Sabha on the 21st December, 1993.

4th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/4threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:51]
4.         The Committee further authorised Shri Jitendra Nath Das and in his absence Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy to lay the
 Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 21st December, 1993.
5.         Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted its Fifth Report on the Annual Report of the Department of
 Biotechnology for the year 1992-93 unanimously.
6.         The Committee again authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel to present the Report
 to the Rajya Sabha on the 22nd December, 1993.
7.         The Committee also authorised Shri E. Ahamed and in his absence Kumari Frida Topno to lay the Report on the
 Table of the Lok Sabha on the 22nd December, 1993.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8.         The Committee then adjourned at 10.30 A.M. to meet again at 9.30 A.M. on Tuesday the 21st December, 1993
 for consideration and adoption of Sixth Report on the Annual Report of the Department of Science and Technology for
 the year 1992-93.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--