PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT 
AND FORESTS (1993-94) 
NINTH REPORT 
 ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1994-95) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
(Demand No. 23) 
(Presented on the 18th April, 1994) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRET ARIA T NEW DELHI 
18 APRIL, 1994/V AISAKHA, 1916 
CONTENTS 
  
COMPOSTION OF THE COMMITTEE 
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                    
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                           
ANNEXURES 
Minutes of the Meetings of the Committee 
    Statement Showing the Activity-wise Allocations for the year 1993-94 and 1994-95 
    Statement Showing the Scheme-wise Budget Estimates, Actuals and Reasons for    Variations            
                                                                                                                         
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMI'TTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1993-94) 
 
  
1. Syed Sibtey Razi-Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
Shri N. Giri Prasad  
Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi  
  Prof. M.G.K. Menon  
  Shri Suresh Pachouri  
@6. Vacant  
@@7.  Vacant  
8.   Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  
  Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh  
 Shri Ram Gopal Yadav  
LOK SABHA  
Shri M.G. Reddy  
Shri Oscar Fernandes 13. Shri K.G. Shivappa  
£14. Vacant  
Shri Shankarrao D. Kale  
Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel  
Shri Sharad Dighe  
18. Shri Rama Chandra Rath  
Page 1 of 149th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/9threport.htm

**19. Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav  
Shri Harchand' Singh  
Shri Yashwantrao Patil  
Shri Vijay Naval Patil  
Shti P.C. Chacko  
Kumari Frida Topno  
Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh  
Shrimati Mahendra Kumari  
Shri Chandresh Patel  
Shrimati Vasundhara Raje  
Pt. Vishwanath Sharma  
Shri Balraj Pasi  
Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia  
Shri Ram Prasad Singh  
Shrimati Saroj Dubey  
Shri Harpal Panwar  
 
Page 2 of 149th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/9threport.htm

@ Vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri V ithalbhai M. Patel from membership of Rajya Sabha
w.e.f. April 2,  
    1994  
@@ Vacancy caused due to retirement of Dr. R.K. Poddar from membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. July
9, 1993.  
*Nominated w.e.f. May 13, 1993 vice Dr. Naunihal Singh resigned.  
£ Vacancy caused due to resignation by Shri Digvij aya Singh from membership  of Lok Sabha,w.e.f. 
January 26, 1994. 
•.• Nominated w.e.f. August 26, 1993 vice Sbri Bbagey Gobardhan died.  
  
Shri Radhika Ranjan Pramanik  
  Shri Jitendra Nath Das  
  Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy  
 ♣
 38. Vacant  
 Shri Bhim Singh Patel 40. Shri E. Ahamed  
SECRETARIAT  
Shri Shrinivasrao S. Sohoni, Additional Secretary  
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director  
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary  
Shri N.K. Singh, Assistant Director  
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer  
INTRODUCI10N 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science a nd Technology, Environment and Forests, having been
autborised by the Committee to present the report on its behalf, pr esent this Ninth Report of the
Committee. This Report deals wi th the Detailed Demands  for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry o f 
Environment and Forests.  
2. The Committee held in all three meetings on the 21st, 22ndMarch and 7th April, 1994 (Annexure ID).
In the meeting held on the 21st Marc h, 1994, the Secretary a nd other representatives of the Ministry o f
Environment and Forests gave a brief account of the al locations on different ac tivities/projects of the
Ministry as proposed in its Detailed Demands for Grants and the Members sought clarifications thereon.
On March 22, 1994 the Committee discussed in detail the Demands for Grants of the Ministry on the
basis of the documents made available to it and th e submissions made before it by the Secretary and
other officials of the Ministry and the officials of the Ministry replied. to the clarifications sought by the
Members.  
"-  
3. The Committee considered and adopted this draft report at its meeting held on the 7th April, 1994.  
4. The Committee expre sses its appreciation for the officials of the Ministry for their cooperation and 
making available the material whenever required by the Committee.  
 
Page 3 of 149th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/9threport.htm

  
 
REPORT 
Environment and Forests are two vital sectors where the role of the Ce ntral and State Governments is of
a complementary nature, one supple menting the efforts of  the other in preser ving and promoting a
healthy environment and conserving fo rest wealth which is an important  part of the environment. The
forests being spread in different States all over the country and envi ronmental issues being common and
of equal import to all the State, the Union Ministry  of Environment and Forests acts as the nodal agency
at the national level for pla nning, promotion and coordination of environmental and forestry
programmes.  
  
2.         To carry out the mandata assigned for the Ministry, an outlay of Rs. 418.27 crores for the yea r
1994-95 has been proposed vide demand No. 23, the Plan component of which is to the tune of Rs. 360
crores and Non-plan component is of an amount of Rs. 58.27 crores. The comparative figures in respect 
of total outlay of the Ministry for the years 1992-93, 1993-94 and 1994-95 are given below:-             
(in crores of Rupees)  
 
  
 
Actuals  
1992-93  
    Plan          Non-Plan  
 
Budget Estimates 1993-94  
Plan      Non-Plan  
 
Revised Estimates 1993-94  
Plan      Non-Plan  
 
Budget Estimates 1994-95·  
Plan      Non-Plan  
 
  
 
272.68    
43.68  
  
317.80  
 
52.01  
 
336.60  
 
62.18  
 
360  
 
New Delhi                                                               
April 7, 1994 
SYED SIBTEY RAZ 
Chairman, 
  
Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment and Forests,
Page 4 of 149th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/9threport.htm

58.21  
 
From these figures it would be se en that in the Budgetary estimate s for 1994-95 the increase in the Plan
component is to the tune of 7% over the Revised estimates of the previous year (199394) whereas in the 
Non-plan component there is slight decrease to the tune of 6%. The activity-wise allo cations of the 
Ministry for the years 1993-94 and 1994-95 may be seen in Annexure (I).  
  
3.   In its two sittings, the Committ ee went into the specifics of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry
and had detailed clarifications from  the Secretary and other officials. In the course of their evidence a
pointed question was raised about the Eighth Plan outlay for the Mini stry and it was explained that
against the projected requirement of  Rs. 4794 crores for the entire Five Year Plan only Rs. 1200 crores
were approved. During the first th ree years of the Plan period th e expenditure already adds up to
approximately Rs. 957 crores . The implication of this  is that for the remain ing two years of the plan
period only a small amount of Rs. 242.5 cr ores will be left with the Mini stry to carry out  its activities
and schemes. But the apprehension of the Committee that in that case, with such a meagre allocation, the
Ministry's activities/projects w ould go haywire was allayed by the Se cretary who clarified that the
Planning Commission has in  general supported the Ministry's outlays assuming th at there is 10%
increase every year in the outlay the Ministry is expected to finish with a plan size of Rs. 1790 crores for
the entire 8th plan period.  
  
The Committee is inclined to accep t the point put forth by him that, ke eping in view the total approved
outlay of 1200 crores of r upees for entire Eighth Fi ve Year Plan for the Mi nistry, the average annual
outlay would have only been within the vicinity of Rs. 240 crores, which is not  the case as the Ministry
has been getting each year much more amount. This allocation of approximately Rs. 300 crores a yea r
on an average for the Ministry does not  appear to be sufficient, if the issues relating to Environment and
Forests are taken into account; but as the Forest s figure in the Concurrent List, considerable
responsibility to provide finances therefor  devolves on the States also. In that context, a valid point was
made by the Secretary of the Mini stry that the Ministry's budget is  just only a part of the total
expenditure on these sectors in the country. While the Committee agrees that the Ministry has been
getting much more per year than what was originally  envisaged in the Eighth Five Year Plan, and this
has to be viewed in the context of allocations made by the State Go vernments, the Committee feels that
this is not a happy situation that even such small annual allocations  have not been utilised by the
Ministry fully. The table in Annexure-II will amply bear this out. No  doubt, the Ministry has given 
reasons for under-utilisation or non-utilisation or excess expenditure and yet the overall picture does not 
look very healthy, though signs of improvement in respect of spending of funds on the relevant
schemes/projects are noticeable during the year 1993-94.  
  
The Committee has also noted that in the Budget Es timates for 1993-94 the Non-plan component of the 
Ministry was just over Rs. 52 crores which was subsequently revised to over Rs. 62 crores, thereby
effecting an increase of 20% but  in the Budget Estimates for 1994- 95 it has been shown as Rs. 58.27 
crores, which represents a reduction  of about Rs. 4crores over that of the previous year. While the
Committee appreciates that the Mi nistry has sought lesser Non-plan  allocation for 1994-95, it fails to 
understand as to what necessitated s ubstantial increase in Nonplan co mponent in the Revise? Estimates 
for 1993-94. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would take due care and confine the Non-plan 
expenditure to the amount as projec ted in the Budget Estima tes for 1994-95 . d the in crease, if any, will 
be confined to the barest minimum.  
  
6.  The Committee has take up se lectively some of the major head s and sub-heads in the Demands fo r 
Grants of the Ministry and the observations of the Committee are given in the succeeding paragraphs.  
  
Major Head '2406'-Forestry and Wildlife  
Page 5 of 149th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/9threport.htm

  
7.  The Committee has observed that an amount of Rs. 218.15 crores (Plan as well as Nonplan) has been 
provided for in the Budget Estimates for 1994-95 for Forestry and Wildlife which include Education and
Training, Research, Survey and Utilisation of Fore st Resources, Forest Cons ervation, Development and
Regeneration, National Afforestation & Eco-Devel opment Programme and Wildlife. This amount is
against Rs. 197.10 crores (Plan and Non-plan) provided             for in the Revised Estimates for 1993-94 
which represents an increase of over 10%.  
              
The Committee has noted that there are a number of plans and schemes in these sectors being carried out
by the Ministry, which have been  explained at some length in the Performance Budget itself.
Notwithstanding the difficulties be ing faced by it at times in bringi ng the concerned States round to a
common point of view on specific issues, the growing pressures on the forests demand a more concerted
approach on the part of the Mi nistry. The Committee was told th at about 220 milli on tonnes of fuel
wood and 250 million tonnes of  green grass are being c ontributed by the forestry  system to rural India,
qnd village industries like Brick a nd Tobacco etc. too depend upon w ood. Besides 80% of the village
medicinal needs is met from forests and about 12 million c.m. of forest timber is used. This works out to
Rs. 13,000crores of removal every year  from forests, but the revenue from the forestry system through
commercial sale is hardly Rs. 1,500 crores. The Co mmittee feels that the Ministry through its R&D
Units should concentrate on devel oping and providing low cost and fu el efficient energy for cooking so
that the dependence of rural peopl e on fuel wood from the forests is  minimised substantially and the
forests have unhindered growth.  
  
The forest policy of the G overnment envisages that 33% area has to be unde r forest cover, and in this
context afforestation and regenera tion of degraded fo rests are quite importa nt. Dr. Swaminathan
Committee suggested that in the Ei ghth Plan the plantation target s hould be25 million hectares at a cost
of Rs. 14,000 crores, but as conceded  by a representative of the Minist ry before the Committee, money
to the tune of such huge proportions may not be available to the Ministr y. The Ministry accordingly
submitted a proposal to raise 18 million hectares of plantations at 9950 crores of rupees initially and this
too was further trimmed down to about 4000 crores of rupees both for Environment and Forest Sectors.
The Ministry was only given Rs. 525 crores for forestry and other related schemes and Rs. 345 crores
were earmarked by the Planning Co mmission for the State sector. This comes to  about 0.9% of the
National Plan \and whatever the Ministry gets, 70% goes towards plantation. Out of an amount o f
Rs.4082crores meant for forestry, both for the Centre and States, in the 8th Plan about Rs. 2800 crores is
meant for plantation and regeneration. This comes to about Rs. 560 crores annually, In the central sector
nine schemes are there, especially for afforestation, but the Committee fe els that in the State Sectors the
schemes for afforestation are not getting the priori ty and attention they sh ould and over the years the
allocation has been showi ng a declining trend. In 1993-94 it has co me down from Rs. 745  crores to Rs. 
676 crores.  
  
Forests are capital assets of the nation and the States do need cent ral budgetary support in this vital
sector. This central budgetary support can also be limited s ubstantially if the Stat es are encouraged to
generate their own funds by utilizi ng forest resources without, in a ny way, contributing to degradation.
In this context the Committee feels that the Ministry  of Environment and Forests can play an effective
role in impressing upon the States to draw upon the e xperience of the State of Madhya Pradesh, which
as told to the Committee is genera ting income from forests to the tune of 400 crore rupees whereas its
forest plan component is just of an amount of 50 crore rupees.  
  
11.  An important component of th e Ministry's Af'forestation Progr amme is tree plantation in a
conventional manner as also through modern methods of aeri al seeding and corelate d with this is the
need for extensive forest survey and strict moni toring of the prescribed targets, Committee has noted
that under the Inte grated Afforestation and Eco-Develo pment Pro jects Schemes. Ph ysical tar get fo r
Page 6 of 149th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/9threport.htm

1993-94 was 64,000 hectares and agains t this achievement urto end of January 1994 has been just
49,377 hectares. Similarly, the Aerial Seeding Scheme lus also failed to  achieve the stipulated physical
target of 30,000 hectares for 1993- 94, as the actual physical achievem ent is just 10,000 hectares. The 
position is not very flattering in respect of Grants-in-Ai d Schemes (for Volunt ary Agencies) whereby 
target achieved is 17 projects as against 35 projects.  
  
12.  The Committee is of the view that any shortf all in achieving the target s results in surrendering o f 
allocated amount unless of course the funds themselv es fall short and there is cost es calation, if the
projects go beyond the periods earmar ked for their comple tion. As' regards Aerial Seeding Scheme it 
was submitted before the Committee that the result s achieved under this sche me have not been that
much satisfactory for various reasons such as lack of interest on the part of some States, non-checking of 
grazing and resistance from the people engaged in making soil fit for seeding because they do not have
employment round the year. Nevertheless, the Minist ry is in the process of  identifying areas like
Chambal ravines of D.P. and M.P.  to bring them under Aerial Seeding Scheme . The Committee feels
that there has not been any major R&D effort on the pa rt of the Ministry in th e field of Aerial Seeding
and whole approach is of  a lackadaisical nature. The Committee,  therefore, urges upon the Ministry to
strengthen R&D in this vital sector to make the Aerial Seeding Scheme more viable and meaningful.  
  
13.  It is of utmost importance that monitoring and evaluation aspects of prescribed targets are taken due
care of and mechanism provided ther efore is suitably strengthened. In this context, the Committee has
observed that in the budge tary estimates for 1994-95 the Plan outlay for monitoring and evaluation o f
schemes formulated under the National Afforestation and Eco Development  Programme (NAEP) has 
been reduced from Rs. 1.5 crore during the previous ye ar to Rs. 75 lakhs. Similarly to carry out such an
important activity as the Forest su rvey, the Ministry has been deferr ing purchase of Digital Cartography
System for the last three years consecutively notwithstanding the fact that allocations therefor have been
made each year in the budgetary system. The explanat ion given by the Ministry is that to operate the
computers at light work stations, the software which is needed is of three kinds and these three kinds
have come up with new versions and now the Technical Evaluation Committee has examined the matter
threadbare and formulated its recommendations. On th at basis the Ministry hopes to acquire the Digital
Cartography System during 1994-95. Sin ce the Ministry proposes to acqui re equipment such as Digital 
Cartography System and other softwares, the Plan outlay for Survey  and Utilisation of Forest Resources
has come down from Rs. 8.5 crores in 1993-94 to Rs. 3.8 crores in 1994-95 and once this equipment is 
acquired, the Ministry may not need any extra money for forest survey etc. In response to a specific
query from the Committee as to wh ether there would be any cost ascalation in purchasing Digital
Cartography System in view of the fact that it has not been acquired by the Ministry despite provision of
budgetary allocation consecutively fo r three years, it was explained th at there will not be any cost
escalation because customs duty has been reduced recently. The Committee was, however, not informed
whether there would be any cost escalation in real  terms in the purchase of the equipment from the
manufacturing country.  
14. Another point raised was what the Ministry wa s doing to prevent deforestation. The submission o f
the Ministry was that during 1980s , 40,000 hectares of land was be ing lost every year, but with
increased Plan allocation, and financial assistance to  the tune of about Rs. 100 crores each year, the
Ministry has been able to contain deforestation to a great extent. The Ministry has been assisting people
to undertake plantation in private lands, Government  Wasteland, etc. and the target is to cover 800
million hectares of land. Seedlings worth Rs. 135 cror es are being distributed all over India at a very
nominal cost and the people are being imparted education in respect of planting the seedlings. Besides, it
is being impressed upon the Planning Commission and the Urban Development Ministry not to sanction
any Plans without considering various aspects of urban forestry.  
  
15.  The efforts of the Central and State Governme nts at afforestation, prev enting deforestation and
extending forest area b y developing wastelands cannot succeed unl ess the critical area of rava ging fires
Page 7 of 149th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/9threport.htm

in the forests is tackled on a war footing. A major fire in a forest may cause devastation as recently
happened in the Nagarhole forests. Such fires virtually reduce to naught  years of effort s of Ministry o f
Environment and Forests and the State Forest Departments in just minutes. In the course of the evidence
of the Secretary and othe r officials of the Ministry taken by th e Committee it came to light that in
controlling fires the Mi nistry is still depending upon conventi onal methods such as collecting the
villagers and providing fire fighting tools to them to undertake, the gigantic task of controlling forest
fires. In the Budgetary estimates for 1994-95 a provision of  just 2 crores of rupees has been made fo r 
introduction of modern forest  fire control methods in the country. Even if it be  assumed that this outlay
will be further supplemented by State allocations, s till this amount looks ridi culous when we talk o f
introducing modern methods of fire control. It has come to the notice of the Committee that close on the
heels of a major fire in the Nagar hole forest, another devastating fire  has been caused in vast areas o f
Orissa's Simlipal Wildlife Sanc tuary which went on raging for over 15 days with 'still no signs of its
being controlled. On a total area of  2,200 sq. kms. of the sanctuary at  least 200 sq. kms. was reported to
be in the grip of fire and the loss was expected to run into millions of rup ees. The Committee feels that
forest wealth worth crores of rupees is lost in  fires and accordingly would like to impress upon the
Ministry to examin e whether it could not be worth spe nding a small amount  on employing modern
methods of fire control like sprayi ng chemicals with the help of aeropl anes as is being done in some o f
the advanced countries. Besides, the Committee re commends that law should be made more stringent
with deterrent penalties' for thos e who deliberately set the forest s on fire and cause huge losses o f
national wealth. 
  
16.  Project Tiger is an important Centrally Sponsored Programme in the area of wildlife protection
launched in April, 1973; and for this a budgetary dema nd of Rs. 7.70 crores in th e Plan sector has been
made for 1994-95. This project has now been over 20 years old but the Committee feels that the basic 
objectives of this project have not been achieved in as much as that tiger population in the country has
registered a decline, poaching still continues in menacing proportions and the habitat for tigers seems to
have shrunk in area. The Committe e recommends that an evaluation of  the entire project be undertaken
by a high powered body to make it more meaningful and result-oriented.  
  
Major Head '343S'-Ecology and Environment  
  
            In the Budget outlay for 1994-95 a sum of Rs. 150.74 crores for the Plan sector and Rs. 38.80 
crores for the Non-plan sector has been earmarked. A comparison of these figures with the figures of the
previous year (1993-94) would reve al that there is just an incr ease of Rs. 2.41 crores in the Plan
component whereas there is a decr ease of Rs. 4.47 crores in the Non- plan component. In other words, 
the Plan outlay for 1994-95 in resp ect of ecology and environment is more or less corresponding to the
figures of the previous year. In the sub-head 'C.1 Surveys' under the majo r head of 'Ecology and 
Environment' the Non-plan component for the succe ssive three years has been  more than the Plan 
component, almost double. Confronted on this point, the explanatio n given by the Ministry is that Non-
plan expenditure reflects expenditu re on ongoing activities and Plan expenditure is the expenditure
proposed to be incurred on additi onal activities during a Plan peri od as per approval by the Planning
Commission. Moreover, the expenditure on establishm ent and on maintenance of assets created during
any Plan period are require d to be met out of Non- plan budget in the years subsequent to the Plan 
period. On the basis of the summary of Ministry's activities in the Environmental and Ecology sectors as
given in the Performance Budget, the Committee has come to the view that while these areas ·are 
engaging the attention of the Minist ry, the allocation in real terms do not reflect the magnitude of the
problem. Only a meagre allocation of Rs. 3 crores has been provide d for promotion of common effluent
treatment plants and that too unde r externally aided schemes. The Committee was surprised that even in
this area the progress is very slow and not much headway has been ma de, with the allocated amounts
practically lying unutilised. TheCommit tee feels that the Ministry shou ld initiate more concerted action
to motivate lar ger number of industrial units to go in for effluent treatment plants in lar ger national
Page 8 of 149th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/9threport.htm

interest of pollution control.  
  
18.   Though an allocation of Rs. 50.33 crores (both Plan and Non-plan) has been sought by the Ministry 
for prevention of air and water pollution during the year 1994-95, a perusal of the schemes in this area 
does not indicate that any major pr oject is on the anvil to meet the increasing challenge of the
environmental degradation. Th e projected assistance for abatement of pollution is just to the tune of 2
crores and similarly the amount ea rmarked for Hazardous Substance Ma nagement is just 3 crores o f
rupees. There is a need to strengthen the pollution fi ghting agencies which can be achieved only if there
is integrated action bot h by the Central and State Government . The State Governments are perhaps
unable to get actively involved in th is area because either  they are not in a pos ition to give matching
grants or lack pr oper motivation. Most of the schemes launched or contem plated by the Ministry o f
Environment and Forests such as Paryavaran Sudhar Pariyojna are of a peripheral nature and do not
strike at the root of th e problem. The idea behind setting up one Paryavaran Vahini for each identified
district with a view to create environmental awareness and involvement of people through active
participation, reporting of illegal  acts pertaining to forests, wild life, pollution and environmental
degradation is no doubt good, but there a ppear to be many pitfalls in the scheme which is mainly to be
administered through the District Co llectors who are supposed to take  action on the complaints of the
Members of the Vahini. There is an apprehension th at the persons brought on these Vahinis may not be
right sort of persons and the gr ant of Rs. 200 per month to each  Member given through the State
Gove7"nments may be poc keted by the persons who are not doi ng any' worthwhile  service. The
Committee, therefore, feels that while the Paryavaran Vahini Scheme  should be contined  and adequate
funds be made available therefor, there should be strict monitoring in respect of performance of these
Vahinis.  
  
19.   The Committee has observed that quite a substantial outlay of Rs. 350 crores has been provided for
in the Eighth Plan period for Ganga  Action Plan which involves prev ention of pollution of riverGanga
and National River Acti on Plan. However, in view of some dela ys in respect of some schemes relating
to Ganga Action Plan there have been cost overruns. In  the course of the oral evidence of the Secretary
and other officials of the Ministry, the Committee was apprised that the Ganga Action Plan is beset with
problems. For example, in respect  of the Sewage Treatment Plants  at Naini near Allahabad and at
Kanpur, the job is entrusted to a firm which has no t been able to push it through. The problem has been
solved as it has been decided that the work can be completed through other agencies. A point was raised
that frequent power failur es virtually make a sewage  treatment plant inoperationa l as a result of which
over flows are caused in the plants and the polluted water goes into the river defeating in the process the
very objective of the Ganga Action Plan. The Project Direct or of the Ganga Acti on Plan clarified that
there was of course, problem of power failure and the matter has been taken up with the Government o f
Uttar Pradesh .at various levels to ensure unint errupted power supply to the pumping stations. A
Steering Committee has been const ituted for the purpose of finding la sting solution to the problem and
the Governments of Uttar Pradesh a nd Bihar have given posi tive assurances that efforts will be made to
maintain regular power supply to the pumping stations. The Committee feels th at since Ganga Action
Plan is a Centrally Sponsored Sc heme, with Phase I thereof bei ng totally funded by the Central
Government, due emphasis should be laid on infrastructural facilities sothat the Plan makes unhindered
progress without being subject to handicaps of thenature     power failures.  
  
General Observations/Recommendations  
  
20. The Committee feels that in  order to fulfill the task s expected of the Ministry  it is necessary to have
technical personnel with the appropriate experience at the highest level of administration in the Ministry
rather than operate it largely as an administrative Ministry. This Ministry by itse1f cannot be expected to
perform all the major tasks relating to environment a nd forestry, even with th e assistance of related
agencies of the State Government s. The role of the Ministr y is to perform promotional and catal ytic
Page 9 of 149th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/9threport.htm

activities that show the way for society to implement meaningful pr ogrammes. For this it is necessary
that the Ministry concerns itself significantly with research and development that will enable it to evolve
practical low cost solutions. This does not appear to be apparent in the perfor mance of the Ministry and
the actuals of the Budget.  
  
21.  The Committee feels that the Mi nistry is engaged in far too ma ny schemes over which the financial
allocations are distributed, this probably leads to sub critical efforts in various  areas. The Committee is
of the view that in the manner in which the progr ammes and activities of the Ministry have been
formulated and are being implemented; there is not any integrated thrust in the direction of sub-stainable 
development.  In this, they will have work out an integrated mix of regulatory & promotional measures,
awareness building in education and close institutional tie-ups with the multiple agencies concerned 
with developmental tasks.  
  
ANNEXURE-III 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND 
FORESTS 
XXXI 
Thirty-First Meeting 
The Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Scien ce and Technology, Environment 
and Forests met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 21st March, 1994 in Room  No. 63, First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.  
PRESENT  
1 Syed Sibtey Razi-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
Prof. M.G.K. Menon  
Shri Suresh Pachouri  
 Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel  
 Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh  
LOK SABHA  
Shri Oscar Fernandes  
Shri Sharad Dighe  
Kumari Frida Topno  
Pt. Vishwanath Sharma  
Shri Balraj Pasi  
Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia  
Shrimati Saroj Dubey  
  Shri Radhika Ranjan Pramanik  
. Shri Jitendra Nath Das  
SECRET ARIA T  
Shri Shrinivasrao S. Sohoni, Additional Secretary  
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director'  
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary  
Shri N.K. Singh, Assistant Director  
Shri J agdish Kumar, Committee Officer  
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS  
New Delhi                                                               
April 7, 1994 
SYED SIBTEY RAZ 
Chairman, 
  
Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment and Forests,
Page 10 of 149th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/9threport.htm

         Shri R. Rajamani, Secretary  
Shri Vinny Shankar, Additional Secretary  
Shri B.P. Singh, Additional Secretary  
Shri K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary  
Shri A.K. Mukerji, Inspector General of Forests  
Shri S.C. Dey, Additional Inspector General of Forests  
Shri NarainSingh, Additional Inspector General of Forests  
Shri S.S. Rizvi, Joint Secretary  
Shri J.C. Kala, Joint Secretary  
Shri Alok Jain, joint Secretary  
Shri S.W. Oak, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
            Shri S. Jha, Joint Secretary       .  
Dr. D.N. Tiwari, Director General, ICFRE  
Shri Harjit Singh, Advisor,  
Shri K. Desiraju, Director  
Shri S.S. Mohanty, Director  
Shri R.S. Ahlawat, Director  
Shri R.K. Tandon, Director  
Shri M.L. Sharma, Director (Animal Welfare)  
Shri C.S. Vedant, DIG (FF)  
Shri M.K. Jiwatajka, DIG (CF)  
Shri S.P. Chakraborty, Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board  
Shri K.S. Narayanan, Chief Engineer  
Shri Rameshwar Dayal, Under Secretary  
Shri T. Srinidhi, Under Secretary  
The Committee took up for consideration the Detailed Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry o
f 
Environment and Forests. The Secretary of the Ministry at the outset briefly explained the allocations on
different activities / projects of the Ministry as proposed in  its Detailed Demands for Grants. The
Members then sought clarifications from him and other  
            representatives of the Ministry.   
3. The discussion on the Demands for Grants remained inconclusive.  
.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.  
4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.25 P.M. to meet again at  11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd
March. 1994.  
XXXII 
Thirty-Second Meeting 
The Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Scien ce and Technology, Environment 
and Forests met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, th e 22nd March, 1994 in Room No. 63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.  
            PRESENT  
1. Syed Sibtey Razi.- Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
 Shri Suresh Pachouri  
 Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel  
 Shri W. Kulabidu Singh  
LOK SABHA  
  Shri Oscar Fernandes  
  Shri Sharad Dighe  
  Kumari Frida Topno  
  Shri Balra
j Pasi  
Page 11 of 149th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/9threport.htm

  Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia  
 Shrimati Saroj Dubey  
 Shri Radhika Ranjan Pramanik  
 Shri Jitendra Nath Das  
 Shri E. Ahmed  
SECRETARIAT  
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director  
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary  
Shri N.K. Singh, Assistant Director  
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer  
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS  
Shri R. Rajamani, Secretary  
Shri Vinay Shankar, Additional Secretary  
Shri B.P. Singh, Additional Secretary  
Shri K.K. Baksi Additional Secretary  
Shri A.K. Mukerji, Inspector General of Forests  
Shri Narain Singh, Addl. IGF  
Shri S.C. Dey Additional Inspector General of Forests  
Shri S.S. Rizvi, Joint Secretary  
Shri S. W. Oak, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
Shri J.C. Kala, Joint Secretary  
Shri Alok Jain, joint Secretary  
Shri Sarweshwar Jha. Joint Secretary  
Dr. D.N. Tiwari, Director General, ICFRE  
Shri Harjit Singh, Advisor,  
Shri K. Desiraju, Director  
Shri S.S. Moballty, Director  
Shri R.S. Ahlawat, Director  
Shri R.K. Tandon, Director  
Shri M.L. Sharma, Director  
Shri M.K. Jiwarajka  
Shri C.S. Vedant, DIG  
Shri S.P. Chakraborty, Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board  
Shri K.S. Narayanan, Chief Engineer  
Dr. G.V. Subrahmanian, Additional Director  
Shri R. Ananda Kumar, Additional Director  
Shri T. Srinidhi, Under Secretary  
Shri Rameshwar Dayal, Under Secretary  
2.         The Committee took up further considerat ion of the Detailed Demands for Grants (1994-95) o
f 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests and heard th e replies of the Secretary and other representatives
of the Ministry to the outset clarifications sought by the Members.  
3.         The Committee concluded its delibera tions on the Demands for Gr ants of the Ministry o f
Environment and Forests.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.  
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 2.05 P. M. to meet again at. 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 23rd
March, 1994.  
 
Page 12 of 149th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/9threport.htm

XXXVIII Thirty-Eighty Meeting 
The Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Scien ce and Technology, Environment 
and Forests met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday the 7t h April, 1994 in Committe e Room 'A' Ground Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.  
PRESENT  
1. Syed Sibtey Razi-Chairman RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Mutli ,Manohar Joshi  
LOK SABHA  
Shri Oscar Fernandes  
Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav  
Shri Harchand Singh  
Shri Vijay Naval Patil  
Kumari Frida Topno  
Shri Braj Bhushan Sharan Singh  
Shri Chandresh patel  
Shri Balraj Pasi  
Shrimati Saroj Dubey  
Shri Jitendra Nath Das  
Shri E. Ahamed  
14. Shri Pt. Vishwanath Sharma  
SECRETARIAT  
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director  
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary  
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer  
REPRESENT A TIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS  
Shri N. Vittal, Secretary  
Shri V.P. Kodali, Advisor  
Shri N. Gopalaswami, Joint Secretary  
Shri K. Roy Paul, Joint Secretary  
Shri S.W. Oak, Joint Secretary and Financial Adviser  
Shri J.S. Raju, DG (STQC)  
Dr. Pranob Sen, Economic Adviser  
Shri S.S Oberoi, Senior Director 
Shri Gautam Soni, Senior Director  
Shri S. Mukhopadhyay, Senior Director  
Shri A.K. Chakravorty, Senior Director  
Dr. U.P. Phadke, Senior Director  
Dr. S.L. Sarnot, Senior Director  
Dr. V. Dharamadhikari, Senior Director  
Shri R.K. Srivastava, Senior Director  
 Dr. K.S.K. Sai, Director  
 Dr. R.K. Arora, Director  
 Shri S.N. Zindal, Director  
Dr. P.N. Gupta Director  
Shri T. Teethan, Deputy Secretary  
Shri B.C. Mohanty, CMD, ET&T Dr. K.K.K. Kutty, CMD, CMC  
Shri M.J. Zarabi, CMD SCL  
Shri B.B. Bahl, Deputy Director (Parl.)  
Shri J .K. Tyagi. Assistant Financial Adviser  
  
2.         The Chairman at the outset informed the Members that the Committee had as on date 
(7.4. 1994)
Page 13 of 149th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/9threport.htm

completed a tenure of one year and was being re constituted w.e.f. April 8. 1994. He thanked the
Members for extending him their wh ole-hearted, co-operation in conduc ting the proceedings of the 
Committee smoothly and taking keen in terest in its deliberations as a result of which it was possible fo r
the Committee to present seven repor ts to both the Houses. He expresse d ,the hope that since almost all
the Members of the existing Comm ittee had been re-nominated on the reconstituted Committee he 
would continue to have their co operation as before and the Commi ttee would function with renewed
vigour.  
3.         The Committee then took up for consideration its draft Eighth and Ninth Reports on the Detailed
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Department of Bi otechnology and the Mini stry of Environment 
and Forests, respectively and adopted the same, without any amendments.  
4.         The Committee decided to present thes e Reports to both the Houses  of Parliament on the 18th
April, 1994. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence, Shri Aj it P.K. Jogi to present
the Reports to the Rajya Sabha a nd Kumari Frida Topno and in her ab sence, Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan
Singh to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.  
5.         The Committee ther eafter took up further consideration of the Detailed Demands for Grants
(1994-95) of the De partment of Electronics and heard the replies of  the Secretary and othe r 
representatives of the Department to the clarifications sought by the Members on various points relating
to the budgetary allocation as proposed in these Demands for Grants.  
6.         The Committee concluded its delibera tions on the Demands for Gran ts of the Department o f
Electronics.  
  
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.  
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.05 P. M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 8th
April, 1994.  
 
♣  Vacancy caused due to the demise of Shri Nani Bhattacharya on October 11, 1993.  
 
Page 14 of 149th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/9threport.htm