 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS  
 
TWO HUNDRED ELEVENTH REPORT 
ON  
"THE PROTECTION AND UTILISATION OF PUBLIC FUNDED 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY BILL, 2008" 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE HON'BLE CHAIRMAN,  RAJYA SABHA ON 28TH JUNE, 2010) 
(FORWARDED TO HON'BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 28TH JUNE, 2010) 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 2
ND AUGUST, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 2ND AUGUST, 2010) 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI
 
AUGUST, 2010/ ASVINA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
C O N T E N T S 
   
       PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                   ( i) -(ii) 
2. PREFACE                                       (iii) 
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                    1-26 
4. ANNEXURES                                                                                                              
5.   MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                              
                               

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2010) 
---------- 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy  –– Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
 ** 2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
3. Shri Anil H. Lad 
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
5. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi  
6. Shri Saman Pathak 
7. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
8. Dr. Ejaz Ali 
9. Shri Jabir Husain 
10. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
 LOK SABHA 
11. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg 
12. Shri Udayanraje Bhonsale 
13. Shri Ninong Ering  
14. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
15. Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
16. Shrimati Kaisar Jahan 
17. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
18. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
19. Shri C. R. Patil 
20. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle 
21. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
22. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
23. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
 # #24. Vacant 
25. Dr. Rajan Sushant 
26. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
27. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
28. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava 
29. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
 30. Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
          #31. Shri K.C. Singh Baba 
                                                 
 Nominated w.e.f. 14th October, 2009 
**  Nominated w.e.f. 31st December, 2009 
     #  Nominated w.e.f.  11th January, 2010 
  # #  Shri Yashwant Sinha ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from the           
Committee w.e.f. 1st February, 2010 
 
 
 

SECRETARIAT 
 Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary 
 Shri  Alok Chatterjee, Director 
 Shri  V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri  Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
PREFACE 
           I, the Chairman of the De partment-related Parliament ary Standing Committee on 
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred and Eleventh Report on ‘The 
Protection and Utilisation of Public Funded Intellectual Property Bill, 2008’. 
2.       In the meetings of the Committee held on the 17 th & 24th December, 2009, 5th January, 8th 
February and 2 nd June, 2010; Secretaries of the Depart ments of Bio-technology, Scientific & 
Industrial Research, Science & Technology and expe rts/representatives of the Defence Research 
& Development Organisation, various institut es, industrial federati ons, scientists and Non-
Governmental Organisations; tendered oral ev idence on the various aspects related to ‘The 
Protection and Utilisation of Public Funded Intellectual Property Bill, 2008’. 
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to  the Officers of the Departments and 
experts/representatives for rendering their valuable views/clarifications sought by the Members of 
the Committee. 
4.      In the meeting held on 7th June, 2010 the Committee considered the draft report and adopted 
the same.  
 
NEW DELHI
;                                                                                         Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy   
7th June, 2010                                                                                    Chairman, 
                     Department-related Pa rliamentary Standing                      
 Committee  on Science & Technology,    Environment & Forests. 
REPORT  
The Chairman, Rajya Sabha in pursuance of Rule 270 (b) of the Rules relating to 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, referred* ‘The Protection 
and Utilisation of Public Funded Intellectual Property Bill, 2008’(Annexure-I) as 
introduced on 15th December, 2008 in Rajya Sabha and pending therein, to the Standing 
Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests for examination and 
report. 
2. The Committee held its first meeting with  the representatives of Department of 
Bio-technology, for a general discussion on the various provisions of the Bill.   The 
Committee also heard the views of thirteen experts from va rious Institutes, industrial 
federations, scientists and Non-Governmental Organi sations on the subject on              
17th & 24 th December, 2009, 5 th January, 8 th February and 2 nd June, 2010 (Names of 
experts at Annexure-II). The Committee also heard the views of the representatives of the 
Department of Scientific & Industrial Re search, and Defence Research & Development 
Organisation on the 8 th February, 2010 and Department of Science & Technology on the 
2nd June, 2010. Written memoranda containi ng comments/suggestions on the various 
provisions of the Bill were also received fr om some of the experts mentioned above and 
the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalo re. The Committee adopted the Report in its 
meeting held on 7th June, 2010. 

 Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin P a r t  I I  d a t e d  t h e                          1 8 t h  
December, 2008. 
3. We are today living in a highly comp lex and excessively competitive world.  
While on the one hand, the world order is ch aracterized by globalization which calls for 
growing economic interdependence of count ries worldwide thr ough increasing volume 
and variety of trade and tran saction in goods and services, free flow of international 
capital, exchange of technology, etc., what stan ds in stark contrast to this, on the other 
hand, is the attempt to claim distinct monopo lies and exclusive righ ts over creation of 
intangible assets, such as discoveries and inventions, artistic and literary works, etc.  Both 
the phenomena – globalization, as well as, cr eation of monopolies by way of patenting 
have their potential fallouts, specially on th e developing countries.  Trade liberalization 
and technological improvements tend to change  the course of economy of a country by 
allowing cheap imports of manufactured goods and in the process destroying traditional 
sources of income and live lihood like agriculture and sm all scale industries.  The 
inevitable consequence to this causes large-scale unemployment, as employment 
opportunities in the traditional sectors of economy become scarce and people being not 
properly skilled and qualified to handle the jo bs which are created.  At the same time, 
patenting serves as a tool to preclude sharing of scientific know how with the developing 
countries and denial of technology transfer.   
4.  Now, when we are confronted with such  a complex and conflicting world order, it 
becomes incumbent upon us to be geared up and get ready to brav e the challenges in 
order not only to survive but to  prosper and flourish as well.  It is a well-known fact that 
Research and development of products and pr ocesses by the universit ies as well as the 
academic and research institutions is of prime importance for the socio-economic growth 
of the country. In fact the manufacturing competitiveness of a country depends on how 
far it is able to utilize its knowledge infr astructure for the purpose of  innovation, 
generation as well as contro lling Intellectual Property Righ ts. Generation of Intellectual 
Property Rights in modern world depends upon abilities to make strategic investments 
into research and development. Appreciating this , the Government of  I ndia   has   been  
investing  large   amounts   of   funds in to  basic and applied research, through the 
scientific and other Central Ministries and Departments. The expenditure on research and 
development by Central Ministries and Departments including the major scientific 
agencies is to the tune of approximately Rs. 52,503.96 crore from 1998-99 to 2002-2003. 
5. Secretary, DBT during his evidence befo re the Committee informed that as 
regards, institutional framework for patent s there are no proper gui delines on what to 
patent, how to even bring it to the notice that there is something patentable and after 
patenting how to manage the decisions for technology transfer to relevant companies, etc.  
He further informed the Committee that th e flow of knowledge from laboratory to 
industry is happening but it is  not happening effec tively and uniformly in all the public 
funded academic research institutions because th is requires process development.  This 
Bill is, therefore, an attempt to instit utionalize processes by bringing a uniform 
understanding and practice of mapping of in tellectual property, patenting and doing 
technology transfer, so that, the flow of knowledge to industry  is seamless, efficient and 
guided by some principles and the universities and academic and research institutions are 
supported to build this capacity  to handle it efficiently.  In  nutshell, the Secretary, DBT 
informed that the Bill aims to provide for patenting as an obligation, technology transfer 

as a responsibility and royalty as  a right to the scientists.  Th is Bill gives an obligation to 
the scientists to patent when there is somethi ng patentable because lot of scientists do not 
want to patent or don’t patent.  It makes obligatory on the scientists and the institution to 
negotiate with companies for technology transfer which they may not be interested in. 
6. The Committee enquired from the Secret ary, DBT as to what will be the impact 
when this Bill becomes an act and comes into force, vis-à-vis the current scenario.  The 
Secretary, DBT replied that currently India has no law which makes it necessary for any 
scientist to patent anything, nor does the c ountry have any law which makes it obligatory 
for research and academic inst itutions to transfer a techno logy.  Such an initiative has 
become all the more inevitable in view of th e fact that in the i nnovation ranking of the 
world today, India is at the bottom, the Secretary mentioned before the Committee.  Even 
a small country like Finland and Ireland are way ahead of India.  Indi a, therefore, needs 
to become a discovery – innovation – nation capable of discovering and making things on 
our own and not by copying others.  The Secretary further informed the Committee that it 
is not that our academic or research instituti ons are not doing anything in the direction of 
patent.  There are some elite scientific and academic institutions which have gradually 
institutionalized some of the practices and policies, but only a small, say 5 per cent of the 
institutions have a technology transfer office, most Univer sities do not have anyone 
skilled in technology transfer a nd majority of Universities do not have patenting cells or 
facilities.  So the current scenario can be summed up by saying that we range in practice 
from good in about 10 to 12 per cent of the ins titutions to average in about 20 to 30 per 
cent to non-existent practices and policies in about 60 per cent. 
7. This gives us a very hazy picture of the state of affairs in th e country and it is in 
this background that such a le gislation has become the need  of the day, so that, this 
problem could be dealt with in a holistic and uniform manner through out the country and 
across all the academic and research institutions.  The leit motif of the Bill is, therefore, to 
create guidelines and institutional framework in academic and research institutions. 
8. The Secretary, DBT brought to the notic e of the Committee the following positive 
aspects of the Bill:- 
8.1 This Bill will give rise to number of patents because now every scientist getting 
public money would be under an ob ligation by law to patent wh at is patentable.  It will 
also increase the flow of knowledge to industry.   Scientists will no more be able to hold 
the Intellectual Property, thinking that he ow ns it and thus it will effectively obviate 
hoarding of knowledge.  Companies will be benefited in the process through India’s 
scientific innovation.  
8.2 At present publication of research paper in reputed national and international 
magazines is associated with prestige for sc ientists working in majority of academic and 
scientific institutions.  Such a publication so metimes results in unintended disclosure of 
valuable knowledge with potential of inte llectual property.  Sometimes, their leads may 
be developed further and patented by foreign scientists.  Thus, the original researcher and 
the country lose invaluable intellectual prope rty.  This Bill, therefore, through clauses 
3(3), 4 and 6 provide to protect the interests of scientists, the institutions they are working 
in and the country at large by sensitizing them , so that they can be major players in 
generation of innovation by being a bit more cautious and conscious.   
 

8.3  At present in the absence of any prot ectionary measures and guidance for patents 
what is happening is that international companies ar e approaching academic and 
research institutions and buying their patents.  Indian scientists are actually signing 
agreements with them for Intellectual Propert y Management.  It means that India will 
pay for the science/innovation while the othe r countries reap the benefit.  Foreign 
countries are plundering our scientific capabilities and we are helpless. 
8.4 Technology transfer at the moment is  being done by tender process without any 
skillful technology transfer officer.  The Direct or of an institution who may also be a 
scientist and who does not know much about this business takes a decision on the basis 
of highest amount offered by a company.  But this process of technology transfer does 
not prove to be effective and efficacious  in successful product development.  It 
sometimes leads to dumping of the intellect ual property because th e successful bidder 
for whatever reasons, are not able to de velop a product or te chnology.  Technology 
transfer office with people trained in technology transfer, contracting, legal services, etc.  
is therefore required. Today, India has a handful of people trained in technology transfer 
as a result of which India has to hire professionals from outside.  The country therefore, 
badly needs professional and systems to ma ke India a power in innovative technology.  
The country is almost 15 years behind on this fr ont and even if India starts this process 
today, it will take some 10 years to put whole establishment and system in place.  
Clause 10 of the Bill thus seeks to address this issue by providing to constitute an 
intellectual property management committee within the organisation within one hundred 
and eighty days of the receipt of public fund.   
8.5  Further, there are other government ag encies, namely, Defence, Atomic Energy, 
Space, etc., which have never in  the past used their Intell ectual Property to build an 
industry for civilian applications.  Even if  their Intellectual Property had non-strategic 
value and had non-defence applications, it was never transferred to a company for 
civilian applications.  But, now they are prep ared to share their Intellectual Property for 
civilian application and such  a development could immensely benefit the industry and 
the society. 
8.6 It has also been felt that in this age of  intense and cut-throat competition, there is 
a strong need to introduce and enthuse professionalism in innovation eco-system.  
Oxford and Cambridge Universities have cr eated IP companies which visit each and 
every laboratory once in 2 to 3 weeks and talk  to the scientists and find out what the 
scientists are doing.  What ha ve they recently found out?   This is how they do 
Intellectual Property mapping.  This stands in stark contrast to the situation prevailing in 
our country.  Many of the times even the heads of the institution may not have full 
knowledge of their institutions whether they  have something patentable because it 
requires talking to scientists at regular in tervals.  The country needs to create and 
develop such professionalism in our research and academic institutions. 
8.7 Yet another issue that Indi a needs to think over is that whether the country should 
continue to look at science in a traditional manner, i.e., science as a pure endeavour for 
pursuit of knowledge, for pleasure and for cu riosity or we should, in the changed global 
scenario try to give something back to the society through invention and innovation.  By 
writing papers we can draw solace and sa tisfaction but cannot provide affordable 
solutions for the people, can’t expand our  manufacturing and in crease employment 
opportunities.  So the country needs to consciously think in terms of using science as an 

instrument of socio-economic transformation or  else we are vulnerable to lag behind in 
the race of all-round development.  
9. The expected benefits of the Bill, in brief, are as under:  
i) The legislation will provide a uniform legal framework within the country 
for protection and utilization of the In tellectual Property generated out of 
public funded research and development.  
ii)  Innovations in private sector as well as in universities, academic and 
research institutions that receive grants from Government will be 
encouraged.  
iii)  Collaboration between  Government, non-governmental organizations and 
private sector will be promoted.  
iv)  The Bill provides for the utiliza tion of public funded Intellectual Property 
and sharing of income or royalty ea rned between the Intellectual Property 
Creator and the recipient. Not less than  30% of the income or royalty has 
to be given to the intellectual prope rty creator and this will promote the 
innovation culture in the country.  
v) The legislation will facilitate commercialization of Intellectual Property 
generated out of Government funded research and development and will 
also promote innovation culture within the country.  
vi) Dependence of universities, academi c and research institutions and other 
recipient organizations for funding on the Government will be minimized 
as the Bill provides for utilization of a portion of royalties or income, 
generated out of the pub lic funded Intellectual Pr operty, for research and 
educational purposes.  
vii)   Employment generation in niche areas, with unique skills required for the 
Intellectual Property management, de velopment and marketing, will be 
encouraged.  
viii) Transfer of technologies from research laboratories to market place 
(nationally and internationally) wi ll spur technological and financial 
growth of the country.  
10.   Clause-wise salient featur es of the Bill are as under : 
10.1 The Bill seeks to provide for a funding agreement between the Government and 
the recipient, whereby any recipient interested  to take a grant from the Government for 
the purpose of research and development shall enter into an agreement with the 
Government before release of grant.(clause 3) 
10.2 Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the r ecipient shall within a period of sixty days 
of actual knowledge of the public  funded intellectual property make a disclosure thereof 
to the Government in such form and manner as specified in the Bill.  
10.3 Clause 5 seeks to provide for vesting of the title of public  funded intellectual 
property with the recipient or the Government , as the case may be. The recipient shall 
within ninety days of the disclosure under Clause 4, intimate to the Government, his 
intention to retain the title of the public funded intellectual property with respect to the 
designated countries. In case the recipient fails to disclose or give such intimation within 
the specified time, the title of the intellectual property, shall vest in the Government. 
 

10.4 Clause 9 of the Bill provides that the recipient shall not publically disclose, 
publish or exhibit the public funded intell ectual property till an application for the 
protection of the same in the designated countries is made.  
10.5 Clause 10 of the Bill provides that ever y recipient shall, wi thin one hundred and 
eighty days of the receipt of the funds under section 3, constitute an intellectual property 
management committee within its orga nisation. The said Committee shall inter-alia 
identify, assess, document and protect pub lic funded intellectua l property having 
commercial potential; perform market re search and market such public funded 
intellectual property; create an intellectual property management fund.  
10.6 Clause 11 of the Bill provides that not less than thirty per cent of income or 
royalties out of the income or royalties ar ising out of the public  funded intellectual 
property, after deducting the e xpenses incurred in protecti on and utilisation, shall be 
given to the creator of intellectual property. Out of the remainder, thirty per cent shall be 
paid into the fund created by the ‘Intellectua l Property Management Committee’. Rest of 
the income or royalties shall be retained by the recipient for their utilisation in any further 
research and to meet other expenses for th e protection and maintenance of public funded 
intellectual property.   
10.7 Clause 12 provides for the preference to  the domestic industr y in manufacturing 
products using the public funded intellectual property by restraining the recipient who has 
retained title to a ny public funded intellectual property from granting to any person, the 
exclusive right to use or sell any public f unded intellectual property in India, unless such 
person manufactures products using the public funded intellectual property substantially 
in India.  
10.8 Under Clause 14 of the Bill provisions have been made for the preparation of 
accounts and other relevant records by the reci pient for its audit by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 
10.9 Clause 18 inter-alia seeks to grant non-exclusive, exclusive, or partially exclusive 
licences for Government owned public funded intellectual property. 
10.10   Clauses 20, 21 and 22 seek to provide fo r stoppage of grant and its recovery in 
case of contravention of the provisions of the Bill; penalty for failure to discharge the 
duties of intellectual property creator and pe nalty for the failure to discharge duties of 
recipient respectively. 
11. In order to have a better understanding and also to have an objective assessment 
of the Bill, the Committee interacted with  the experts from academic institutions, 
scientists and represen tatives of non-government organisati ons.  During its interaction 
with various experts, the Committee garnered a mixed response on the Bill.  While some 
of the experts wholeheartedly supported the Bi ll, some expressed their views against it.  
Some of the viewpoints expressed against this Bill are as follows: -  
 Some of the experts were of the view that there is nothing in the Bill which is 
going to help, specifically to the scientists  in the country.  This is so because 
what the Bill intends to do is already possible and is in practice.  Scientists 
hold patents, do technology transfer and get royalty incentives and as such the 
Bill does not provide any more facilita tion to the scientists than they are 
already getting.  The current Bill, on th e contrary imposes restrictions on the 
scientists.  The Committee was further informed that the current executive 
process allows for a great deal of flex ibility that scientists look for.  The 

purpose of the Bill could, therefore, be achieved through executive orders 
which are flexible rather than th rough legislative process, which is 
prescriptive and rigid in nature. 
 When the Secretary, Department of Biotechnology was aske d to give his 
opinion on this issue it was stated th at the Bill may not help the elite 
institutions which have gr adually developed the system  what the Bill intends 
to achieve because they already have  an understanding of how to handle the 
flow of knowledge to industry.  He furt her stated that some of the institutes 
like Indian Institute of Technology (IITs), Indian Institute of Immunology, 
Indian Institute of Science, etc. have developed this system and have put it 
into practice.  When a student or a faculty develops a new knowledge which 
can be translated into a product or de vice and it is bought by a company for 
some price, some part of the money is reinvested in research facility and a 
portion of it goes to the scientist as r oyalty.  But this is happening only in a 
few elite institutes which needs to be replicated in all the academic and 
research institutes.  The Committee was further informed that as regards these 
elite institutes even they need to imp rove upon their system as some of the 
technologies that were transferred to i ndustries from them did not lead to any 
socially useful products b ecause of lack of professi onal expertise in handling 
those technology transfers.  Even th ese elite institutions don’t have any 
accepted common guidelines and consistent institutional framework.  In such 
a situation no institution is going by a collective wisdom and everyone is 
going the way it likes to, thinking th at they have only rights and no 
obligations.  This is the situation whic h the Bill intends to address and in the 
process help the society.  Secondly, I ndia is not a club of only 5 or so big 
institutes.  It has a large number of  academic and scientific research 
institutions working under various Minist ries like Chemicals and Fertilizers, 
Health, Industry, Human Resource De velopment, Atomic Energy, Defence, 
Deptt. of Biotechnology, etc.  So, to bring some amount of standardization, 
capacity improvement and institutional fr amework in such a large number of 
institutions functioning under different Mi nistries, it was felt that it is very 
difficult to do this by executive orders.  That’s why an enabling legislation 
was considered as a preferred option.  The Committee agrees with the view of 
the Government and feels that an enab ling legislation is a better option to 
bring fundamental changes in such a vast number of institutes.  The 
Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that Bill is really useful and is going to 
help the country.   
 The Committee was further  informed th at the Bill seems to pose a practical 
problem to the scientists by prescribing that all ‘Intellectual Property’ created 
with Government funding is to be subjected to intellectual property protection, 
i.e., patenting that too within a specific and strict time frame of sixty days as 
provided in clause 4 of th e Bill.  Scientists make experiments everyday, and 
may be that everyday or every couple of days, they have a small new finding.  
It may not, in the judgment of scientis ts, be such a finding that needs to be 
protected because it may or may not lead  to creation of intellectual property 
but according to the Bill the scientist is  bound to report to the Intellectual 

Property Management Committee about hi s finding.  Now the problem before 
the scientists lies in the fact that ho w much of finding should a scientist make 
before he or she reports and a scientist has to do this with every new finding 
by filing paper work with the IP Management Committee and the Committee 
reports to the Government.  Thus, the Bill effectively builds up a whole flow 
of paper work in bureaucracy – scient ists representing to IP Management 
Committee and Committee reporting to Government and if this starts 
happening with every new finding, one can imagine the volume of paperwork 
that will be generated in  around 300 plus Universities /Institutions all over the 
country.  With this sort of prescriptive nature of the Bill, possibilities of abuse 
and harassment may not be ruled out because some scientists may be doing all 
the paper work, while others may not be .  This will create a very piquant 
situation.  It is this nitty-gritty and the actual/practical im plementation aspect 
of the Bill which bothers scientists and not the broader policy issues of the 
Bill as illustrated by the S ecretary, DBT.  For this practical problem, the Bill 
needs to be improved from being prescriptive to genuinely facilitatory. 
 When the Committee sought Government’s reaction to this reservation, the 
Secretary, Department of Biotechnology was very forthright in broadly 
agreeing to make suitable changes in the Bill.  The Committee is of the 
opinion that the provision of mandatory pa tenting in all cases as provided in 
the Bill has its other fall-outs too.  Blind patenting of all IP created, may prove 
to be counter productive because all of  them, may not be potent enough to be 
converted into a product or technology.   
 The Committee also feels that the creat or of the intellectual property knows 
better as to whether his innovation will l ead to a product and since he has the 
vision to take it further to the process of technology, he or she must be 
associated in the Intellectual Property Management Committee to take a 
decision on patenting and its technology transfer to the company. 
 The Committee finds that one of the obj ectives of this Bill is likely to 
commercialize knowledge which goes agains t the tenets of our tradition of 
imparting knowledge and wisdom to the world.  The Bill is, therefore, likely 
to promote crass competitiveness away  from creativity in universities and 
research institutes.   
 When the Committee desired to know th e reaction of experts from academia 
on this issue, it was informed that t oday we are living in a different world 
where the whole country has become a small village as information is 
disseminated immediately.  Knowledge t oday is looked at from two ways – 
one as something like writing philos ophy to understand human relations and 
the other as can be used in day to da y life for the good of the humanity.  Now, 
knowledge has become such a powerful  component that if we do not use 
somebody else will use it and reap the be nefit.  The creato r of the knowledge 
will be deprived of that.  So, now it is  understood that money can be made out 
of new knowledge – “Arthkari Vidya” advocated in the ancient text as one of 
the comforts of the mortal world.  On  the more, money today has become the 
source of creation of knowledge.  Moreover,  whatever little is proposed to be 
generated out of it certain portion of that  is ploughed back in to research.  The 

Bill aims at developing a system whic h helps everybody.  The scientists gets 
royalty, industry gets a product to de velop and the society gets a new 
technology.  The Committee is convinced w ith the contention of the experts 
and is of the view that India can’t live in isolation and continue to do science 
for knowledge sake only.  The country must use science for the societal 
benefit and for seeking solutions for food, environment and other technology 
related problems which the country is confronting today.   
 The Committee was given to understand that the original intent of the Bill was 
to cover inventions and patents a nd this was the recommendation of the 
Knowledge Commission.  But the Bill in its current form expands itself to 
include copyrights; trademark, designs, etc.  thus, taking the scope of the Bill 
far beyond inventions.  The Committee was further informed that with 
bringing copyright into the ambit of the Bill, IT Sector would be adversely 
affected because free and open source software activities can’t take place. 
 The Committee is of the opinion that c opyrights come into play with creation 
of work and does not need registration for validity.  
 The Statement of Objects and Reasons, though not on integral part of the Bill, 
plays the role of a prism through which the purpose behind the Bill could be 
perceived.  The Committee notes that pa ra 3 of the Statement forcefully 
asserts that resources generated out of intellectual property will prompt self-
reliance and will minimize dependen ce of public funded universities, 
academic and research institutions and other recipient organisations for Govt. 
funding.  The natural corollary to this a ssertion leads one to the inference that 
Govt. gradually but certainly wants to w ithdraw itself as far as finances are 
concerned by aiming at making universi ties self-reliant.  The Secretary, DBT 
vehemently denied any such attempt being made by the Govt. through this 
Bill.  Some experts also tried to al lay the apprehension by saying that 
monetary part of it is, in fact, insignifi cant.  It was stated that even under the 
best situation academic and research institutions will be able to generate five 
per cent of the grant received from the Govt. in ten years time from now.  The 
Committee, however, is of the opinion that such a forceful yet unfounded 
assertion on making universities fina ncially self-reliant creates a wrong 
impression.  At the same time, Govt. cannot absolve itself of the 
responsibility to provide adequate f und that it owes towards universities 
and research institutions.  The Co mmittee, therefore, recommends that 
the relevant paragraph should be suitably amended.   
 Yet another objective of the Bill as provi ded in the Statement of Objects and 
Reasons and forcefully made out and asserted by Secretary, DBT is promotion 
of transfer of technology from lab to  companies or industry and to ensure 
access to innovation by all stakeholders for public good.  A large number of 
witnesses/ experts who appeared before the Committee expressed their serious 
reservations on the Bill.  They str ongly apprehended that the mandatory 
patenting of public funded intellectual property and the technology transfer, as 
provided in the Bill will not promote public good as commercialization of 
intellectual property will lead to rise in prices of drugs and it would hit the 

poor really hard.  Essential drugs will go out of the reach of the common man 
who can not afford to pay market prices. 
 Yet another risk that the Bill is fraught with is that, with such objectives as – 
‘Commercialization of in tellectual property created  out of public funded 
research, utilization of innovations for raising resources th rough royalties or 
income’, the area and focus of research  may tilt in favour of market driven 
model rather than the social sector m odel because the former guarantees more 
financial gain to the inventor a nd the recipient from the successful 
manufacture and marketing of technologies  than the latter.  Now, the inventor 
will aim at technologies in areas that would be expect ed to fetch market place 
profits rather than the social sector good, the driving force being the profit and 
profit alone.  Promoting such a profit orie nted motif would give fillip to the 
tendency to focus on applied research or to develop technologies rather than to 
concentrate on basic science/academic or other fundamental research to 
develop models of understanding.   
 When the Committee inquired from the Secretary, Department of Science & 
Technology(DST) as to whether some modi fications could be made in the bill 
without compromising on the original concept of the Bill, it was informed that 
this issue needs to be seen in a la rger perspective and it would not be 
appropriate nor advisable to incorpor ate any such clauses in the present 
legislation which falls outside the scope of the Bill. In the same meeting the  
representatives of some NGOs also brought to the notice of the Secretary, 
DST the need for a separate legislat ion for regulation of Research and 
Development. The Secretary, accepted the fact and stated that a separate 
Bill will be brought out to cater to  the requirement of Research & 
Development so that research on diseases such as Malaria, Cholera, 
Diabetes, Tuberculosis, etc.  coul d be encouraged and promoted. The  
Committee agrees to the contention of the Department and recommends 
that government should bring out a se parate legislation on Research and 
Development relating to the interest  of the common man after holding 
wider consultation with various stake holders.      
 The Committee feels that this Bill is likely to shape the direction and set 
the destination of research and innovation in the country, Govt. must give 
due thoughts on this issue and weigh all the pros and cons before taking a 
final decision on this matter.  The Co mmittee is of the opinion that while 
formulating a policy for promoting util ization of inventions arising out of 
public funded research, Govt. must strive to strike a fine balance between 
social sector and market driven model so as to serve public interest in the 
best possible way.  The Committee feels that the objective of the Bill is 
how to utilize the public funded mone y to maximize the benefit for the 
nation.  Intellectual Property creation  is an important component.  In 
doing so, one needs to create wealth, to create public good.  Non-exclusive 
licensing benefits the public but the revenue earning is low.  Exclusive 
licensing increases the revenue earning but the private good is higher 
than the public good.  So it needs to be judiciously decided as to when 
does one need to prefer public good and when one should opt for private 

good.  So if there is a case for licen sing a drug where customer in our 
country is quite less, we can go for private good because it will take global 
market and hence this Intellectual Property should be exclusively 
licensed.  But if we have to license a drug for say Malaria or Tuberculosis 
which afflicts larger populace of our country, we should go for non-
exclusive licensing.  The Committee feels that there cannot be any 
uniform policy for licensing as it needs a sort of strategy.   
The Committee is of the opinion that the overall welfare of the 
society should take precedence over me re commercial interests to decide 
whether exclusive or non-exclusive license needs to be granted. Therefore, 
grant of exclusive or non-exclusive license should be decided on case-to-
case basis depending upon its merit a nd keeping in view the interests of 
the poor people so as to ensure th at the benefits of the public-funded 
research percolate down to the lowest  strata of the society. To avoid 
misuse of the exclusivity of the li cense, a provision for reviewing the 
operation of license at regular intervals should be provided for in the Bill. 
The Committee also recommends th at in the extreme case where there is           
non-compliance by the recipient and the patented invention that has been 
assigned exclusive license to a private entity is not available to the public 
at a reasonable  and affordable pr ice, Government should revoke the 
license and acquire the patent to ensure overall societal benefit. 
 Another area of concern as expressed by experts, lies in provisions of harsh 
punishment provided in clauses 20, 21 and 22 of the Bill.  The Committee 
understands that these provisions are aimed at ensuring accountability of those 
doing research with public money to societal needs.  At the same time, 
however, the Committee feels that such  harsh provisions may deter some 
genuine researcher or scientists from  taking the challe nges of innovation and 
hence may prove to be counterproductive.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that Govt. should try to make penal provisions as far as 
possible, moderate without compromising on the point of accountability.   
 The Committee is quite happy to note that Secretary, Department of 
Biotechnology had been immensely receptive, appreciative and open to 
suggestions/comments of the experts drawn from various fields and had 
agreed to incorporate their viewpoints , as far as possible, in the Bill 
without compromising on the original scope of the Bill. The Committee is 
happy to note that the Department has taking note of the concerns 
expressed by various stake holders and the views of the Committee, 
revisited the Bill and proposed 52 amendments.  
12. General Observations 
12.1 As regards clause 7 pertaining to th e duties of the recipient organization, 
some of the experts were of the view that  to ensure greater transparency, it should 
be made obligatory for the recipient/creator  to publish in their website the details 
of the public funded intellectual property  acquired, assigned or licensed and such 
other information as may be prescribed. Further, in order to strengthen this aspect, 
an obligation should be imposed on the r ecipient to mention in its Intellectual 
Property application, that the application has stemme d from the use of public 

funds which will make it very easy to tr ack the public funded IP from the patent 
and plant variety database , without members of the public having to scour each 
individual website of recipients of government grants. 
12.2 The Committee also feels that there should be more transparency in 
public funded Intellectual Property so th at people could easily come to know 
about a public funded intellectual Pr operty.  This will also ensure full 
utilization of the public funds invested in the research for the technology. 
The aforesaid suggestion of the exp erts  was well taken by the Secretary, 
Department of Science & Technology and  it was assured that due 
consideration would be given to th is issue.  The Committee therefore, 
recommends that the Bill may be suitably amended in this direction.     
ANNEXURE-II 
List of experts whose oral evidence was heard on the Protection and Utilisation of 
Public Funded Intellectual Property Bill, 2008 
 
Sl. 
No. List of expert Date of hearing 
 1. Dr. Alok Ray, 
Head, Centre for Biomedical Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 
 
24
th December, 2009 
2. Prof. Avadhesha Surolia, Director, 
National Institute of Immunology,  
New Delhi  
 
24
th December, 2009 
3. Prof. Paramjit Khurana, 
Department of Plant Molecular Biology, 
University of Delhi, New Delhi  
 
24
th December, 2009 
4. Shri Anjan Das, Senior Director, 
Dr.S.Sengupta, Senior Advisor & 
Ms. Shilpi Jha, Executive Officer. 
Confederation of Indian Industry, (CII), New Delhi 
 
5
th January, 2010 
5. Shri Jyotirmoy Jain, Advisor, 
Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
of India (ASSOCHAM), New Delhi  
 
5
th January, 2010 
6. Dr. Amit Mitra, Secretary-General 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce  
& Industry, (FICCI), New Delhi 
 
5
th January, 2010 

 
7. Dr. Satyajit Rath, Scientist 
National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi 5th January, 2010 & 
2nd June, 2010 
8. Shri Prabir Purkayastha, 
Vice-President, Delhi Science Forum,  
New Delhi 
5
th January, 2010 
9. Ms.Leena Menghaney, Project Manager, 
Medicines Sans Frontiers, 
New Delhi 
5
th January, 2010,   
8th February, 2010 & 
2nd June, 2010 
10. Shri Anand Grover, Director   
                     & 
Ms. Pratibha S., Legal Advisor, 
Lawyers Collective HIV/Aids Unit, 
 New Delhi. 
5
th January, 2010,   
8th February, 2010 & 
2nd June, 2010 
11. Shri K.M. Gopakumar, Member 
Third world Network (TWN) 
New Delhi 
5
th January, 2010 & 
2nd June, 2010 
12. Prof. Shamnad Basheer, WB  National University of 
Juridical Sciences, Kolkata 8th February, 2010 & 
2nd June, 2010 
13. Prof. S. A. Shivashankar,  Chairperson, Intellectual 
Property Cell, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 
 
8th February, 2010 
Short title andcommencement. 
Definitions. 
 
THE PROTECTION AND UTILISATION OF PUBLIC FUNDED 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY BILL, 2008 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the protection and utilisation of intellectual property originating from 
public funded research and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection and Utilisation of Public Funded Intellectual 
Property Act, 2008. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “designated countries” means countries in respect of which the recipient 
opts to retain the title under section 5; 
(b) “Government” means the Central Government and includes local authorities 
and statutory authorities under the control of the Central Government; 
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA. 
Bill No. LXVI of 2008 

2 
(c) “intellectual property” means any right to intangible property, including 
trade mark, patent, design, and plant variety as defined under the Copyright Act, 1957, 
the Patents Act, 1970, the Designs Act, 2000, the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits 
Layout-Design Act, 2000, and the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights 
Act, 2001; 
(d) “intellectual property creator” means the person employed or engaged by 
the recipient for research and development and who created the public funded 
intellectual property; 
(e) “recipient” includes a university or institution of higher education established 
for research purposes which has entered into an agreement with the Government 
under section 3, and includes an organisation established by an Act of Parliament or a 
non-profit scientific or educational organisation registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860; 
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(g) “public funded intellectual property” means intellectual property which is 
the outcome of research and development for which the Government has provided 
grant under section 3; 
(h) “utilisation” means the manufacture of a composition or product, the practice 
of a process or method, operation of a machine or system, or commercialisation thereof. 
3. (1) Any recipient interested to take a grant from the Government for the purpose of 
research and development shall enter into an agreement with the Government before 
receipt 
of such grant. 
(2) The agreement entered into under sub-section (1) shall be in such form and manner 
as may be prescribed. 
(3) The recipient shall,— 
(a) make disclosure of public funded intellectual property to the Government 
within the time specified under section 4; 
(b) perform the duties under section 7; 
(c) constitute an intellectual property management committee in the manner 
specified under section 10; 
(d) abide by such other conditions as may be prescribed. 
(4) The Government shall not release any grant to any recipient until an agreement 
under sub-section (1) is entered into. 
4. The recipient shall within a period of sixty days of actual knowledge of the public 
funded intellectual property make a disclosure  thereof to the Government in such form 
and 
manner as may be prescribed. 
5. (1) The recipient shall within ninety days of the disclosure under section 4, but 
within the period specified by any law for the time being in force for receipt of 
application in 
the designated countries for protection of public funded intellectual property, intimate, in 
such form as may be prescribed, to the Government, his intention to retain the title of the 
public funded intellectual property with respect to the designated countries and the 

Government shall allow the title of such pub lic funded intellectual property with respect 
to 
such countries to vest in the recipient: 
Provided that where the recipient fails to disclose the public funded intellectual property 
under section 4 or give such intimation within the specified time, the title of the public 
funded 
intellectual property, shall vest in the Government: 
14 of 1957. 
39 of 1970. 
16 of 2000. 
37 of 2000. 
53 of 2001. 
21 of 1860. 
Funding 
Agreement. 
Disclosure of 
public funded 
intellectual 
property. 
Vesting of 
title of public 
funded 
intellectual 
property. 
3 
Provided further that the Government may, by an Order published in the Official Gazette, 
refuse the title to the recipient within ninety  days of the receipt of the intimation on any 
of the 
following grounds,— 
(a) that the recipient is not located in India or does not have a place of business 
located in India or is subject to the control of a foreign Government; 
(b) that in the public interest and in exceptional circumstances the Government 
deems it expedient so to do; 
(c) that it is necessary so to do in the interest of the security of the nation; 
(d) that the public funded intellectual property is related to atomic energy as 
defined under section 20 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 or under section 4 of the 
Patents Act, 1970: 
Provided also that where the Government is satisfied that the recipient has, for reasons 
beyond his control failed to gi ve intimation within the ti me specified under this sub-
section, 
it may, for reasons to be record ed in writing, extend the said period to such limit as may 
be 
prescribed. 
(2) The title of the public funded intellectual property in respect of the countries other 
than the designated countries shall vest in the Government. 
(3) Where the recipient fails to apply for protection of public funded intellectual property 

within the period specified under section 7, the title of  same, shall vest in the 
Government. 
(4) Where the recipient does not make a written submission to retain the title to the 
intellectual property or is refused the retention of title to the intellectual property by the 
Government, and where more than one Government authorities are party to the funding 
agreement, the intellectual property shall be jointly owned by the Government authorities 
on 
terms agreed upon by such Government authorities: 
Provided that the share of costs and responsibility for intellectual property protection, 
maintenance, litigation and its utilisation shall be mutually agreed to by the Government 
authorities within such time as may be prescribed. 
6. The recipient shall not publically disclose, publish or exhibit the public funded 
intellectual property till an application for the protection of the same in the designated 
countries is made: 
Provided that the recipient shall give intimation regarding public disclosure, publication 
or exhibition at least fifteen days before such disclosure, publication and exhibition to 
enable 
the Government to file application in countries other than the designated countries. 
7. A recipient who retains the title to a public funded intellectual property shall,— 
(a) apply for the protection of public funded intellectual property in designated 
countries within the period specified by any law for the time being in force; 
(b) having regard to its financial capability, bear all the expenses for its protection 
and enforcement; 
(c) initiate the process for utilisation of the public funded intellectual property 
immediately after the application for protection of public funded intellectual property 
is filed and submit a written report within six months and biannually thereafter to the 
Government, specifying the steps taken for utilisation of the public funded intellectual 
property, details of licensees and any other information as may be prescribed. 
(d) share the royalties or income received from the public funded intellectual 
property with the intellectual property creator under section 11; 
(e) cause to maintain the accounts of the intellectual property management 
committee constituted under section 10; 
33 of 1962. 
39 of 1970. 
Bar to public 
disclosure, 
publication 
and 
exhibition. 
Duties of 
recipient who 
retains title 
to intellectual 
property. 
4 
(f) cause the funds of the intellectual property management committee to be 

audited under section 14. 
8. The recipient shall not assign its right to public funded intellectual property to any 
person or body of persons without the prio r written permission of the Government 
obtained 
sixty days in advance to such assignment: 
Provided that the Government shall within a period of forty-five days convey its 
decision to grant or refuse such permission to the recipient: 
Provided further that where no such decision is conveyed within the said period of 
forty-five days, permission shall be deemed to have been granted. 
9. (1) The intellectual property creator shall, immediately after the creation of public 
funded intellectual property, make  a disclosure to th e recipient to enab le it to make a 
disclosure 
to Government under section 4. 
(2) The intellectual property creator shall co-operate in all respects with the recipient 
or the Government, as the case may be, in the process of protection and utilisation of the 
public funded intellectual property so created. 
(3) The intellectual property creator shall not publish, exhibit or publicly disclose the 
public funded intellectual property without prior intimation, of at least thirty days, to the 
recipient or the Government, as the case may be. 
10. (1) Every recipient shall, within one hundred and eighty days of the receipt of the 
funds under section 3, constitute an intellect ual property management committee within 
its 
organisation. 
(2) The intellectual property management committee constituted under sub-section 
(1) shall,— 
(a) identify, assess, document and protect public funded intellectual property 
having commercial potential; 
(b) perform market research and market such public funded intellectual property; 
(c) create an intellectual property management fund; 
(d) monitor the process of licensing and assignment; 
(e) manage revenues from licensed public funded intellectual properties for the 
organisation; 
(f) within one hundred and eighty days of its constitution, establish mechanism 
to promote the culture of innovation and public funded intellectual property generation 
within the organisation; 
(g) create mechanisms to govern the relations between the recipient and the 
creator of public funded intellectual property. 
11. (1) The income or royalties arising out of the public funded intellectual property 
shall be shared as under:— 
(a) subject to the provisions of any agreement which may be entered into between 
the intellectual property creator and the recipient, not less then thirty per cent. of such 
income or royalties, after deducting the expenses incurred in protection and utilisation, 
shall be given to the creator of intellectual property: 
Provided that where such agreement has a provision for a lesser amount than thirty 
per cent. of the net income, the provisions of this section shall prevail; 
(b) out of the remainder, thirty per cent. shall be paid into the fund created by the 

intellectual property management committee; 
Assignment. 
Duties of 
intellectual 
property 
creator. 
Constitution 
of intellectual 
property 
management 
committee 
and its 
functions. 
Sharing of 
royalties or 
income. 
5 
(c) rest of the income or royalties shall be retained by the recipient for their 
utilisation in any further research and to meet other expenses for the protection and 
maintenance of public funded intellectual property. 
(2) The recipient shall give a written report regarding the distribution of the royalties or 
income to the Government along with report under clause (c) of section 7. 
12. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no recipient who has retained 
title to any public funded intellectual property and no assignee of any such recipient shall 
grant, to any person, the excl usive right to use or sell any public funded intellectual 
property 
in India, unless such person manufactures products using such public funded intellectual 
property substantially in India: 
Provided that the Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, allow such 
sale or use for manufacture in countries other than India. 
13. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Government shall have a right 
to practice and to assign any public funde d intellectual property to carry out its 
obligations 
under any international treaty or agreement. 
14. (1) The recipient shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be, in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, prescribed. 
(2) The accounts of the recipient shall be audited by the Comptroller and Autitor- 
General of India at such intervals as ma y be specified by him and any expenditure 
incurred in 
connection with such audit shall be payabl e by the recipient to the Comptroller and 
Auditor- 
General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of  India shall have the same rights and 
privileges 
and authority as he has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in 

particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected 
vouchers, other documents and papers and inspection of offices of the recipient. 
(4) The accounts of the recipient, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India together with the audit report ther eon, shall be forwarded to the Government at 
such 
time as may be prescribed. 
15. The recipient, shall prepare in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, an 
annual report giving a summary of its activities including information relating to the 
proceedings and policies during the previous years and such report shall also contain 
statements of annual accounts of the recipient. 
16. All disputes arising as a result of the provisions of this Act shall be settled in 
accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. 
17. Nothing in this Act shall apply to any intellectual property generated out of 
scholarship, fellowship and grant given by the Government, primarily, for educational 
purposes: 
Provided that this section shall not apply to any public funded intellectual property 
falling within sub-section (1) of section 20 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962. 
18. The Government shall,— 
(a) apply for protection and maintain the public funded intellectual property for 
which the title vests with it under section 5 in any country as deemed necessary; 
(b) grant non-exclusive, exclusive, or partially exclusive licences for Government 
owned public funded intellectual property, royalty free or for royalties or other 
consideration and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed; 
(c) transfer custody and administration, in whole or in part, to any other entity, 
the right, title or interest in any Government owned public funded intellectual property 
under section 5; 
Preference 
for national 
industry. 
Government’s 
right to 
public funded 
intellectual 
property. 
Audit and 
Accounts. 
Annual 
Report. 
Dispute 
settlement. 
Disposition 
of rights in 
educational 
Awards. 
Duties of 
Government. 

26 of 1996. 
33 of 1962. 
6 
(d) give directions for prohibiting or restricting the publication of information 
with respect to any public funded intellectual property or communication of such 
information to any person or entity which it considers prejudicial to the interest of the 
security of India. 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression “interest of 
security of India" means any action for the security of India that relates to the use of 
public funded intellectual property for making a product which — 
(i) relates to fissionable materials or the materials from which they are 
derived; or 
(ii) relates to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to 
such traffic in other goods and materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for 
the purpose of supplying to a defence establishment; or 
(iii) is taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations; 
(e) acquire title to any public funded intellectual property which it considers 
necessary in the interest of the security of India. 
19. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person in respect of anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act. 
20. Where a recipient fails to fulfil the conditions of the agreement entered into under 
section 3 and contravenes any of the provisi ons of sections 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 14 
and 
15 the Government shall,— 
(a) recover the amount of grant already released with interest at the rate of ten 
per cent. per annum thereon in such manner as may be prescribed; and 
(b) bar such recipient for future grants for those purposes which were subjects 
of initial funding agreement. 
21. Whoever, being creator of intellectual property, fails to discharge his duties under 
section 9 shall,— 
(a) not be given his share of income or royalty; and 
(b) be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty-five per cent. of the 
amount of grant received by the recipient for research and development. 
22. Whoever being recipient, contravenes the provisions of sections 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 
11, 12, 14 and 15 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty per cent. of the 
amount of the grant received by him for research and development under section 3. 
23. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from 
the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament. 
24 (1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act. 
(2
) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide 

for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the form and manner in which agreement shall be entered into under subsection 
(2) of section 3; 
Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 
Stoppage of 
grant and 
recovery of 
grant 
released. 
Penalties for 
failure to 
discharge 
duties of 
intellectual 
property 
creator. 
Penalty for 
failure to 
discharge 
duties of 
recipient. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
Power to 
make rules. 
7 
(b) the conditions under clause (d) of sub-section (3) of section 3; 
(c) form and manner in which the disclosure shall be made under section 4; 
(d) form in which the recipient shall intimate his intention and the limit of time 
extended under sub-section (1) of section 5; 
(e) the time for the Government authorities to mutually agree to share costs and 
responsibilities under sub-section (4) of section 5; 
(f) information under clause (c) of section 7; 
(g) form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be made under subsection 
(1) of section 14; 
(h) the time at which the accounts together with the audit report shall be forwarded 
to the Government under sub-section (4) of section 14; 
(i) the form and time in which the annual report shall be prepared under section 
15; 
(j) the terms and conditions for grant of licences under clause (b) of section 18; 
(k) the manner of recovery of grant under section 20. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as, may be after it is made, 

before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thiry days 
which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both 
Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not 
be 
made, that rule shall, thereafter have effect onl y in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
To compete in a global environment, it is necessary for India to innovate and promote 
creativity. For promoting creativity and innovation, India needs to protect and utilise the 
intellectual property created out of public funded research and development. Over the 
years, the Government has invested large funds in research and development. To provide 
incentives for creativity and innovation, it is ne cessary to develop a framework in which 
the 
protection and utilisation of intellectual property is put in place. The ultimate objective, 
however, is to ensure access to such innovation by all stakeholders for public good. 
2. The proposed legislation imposes obligations and creates rights to optimise 
the potential of public funded research and development, provides incentive to create 
intellectual property and the mechanism for its protection and utilisation, encourages 
innovation in small and medium enterpri ses, promotes coll aboration between 
Government, 
private enterprises and non-Government organisations, commercialisation of intellectual 
property created out of public funded resear ch and development and the culture of 
innovation 
in the country. 
3. The proposed legislation will enhance awareness about intellectual property issues, 
especially in universities, academic and research institutions. It will also increase the 
responsibility of universities, academic and research institutions to encourage students, 
faculty and scientists to innovate. Such innovations can be utilised for raising financial 
resources of these establishments, through  royalties or income. The income from 
intellectual 
property will promote self-reliance and wi ll minimise dependence of universities, 
academic 
and research institutions and other recipient organisations for Government funding. 
4. The proposed legislation seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; KAPIL SIBAL. 
The 3rd December, 2008. 
8 
Notes on clauses 
Clause 2 seeks to define various words and expressions used in the Bill. 
Clause 3 seeks to provide for a funding agreement between the Government and the 
recipient before release of grant for research and development. 

Clause 4 provides for disclosure of public funded intellectual property within a 
period specified therein. 
Clause 5 seeks to provide for vesting of the title of public funded intellectual property 
with the recipient or the Government, as the case may be. 
Clause 6 seeks to bar public disclosure, publication and exhibition of the public 
funded intellectual property. 
Clause 7 provides for duties of the recipient who retains title to the public funded 
intellectual property. 
Clause 8 provides for the conditions for assignment of the public funded intellectual 
property by the recipient. 
Clause 9 provides for the duties of intellectual property creator. 
Clause 10 provides for the constitution of intellectual property management 
committee and its functions. 
Clause 11 provides for sharing of royalties or income arising out of public funded 
intellectual property between the recipient and the intellectual property creator. 
Clause 12 provides for the preference to the domestic industry in manufacturing 
products using the public funded intellectual property. 
Clause 13 seeks to empower the Government to practice or assign any public funded 
intellectual property to carry out its obligations under International treaty or agreement. 
Clause 14 seeks to provide for preparation of accounts and other relevant records by 
the recipient for its audit by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
Clause 15 provides for preparation of an annual report by the recipient. 
Clause 16 provides for dispute settlement in accordance with the provisions of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. 
Clause 17 seeks to provide exemption to certain intellectual property generated for 
educational purposes from the purview of this Bill. 
Clause 18 provides for duties of the Government in respect of the countries for which 
intellectual property title vests with it. 
Clause 19 provides for protection of action taken in good faith. 
Clause 20 seeks to provide for stoppage of grant and its recovery in case of 
contravention of the provisions of the Bill. 
Clause 21 provides for penalties for failure to discharge the duties of intellectual 
property creator. 
Clause 22 provides for penalty for failures to discharge the duties of the recepient. 
Clause 23 seeks to empower the Government to remove difficulties in implementation 
of the Bill. 
Clause 24 seeks to empower the Government to make rules to carry out the provisions 
of the Bill. 
9 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (2) of clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
to provide for the form and manner in which agreement shall be entered into. 
Item (d) of sub-clause (3) of clause 3 empowers the Central Government to lay down 
conditions to be complied by the recipient. 
Clause 4 empowers the Central Government to make rules to provide for the form and 
manner in which the disclosure shall be made. 

Sub-clause (1) of clause 5 empowers the Central Government to make rules to provide 
for the form in which the recipient shall intimate its intention to retain title of the public 
funded intellectual property with respect to designated countries and the extended limit of 
time for such intimation. 
Sub-clause (4) of clause 5 empowers the Central Government to make rules specifying 
time to mutually agree to share costs and responsibilities with regard to jointly owned 
public 
funded intellectual property. 
Sub-clause (c) of clause 7 empowers the Central Government to make rules specifying 
the information to be furnished, in the report , by the recipient who retains the title to a 
public 
funded intellectual property. 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 14 empowers the Central Government to make rules to provide 
for the form for maintenance of accounts and records and preparation of annual statement 
of 
accounts. 
Sub-clause (4) of clause 14 empowers the Central Government to make rules specifying 
the time frame for submission of accounts together with audit report to the Government. 
Clause 15 empowers the Central Government to make rules to provide for the form and 
time in which the annual report shall be prepared by the recipient. 
Sub-clause (b) of clause 18 empowers the Central Government to make rules with 
regard to the terms and conditions for grant of licences. 
Clause 20 empowers the Central Government to make rules specifying the manner of 
recovery of grant from the recipient for contravention of the provisions of the Bill. 
The matters, for which the rules are to be made, pertain to matters of procedure or 
administrative detail, and it is not possible to provide for them in the Bill. The delegation 
of 
legislative power is, therefore, of normal character. 
10 
RAJYA SABHA 
———— 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the protection and utilisation of intellectual property orginating from public 
funded research and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
———— 
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Science & Technology and Earth Sciences) 
GMGIPMRND—4262RS(S-1)—10.12.2008. 