PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 187
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY , 
ENVIRONMENT  AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-2009) 
OF THE MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES
(DEMAND NO. 28)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-2009)
OF THE MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES
(DEMAND NO. 28)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 TH APRIL, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 TH APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/V AISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—17
4S UMMARY OF R ECOMMENDATIONS .......................................................................................... 18—21
5. A NNEXURE .............................................................................................................................. 2 3—26
6. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................ 27—31

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
**2. V acant
3. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
4. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
5. Shri Kamal Akhtar
6. Shri Saman Pathak
7. Shri Jabir Husain
**8. V acant
9. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
*10. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
12. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
13. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
14. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
15. Shri Francis Fanthome
16. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
17. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
18. Shri Brahmananda Panda
19. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
20. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
21. Shri Pratik P. Patil
22. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
23. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
#25. V acant
26. Shri Rampal Singh
27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
28. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
29. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
30. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
31. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
** Dr. Prabha Thakur and Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of
their term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9th April, 2008.
* Nominated w.e.f. 28th August, 2007.
# Shri Rakesh Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 1st December, 2007 on his resignation from
the Membership of the Committee.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred Eighty-seventh Report of the Committee. This
Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences
(Demand No.28).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on the 2nd April, 2008, the Secretary and other
Officers of the Ministry of Earth Sciences gave an overview of the various activities of the
Ministry and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the
Ministry to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Ministry for replying to the
clarifications sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 23rd April, 2008.
DR. V . MAITREYAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
April 23, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

1
REPORT
The Indian peninsula is surrounded by the Arabian Sea, Bay of Bengal and Indian Ocean
and has a coastline of about 7500 kilometers. The seas around India influence the life of a large
coastal population including millions of coastal fishing community. Understanding our ocean and
weather is, therefore, vital to their livelihood. The vast coastal and offshore environment supports
a wide variety of marine ecosystem rich in species diversity and multifarious economic
development activities. Gathering adequate knowledge of the potential of ocean, especially within
our Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) forms a key multidisciplinary research which is again closely
linked to weather and atmosphere. Recognising the importance of ocean atmospheric processes for
understanding the variability of earth, Government of India established Ministry of Earth Sciences
in 2006 by bringing the meteorological agencies and ocean development Department under one
umbrella. The Ministry aims to look at the planet in a holistic way so as to understand the interplay
of earth dynamics and systems phenomenon. It also strives to provide applications such as
forecasting weather, ocean state, future climate scenarios, natural hazards such as earthquakes,
tsunami, coastal erosion and landslides. The schemes of the Ministry relating to ocean development
are directed towards achieving sustainable development and use of science and technology for the
exploration and exploitation of vast marine resources for the socio-economic benefit of the society.
It has been functioning as a nodal Ministry for organising, coordinating and promoting related Earth
Sciences activities in the country.
1.1 The activities of the Ministry are broadly classified into three major activities (i) Ocean
Science and Technology; (ii) atmospheric research and meteorological services; and (iii) seismic
monitoring and earth quake research.
1.2 For effective implementation of programmes in the front of Ocean Science, Technology and
Services, two attached Offices were set up viz. the Centre for Marine Living resources and
Ecology (CMLRE) at Kochi, and the Project Directorate for Integrated Coastal and Marine Area
Management (ICMAM) at Chennai. Three autonomous Institutions viz. the National Centre for
Antarctic Research (NCAOR) at Goa, National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) at Chennai
and the Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) at Hyderabad, as well as
nine Ocean Sciences and Technology Cells in universities/institutes and a chain of Marine Data
Centres at national Institutions are under the administrative set up of the Ministry. The Ministry also
maintains the permanent research station-Maitri in Antarctica apart from a f1eet of oceanographic
research vessels, which are well-equipped floating laboratories.
1.3 The atmospheric sciences and meteorological services are being rendered by three dedicated
institutes viz., India Meteorological Department (IMD), National Centre for Medium Range Weather
Forecasting (NCMRWF) and Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM). The India
Meteorological Department is one of the oldest of organized meteorological services in the world.
In course of time, when it was realised that the nature of meteorological phenomena was distinctly
different not only in the tropics and mid-latitudes but also in different geographic regions
characterized by large ocean basins like that of Pacific, Atlantic and the Indian Ocean the Indian
Institute of Tropical Meteorology came up in 1962 and the National Centre for Medium Range
Weather Forecasting in 1989. Today they complement each other’s role and add to the overal1
scientific capability in the country.
1.4 Towards detection of earthquake and seismic monitoring system, an Earthquake Risk
Evaluation Centre was established at Delhi for seismic microzonation. The Ministry has developed

2
a close interaction at both research and operational level between the scientific community and
ensuring that there is a seamless flow of data, information and knowledge that percolates down to
the end users, thereby getting integrated with the development process in the country.
2. ELEVENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN (2007-2012)
2.1 The Ministry has stated that 33 programmes are proposed to be carried out which include
19 continuing programmes and 14 new programmes. The new schemes/projects proposed for the
Eleventh Five Year Plan are as follows:
➢ Development of Manned submersible
➢ Installation of Multi-Channel Seismic (MCS) System
➢ Expedition to Arctic
➢ Desalination Project
➢ MLR: vessel requirement and Dedicated berthing and associated facilities
➢ National Oceanarium
➢ Demonstration of Shore Protection measures through Pilot project
➢ Integrated Ocean Drilling Programme (IODP)
➢ Ice class Research vessel
➢ Headquarter Building
➢ Modernisation of IMD (Communication, Observation, Cyclone warning, Forecasting,
Aviation Services, Instrumentation, Hydromet, infrastructural development)
➢ Multi-hazards Early Warning Support System
➢ Centre for Climate Change
➢ Sea Front Facilities
2.2 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests considered the detailed Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of
Earth Sciences on 2nd April, 2008 and it has following provisions:
3. BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2008-09
3.1 The total outlay for 2008-09 has been fixed at Rs. 971 crore (Rs. 750 crore for Plan and
Rs. 221 crore for Non Plan expenditure) as against the projected demand of Rs. 1566 crore by
the Ministry. The current allocation is however, 84 crore more than the outlay for the previous year
of Rs. 887 crore. The percentage increase in B.E. 2008-09 from RE. 2007-08 is about 9.5 per
cent. The Ministry has informed that for the year 2008-09 the plan outlay for Oceanographic
Research has been fixed at Rs. 294 crore, which is Rs. 34.80 crores less than the outlay for the
year 2007-08. Out of the plan allocation of Rs. 432 crore for Meteorology, Rs. 364 crore has been
earmarked for Modernisation of India Meteorological Department (IMD) and Rs. 68 crore for other
schemes in IMD. The higher allocation for IMD has resulted in the total allocation for the Ministry
to be higher than that of the previous year.

3
3.2 The details of the programme and budgetary allocation for the year 2008-2009 are given at
Annexure.
3.3 In a reply to a query as to whether the allocation for 2008-09 is sufficient to carry out
the activities and if not which schemes will be affected due to reduction of fund, the Ministry
informed that the major schemes likely to be affected are primarily Modernization of India
Meteorological Department, Marine Research and Technology Development Programme and a set
of new programmes of the Ministry viz., Sea Front Facility, Shore Protection Measures, Manned
Submersible, desalination, Centre for Climate Change and National Oceanarium.
3.4 The Ministry has stated that during the year 2007-08, the plan allocation of the Ministry
i.e. Rs. 690 crore at RE. stage had been reduced to Rs. 437 crore in R.E. stage, though, allocation
for some programmes has been increased namely, Polar Science, acquisition of Research Vessel
Sagar Nidhi , Information Technology. Due to this, scaling down of activities had to be made under
most of the other programmes. During its interaction with the Secretary, Ministry of Earth
Sciences, the Committee sought to know the reasons for under utilisation of budget and proposed
methods to carry out its schemes since there is a substantial cut in the projected budgetary
demands of the Ministry in the current year. The Committee was informed that the Ministry would
be able to carry out its programmes with the allocated budget of Rs. 750 crore by re-prioritisation
of its schemes. The Committee was further informed that last year, Ministry had planned to start
modernisation activities by around the third quarter of the last financial year and that they would
be able to spend around 20% of the allocated budget. However, it could not take place due to delay
in their processing and non requirement of advance payments. It has been admitted that Ministry’s
assumption during last year with regard to cash flow was not accurate, as a result most of the
expenditure will take place this year.
3.5 The Committee is constrained to note that the projected demand of Rs. 1566 crore
made by the Ministry was drastically reduced to virtually half to the tune of Rs. 750 crore
only. This will adversely affect the major programmes that are to be undertaken during the
current year. The Committee is of the view that unless there is a raise in the allocation,
the Ministry will not be able to translate their dream into reality. The Committee, at the
same time is of the opinion, that Ministry should also plan its projects/schemes meticulously
so as to avoid any drastic cut in their projections because of poor performance in utilisation
of previous fund.
4. MECHANISM DEVELOPED TO MONITOR AND REVIEW THE ONGOING SCHEMES
4.1 Regarding the mechanism that exists in the Ministry to monitor and review the progress of
its ongoing schemes/projects, the Committee was informed that the Ministry has adopted a three
level monitoring mechanism to oversee implementation of the schemes. Each programme has a
separate Steering Committee for monitoring various schemes periodically. Besides, the schemes of
autonmous bodies are also being monitored by the Project Monitoring Committee, Research
Advisory Committee and the Governing Council of respective Institute. On a half yearly basis, the
performance of the Ministry is being monitored by the Member Science, Planning Commission in
addition to the annual review conducted by the Secretary, Planning Commission. The day-to-day
progress of the project is also being reviewed through weekly meetings by the Secretary, Ministry
of Earth Sciences. For the purpose of monitoring the mission mode programme, like Tsunami
project, two separate committees have been set up viz., Project Management Board and Steering
Committee for periodical review and assessment of the programmes. With regard to R&D projects,
an internal mechanism exists for periodical review and consideration. The recommendations are

4
put up to the Steering Committee and Management Board for approval and monitoring the
projects.
4.2 The Committee notes with concern that despite the existing Mechanism to monitor
and review the ongoing schemes, most of the major programmes, which were undertaken
during the last year saw a large scale under utilization of funds. The Committee hopes that
the Department will further strengthen this mechanism for effective implementation of its
programmes so as to avoid delay in the implementation of various projects and also in
avoiding underutilization of the funds allotted to it. The Committee is of the view that
procedural and administrative delays could have been avoided through well focused planning
and management. Therefore. the Committee recommends the Ministry to review its
mechanism and make sure that fund allocations are made as per requirements and are
utilized to the maximum possible.
5. ACTIVITIES OF THE MINISTRY
OCEAN SCIENCE
5.1 The programmes of the Ministry in the field of Ocean Science are directed towards:
• Technology Development Programmes for future applications with strategic,
industrial and economic significance.
• Societal Programmes with direct/indirect benefit for the community by technology
applications and pilot project demonstration with the participation of the community
for their socio-economic. prosperity, and for coastal area development/management
through scientific tools and techniques.
• Marine Resource Programmes for exploration of marine living and non-living
resources, techno-economic studies to evolve strategies for sustainable exploration
and utilisation, and resource enhancement.
• Multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary Polar Science Programmes and Antarctic
Expeditions with scientific and geo-political significance.
• Capacity Building Programme towards self-reliance through basic scientific research
in ocean sector, human resource development and establishing Centres of Excellence
in academic institutions.
• Creation of public awareness of ocean, its potential and uses.
5.2 The scientific research and technology development programmes are formulated,
coordinated and executed through three autonomous institutions and two Attached offices of the
Ministry. These multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional programmes are assisted by National
Research Laboratories, academic institutions and industries. Further, Marine Research and Capacity
Building is one of the key programme areas of the Ministry to promote basic research in marine
science and establish centres of excellence in academic institutions and for self-reliance. The
oceanographic programmes have national, regional and global importance. With the ratification of
the UN Convention on Law of the Sea, a new international order has been established for the
oceans. India is represented in almost all the important bodies on oceans.
5.3 The Ministry is the nodal agency for international programmes in the ocean sector and
represents the country in Inter-Governmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) of UNESCO,

5
Regional Committee of IOC in Coastal Indian Ocean (IOCINDIO), South Asian Regional Seas
Programme, Commission on the Limits of Continental Shelf (CLCS), International Sea—Bed
Authority (ISBA) and the State Parties of the United Nation Convention on the Law of the Seas
(UNCLOS), the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) and its scientific and managerial organs-
Commission on Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), Council of
Managers of National Antarctic Programme (COMNAP), Scientific Committee on Antarctic
Research (SCAR), etc. These activities have scientific, economic and geopolitical impacts. Hence,
the activities of the Ministry address Scientific Research and Technology Development with
orientation towards applications, capacity building and human resource development for self-
reliance, and international programmes arising out of International obligations and bilateral and
multilateral cooperative ventures.
6. POLAR SCIENCE/ANTARTIC RESEARCH
6.1 The Antartic Research programme has been designed to take advantage of the unique
location and environment of the icy continent for understanding the key global processes, which
are manifested and controlled by this Polar cap. The Antarctic is a pristine and natural laboratory,
which enables scientists to study, detect and monitor global phenomena, such as the atmospheric
patterns and ocean circulations. Glaciological and geophysical research provides clue to the
geological history and evolution of the earth. In addition, Antarctica provides a singular platform
for conducting studies on solar terrestrial interaction, adaptation of organisms, including human
beings in the cold land isolated conditions, Antarctic/Polar Research and Antarctic scientific
expeditions to Antarctica would be continued during the year 2008-09.
6.2 The Antarctic mission objectives of Ministry is to plan, promote, co-ordinate and execute
the polar science and logistic activities of the country, in order to ensure a perceptible and
influential presence of India in Antarctica. It also upholds nation’s strategic interests in the global
framework of nations in the Antarctic continent and the southern oceans expressed through our
Consultative status in the Antarctic treaty. As a treaty obligation to demonstrate India’s sustained
interest in Antarctica by conducting substantial scientific activities such as the establishment of a
scientific station and the dispatch of annual scientific expeditions. Accordingly, a scientific work
plan, which is dynamic and is aimed towards addressing issues pertinent to our national needs and
those that have global relevance and is of international standard may be pursued.
6.3 Under Oceanographic Research, Rs. 35.50 crore has been earmarked for Polar Science
activities including expedition to Antarctic, Southern Ocean Studies and setting up of 3rd permanent
Antarctic Research station in the Larsemann Ranges, maintenance of the permanent research station
‘Maitri’, while Rs. 20 crore is for Ministry’s campus in Central Delhi. An allocation of Rs. 2 crore
towards collaborative research in Spitzbergen (Arctic research), and Rs.15 crore to National Centre
for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR) for the institutional and logistic activities related to
establishment of the 3rd permanent Indian Base at Antarctica and infrastructure development,
operation & manning of the NCAOR. This outlay is required to initiate new research in the fields
of Southern Ocean Oceanography, Arctic studies, ice-core drilling, Antarctic lake studies, Antarctic
Global Change Research and Polar Environment and Ecology. To venture into the frozen Antarctic
an Ice-Class research vessel is needed for which an outlay of Rs. 5 crore is provided. To execute
the seismic surveys there is need to install a Multi-Channel Seismic (MCS) system onboard any
of the Ministry’s research vessels for which an outlay of Rs. 5 crore is provided. Also a provision
of Rs. 4 crore is towards developing the science plan for 3 significant sites, one each in Arabian
Sea, Bay of Bengal and western Andamans under the Indian involvement in Integrated Ocean
Drilling Programme.

6
6.4 The proposed targets of activities during 2008-09 are as under:
• Planning, co-ordination and execution of the XXVIII Indian Scientific Expedition to
Antarctica.
• Initiation of the work of structural strengthening of Maitri.
• Establishment of third permanent base in Antarctica: initiation of construction work
of new station.
• Planning, co-coordinating and mounting a multi-disciplinary cruise to the Southern
Ocean. Considering the logistics involved, it is planned to combine the Southern
Ocean studies with the scheduled expedition to the site of the Third Indian Base in
Antarctica, in the Larsemann Hills.
6.5 The Committee commends the research work carried out by the Ministry in the
Antarctica as initiating scientific research and exploration in extreme cold conditions is not
an easy task. In addition, the Committee is of the view that the Ministry may also conduct
a prospective study on heart rate variabilities under extreme cold climate and prolonged
isolation on expedition’s team members to reveal the physiological changes in the heart due
to exposure to cold climate. At the same time study may also be carried out to examine the
effect of such cold climate on vital body parameters like blood pressure, pulse rate,
hemoglobin levels, sleep duration of the members.
6.6 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should study the icy continent’s
atmospherics and ozone depletion. Besides ongoing activities, it should also plan to
undertake studies on lake water and its biology, Antarctic microbes. In addition, the
Ministry should also think of undertaking a shallow drilling in Antarct ica for retrieval of
ice core for paleo-climatological studies.
6.7 The Arctic Ocean and the surrounding regions are one of the most important areas
that not only govern the earth’s climate but have also faithfully recorded the past climatic
history. The region is an excellent harbinger of future changes as the signals and clues that
signify climate change are much stronger in the Arctic region than anywhere else on the
earth. This region has always been significant to the Indian subcontinent due to the
probable tele-connection between the northern polar region and Indian monsoon intensity,
which is critical for an agrarian economy like ours. The Committee appreciates the fact that
India has embarked upon Arctic Research by launching her first scientific expedition to this
region under the leadership of Director, National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research
(NCAOR) last year. The Committee recommends the Ministry to continue to aspire for a
strong presence in the Arctic region.
7. POLYMETALLIC NODULES PROGRAMME
7.1 The Polymetallic Nodules (PMN) Programme is a national programme with international
commitments. The programme consists of four components - Survey & Exploration of Polymetallic
Nodules in the Central Indian Ocean Basin (CIOB), Environmental Impact Assessment studies at
CIOB, Technology Development for mining of nodules and Technology Development for extraction
of metals from nodules. The programme is guided and reviewed by the PMN Board of
Management. The major effort during the Tenth Five Year Plan has been to optimally utilise the
capabilities and infrastructure already created at different National Laboratories for scientific and

7
technological development. A sustained effort has been made to implement this programme in a
more focused and well-defined manner.
7.2 The Ministry has informed that apart from carrying out the experiments in the four
components of the programme, an inter-institutional R&D programme will be initiated to develop
technology for mining the nodules during 2008-09.
7.3 Under this programme, the activities planned include, continuation of survey of nodules
in the CIOB first generation mine site along the selected profiles for identifying and validating
the trends of higher abundance of nodules; continuation of Environmental Impact Assessment of
simulated sea bed disturbance; research to upgrade existing mining system in a phased manner
with a view to ultimately mine the nodules at 6000m depth; development and testing of unmanned
submersible capable of operation upto water depth of 6000m; and designing of a remotely
Operated Vehicle for underwater examination; with continuation of testing new process routes
and undertaking techno-economic studies for extracting metals from the crust. For all these
activities under the Polymetallic Nodules Programme, an outlay of Rs. 15 crore has been
provided.
7.4 The Committee feels that the country is faced with an enormous task of carrying out
development and meeting the challenges of modern times for which there is requirement
of minerals. Therefore, the efforts of the Ministry should be directed towards developing
technology for sufficient metal recovery from the polymetallic nodules and tapping rich
resources from ocean. It will help in meeting the requirement of minerals for the country
besides attaining self-sufficiency.
8. OCEAN OBSERV ATION AND INFORMATION SERVICES
8.1 The Ocean Observation & Information Services Programme is designed to acquire time-
series data and develop a wide range of ocean atmospheric models. The data acquired through Argo
floats, Drifters, XBTs, Current Meter Arrays from the sea around India are being used for various
operational and research purposes including forecasting of cyclones and understanding the climate
variability. Besides, 147 ARGO (Arrays for Realtime Geotropic Oceanography) profiling floats have
also been deployed in the Indian Ocean so far, to acquire real-time measurements of temperature
and salinity profiles up to a depth of 2000 m with a view to improve understanding the monsoon
variability. Besides real-time dissemination of data to various users, a set of 12 Argo data products
are being made available through Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS)
website. The ocean modeling and dynamics projects being carried out by reputed national agencies
would address basic issues on the ocean dynamic, climate variability, ocean state forecast, sea level
variations, ocean flux studies etc. Some models generated under the programme have already been
made operational at INCOIS.
8.2 For the Ocean Observation & Information Services, an outlay of Rs. 13 crore has been
provided to cater to the science programmes, viz., the Argo programme, fishing advisories, and
developing various forecast capabilities. The provision of Rs.30 crore to Indian National Centre for
Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) is mainly towards strengthening its IT infrastructure
facilities such as High Performance Computer facility at Hyderabad and for generating other end-
user oriented data products and services. When enquired as to why during the year 2007-08 the
allocation was Rs. 35.00 crore in BE stage, which was reduced to Rs. 24.00 crore in RE stage
and this year the allocation has been kept at Rs. 30 crore the Committee has been informed
that the increase of INCOIS budget from Rs. 24 crore in 2007-08 RE stage to Rs. 30 crore in

8
2008-09 is primarily due to provision made for procurement of high Performance Computing
System. For the Ocean Data Buoy Programme, a sum of Rs. 10 crore has been provided to
establish the objective of setting up an integrated sustained ocean observation network by the end
of Eleventh Plan.
8.3 The objective of the project Tsunami And Storm Surge Warning System is to establish a
warning system for the oceanogenic disasters caused by tsunami and storm surges. The project
is being carried out with participation of other concerned departments such as Science and
Technology (DST), Scientific and Industrial Research, Space over a period of 30 months. The
project is expected to strengthen the 7 seismic observation station of DST, establishment of 8-10
DART Observation Network, Instillation of real time tide gauge monitoring stations, 24 hours
monitoring of the systems for generation of timely warning, etc. A full fledged tsunami warning
centre had been set up at INCOIS, Hyderabad with deployment of 17 tide gauges and 6 bottom
pressure recorders for providing warning of 24X7 basis. This Centre was inaugurated in October,
2007 which has been made fully operational.
8.4 An allocation of Rs. 15 crore has been earmarked for Tsunami and Storm Surge Warning
System mainly for indigenous development of Deep Ocean Assessment and Reporting systems and
setting up of INSAT DART & INSAT Met data Reception system at INCOIS.
8.5 The Committee expresses its satisfaction that Ministry’s sincere efforts have finally
led to the setting up of a full fledged National Tsunami Early Warning Centre at INCOIS,
Hyderabad for providing warning on a 24X7 basis. In view of the above, the Committee
recommends that Ministry must make optimum use of this Centre to disseminate data to
the concerned authorities as early as possible.
8.6 In reply to a query made by the Committee regarding forecasting of the potential fishing
zone and disseminating the information to fishing community, the secretary of the Ministry replied
that the Potential Fishing Zone programme is a unique one which makes our country ahead of even
advanced countries. The potential fishing advisories like INCOIS, Hyderabad uses satellite data and
disseminate the information to fishing community. They have developed the information
dissemination system on the coastal States of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala and
Maharashtra and sending the information to all major cooperatives using latest technologies.
8.7 The Committee commends the efforts made by the Ministry to forecast key ocean
parameters and disseminate the information such as availability of fish stocks, ocean state,
tsunami, etc. which will immensely help the weaker sections of the society both in terms
of the security and income for the fisherman. The Committee would like the Ministry to
provide ocean data, information and advisory services to society, industry, government and
scientific community through sustained ocean observations and constant improvements
through systematic and focused research, data and information management and ocean
modeling.
9. MARINE RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
9.1 The objectives of the programme are to foster the concept of stewardship through
education, training and human resource development and increasing awareness at all levels The
activities proposed in the programme include promotion of research under the basic categories of
marine ecology, marine biology, marine microbiology, marine benthos, coastal marine culture
systems, marine geology/geophysics and ocean engineering and underwater robotics. Besides the

9
ongoing programme of award of fellowships to students for pursuing higher studies in academic/
educational institutions in various disciplines of ocean science and tcchnology, organizing
exhibitions and fairs to create awareness among the public on the oceans would continue.
9.2 The Scientific Research and Technology Development programmes for exploration and
sustainable use of the marine resources are multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional. Basic research
and developments are required in a wide spectrum of areas to gain adequate knowledge and
expertise. Required infrastructure and trained personnel are essential for successfully implementing
different programmes. There is need for effective interaction between R&D institutions,
academicians and industries. The sub-programmes under this programme are as under:
(i) Assessment of Marine Living Resources and FORV
(ii) Drugs from Sea
(iii) Assistance for Research Projects and Manpower Training
(iv) Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS)
(v) Ocean Awareness (Exhibitions & Fairs, Seminars/Symposia)
(vi) Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM)
(vii) Deep Sea Mineral Exploration
(viii) Marine Non-Living Resource Programme
9.3 The funds for the Oceanographic Survey and Marine Living Resources are mainly for
operation and maintenance of two Research Vessels of the Ministry viz., Oceanographic Research
Vessel ‘Sagar Kanya’ and Fisheries Oceanographic Research V essel ‘Sagar Sampada’. The decrease
in funds during the year 2008-09 compared to previous year is attributed mainly to a major dry
docking and retrofitting work taken up during the last year. The vessels are 25 years old but still
contributing to the Oceanographic Research in India and has undergone for the first time a major
repair.
9.4 During the year 2007, the vessel ORV Sagar Kanya had undertaken 20 cruises and logged
239 days at sea. The newly installed Dynamic Positioning (DP) System and LARS (Launcher and
Retreival System for ROVs) have been utilized for the ongoing cruises. The capability of the vessel
has also been improved by means of speed after the replacement of Generators and Power
Management System onboard and other repairs. NIO, ISRO and NIOT have utilized the vessel for
MoES and DoS programmes. The new Facilities acquired are state-of-the-art Multibeam System,
Dynamic Positioning System/HiPaP (High Precision Acoustic Positioning System)/Replacement of
Bow Thruster/New Azimuth Thruster/DGPS/Gyros/Wind speed sensors, Deck Crane. The notable
other achievements during the year are (i) recovery of GSLV launch vehicle (ii) sea trials of deep
sea crawler.
9.5 The Committee is of the view that Fisheries Oceanographic Research Vessel (FORV)
Sagar Sampada forms the backbone of Marine Living Resources surveys and notes with
satisfaction that during last year ORV Sagar Kanya and FORV Sagar Sampada had
undertaken various cruises to meet the requirements towards the implementation of the
Marine Living Resources programme. The Committee recommends the Ministry to carry out
activities such as charting of exploitable resources of the deep sea, promoting operational

10
fishery oceanographic services, ecosystem monitoring and modeling, promoting basic
Research and Development on Marine Living Resources and transfer of technology for
societal development.
10. DRUGS FROM SEA
10.1 This is an ongoing project for supporting research in different participating R&D
laboratories and including new institutions for exploratory and product development phases. After
successful completion of clinical trial, the systematic collection, extraction and biological evaluation
of sea weeds, sea grasses, mangroves, anemones, sponges, corals, starfish, seahorses, poisonous
fin-fish and associated organisms, etc., would be carried out to identify novel molecule(s) for
developing potential drugs. More numbers of Institutions have been induced for carrying out the
studies during 2008-09.
10.2 It has been informed that under this programme more than 560 marine samples have been
collected and screened. Two potential compounds are identified and in advanced stages of drug
development. The Clinical Trial, Phase-I of single dose has been completed successfully and the
multi-dose trial of Phase-I is in progress for anti-diabetic compound. The second compound for
developing anti-hyper-lipidaemic drugs, an application for Investigational New Drugs (IND) has
been filed for approval of Drugs Controller General of India to initiate Clinical Trial Phase-I. In
addition, nine more new leads for the following four activities are in pipeline for further
optimization of various pharmacological activities: (a) Anti-hyperglycaemic; (b) Anti-hyperlipidaemic;
(c) Anti-fungal; and (d) Anti-viral. Considering the national importance of the programme, the
Ministry is in the process of establishing a Centre of Excellence at Central Drug Research Institute
(CDRI) so as to engage a team of scientists exclusively to carry out these activities.
10.3 The Committee observes that marine organisms have attracted much attention as
potential source of drugs over the recent years. The discovery, development and production
of drugs from marine bacteria, fungi, microalgae, sponges remains largely in the realm of
experimentation. The Committee observes that there is a need to look at this aspect more
thoroughly and therefore, recommends extensive research and study to harness bioactive
compounds from the marine organisms for human therapeutic purposes. The Committee
also recommends that the extraction and development of potential drugs and chemicals from
the depth of the ocean should be pursued with well-focussed mechanism. It further
recommends that clinical stage trials should be expedited so that drugs are available in the
market at the earliest for the benefit of the people.
11. GAS HYDRATES AND TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT FOR EXPLOITATION
11.1 During the year 2008-09, activities relating to the Exploration of Gas Hydrates with the aim
of identification of areas in the seas around India and for coring system development will be
carried out with a budget allocation of Rs.12 crore. A programme of Comprehensive Swath
Bathymetric survey with an allocation of Rs. 5 crore will be carried out with the aim to survey
the Exclusive Economic Zone to support the activities relating to exploration of non-living resources
in this area.
11.2 For ‘‘Gas Hydrates’’ the budgetary allocation has been increased from Rs. 4.00 crore
(R.E. 2007-08) to Rs.12.00 crore during the year 2008-09. The Ministry has informed that the
substantial increase in the budgetary support is primarily to undertake the survey work by
chartering vessels in the identified locations besides, carrying out the technological development

11
work. During 2007-08, under technology development component, a Remotely Operated
Submersible (ROSUB-2500) was developed. The system would be qualified up to 2500 m water
depths in phases. As a first phase, the system has been first tested at 250 m water depth
off Mangalore. An Indo Russian seminar on gas hydrates was also organized at Chennai in
February, 2007 to discuss the various issues. Efforts have been renewed for chartering suitable
research vessel. Considering high cost of charter hire the Ministry has decided to install MCS
system on its research vessel for doing this job and overcome this difficulty in future.
11.3 Gas hydrates with their abundant resource potential is emerging as a potential cleaner fuel
resource. The preliminary assessment of geological condition and limited available seismic data
suggests high possibility of occurrence of large quantity of gas hydrates within the EEZ of India.
The scheme is broadly divided into science component and technology development component.
The progress of implementation of the programme is as follows:
11.4 Science component : The multichannel seismic data collected by various organization have
been evaluated and based on the data, two promising sites of 100 km x 100 km were identified
in Krishna- Godavari(KG) and Mahanadi basins for detailed survey. Deep sea core sampling have
been carried out onboard a French vessel in the KG Basin and Mahanadi Basin in May, 2007 and
31 long sediment cores were acquired. Further, in one of the significant development, the gas
hydrates were synthesized successfully in laboratory as a part of an experimental work.
11.5 Technology component: Remotely operated submersible capable of operating at water depth
of about 2500 m was designed, developed and is presently undergoing trial. Preliminary design of
Autonomous Coring System for sampling upto 150 m sediment thickness at a water depth of about
2500 m.
11.6 The Committee is of the view that Fossil fuels besides being costly are continuously
depleting and will not last long. Gas Hydrates have the potential of providing energy
security to the nation, as it can prove to be an alternative source of energy. The Committee
is however, constrained to note that the budgetary support allocated under this programme
was not fully utilized during the last year . Non-availability of suitable collaboration partner
and other technical inadequacy were the reasons attributed for this shortcoming. The
Committee is constrained to observe that the Ministry has been citing the same problem
since 2005-06. The Committee fails to understand as to why the Ministry has not been able
to find a suitable collaborative partner for so long and why alternative arrangements are
not being made? The Committee recommends that Ministry must find a solution in this
regard at the earliest.
12. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF OCEAN TECHNOLOGY
12.1 The NIOT was established in November, 1993 with a view to develop technology in ocean
sector. In addition to the four core mission activities of Ocean Energy, deep sea Mining, coastal
and Environmental engineering and Marine Instrumentation, NIOT would also continue to undertake
consultancy service in ocean related activities, Ocean Science and Technology and enhancement of
marine living resources, development for breeding, rearing and fattening of lobsters to begin with
for Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Consolidation of deep sea mining technology such as soil tester,
ROV and crusher would be carried out, besides developing Marine Sensors and underwater
equipment.
12.2 For National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) an outlay of Rs. 20 crore including for
Island Development Programme, is provided to carry out various R&D activities/programmes on

12
sea bed mining, coastal engineering, and marine instrumentation which will be continued during the
year. The Ministry entrusted the work to NIOT for development of seafront facilities and manned
submersible and a provision of Rs. 10 crore and Rs. 5 crore respectively has been made. As an
advance action for 10 MLD Desalination Plant project, a provision of Rs. l0 crore has been made.
Also Rs. 0.50 crore is towards Demonstration of Shore Protection Measures to tackle the menace
of coastal erosion by taking up pilot projects in selected areas of Indian coast.
12.3 The Ministry has informed that after successful design, development of 1 MLD
demonstration plant in April, 2007, the Ministry had taken up the project of development of 10
MLD desalination Plant. This is based on the Low Temperature Thermal Desalination development
indigenously by NIOT, Chennai. The barge based plants envisage a deep sea mooring of about
1000 m depth with a pipe diameter of more than a meter in the open ocean which requires a great
deal of technology not available in the conventional off shore platforms being used in the oil
industry. The deployment of single mooring of 1000 meters, is the first of its kind in the Indian
Ocean and the proposed 10 MLD is a challenging ocean Engineering Project in this country. The
Ministry had constituted an expert committee to have detailed design review for its acceptance. The
detailed Project Proposal would be prepared by NIOT for consideration of approval of the
Government. The demonstration of the pilot plant is expected to done during 2009-2010.
12.4 The Committee commends the activities of the Ministry in the area of desalination
of sea water. The Committee feels that an integrated and coordinated effort of various
Departments of Government/organizations involved in this direction will achieve better
results and also reduce the cost factor involved. The nation, particularly its coastal areas
can think of getting safe drinking water at affordable cost in the near future. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry should expand and extend this programme so that
more areas facing scarcity of drinking water could be covered and more and more people
are benefited.
13. ACQUISITION OF TECHNOLOGY DEMONSTRATION VESSEL ‘‘SAGAR NIDHI’’
13.1 The Ministry of Earth Sciences undertook the programme of acquisition of Research Vessel
with a view to provide a platform for programme envisaged in the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The
Ministry’s focus in the next five years would be to develop sustainable technology for the
exploitation of various non-living resources. Suitable platform is required to replace the vessels and
craft charted by Ministry of Earth Sciences at present for technology services and demonstration.
Accordingly, the Ministry had launched a vessel Sagar Nidhi in July, 2007 after completing the
construction of sea trials. The vessel was delivered in December, 2007 and in March, 2008, it has
been dedicated to cater to the ocean developmental activities. The National Institute of Ocean
Technology (NIOT) is the nodal agency to implement this programme and to operate and maintain
the vessel.
13.2 The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s efforts that led to the launch of new
Research Vessel Sagar Nidhi with state-of-the art navigational facilities as per its stipulated
time schedule. The Committee is of the view that this Research Vessel which is a multi
purpose vessel for technology services and demonstration, acquired to cater to various
programmes, such as Deep Sea Mining, Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV), Autonomous
Underwater Vehicle (AUV), Gas Hydrates and Manned Submersibles, supporting under water
observation system and instrumentation will enable the Ministry to carry out its important
task of ocean development and use its services in best possible way. The Committee,
therefore, desires that the Ministry should make optimum use of this vessel.

13
14. ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE
14.1 The atmosphere plays a vital role in defining the overall environment in which all organisms
live. It impacts almost all kinds of human activities in a major way. Society has evolved in harmony
with the existing variability of weather and climate and needs the support of forecasts to manage
many of its critical functions. Forecasting such a complex system as the atmosphere is a growing
science and needs to be supported. Weather services in general have very early origins in this
country and currently engage the India Meteorological Department (IMD), the National Centre for
Medium Range Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF) which is a specialized agency for developing
medium range forecast capability in the country and the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology
(IITM) which carries out research in required areas.
14.2 Advancement of science in recent years indicate that a combined approach involving land,
oceanic and atmospheric processes holds the key to longer ranges of forecasts to provide a
credible policy tool. On the other hand, intensive monitoring and analysis of cloud systems using
Satellite and Radar technology can help us to accurately gauge the severity of an immediately
impending calamity thereby prompting the selection of appropriate measures. The Ministry of Earth
Sciences has taken positive steps to implement a comprehensive developmental programme in these
lines involving all the three agencies.
14.3 Three meteorological institutions mainly devoted to Weather Modelling, viz.  India
Meteorological Department (IMD), National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting (NCMR
WF) and Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM) have been functioning under the purview
of Ministry of Earth Sciences since June, 2006.
15. INDIA METEOROLOGICAL DEPARTMENT
15.1 India Meteorological Department (IMD) is one of the oldest scientific institutions of the
country. It is the national agency for providing weather forecast and cyclone warnings. It is also
the nodal agency for monitoring seismic activities in the country. The main objectives of the
Department lie in: Forecasting and providing climatological statistics for operational planning in
various fields of Agriculture, Aviation, W ater Conservation, Oceanography, Industries, Astronomy,
etc. It maintains a network of large number of observatories for acquisition of surface and upper
air weather data. It specifically issues weather forecast and timely disaster warning of severe
weather conditions/phenomena including cyclones; provides adequate aviation meteorological
services for efficient air navigation as per mandatory requirements; provides inputs to Flood
Forecasts and advisories to Agricultural Planners, Fishermen, Mountaineers etc.
15.2 The IMD has a network for monitoring Seismic activity over the territory of India, for
locating intensity and centres of earthquakes, and to understand their processes and mechanisms.
It has a network for monitoring ozone, acid precipitation, atmospheric aerosol and Radiation which
are all important environmental indicators. It has its own workshop for manufacturing equipments
that are deployed in the basic observational network and procures specialized equipment required
for sophisticated monitoring and analysis. It is the nodal agency in the country for calibration and
standardizing of several types of meteorological equipment. It carries out and promotes research
and development work in Atmospheric and Meteorological Sciences and imparts meteorological
training to persons of developing countries under WMO programmes and to Departmental, State
Government and Defense services personnel.
15.3 Out of the total plan outlay of Rs. 432 crore for India Meteorological Department (IMD)
during 2008-09, Rs. 364 crore has been fixed for Modernisation of IMD. It may be worthy to note

14
here that during the year 2007-08, the B.E. allocation for Modernisation programme under the head
Meteorology was Rs. 239.62 crore which was drastically reduced to Rs. 25.50 crore in R.E. stage.
However, this year Rs. 364 crore has been allocated for the Modernisation of IMD. Since India
Meteorological Department (IMD) being the nodal Government agency in the country responsible
for making systematic observations of weather and climate and providing weather related warnings/
forecasts to all sectors of activity, it is proposed to upgrade/modernize the observational network
and modeling capability.
15.4 Modernization plan of IMD aims at commissioning state-of-the art observing systems
throughout the country, network and integrate all the existing as well the new observing systems.
It is aimed to receive, process and archive all observations in digital form at a central information
processing facility of IMD and disseminate all processed information in digital form to all
forecasters of the various regional centres, State capitals to value add and generate/disseminate the
same to the multi sectoral user communities in the most efficient manner. V arious mechanisms like
internet, TV, AIR and print media including local newspapers in vernacular languages, etc. are
already being utilized for the dissemination purpose. With the commencement of the district level
forecasts (from June 2008 onwards), dissemination through district level extension agencies
consisting of district agricultural offices, NGOs are being explored in addition to the SMS services.
The modernization project is being implemented as a mission mode project with the project being
divided into 10 sub projects, each having its own project director and project implementation team
and a time schedule.
15.5 During its interaction with the Secretary of the Ministry, the Committee enquired about
the reasons for gross under-utilisation of budget under this programme during the last year. The
Committee was informed that the Ministry did not have the proposed expenditure for the same
and it was at its nascent State. Cabinet approval was obtained recently for Modernisation Plan
Phase-I (to be implemented in 24 months) estimated at Rs. 920 crore. It splits into 10
components and the Ministry is geared up for implementation of the Modernisation Plan as per
schedule.
15.6 The Committee hopes that this year the total budget of Rs. 364 crore which has been
allocated under the programme namely Modernization of India Meteorological Department
(IMD) would be fully utilised. The Committee desires that the Ministry of Earth Sciences
should make all efforts so as to bring IMD at par with world-class weather forecasting
network in near future. It feels that after modernisation, IMD would be able to offer more
accurate monitoring and warnings for severe weather events like thunderstorms, dust
storms, heavy rainfall, windstorms, hail heat waves and cold waves and improved monitoring
of tropical cyclones and better prediction of their movement and rainfall. It would also go
a long way in predicting with some precision the trend of monsoon on which agriculture of
our country is heavily dependent. There is also an urgent need to instill confidence in the
minds of common man about the capabilities of the Department to predict weather more
accurately. Efforts should also be made to ensure that media reports the updated
information only.
15.7 The Committee is also of the view that the modernization of IMD would lead to
dissemination of forecast products at district level, particularly for use by the farming
community and for better planning, disaster management and agro advisories. 1t would also
help in getting more tailor made applications for different sectors like civil aviation,
tourism, agriculture, power generation and hydrological purposes, which will generate
additional revenue.

15
15.8 The Committee further recommends that along with the modernization process,
adequate care needs to be taken towards the human resources of the Department. A state-
of-the art facility warrants that talented and dedicated staff are in place to utilize the
available resources to its optimum level. Without a perfect combination of technological
resources and human resources, the efforts would not yield the desired results.
16. INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TROPICAL METEOROLOGY
16.1 The Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), Pune established in 1962 has been
functioning as a national centre for basic and applied research in monsoon meteorology of the
tropics in general with special reference to monsoon meteorology in India and neighbourhood. Its
primary functions are to promote, guide and conduct research in the field of meteorology in all
its aspects. In tune with the mandate of basic research for advancing the prediction of weather,
climate and seasonal mean monsoon rainfall the IITM has made fundamental and noteworthy
contribution in the areas of monsoon prediction, monsoon variability, climate change, climate
variability, atmospheric chemistry modelling and air quality measurements. IITM has been playing
a leading role in the development of empirical models for long-range prediction of seasonal mean
monsoon rainfall and has taken major initiative in simulation of seasonal prediction of Indian
summer monsoon and its variability by using atmospheric and oceanic general circulation models.
Research in this area has been advanced by developing an intermediate atmosphere-ocean coupled
model and slab ocean model. Several simulation experiments using the latest version of Hadley
Centre Regional Climate Model PRECIS (Providing Regional Climates for Impacts Studies)
have been performed for the South Asian domain, to generate the regional climate for the baseline
(1961-1990) and a future period (2071-2100) urder two different socio-economic scenarios. The
scenario data products have been distributed to several impact assessment groups in the country.
This activity helped the IITM to develop expertise in regional climate modelling, and also emerge
as a national and South Asian resource base for regional climate change scenarios. IITM
has been identified as a regional coordinating centre for the application of PRECIS in South
Asia.
Observational Programmes
16.2 The IITM has been actively participating in the multi-agency and multilateral research
programmes with the organizations in India and abroad and vigorously pursuing its national and
international Field Experimental Programmes for collection of special observational data for the
study of different environmental conditions. The IITM has participated thrice in the Antarctica
Expedition and in the First Expedition to Arctic for the study of various aspects of the atmosphere
over Antarctica and Arctic.
Academic Activities
16.3 The IITM has been recognized by several Indian Universities as a Centre of Advanced
Research for carrying out work leading to the award of M.Sc. and Ph.D. Degrees in Atmospheric
Sciences. The IITM scientists contribute to the academic programmes of universities and
institutions by providing their expertise through lectures, guidance, and working as examiners,
paper setters and Members of Board of Studies. The lITM has been conducting M.Tech.
(Atmospheric Physics) course of the University of Pune since 1988. A Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) between the University of Pune and the IITM was signed on 26 May, 1999
for collaboration in teaching and research in Atmospheric Physics. An In-house Training
programme in Atmospheric Sciences for the Research Fellows and young scientists has been run

16
in two parts such as Basic Training and Advanced Training. Total allocation for all schemes of
IITM, Pune during 2008-09 is Rs. 22 crore.
16.4 The Committee observes that Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM) has
been playing a leading role in the development of empirical models for long-range prediction
of seasonal mean monsoon rainfall and has taken major initiatives for the prediction of
seasonal mean Indian summer monsoon rainfall and its variability. The Committee
recommends that IITM has to widen its objectives and scope of research activities to meet
the critical challenges and the national needs for providing information relating to various
aspects of atmosphere and the increasing concern among the Government and general
public about a variety of environmental issues.
17. NATIONAL CENTRE FOR MEDIUM RANGE WEATHER FORECASTING
17.1 The National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF) was created as a
mission mode project of the Government in 1988 and continues to function in the same mode. The
mandate of the Centre is to provide medium range location specific forecasts to farmers through
development of Agro-Advisory Service for the 127 Agro-climatic zones (ACZ) of the country. In
this regard the NCMRWF has established links with different Agricultural Universities and Indian
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) research centres spread across the country. NCMRWF has
been designated as a Ministry of Earth Sciences centre of excellence for weather & climate
modeling in India after mandates of its constituent units were redefined by a designated committee
and accepted by the Earth Commission. This year, budgetary allocation of Rs. 14.90 crore has been
provided to carry out various activities under this programme.
17.2 To provide the medium range weather forecasts, an end-to-end Numerical Weather
Prediction (NWP) system based on a global Atmospheric General Circulation Model (AGCM) of
horizontal resolution of 150 km and 18 levels in vertical was implemented and made operational in
June, 1994. This involved use of voluminous global meteorological and oceanographic data, their
assimilation to provide initial conditions, numerical models, and high end computing resources.
NCMRWF has recently upgraded its NWP system by increasing the horizontal resolution of the
global AGCM to 50 km and 64 levels in the vertical. NCMRWF NWP products are also made
available on routine basis to operational and Research organizations such as IMD, INCOIS, Air
Force, SASE, BARC, ISRO, etc. on real time and to various academic/research groups and other
user agencies on demand.
17.3 The Committee is of the view that Research and Development policy under this
programme, which aims towards improving medium range and extreme weather events
prediction should be an integral part of the National Centre for Medium Range Forecasting
(NCMRWF) activity. The Committee observes that the Centre has been contributing
regularly to human resource development in Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) and NWP
capability building in other institutions within the country and neighbouring countries. It
recommends that its products should be provided to various agencies in the Government and
other users in a number of socio-economic sectors.
18. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Earth Sciences has initiated a
new programme on global and regional climate change and propose to set up a dedicated
climate change research centre with the state-of-the art research facilities in the current
plan period. This is indeed a timely initiative. The Committee recommends that all out
effort should be made to make this centre operational within the targeted time-frame so
that necessary research work in this field could be carried out.

17
19. After considering the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Earth Sciences and
assessing the progress of various important programmes and projects administered by it, the
Committee recommends that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 971 crore, as sought by the
Ministry for the year 2008-09, under Demand No. 28, may be approved.

18
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Committee is constrained to note that the projected demand of Rs. 1566 crore
made by the Ministry was drastically reduced to virtually half to the tune of Rs.750 crore
only. This will adversely affect the major programmes that are to be undertaken during the
current year. The Committee is of the view that unless there is a raise in the allocation,
the Ministry will not be able to translate their dream into reality. The Committee, at the
same time is of the opinion, that Ministry should also plan its projects/schemes meticulously
so as to avoid any drastic cut in their projections because of poor performance in utilisation
of previous fund. (Para 3.5)
2. The Committee notes with concern that despite the existing Mechanism to monitor
and review the ongoing schemes, most of the major programmes, which were undertaken
during the last year saw a large scale under utilization of funds. The Committee hopes that
the Department will further strengthen this mechanism for effective implementation of its
programmes so as to avoid delay in the implementation of various projects and also in
avoiding underutilization of the funds allotted to it. The Committee is of the view that
procedural and administrative delays could have been avoided through well focused planning
and management. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to review its
mechanism and make sure that fund allocations are made as per requirements and are
utilized to the maximum possible. (Para 4.2)
3. The Committee commends the research work carried out by the Ministry in the
Antarctica as initiating scientific research and exploration in extreme cold conditions is not
an easy task. In addition, the Committee is of the view that the Ministry may also conduct
a prospective study on heart rate variabilities under extreme cold climate and prolonged
isolation on expedition's team members to reveal the physiological changes in the heart due
to exposure to cold climate. At the same time study may also be carried out to examine the
effect of such cold climate on vital body parameters like blood pressure, pulse rate,
hemoglobin levels, sleep duration of the members. (Para 6.5)
4. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should study the icy continent's
atmospherics and ozone depletion. Besides ongoing activities, it should also plan to
undertake studies on lake water and its biology, Antarctic microbes. In addition, the
Ministry should also think of undertaking a shallow drilling in Antarct ica for retrieval of
ice core for paleo-climatological studies. (Para 6.6)
5. The Arctic Ocean and the surrounding regions are one of the most important areas
that not only govern the earth's climate but have also faithfully recorded the past climatic
history. The region is an excellent harbinger of future changes as the signals and clues that
signify climate change are much stronger in the Arctic region than anywhereelse on the
earth. This region has always been significant to the Indian subcontinent due to the
probable tele-connection between the northern polar region and Indian monsoon intensity,
which is critical for an agrarian economy like ours. The Committee appreciates the fact that
India has embarked upon Arctic Research by launching her first scientific expedition to this
region under the leadership of Director, National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research
(NCAOR) last year. The Committee recommends the Ministry to continue to aspire for a
strong presence in the Arctic region. (Para 6.7)
18

19
6. The Committee feels that the country is faced with an enormous task of carrying out
development and meeting the challenges of modern times for which there is requirement
of minerals. Therefore, the efforts of the Ministry should be directed towards developing
technology for sufficient metal recovery from the polymetallic nodules and tapping rich
resources from ocean. It will help in meeting the requirement of minerals for the country
besides attaining self-sufficiency. (Para 7.4)
7. The Committee expresses its satisfaction that Ministry's sincere efforts have finally
led to the setting up of a full fledged National Tsunami Early Warning Centre at INCOIS,
Hyderabad for providing warning on a 24X7 basis. In view of the above, the Committee
recommends that Ministry must make optimum use of this Centre to disseminate data to
the concerned authorities as early as possible. (Para 8.5)
8. The Committee commends the efforts made by the Ministry to forecast key ocean
parameters and disseminate the information such as availability of fish stocks, ocean state,
tsunami, etc. which will immensely help the weaker sections of the society both in terms
of the security and income for the fisherman. The Committee would like the Ministry to
provide ocean data, information and advisory services to society, industry, government and
scientific community through sustained ocean observations and constant improvements
through systematic and focused research, data and information management and ocean
modeling. (Para 8.7)
9. The Committee is of the view that Fisheries Oceanographic Research Vessel (FORV)
Sagar Sampada forms the backbone of Marine Living Resources surveys and notes with
satisfaction that during last year QRV Sagar Kanya and FORV Sagar Sampada had
undertaken various cruises to meet the requirements towards the implementation of the
Marine Living Resources programme. The Committee recommends the Ministry to carry out
activities such as charting of exploitable resources of the deep sea, promoting operational
fishery oceanographic services, ecosystem monitoring and modeling, promoting basic
Research & Development on Marine Living Resources and transfer of technology for
societal development. (Para 9.5)
10. The Committee observes that marine organisms have attracted much attention as
potential source of drugs over the recent years. The discovery, development and production
of drugs from marine bacteria, fungi, microalgae, sponges remains largely in the realm of
experimentation. The Committee observes that there is a need to look at this aspect more
thoroughly and, therefore, recommends extensive research and study to harness bioactive
compounds from the marine organisms for human therapeutic purposes. The Committee
also recommends that the extraction and development of potential drugs and chemicals from
the depth of the ocean should be pursued with well-focussed mechanism. It further
recommends that clinical stage trials should be expedited so that drugs are available in the
market at the earliest for the benefit of the people. (Para 10.3)
11. The Committee is of the view that Fossil fuels besides being costly are continuously
depleting and will not last long. Gas Hydrates have the potential of providing energy
security to the nation, as it can prove to be an alternative source of energy. The Committee
is however, constrained to note that the budgetary support allocated under this programme
was not fully utilized during the last year . Non-availability of suitable collaboration partner
and other technical inadequacy were the reasons attributed for this shortcoming. The
Committee is constrained to observe that the Ministry has been citing the same problem
since 2005-06. The Committee fails to understand as to why the Ministry has not been able
to find a suitable collaborative partner for so long and why alternative arrangements are

20
not being made? The Committee recommends that Ministry must find a solution in this
regard at the earliest. (Para 11.6)
12. The Committee commends the activities of the Ministry in the area of desalination
of sea water. The Committee feels that an integrated and coordinated effort of various
Departments of Government/organizations involved in this direction will achieve better
results and also reduce the cost factor involved. The nation, particularly its coastal areas
can think of getting safe drinking water at affordable cost in the near future. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry should expand and extend this programme so that
more areas facing scarcity of drinking water could be covered and more and more people
are benefited. (Para 12.4)
13. The Committee appreciates the Ministry's efforts that led to the launch of new
Research Vessel Sagar Nidhi with state-of-the art navigational facilities as per its stipulated
time schedule. The Committee is of the view that this Research Vessel which is a multi
purpose vessel for technology services and demonstration, acquired to cater to various
programmes, such as Deep Sea Mining, Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV), Autonomous
Underwater Vehicle (AUV), Gas Hydrates and Manned Submersibles, supporting under water
observation system and instrumentation will enable the Ministry to carry out its important
task of ocean development and use its services in best possible way. The Committee,
therefore, desires that the Ministry should make optimum use of this vessel. (Para 13.2)
14. The Committee hopes that this year the total budget of Rs. 364 crore which has been
allocated under the programme namely Modernization of India Meteorological Department
(IMD) would be fully utilised. The Committee desires that the Ministry of Earth Sciences
should make all efforts so as to bring IMD at par with world-class weather forecasting
network in near future. It feels that after modernisation, IMD would be able to offer more
accurate monitoring and warnings for severe weather events like thunderstorms, dust
storms, heavy rainfall, windstorms, hail heat waves and cold waves and improved monitoring
of tropical cyclones and better prediction of their movement and rainfall. It would also go
a long way in predicting with some precision the trend of monsoon on which agriculture of
our country is heavily dependent. There is also an urgent need to instill confidence in the
minds of common man about the capabilities of the Department to predict weather more
accurately. Efforts should also be made to ensure that media reports the updated
information only. (Para 15.6)
15. The Committee is also of the view that the modernization of IMD would lead to
dissemination of forecast products at district level, particularly for use by the farming
community and for better planning, disaster management and agro advisories. It would also
help in getting more tailor made applications for different sectors like civil aviation,
tourism, agriculture, power generation and hydrological purposes, which will generate
additional revenue. (Para 15.7)
16. The Committee further recommends that along with the modernization process,
adequate care needs to be taken towards the human resources of the Department. A state
of the art facility warrants that talented and dedicated staff are in place to utilize the
available resources to its optimum level. Without a perfect combination of technological
resources and human resources, the efforts would not yield the desired results. (Para 15.8)
17. The Committee observes that Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM) has
been playing a leading role in the development of empirical models for long-range prediction
of seasonal mean monsoon rainfall and has taken major initiatives for the prediction of
seasonal mean Indian summer monsoon rainfall and its variability. The Committee

21
recommends that IITM has to widen its objectives and scope of research activities to meet
the critical challenges and the national needs for providing information relating to various
aspects of atmosphere and the increasing concern among the Government and general
public about a variety of environmental issues. (Para 16.4)
18. The Committee is of the view that Research & Development policy under this
programme, which aims towards improving medium range and extreme weather events
prediction should be an integral part of the National Centre for Medium Range Forecasting
(NCMRWF) activity. The Committee observes that the Centre has been contributing
regularly to human resource development in Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) and NWP
capability building in other institutions within the country and neighbouring countries. It
recommends that its products should be provided to various agencies in the Government and
other users in a number of socio-economic sectors. (Para 17.3)
19. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Earth Sciences has initiated a
new programme on global and regional climate change and propose to set up a dedicated
climate change research centre with the state of art research facilities in the current plan
period. This is indeed a timely initiative. The Committee recommends that all out effort
should be made to make this centre operational within the targeted time frame so that
necessary research work in this field could be carried out. (Para 18)
20. After considering the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Earth Sciences and
assessing the progress of various important programmes and projects administered by it, the
Committee recommends that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 971 crore, as sought by the
Ministry for the year 2008-09, under Demand No. 28, may be approved. (Para 19)

ANNEXURE

24

25
ANNEXURE
(Rs. in crores)
Sl. No. Schemes/Programmes B .E. 2008-09
12 3
1. Polar Science 35.50
2. Polymetallic Nodules (PMN) programme 15.00
3. Ocean Observation and Information System(OOIS) 13.00
4. Marine Research and Technology Development (MRTD) 24.00
5. Delineation of the outer limits of continental shelf 1.00
6. Coastal research vessels and other Research vessels 5.00
7. National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) 20.00
8. Information Technology 1.00
9. Comprehensives Topography Surveys 5.00
10. Gas Hydrates 12.00
11. Acquisition of Research Vessel ‘‘ Sagar Nidhi ’’ 12.00
12. Data Buoy Programme/Integrated Sustain Ocean Observation 10.00
13. Tsunami and Storm Surge Warning System 15.00
14. National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR) 15.00
15. Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) 30.00
16. Sea front facilities 10.00
17. National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecast (NCMR WF) 11.00
18. Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM) 13.00
19. India Meteorological Department (IMD)
(a) Space Meteorology 100.0
(b) Agro met Advisory Services 10.00
(c) Seismic Hazard and Risk Evaluation 15.00
(d) Operation and Maintenance 28.00
(e) Aviation Meteorology 5.00
25

26
12 3
(f) Modernisation of IMD (Communication, Observation, Cyclone, 364.00
warning, Forecasting, Aviation Services, Instrumentation,
infrastructural development)
20 Development of mannned submersible 5.00
21 Multichannel Seismic System onboard ORV Sagar Kanya 5.00
22 Expeditions to the Arctic region 2.00
23 Desalination plan 10.00
24 National Oceanarium 0.50
25 Demonstration of Shoreline protection Measures 5.00
26 Integrated Ocean Drilling Prog. & Geotechnoic studies (lODP) 4.00
27 Ice-Class Research Vessel 5.00
28 Headquarters Building 20.00
29 Multi-hazards Early Warning Support System 1.00
30 Centre for Climate Change 5.00
31 Dedicated Weather Channel and Commonwealth Games 5.00
32 NIOT ext. centre West Bengal 0.50
33 R&D in Earth and Atmopsheric Sciences 7.00
G
RAND T OTAL: 750.00

27
MINUTES

28

29
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 2nd April, 2008 in Room No. ‘139’,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Jabir Husain
4. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Shri Francis Fanthome
8. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
9. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
10. Shri Pratik P. Patil
11. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
12. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
13. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES
1. Dr. P.S. Goel, Secretary
2. Shri E.K. Bharat Bhushan, JS & FA
3. Shri Prakash Kumar, JS
4. Shri S.K. Das, Scientist ‘G’
5. Dr. B.R Subramaniam, Scientist ‘G’
6. Shri Rasik Ravindra, Director, NCAOR
7. Shri Ajit Tyagi, DG, IMD
8. Shri R C. Bhatia, ADGM, IMD
9. Dr. S. Kathiroli, Director, NIOT, Chennai
10. Dr. S. Nayak, Director, INCOIS, Hyderabad
29

30
11. Dr. Swati Basu, Scientist ‘G’
12. Shri R.K. Sharma, Scientist ‘G’
13. Shri T.V .P. Bhaskara Rao, Scientist ‘G’
14. Dr. A.K. Bhatnagar, ADGM
15. Dr. Vasundhra Gupta, Director
16. Dr. K. Somasunder, Scientist ‘E’
17. Dr. B.K. Bansal, Scientist ‘G’
18. Dr. V .N. Sanjeevan, Scientist ‘E’
19. Dr. M.P. Wakdikar, Scientist ‘F’
20. Dr. P. Madeswaran, Scientist ‘E’
21. Dr. B. Mukhopadhayay, Director, IMD
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Ministry
of Earth Sciences and requested the Secretary to make a presentation on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Ministry. Thereafter, the Secretary made a visual presentation regarding the
major activities formulated for the year 2008-09 and achievements of the Ministry during the year
2007-08. He also mentioned about the budgetary allocations made under different heads. Thereafter,
Members sought clarifications on the points that emerged out of the presentation: The Secretary
replied to them.
The officials then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 1.55 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday,
the 3rd April, 2008.

31
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 23rd April, 2008 in Room No. ‘139’,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Saman Pathak
4. Shri Jabir Husain
5. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK  SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
9. Shri Francis Fanthome
10. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
11. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
12. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
2. The Committee took-up for consideration its draft ***, *** 187th, ***, ***, ***; Reports
on the Demands for Grants (2008-09) pertaining to the ***, *** Ministry of Earth Science; ***,
*** *** ***.
3. * * *
4. The Committee decided to present all the seven reports (185th to 191st) on 29th April, 2008
in both the Houses of Parliament. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence
Dr. Barun Mukherjee to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and to lay the copies of the reports
on the Table of Lok Sabha by Dr. Sujan Chakraborty and in his absence by Shri Francis Fanthome.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.
31

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.