PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
0 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
(1996-97) 
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT & 
FORESTS ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
NINTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (1994-95) OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT & 
FORESTS 
(Presented on 19th December, 1996) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 1996/ Agrahayana 1918 (Saka) 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
CONTENTS 
CoMPOSITION oF THE CoMMITTEE •.•.•..•••••.•.•••....•.......•.••. 
INTRODUCOON .•.••............•..•......•••.•. ••••••.••..•.•......•.•••• 
REPORT OF THE COMMITT EE ......................................... . 
ANNEXUR.ES ........................... ... ...... ..... .................... . 
MJN lJTES ..... . .. .. ....................................................... . 
PAGES 
(i)--{ii) 
(iii) 
1-18 
19-28 
29-34 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMIT'l;EE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1996-97) 
1. Shri V. Narayanasamy~hairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt 
4. Shri N. Giri Prasad 
5. Shri K.R. Jayadevappa 
6. Shri K. Karunakaran 
7. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
8. Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty 
9. Shri Narendra Pradban 
10. Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar 
11. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
12. Shri G. Swaminathan 
13. Shri Prakanta Warisa 
LOK SABHA 
14. Shri Mahabir Lal ]3ishvakarma 
15. Shri Ranjib Biswal 
16. Shri A.B.A. Gani Khan Choudhury 
17. Prof. Jitendra Nath Das 
18. Shri Mohd. Ali Ashraaf Fatmi 
19. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi 
20. Shri K.C. Kondaiah 
21. Dr. Ramkrishan Kusmaria 
22. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
23. Shri Shivaji Mane 
24. Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta 
25. Shri Punnu Lal Mohle 
26. Shrimati Alka Nath 
27. Shri Sharad Pawar 
28. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
29. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
30. Shri Kalpnath Rai 
0 
31. Shri A. Raja 
32. Shrimati Vasundhara Raje 
33. Shri P.V. Rajendran 
34. Shri K.B. Raut 
35. Shri S. Ramachandra Reddy 
36. Shri Harivansh Sahai 
37. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
38. Shrimati Vijayaraje Scindia 
39. Kumari Selja 
40. Capt. Satish Sharma 
41. Shri Soumya Ranjan Patnaik 
42. Sushri Uma Bharati 
43. Shri Srikanta Dutta Wadivar 

SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer 
Shri R.K. Malhotra, Committee Officer 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf present the 
Thirty-ninth Report on Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the 
recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on the Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1994-95 (Demand No. 23). 
2. The Ninth Report of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and 
Forests was presented to Rajya Sabha on the 18th April, 1994. The Ministry furnished t.heir 
replies indicating action taken on the recommendations/observations contained in that 
Report on 27th March, 1995. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on 
17th December, 1996. 
NEw DELHI; 
19th December, 1996. ~ 
V. NARAYANASAMY 
Chairman, 
Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment and Forests. 

REPORT 
CHAPTER-I: GENERAL 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests on the recommendations cont~iTled in the Ninth Report of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
'Environment and Forests on the demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th April, 1994. 
2. There are 13 recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee. 
Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee, were received from the 
Ministry on 27th March, 1995. 
3. In the meeting held on 29th October, 1996 the Committee considered the Action 
Taken Report and decided to seek some clarificationslobserv3tions from the Ministry. The 
Ministry of Environment and Forests furnished their clarificatiom;/comments on 3rd 
December, 1996 which have been incorporated in this reports, in the succeeding paragraphs. 
RECOMMENDATION 
4. The Committee has also noted that in the Budget Estimates for 1993-94 the Non-Plan 
component of the Ministry was just over Rs. 52 crores which was subsequently revised to 
over Rs. 62 crores, thereby effecting an increase of about 20% but in the Budget Estimates 
for 1994-95, it has been shown as Rs. 58.27 crores, which represents a reduction of abot! ~ 
Rs. 4 crores over that of the previous year. While the Committee appreciates that the 
Ministry has sought lesser Non-plan allocation for 1994-95, it fails to understand as to what 
necessitated substantial increase in Non-Plan component in the Revised Estimates for 1993-
94. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would take due care and confine the Non-Plan 
expenditure to the amount as projected in the Budget Estimates for 1994-95 and the 
increase, if any, will be confil)ed to the barest minimum. 
(Para No. 5) 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY 
4.1 Against the Non-Plan Budget Estimates 1993-94 of Rs. 52.01 crores, a provision of 
Rs. 621.18 crores was asked for under the Revised Estimates 1993-94. An additional amount 
of Rs. 10.17 crores was projected for making reimbursement to the CentraYState Pollution 
Control Boards under the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution (Cess) and meet the 
additional requirement of Botanical Survey of India .for the following reasons:-
(a) In accordance with the Water Cess Act, 1977 as amended from time to time, 
CentraVState Pollution Control Boards collect the Water Cess which is deposited in the 
Consolidated Fund of India. The amount collected is then reimbursed to the CentraYState 
Pollution Boards under the prescribed formulae. 
The Water Cess Act, was amended in 1991 enhancing the Cess rates by nearly three 
times. This amendment came into effect from 1st February, 1992. While this led to a 
considerable increase in the total collection of Cess, it also correspondingly increased the 
total quantum of releases that bad to be made to the CentraVState Pollution Control 

Boards. This had an impact during 1992-'93; consequently an amount of Rs. 9.71 crores 
could not be reimbursed to State Pollution Boards during the said financial year and had to 
be carried forward for reimbursement to the subsequent year, i.e., 1993-94. As a result, an 
additional provision of Rs. 10.00 crores over and above the sanctioned grant of Rs. 16.30 
crores had to be kept for the purpose at the Revised Estimates stage during 1993-94. 
(b) An additional amount of Rs. 0.17 crores had to be provided for Botanical Survey of 
India to meet the additiona l requirement due to grant of Interim relief sanctioned during 
1993-94. 
Although the Non-Plan Revised Estiamte for 1993-94 for Rs. 62.18 crores had been 
accepted by the Ministry of Finance, keeping in view the need to ensure financial discipline, 
the Ministry had decided not to go in for a supplementary grant and instead endeavoured to 
remain .within the sanctioned Budget for 1993-94 by utilising the savings available under Plan 
through diversion. As no arrears for reimbursement of Water Cess pertaining to previous 
years were pending, the Budget Estimates for 1994-95 under Non-Plan were worked out on 
the basis of Actual requirement for the scheme of Prevention and Control of Water 
Pollution (Cess) which was therefore less than the provision made in Revised Estimates for 
the year 1993-94. 
COMMENTS 
4.2 The Committee finds that the Ministry did not take into consideration the 
recommendations of the Committee and again utilised the savings available under plan 
through diversion for Non-Plan expenditure. The Budget Estimates and Non-Plan provision 
were to the tune of Rs. 58.27 crores for the year 1994-95 but the Ministry spent Rs. 59.41* 
crores (actual) during the year 1994-95 obviously through diversion of Plan allocation. 
The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Ministry shou ld confine 
the Non-Plan expenditure to the amount projected in Budget Estimates. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
5. The Committee feels that the Ministry through its R&D Units should concentrate on 
developing and providing low cost and fuel efficient energy for cooking so that the 
dependence of rural people on fuel wood from the forests is minimised substantially and the 
forests have unhindered growth. 
(Para No. 8) 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY 
5.1 The development of low cost and fuel efficient energy for cooking is the 
responsibility of the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources. That Ministry is 
implementing the following two national programmes since 1982-83:-
1. National Programme on improved chulha. 
2. National Programme on biogas development . 
National Programmes on improved cbulba: 
Various models of improved chulhas have been developed indigenously by 17 Technical 
Backup Units set up under this programme. At present, there are about 60 models of fixed 
chulhas and 20 models of portable chulhas under propagation, some of which cost as low as 
Rs. 351- with a thermal efficiency in the range of 25% to 45%. 
•Source:- Demands on Grants for Ministry of Environment and Forests 1996-97 showing actuals. 

National Programme on Biogas Development 
Cheaper models such as Deenbandhu and FRP models have been developed in the past 
and are being propagated by the MNES. Work on development of designs suitable for leafy 
biomass and agro-residues is in progress. 
These programmes are being implemented through State Government nodal 
departments and all India level agencies like Khadi and Village Industries Commission 
(KVIC) , National Dairy Development Board, State Forest Departments etc. Voluntary 
Organisations have also been involved in the implementation of these programmes. 
Till 1993-94, about 170 lakhs improved chulhas and 20 lakhs biogas plants have been 
installed . It is expected that about 132 lakhs tonnes of fuelwood will be saved annually. 
Ministry of Environment and Forests has also included the wood substitution and 
fuelwood conservation measures as one of the Project activities in its centrally sponsored 
scheme for Integrated Afforestation and Eco-Development Projects. Physical and Financial 
outlay as approved by the Planning Commission for this Scheme are as under:-
Year Financial outlay Physical targets 
~ 
(Rs. in lakhs) (Area in Lakh haq .) 
1990-91 2384 0.42 
1991-92 4500 0.62 
1992-93 5000 0.68 
1993-94 5500 0.75 
1994-95 5616 0.78 
This Ministry has already taken several initiatives in the direction of fuelwood 
conservation. A Policy Advisory Group (PAG) was constituted for this purpose in 1990. The 
recommendations of PAG have been circulated to the State Governments for 
implementation. Apart from this, the Ministry is also a part of the Regional Wood Energy 
Development Programmes in Asia of the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the U.N. 
COMMENTS 
5.2 The Ministry in its Action Taken Report has inter-alia stated that a Policy Advisory 
Group was constituted in 1990 to suggest measures for fuelwood conservation. The 
recommendations of this Group were circulated to the State Governments for 
implementation. 
The Committee wanted the Ministry to furnish details of the recommendations and 
when these recommendations were communicated to the State Governments. Whether any 
follow-up action has been taken by the State Governments and if so, what is the outcome of 
that. If no follow up action has been taken by the State Governments, what are the reasons 
therefor. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
6. Forests are capital assets of the nation and the States do need central budgetary 
support in this vital sector. The central budgetary support can also be limited substantially if 
the States are encouraged to generate their own funds by utilising forest resources without, 
in any way, contributing to degradation. In this context the Committee observes that the 

Ministry of Environment and Forests can play an effective role in impressing upon the States 
to draw upon the experience of the State of Madhya Pradesh, which the Committee has 
been given to understand, is generating income from forests to the tune of Rs. 400 crores 
whereas its forest plan component is of the size of Rs. 50 crores. · · 
(Para No. 10) 
ACTION TAKEN BY mE MINISTER 
6.1 It is a fact that level of investment in the forestry sector in the country is not 
commensurate with the level of withdrawls from our forests. The Ministry has already taken 
up the issue of raising the forestry allocation with the Planning Commission and the State 
Governments. It has been found that many of the State Governments are not allocating 
sufficient funds for forestry development despite the fact that the revenue from forests from 
the States is considerable as is evident from the case of Madhya Pradesh. While the States 
with higher income from forests need to augment investments in order to sustainably 
manage, develop and utilise their forest resources, the States with lesser forest areas also 
need to allocate sufficient funds for forest development in order to ensure increased supply 
of goods and services for the benefit of community as well as for its environmental well 
being. The Plan allocation of forestry under Vlllth Plan is only 1% and there is urgent need 
to increase it upto 2% during the remaining years of the Vlllth Plan and to a level of 3% 
under IXth Plan. 
• COMMENTS 
6.2 In view of the reply of the Ministry, the Committee observes that there is need for 
more allocation for forestry. Planning Commission should consider the importance of the 
forestry and provide higher allocations in the IXth Plan period. 
RECOMMENDATION 
Paryavaran Vabini: 
7. Most of the schemes launched or contemplated by the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests such as Paryavaran Sudhar Pariyojna are of a peripheral nature and do not strike at 
the root of the problem. The idea behind setting up one Paryavaran Vahini for each 
identified district with a view to create environmental awareness and involvement of people 
through active participation , reporting of illegal acts pertaining to forests, wildlife, pollution 
and environmental degradation is no doubt good, but there appear to be many pitfalls in the 
scheme which is mainly to be administered through the District Collector who are supposed 
to take action on the complaints of the Members of the Vahini. There is an apprehension 
that the persons brought on these Vahinis may not be right sort of persons and the grant of 
Rs. 200 per month to each Member given through the State Governments may be pocketed 
by the persons who are not doing any worthwhile service. The Committee, therefore, feels 
that while the Paryavaran Vahini Scheme should be continued and adequate funds be made 
available therefor, there should be strict monitoring in respect of performance of these 
Vahinis. 
(Para No. 11) 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY 
7.1 This Ministry is making every effort to ensure that right kind of persons are selected 
as Members of the Paryavaran Vahinis. For this, the Ministry has provided detailed 
guidelines for selection of Members. Also, th! Regional Offices of, the Ministry are involved 
with process of selection and constitution of the Vahinis. Their representatives attend the 

Selection Committee meetings. Besides, the performance of these Vahinis is also monitored 
by the Regional Offices. 
(Para No. 11) 
COMMENTS 
7.2 The Committee feels that the Ministry should work and a mechanism in order to 
create awareness among the people to preserve the environment. The Ministry should 
examine as to how best the involvement of NGOs can be ensured. 
FURTHER ACTION TAKEN 
7.3 The Ministry of Environment and Forests in its drive for creating environmental 
awareness and to involve people in the preservation of environment and forests and wildlife 
has started a scheme known as 'Paryavaran Vahini'. It is meant to be a people's programme 
wherein persons!NGOs who are dedicated to the cause of environmental protection would 
be welcome to become members of the Paryavaran Vahinis. The objectives of the scheme 
are as follows:-
- Environmental awareness and involvement of people through active participation 
- Reporting on illegal acts pertaining to forests, wildlife, pollution and environmental 
degradation 
- Feed back regarding afforestation and survival of plants 
- Monitoring including collection of sample, analysis of ambient air and water quality 
including vehicular pollution 
The scheme is not an employment generating scheme and membership in the Vahini is 
of honorary nature and they are partially reimbursed the expenses incurred for the meetings. 
The meetings are held once every month. 
To involve people working at the grassroot levels in the Environment conservation 
efforts, Paryavaran Vahini has been constituted at the district level. 184 districts have been 
approved for constitution of Vahinis and by now, these have been constituted in 141 districts 
spread over 25 States and 4 Union Territories. These districts have been selected on the 
basis of high incidence of pollution, density of tribal population and forest cover. Each 
Paryavaran Vahini has about 20 members. Two States viz. Madhya Pradesh and Arunachal 
Pradesh have be.en covered 100% under the scheme. The members organise activities to 
create environmental awareness in their areas. 
Violation of activities like deforestation/illegal felling of trees/illegal mining! 
encroachment of forest land/wildlife poaching/cruelty to animals/violations of provisions of 
Environment Protection Act, 1986/Forest Conservation Act, 1980/Wildlife Protection Act, 
1972, causing environmental degradation · are reported and action is taken up on the 
complaints received from the various members by the District Magistrate. Action taken on 
various complaints is discussed in the subsequent meetings of Paryavaran Vahinis. 
Monitoring of scheme is being done through Regional Offices of the Ministry by way of 
quarterly reports received from district and field visits where Paryavaran Vahinis are 
working. 
RECOMMENDATION 
8. The Committee is of the view that any shortfall in achieving .the targets results in 
surrendering of allocated amount unless of course the funds themselves fall short and there 
is cost escalation, if the projects go heyond the periods earmarked for their completion. As 

regards Aerial Seeding Scheme it was submitted before the Committee that the results 
achieved under this scheme have not been that much satisfactory for various reasons such as 
lack of interest or the part of some States, non-checking of grazing and assistance from the 
people engaged in making soil fit for seeding because they do not have employment round 
the year. Nevertheless, the Ministry is in the process of identifying areas like Chambal 
ravines of U.P. and M.P. to bring them under Aerial Seeding Scheme. The Committee feels 
that there has not been any major R&D effort on the part of the Ministry in the field of 
Aerial Seeding and whole approach is of a lackadaisical. The Committee, therefore, urges 
upon the Ministry to strengthen R&D in this vital sector to make the Aerial Seeding Scheme 
more viable and meaningful. 
(Para No. 12) 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY 
8.1 As regards the Aerial Seeding Scheme ICFRE Dehradun have been asked to collect 
information regarding technological advances in the field of aerial seeding which ensure 
better penetration of seeds in soil and take care of characteristics of soil to secure plantation 
in difficult terrains. A techno-economic evaluation study for comparative analysis of manual 
and aerial seeding technique is also proposed to be carried out. 
COMMENTS 
8.2 The Committee is satisfied with the approach of the Ministry. However, the 
Committee would appreciate if the findings of the study conducted by the techno-economi c 
evaluation Group for comparative analysis of manual and aerial seedings technique are made 
known to the Committee. 
FURTHER ACTION TAKEN 
8.3 Subsequent to the observation of the Committee there has not been any major R&D 
effort on the part of the Ministry in the field of aerial seeding, Indian Council of Forestry 
Research and Education (ICFRE) was asked to carry out the evaluation of the aerial seeding 
scheme. A meeting was held at the level of the then Ministry of Environment and Forests on 
5.9.94 to discuss the technological improvements possible in the scheme. ICFRE was 
assigned the task of collectiqg available information in other countries particularly with 
regard to latest technologies of aerial seeding as experimented in the country in the past has 
not achieved the desired results and that no technologies are available to make the seeds 
peneuate in the soil which is highly degraded and compact. In view of the comments of the 
ICFRE the implementation of the scheme in its present form has been discontinued with the 
approval of MEF. 
RECOMMENDATION 
9. It is of utmost importance that monitoring and evaluation aspects of prescribed 
targets are taken due care of and mechanism provided therefore is suitably strengthened. In 
this context, the Committee has observed that in the budgetary estimates for 1994-95 the 
Plan outlay for monitoring and evaluation of schemes formulated under the National 
Afforestation and Boo-Development Board (NAEB) has been reduced from Rs. 1.5 crore 
during the previous year to Rs. 75 lakhs. Similarly to carry out such an important activity as 
the Forest survey, the Ministry has been deferring purchase of Digital Cartography System 
for the last three years consecutively notwithstanding the fact that allocations therefor have 
been made each year in the budgetary system. The explanation given by the Ministry is that 
to operate the computers at light wprk stations, the software which is needed is of three 

kinds and these three kinds have come up with new versions and now the Technical 
Evaluation Committee has examined the matter threadbare and formulated its 
recommendations. On that basis the Ministry hopes to acquire the Digital Cartography 
~ystem during 1994-95. Since the Ministry proposes to acquire equipment such as Digital 
Cartography System and other softwares, the Plan outlay for Survey and Utilisation of 
Forest Resources has come down from Rs. 8.5 crores in 1993-94 to Rs. 3.8 crores in 1994-95 
and once this equipment is acquired, the Ministry may not need any extra money for forest 
survey etc. In response to a specific query from the Committee as to whether there would be 
any cost escalation in purchasing Digital Cartography System in view of the fact that it has 
not been acquired by the Ministry despite provision of budgetary allocation consecutively for 
three years , it was explained that there will not be any cost escalation because customs duty 
has been reduced recently. The Committee was, however, not informed whether there would 
be any cost escalation in real terms in the purchase of the equipment from the 
manufacturing country. 
(Para No. 13) 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY 
9.1 Under this head, evaluations that are mounted to sample check the saplings planted 
in individual districts, evaluations made by specialised agencies for projects implemented 
under the IAEPS, AOFFPS and MFPS are paid for. Also it was intended to meet the costs 
for providing computers as well as softwares on a pilot basis to improve the monitoring 
capacity in 30 districts through the NIC. However, keeping in view the costs involved for 
replicating this arrangement for all the districts of the country, it has been decided not to go 
in for the programme. For this reason the budgetary estimate for 1994-95 has been reduced 
from Rs. 150 lakhs during the previous years to Rs. 75 lakhs. 
There is no likelihood of escalation in real terms in the purchase of the equipment 
during the year 1994-95 in view of stiff competition among the vendors to supply the 
equipment. 
COMMENTS 
9.2 The Committee wanted the Ministry to apprise it of the present position ':1 this 
regard. 
FURTHER ACTION TAKEN 
Status Note on Digital Cartographic System 
The main objective in acquiring Digital Cartographic System was to have an operational 
forest mapping and monitoring system, which would be used to produce forest vegetation 
map at 1 : 250000 scale at a two year cycle and thematic map at 1 : 50000 scale at a ten year 
cycle for the whole country. Alongwith Digital Satellite Data, digitized forest maps and 
other ancillary data would be used as an input to the· Digital Cartographic System with an 
objective to build up a geographic information system for forest development planning. The 
main functions of the system are:-
- map digitization. 
- storage and Management of large volumes of spatial data. 
- manipulation and editing of all graphic features. 
- overlaying of classified data with map. 
- high quality map plotting. 
- printing of copies of thematic maps as required. 

The purchase of Digital Cartographic System was approved in the EFC Memo under the 
Scheme, Forest Survey of India-Application of Remote Sensing Techniques in the Survey 
of Forests on 16th November, 1994. The approval of Ministry of Finance could be obtained 
only in late March, 1995. The Digital Cartographic System has since been procured in 
August, 1996 at a cost of Rs. 7,755 crores and is being commissioned at Forest Survey of 
India, Dehradun. 
The Digital Cartographic System includes a package of sophisticated computer systems 
intended to produce digital vegetation and thematic maps. At present , they are being 
commissioned. Once commissioned, they shall provide Forest Survey of India the capability 
to achieve in time its present mandate of publishing a biennial report called "State of Forest 
Reports", as well as National Vegetation Map digitally. The digital photogrammetic 
subsystem alongwith analytical one shall allow Forest Survey of India to update existing 
thematic maps as well as produce new maps/reports containing species, volume and growing 
stock information. Several important studies like monitoring hot spot areas like highly 
deforestation prone or fire prone area can also be undertaken which were hitherto not 
possible. 
During its visit to Forests Survey of India, Dehradun on 16th November, 1996 the 
Committee was given to understand that the pace of acquisition of Digital Cartographic 
System was rather slow depending on the availability of funds in a given year. The 
Committee is not happy with the snail's pace at which the system is being acquired. 
RECOMMENDATION 
10. The efforts of the Central and State Governments at afforestation , preventing 
deforestation and extending forest area by developing wastelands cannot succeed unless the 
critical area of ravaging fires is tadued on a war footing. A major fire in a forest may cause 
devastation as recently happen ed in the Nagarhole forests. Such fires virtually reduce to 
naught years of efforts of Ministry of Environment and Forests and the State Forest 
Departments in just minutes. In the course of the evidence of the Secretary and other 
officials of the Ministry taken by the Committee, it came to light that in controlling fires, the 
Ministry is still depending upon conventional methods such as collecting the villagers and 
providing fire fighting tools to them to undertake the gigantic task of controlling forest fires. 
In the Budgetary estimates for 1994-95, a provision of just 2 crores of rupees has been made 
for introduction of modern forest fire control methods in the country. Even if it be assumed 
that this outlay will be further supplemented by State allocations, still this amount looks 
ridiculous when we talk of introducing modern methods of fire control. It has come to the 
notice of the Committee that close on the heels of a major fire in the Nagarhole forest, 
another devastating fire has been caused in vast areas of Orissa's Simlipal Wildlife Sanctuary 
which went on raging for over 15 days with still no sign of it being controlled. On a total 
area of 2,200 sq. kms. of the sanctuary at least 200 sq. kms. was reported to be in the grip 
of fire and the loss was expected to run into millions of rupees. The Committee feels that 
forest wealth worth crores of rupees is lost in fires and accordingly would like to impress 
upon the Ministry to examine whether it could not be worth spending a small amount on 
employing modem methods of fire control like spraying chemicals with the help of 
aeroplanes as is being done in some of the advanced countries. Besides, the Committee 
recommends that law should be made more stringent with deterrent penalties for chose who 
deliberately set the forests on fire and huge losses of national wealth. 

AC'flON TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY 
10.1 Modern Forest Fire Control Project with UNDP assistance was launched in 1984. 
The project continued as Pilot Project till 1990-91 with UNDP assistance. The project clearly 
demonstrated that the Modem Forest Fire Control techniques could be successfully 
imlemented in India and dramatically reduce a number of fires and the trend in forest 
resources damaged and destroyed by wild fires. 
To replicate the methods in the fire prone forest areas , and with the objectives to 
control Forest Fires with a view to protect and conserve forests and to improve ·the 
productivity of forests by reducing the incidence and extent of fire. The Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme "Modem Forest Fire Control Methods" was introduced during the year 1992-93 with 
100% central assistance to the States. The outlay of the scheme for the entire Eighth Five 
Year Plan period was Rs. 5 crores only. Till 1993-94 the Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
"Modem Forest Fire Control Methods" was limited to only eleven States of Andhra 
Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala , Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya 
Pradesh, Orissa , Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. 
From this year onwards the scope of the Scheme is proposed to be extended to all the 
States!UTs including National Parks, Sanctuaries and Biosphere Reserves. 
The Forest Departments of all the States and UTs have been requested to identify the 
fire prone sensitive areas and submit the proposals for central assistance . 
The Ministry is maintaining the helicopters and aircrafts for using them in the detection , 
prevention and control of forest fires. 
The forest fire in Simlipal forests including the Tiger Reserve has become an annual 
feature which is set by the local people to facilitate collection of sal seed, mahua flowers etc. 
The fire covered a total area of 600 sq. kms. To combat this problem more staff and funds 
are required. However , the project authorities have been advised to take all possible 
measures to save these forest s from fire within the resource s available with them . 
Fire control with chemicill spray is not advisable as sometime s it may damage the 
biodiversity of the area particularly in sanctuaries and national park s. 
As regards Committee 's recommendation to make law more stringent , it is submitted 
that minimum penalty for this offence is 3 years imprisonment and the fine upto Rs. 25,000 
under the provisions of the Wildlife Protection Act when the offence is committed in a 
sanctuar y. Second and subsequent offence attracts more stringent penalties. These provisions 
were made recently when the Act was amended in 1991 and present level of penalties 
provided is considered sufficiently deterrent. The Indian Forest Act , 1927 is in the process of 
being amended in consultation with State Governments and the provision of penalties for 
causing damage to forests is proposed to be made more stringen t. 
COMMENTS 
10.2 The Ministry has reported that it has Modern Fore st fire Control Projec' with the 
UNDP assistance in order to combat forest fire. The Eighth plan allocation from Rupee s 
five crores had also been increa sed to Rupees sixteen crores . further , the Ministry was also 
maintaining helicopters and aircraft s for detection , prevention and control of forest fire. 
2. The Committee is not satisfied with the information given on utilisation of plan funds 
in combating forests fire and full details of utilisation of helicopter s and aircraft s for this 
purpose are required to be given. 

RECOMMENDATION 
11. Project Tiger is an important Centrally Sponsored Programme in the area of wildlife 
protection launched in April, 1973; and for this a budgetary demand of Rs. 7.70 crores in 
the Plan sector has been made for 1994-95. This projects has now been over 20 years old but 
the Committee feels that the basic objectives of this project have not been achieved in as 
much as that tiger population in the country has registered a decline, poaching still continues 
in menacing proportions and the habitat for tigers seems to have shrunk in area. The 
Committee recommends that an evaluation of the entire project be undertaken by a high 
powered body to make it more meaningful and result-oriented. 
(Para No. 16) 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY 
11.1 For the evaluation of the entire Project, a Committee under the Chairmanship of 
Shri J.J. Dutta, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Retired) has been set up. A copy of 
the Office Memorandum dated 31.10.1994 is at Annexure-/. 
COMMENTS 
11.2 The Committee desires that the Ministry should give a self contained note on the 
evaluation carried out by the Departmental Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri J .J. 
Dutta, the recommendations made by that Committee and the extent to which the 
recommendations have been implemented. 
FURTHER ACTION TAKEN 
11.3 Details of the recommendations made by 1.1. Dutta Committee and the action 
being taken/proposed to be taken are at Annexure-[[. 
RECOMMENDATION 
12. In the Budget outlay for 1994-95, sum of Rs. 150.74 crore for the plan sector and 
Rs. 38.80 crore for the non-plan sectors has been earmarked. A comparison of these figures 
with the figures of the previous year (1993-94) would reveal that there is just an increase of 
Rs. 2.41 crore in the plan component whereas there is a decrease of Rs. 4.47 crore in the 
non-plan component. In other words, the plan outlay for 1994-95 in respect of ecology and 
environment is more or less corresponding to the figures of the previous year. In the sub­
head C. 1 surveys under the major head of 'Ecology and Environment' the non-plan 
component for the successive three years has been more than the plan component, almost 
double. Confronted on this point, the explanation given by the Ministry is that non-plan 
expenditure reflects expenditure on ongoing activities and plan expenditure is the 
expenditure proposed to be incurred on additional activities during the plan period as per 
approval by the Planning Commission. Moreover, the expenditure on establishment and on 
maintenance of assets created during any plan period are required to be met out of non-plan 
Budget in the year subsequent to the plan period. On the basis of the summary of Ministry's 
activities in the Environment and Ecology Sectors given in the performance Budget, the 
Committee has come to the view that while these areas are engaging the attention of the 
Ministry, the allocation in real terms does not reflect the magnitude of the problem. Only a 
meagre allocation of Rs. 3 crore has been provided for promotion of common effluent 
treatment plants and that too under externally aided schemes. The Committee was surprised 
that even in this area the progress is very slow and not much headway has been made, with 

the allocated amounts practically lying unutilised. The Committee feels that the Ministry 
should initiate more concerted action to motivate larger number of industrial units to go in 
for effluent treatment plants in larger and national interest of pollution control. 
(Para No. 17) 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY 
12.1 (i) The aiiocation of Rs. 3 crores given in the Budget reflects the grant component 
for setting up common effluent treatment plants (CETP) in clusters of small scale industries 
for conveying and treating their effluent in common facilities. The Central Government 
provides only 25% or Rs. 50 lakhs of the capital cost, State Governments 25% or Rs. 50 
lakhs of the capital cost whichever is less and subject to a matching grant to be given by the 
State Government, 30% is provided as soft loan from IDBI through World Bank aided 
Industrial Pollution Control Projects and the rest 20% is met by the beneficiaries themselves. 
(ii) Bigger units set up their own individual effluent treatment plants, and there is no 
Government grant for setting up effluent treatment plants or emission control equipments by 
bigger units, although World Bank loans are available for this purpose at a concessional rate 
of interest. 
(iii) The small scale units have a number of problems in effectively running a common 
effluent treatment plant. The effluents are of different chemical composition and 
concentration poses technical problems. The amount to be paid by each member unit for its 
pollution treatment is also variable. To identify and overcome the above problems , this 
Ministry has conducted a series of workshop training programmes for the CETP personnel. 
The list of CETPs supported by the Ministry is annexed. (Annexure-Ill). 
COMMENTS 
12.2 Recommendations/Observations have been accepted by the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION 
13. Though an allocation of Rs. 50.33 crores (both Plan and Non-Plan) has been sought 
by the Ministry for prevention of air and water pollution during the year 1994-95, a perusal 
of the schemes in this areas does not indicate that any major project is on the anvil to meet 
the increasing challenge of the environmental degradation. The projected assistances for 
abatement of pollution is just to .the tune of 2 crores and similarly the amount earmarked for 
Hazardous Substance Management is just 3 crores of rupees. There is a need to strengthen 
the pollution fighting agencies which can be achieved only if there is integrated action both 
by the Central and State Government. The State Governments are perhaps unable to get 
actively involved in this area because either they are not in a position to give matching 
grants O! lack proper motivation. 
(Para No. 18) 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY 
13.1 The actual Budget Estimates as given in Demand for Grants, 1994-95 under the 
Head "Prevention of Air and Water Pollution" for various schemes are provided in 
Annexure- IV. 
The details of various projects/activities are given below: 
1. Grant-in-aid to Central Pollution Control Board 
The proposals for Annual Plan of 1994-95 have been prepared in consonance with the 

needs spelt out in the Policy Statement for Abatement of pollution and the National 
Conservation Strategy and Policy ~tatement on Environment and Development announced 
by the Government (1992). 
THRUST AREAS FOR 1994-95 
Prevention of Pollution at Source Development and application of best available 
practicable pollution abatement technologies. 
Focus on restoration of environmental quality in heavily polluted areas, and polluted 
river stretches. 
Mass awareness programmes and involvement of Public and Non-Government 
Organisations. 
ACTIVITIES 
(i) Inventefization of industrial estates for promoting schemes of combined effluent 
treatment plants. 
(ii) Technology development for small scale industries particularly for those 
belonging to highly polluted categories. 
(iii) Monitoring of polluted river stretches, lakes, coastal stretches and ground water. 
(iv) Assessment of ambient air quality through a Network monitoring stations in 
collaboration with the State Pollution Control Boards and specialised agencies. 
(v) Establishment of laboratories at Zonal Offices and pollution momtoring in 
collaboration with the State Pollution Control Board. 
(vi) Analysis of critical pollutants and training of State Board Laboratories to 
undertake such analysis. 
(vii) Establishing continuous air quality monitoring facilities. 
(viii) Application· of biomonitoring in river, toxicity evaluations and their appiication in 
standards development. · 
(ix) Standards development for different categories of industries. 
(x) Follow up and development of criteria for Eco-labelling. 
(xi) Organising training courses for the State Pollution Control Boards and for the 
industries. 
(xii) Establishment of on-line and computerised network of information exchange 
between CPCB and State Pollution Control Boards. 
(xiii) Follow up of directions for installation of pollution control system in 17 categories 
of highly polluting industries in different States. 
(xiv) Evaluation of performance of Common effluent Treatment Plants (CETPs). 
(xv) Inventorization of hazardous waste generating industries and evaluation of 
procedures adopted by State Pollution Control Boards for granting 
authorizations. 
(xvi) Collaborating programmes with the State Pollution control Boards for 
identification and monitoring of polluted stretches under the National River 
Action Plan (NRAP). 

2. Prevention and Control of Water Pollution 
The main project for which the funds are proposed to be utilized under this scheme are: 
Reserach and Developmental activities in small scale units (clean technologies) . 
Schemes for sewerage in class II and class III cities. 
Promotion of common effluent treatment plants and pollution control projects 
(externally aided schemes). 
Under these schemes, the industrial pollution control projects have been prepared by 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests to utilise the support of the World Bank to prevent 
·and alleviate environmental degradation caused by the industrial operations. The projects 
involve a line of credit and counter part funding & ICICI and by the industrial units availing 
the loan. The agreement of the project was signed on 8.7.1991 and is expected to be 
completed before the end of the present Five Year Plan. Various components of the proje.cts 
are: 
Investment Component 
(a) Loan assistance to large and medium industries for installing pollution control 
equipment. 
(b) Establishment of CEPTs, for clusters of small scale units. 
(c) Establishment of demonstration projects for introd•,tcing energy and resource 
conservation measures in the small and medium scale sectors. 
3. Institutional Development Component 
This component is designed to strengthen the monitoring and enforcement abilities of 
Pollution Control Boards of 4 industrialised States i.e., Gujarat , Maharashtra , Tamil Nadu 
and Uttar Pradesh . The following are the outlines of the assistance provided to the above 
State Boards. 
(a) Procurement of equipment for the Regional and Central Laboratories of the a bove 
State Pollution Control Boards. 
(b) Provision for refurnishing of the Central I Regional laboratori es of the above State 
Po11ution Control Boards . 
(c) Training for the staff of the Central and all the State Pollution Contro l Boards . 
4. Technical Assistance 
The package for this component provides for assistance addressed to meet the need o f 
technical e-xpertise, environmental assessments, R&D efforts in environmental technology, 
and extension services on environmental tssues; 
S. Hazardous Substance Management 
Various functions to be performed for the management of hazardous substances such as 
preparation of of f-side emergency plans, hazard analysis, providing sites for disposal of 
hazardous wastes etc. are the responsibilities of the State Government s. However , in order 
to provide models for this purpose and to serve a c atalytic role, financial assistance to 
selected States has been provided by the Central Government. 
Apart from this, financial assistance has also been provided to selected States for 
creation of management structures for hazardous substances, setting up Emergency 
Response Centr e ( ERC), survey for solid wastes, setting up pilot plant for utilisation of 

industrial wastes. The State Governments are being requested to contribute a matching grant 
particularly in case of setting up pilot plants for utilising industrial wastes and ERC so that there 
i~ integrated action both at the Central and State levels. The role of Central Government is 
mostly catalytic. and once a Model is set up. the State Governments can undertake similar 
activities from their own resources. 
6. Other Projects 
The other important projects taken up under the scheme of prevention of "Air and Water 
Pollution" are; 
(i) Environmental Audit to conducnraining programmes for the industry as weB as the 
State Pollution Control Boards personnel so that they are in a position to conduct 
proper environmental audits and to prepare statements therefor every year to 
minimise the productio n and discharge of wastes. 
(ii) Environmental Statistics and Mapping to show on an atlas the pollution sources and 
the critically polluted areas so that priority action can be taken to improve the 
environmental quality; 
(iii) Clean Technologies-Adoption on the best available and practicable technologies I 
practices for waste minimisation I recycling and reuse in the small scale industries. 
Identification and setting up of waste minimisation circles in the specific small scale 
industry sectors. 
(iv) Setting up. of the National Environmental Tribunal to expedite the cases for 
compensation arising out of accident while handling hazardous substances. A bill is 
being introduced for this purpose. 
COMMENTS 
13.2 The Committee desired to have a status note from the Ministry. 
FURTHER ACTION TAKEN 
13.3 Central PoJiution Control Board, State Pollution Control Boards and Pollution Control 
Committee 
The Central Pollution Control Board , the State Pollution Control Boards in the States, and 
the Pollution Control Committees in the Union Territories, are the controlling agencies of air 
and water pollution. They are statutory bodies. They were constituted under section 4, 5, 6 and 
7 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. These Boards and Committees 
are responsible for implementation of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution), Air 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution, Cess and the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. 
Under Section 17(n) of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and 
Section 17(h) of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act. 1981, the State Pollution 
Control Boards are to advise the respective State Governments with respect to the location of 
any indu stry carrying on of which is likely to pollute water and air. 
No Objection Certificate or "Consent to Operate" 
Under section 25 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, and section 
21 of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, an industry is required to obtain 
"consent to operate", where it is a statutory obligation of the industry to comply with the 
pollution control norms stipulated by the State Pollution Control Boards. 

As per provisions of the Water t.•td Air Acts, the "No Objection Certificates I Consent 
to Operate.. are given by the respective State Pollution Control Boards and the Pollution 
Control Committees in the Union Territories. The requirement and procedure for seeking 
environmental clearances of projects and industries are listed in Schedule-! of the 
~otification issued by this Ministry dated 17.1.94 (as amended on 4.5.94). The issuance of 
clearance, which also includes public hearing, take~ upto four months. 
Procedural Delays and Check on Malpractices 
In order to reduce procedural delays, several State Boards have simplified the 
procedure for issue of "No Objection Certificate". For non-polluting industries and those 
complying with their location in conforming areas, are either exempted or issued with long 
term consents. For selected category of industries, clearances from "single window concept" 
has been introduced. In some States categorisation of industries into "Red", "Orange" and 
"Green" is done depending on pollution potential of the units. The Green category of 
industries in non-polluting and units under such category are issued clearances expeditiously 
for longer periods upto 15 years. 
The "No Objection Certificates" I "Consent to Operate" are given with the concurrence 
of respective State Pollution Control Boards, by a Committee which consists of 17 members 
(the Chiarman and the Member-Secretary of the State Pollution Control Board are full-time 
members) and the others are nominated by the respectives State Boards. This helps in 
keeping a watch over indiscriminate issuance of NOCs. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
14. The Committee feels that since Ganga Action Plan is a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme, with Phase-1 thereof being totally funded by the Central Government , due 
emphasis should be laid on infrastructural facilities so that the plan makes unhindered 
progress without being subject to ... handicaps of the nature of power failures. 
(Para No. 19) 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY 
14.1 The focus is on developing workable models for depolluting rivers which can 
eventually be replicated by the States. The thrust is on promoting low cost technologies 
which can be substained with least resources for their operation and maintenance . 
COMMENTS 
14.2 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply and takes serious view of the Ganga 
Action Plan which is not being monitored. It should . be made result oriented. The 
Committee reiterates its recommendations and emphasises the need to take positive steps to 
achieve the main objectives of the Ganga Action Plan (GAP) by preventing the pollution 
·load. Simultaneously the Committee has decided to take up seperate ly the examination of 
various aspects of the Plan. 
RECOMMENDATION 
15. The Committee feels that in order to fulfil the tasks expected of the Ministry, it is 
necessary to have technical personnel with the appropriate experience at the highest level of 
administration in the Ministry rather · than operate it largely as an administrative Ministry. 
This Ministry by itself cannot be expected to perform all the major tasks relating to 
environmental and forestry, even with the assistance of related agencies of the State 
Governments. The role of the Ministry is to perform promotional and catalytic activities that 

show the way for society to implement meaningful programmes. For this it is necessary that 
the Ministry concerns itself significantly with research and development that will enable it to 
evolve practical low cost solutions. This does not appear to be apparent in the performance 
of the Ministry and the actuals of the Budget. 
(Para No. 20) 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY 
15.1 The Committee's observations that the Ministry should perform catalytic activities 
that show the way society to implement meaningful programmes are undisputed. However, it 
is doubtful whether this purpose can be achieved merely by placing technical personnel at 
the highest level of administration in the Ministry. Identification of promotional and catalytic 
activities that can effectively motivate the society comes more out of administrative 
experience rather than handling of frontier technologies. Any administrative officer selected 
to head the Ministry is, in addition to his administrative experience, undoubtedly endowed 
with as much technical awareness of environmental issues, if not more than, any other 
enlightened citizen of the country. Technical knowledge higher than that level of awareness 
is not a pre-requisite to identify the catalytic activities that can mobilise the society. Any 
higher technical knowledge of environmental science is necessary for a researcher exploring 
new horizons to enlarge the human knowledge base, but such academic excellance may most 
often inhibit effective leadership to stimulate the ground level application of such scientific 
knowledge. 
Further, the Ministry of Environment and Forests deals with a wide range of subjects 
associated with .environment and forests. In fact, it is a multi-disciplinary Ministry which has 
to interact not only with scientific institutions but also with a large spectrum of institutions 
dealing with administrative, social, economic, academic, legal and various other aspects of 
programmes in different sectors of the nation. There has, therefore, to be a balanced 
appreciation of these related programmes of the Government while ensuring that the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests discharges its responsibilities meaningfully in 
conformity with the priorities of the nation. In addition, the Ministry has extensive 
international interactions and obligations and is often called upon to take positions from not 
only scientific angle but also developmental and diplomatic angles keeping in view the 
international conventions an9 commitments of the country. All this requires that the 
Ministry is headed by an administrative officer who possesses varied experiences of different 
programmes of Government and is familiar with the overall policy thrust of the 
Government. 
It may be appropriate to mention that Research and Development has received due 
attention since the inception of the Ministry of Environment and Forests (and the erstwhile 
Department of Environment created in November, 1980). 
Research and Development Programmes of the Ministry are supported in 
multidisciplinary aspects of environmental protection, conservation and development . The 
journey of the research efforts in a decade and a half has been one of preliminary 
assessments of the status of the various environmental parameters to those of 
characterisation of the problems and organisms in different eco-systems. 
From its modest start in the late Seventies, the programme of research has progressed 
from preliminary estimations to futuristic impact studies both in manifestations and 
ecological insights. 

The programme of Research in the Research Division is e~sentially undertaken through 
three major researches viz. 
(i) Man and Biosphere Research Scheme. 
(ii) Environment Research Scheme. 
(iii) Integrated Action Oriented Research and Demonstration Projects in the Western 
and Eastern Ghats. 
During the period of operation of these schemes more than 600 research projects in 
multi-disciplinary aspects of Environmental Management has been supported all over the 
country through Universities , R&D Institutions and non-governmental organisations. 
These schemes have significantly contributed to the 
(a) Advancement of the Scientific knowledge 
(b) Creation of Scientific Manpower 
(c) Creation of Research Facilities in the Institutions. 
The research studies, in the first instance, have contributed to the advancement of 
scientific understanding of the complex processes, systems and development of 
methodologies for studies. Secondly, the research the multidisciplinary aspects and, thirdly , 
through the research schemes, capability of institutions has beP-n built up in terms of modern 
equipment and the capability ·of undertaking research problems. 
The research results, more often than not, are not directly applicable to problems of 
environmental management, but do immensely contribute towards attempting solutions to 
environment problems in helping to devise strategies for protection, conservation and 
management of the environment. 
In order to achieve this summaries of the completed research projects have been 
published in two volumes and have been widely circulated for appropriate use. 
The Eighth Plan orientation of the Research Programmes is to intensify activities in 
development of low cost solutions to environmental problems and long-term monitoring 
studies, a mixture of immediate to medium and long-term needs. 
COMMENTS 
15.2 The Committee notes the position spelt out by the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION 
16. The Committee feels that the Ministry is engaged m far too many schemes over 
which the financial allocations are distributed, this probabfy leads to subcritical efforts in 
various areas. The Committee is of the view that in the manner in which the programmes 
and activities of the Ministry have been formulated and are being implemented; there is not 
any integrated thrust in the direction of substainable development. In this, they will have to 
work out an integrated mix of regulator and promotional measures, awareness building in 
education and close institutional tieups with the multiple agencies concerned with 
developmental tasks. 
f ,.. ___ lilro.T ..... "1 

18 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY 
16.1 It is true that some schemes need to be integrated to avoid overlapping and 
dilution of· efforts. We are in the process of integrating the programmes related to R & D 
and are also planning to finalise priority areas for concerted efforts. 
COMMENTS 
16.2 The Committee would like to know details of programmes related to R & D and 
other integrated programmes which have been finalised in view of Committee 's 
recommendation towards concerted efforts. 
FURTHER ACTION TAKEN 
-!6.3 A note furnished by the Ministry on proposed Research and Development in the 
areas of Sustainable Development is as follows. 
To achieve sustainable development and utilisation of country's forest resour ces, 
Government of India initiated a project "Formulation of National Fore stry Action 
Programme" with UNDP and FAO in June, 1993. National Forestry Action Programme of 
the country is in filial stage of completion. State Forestry Action Programmes have been 
received from all States and Union Territory of Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Out of 26 
State Forestry Action Programmes , 20 have been approved by respective State Level 
Steering Committees. 
For preparing final NF AP document , the assignment has been trifurcated into three 
consultancies. First Consultancy report relating to "Background situation and curr ent statu s 
of forestry in the country" has been received. Second Report dealing with "Polic y 
Framework and Programme Structure" is under preparation. In respect of third consultancy 
dealing with "Investment and Technical Assistance Proposals", negotiations with consultant s 
are going on. Final NFAP document is expected to be complete by March, 1997. 
NEW DELHI; 
19th December, 1996. 
V. NARAYANASAMY 
Chairman 
Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment and Forest 

ANNEXURE 

ANNEXURE-I 
F. No. 2-2194-PT 
Government of India 
Ministry of Environment & Forests 
(PROJECT TIGER) 
Annexe No. 5, Bikaner House, Shahjahan Road 
New Delhi- 110011, Dated the 31st October, 1994 
OFFICE MEMORANDUM 
Subject: Setting up of a Committee to undertake Evaluation of the Project Tiger. 
The undersigned is directed to say that, as per the recommendations made on the 
Demands for Grants for 1994-95/performance Budget of the Ministry by the Department 
related Parliamentary Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests , a 
Committee, comprising of the following Members, ts hereby constituted·-
(i) Shri J. 1. Dutta Chairman. 
Principal Chief Conservator 
of Forests (Retired), 
Government of Madhya Pradesh. 
(ii) Dr. A. B. Chaudhury 
(ex) Director 
Forest Survey of India 
Dehradun. 
(iii) Dr. L. M. Nath , 
All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, New Delhi. 
(iv) Director , Project Tiger • 
- Member 
- Member 
- Member Secretary 
2. The terms and reference of this Committee would be to have a look at the Project in 
its totality: carry out evaluation; and suggest ways and means for the Project to be more 
meaningful and result oriented. 
3. The Committee would meet as and when necessary and would also visit a few Project 
Sites, for which they would be entitled to usual TA/DA admissible to the Grade-A officers 
of the Central Government. 
4. A final report on its findings/recommendations would be submitted by the 
Committee to the Ministry, by 30th April, 1995. 
• 
To, 
1. PPs to MEF/SECRET AR Y (E -& F)IIGF/ ADDL. 
2. Members concerned. 
21 
Sd/­
(ARINJ 
DIRECTOR, PROJECT 
IGF (WL). 

3. Forests Secretaries/Chief Wildlife Wardens/Field Directors of Reserve States. 
4. Parliament Section - With reference to their note No. H-11013/5/94 dated 20th May 
1994. 
5. Forests Finance Division. 

ANNEXURE-II 
RECOMMENDATION OF J.J. DUTTA COMMITTEE ON PROJECT TIGER AND 
ACTION BEING TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
Recommendations Action being taken/proposed to be taken 
1. Shifting of villages should be a One of the major condition (pre-requisite) 
voluntary efforts and fully already existed under the guidelines of 
supported. Assess dependencies Beneficiary Oriented Scheme for Tribal is that 
of villages on the resource of the the shifting of villages should be voluntary; 
reserve and phase them out people slated for rehabilitation must give their 
2. 
3. 
through eco-development of consent for relocation. As far as the assessment 
target individulas. of dependencies is concerned, they are by and 
large taken into account and based on that, 
activities (rehabilitation) oriented towards 
community devf:lopment and those benefiting 
individually are taken up accordingly. Moreover, 
Eco-development programme operating in the 
surrounding areas of the PAs do also help in 
reducing the dependencies by improving the 
socio-economic conditions of the local people. 
Management plans must have 
clear prescriptions based on study 
of ground truth and the 
management of certain Protected 
Areas should be revamped on this 
basis. 
Adequate budgetary support 
should be given to fire protection 
efforts, communication systems 
strengthened and fire combat 
teams stationed at strategic points 
with proper vehicles and road 
network. 
Most of the PAs have got an Eco-development 
Plan besides having a P.A. Management Plan. 
The Eco-development Plan incorporates the 
Socio-economic status of the local people, their 
dependence on the forest resources and 
management strategies to overcome them. In 
fact, the need on the State level is to have Eco­
development Plan for all the PAs and their 
compatibility with the PA Management Plan so 
that Socio-economic development of the people 
takes place without effecting the scientific 
management of the wildlife & without 
endangering the ecological aspect. 
Maximum possible central assistance is provided 
to Tiger Reserves for these activities under 
Centrally Sponsored Project Tiger Scheme. 
Every Tiger Reserve area engages Fire Fighting 
Squads seasonally and fire protection measures 
are adopted. The Tiger Reserves have effective 
wireless network. Areas where Communication 
system needs to be str~ngthened are provided 
funds to improve the system in phases. 

4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Recommendations 
Habitat management . should be 
done for maximum herbivore 
production as prey-base for .tiger 
is required in the Tiger Reserves. 
Control of grazing is an absolute 
necessity with reduction in 
grazing incidence through rotation 
in time and space , and 
settlements reached with the 
villages concerned. Cattle 
holdings of people should also be 
reduced. 
Alternatives should be provided 
to compensate loss of livelihoods 
due to stoppage of NTFP 
collection. 
Eco-development must be 
pursued at a much more 
increased pace and in a much 
more studied and methodical 
manner than hetherto attempted 
since haphzard works could be 
counterproductive. The use of 
PRA techniques should be come 
a normal continuing activity of 
each Tiger Reserve. 
The total research function of 
Project Tiger should be made 
over to WII. The posts of R. Os 
under P.T. should be withdrawn 
from the States and placed with 
Wildlife Institute of India. 
Action being taken/proposed to be taken 
Habitat improvement for increasing the pre y 
base is one of the prime activities for which 
funds are provided to the Tiger Reserves under 
Centrally Sponsored Project Tiger Scheme. 
In core areas of Tiger Reserves grazing is totally 
prohibited. It is, however, admitted that some 
illegal grazing do take place in core areas also. 
This is a social evil-we are trying to curb it. In 
buffer areas where rights of the local people do 
exists, limited grazing is allowed. In some Tiger 
Reserves the concept of rotational grazing is in 
practice which should be introduced to all the 
areas by taking local people into the confidence. 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme of 'Eco­
development ' is meant to compensate loss of 
livelihood due to stoppage of NTFP collection 
from protected areas by providing such thing 
through appropriate programme in adjoining 
land . 
Govt. of India is taking action to initiat e 
systematic evaluation of Eco-developmen t 
programme in various Tiger Reserve area s s o 
that shortcomings could be indentified and 
programme be modified so as to be more 
effective, useful and methodical, attempts to 
provide more fund to this work is being made 
from externally aided scheme. 
It will be difficult for Govt. of India or Wildlife 
Institute of India to take over the resear ch 
liability of all the Project Tiger areas. While WII 
can take up some pilot research projects on 
identified issues, the detailed research in field 
has to be undertaken by the State through 
collaborative research with local & regional 
Institutes. 

9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
Recommendations 
Buffer zone management must be 
recast to meet buffer functions 
under the overall supervision of 
the Field Directors. 
The post of Director , Project 
Tiger may be designated as 
Director General at the rank of 
PCCF and Deputy Directors at 
the rank of Conservator of 
Forests. The Headquarter must 
be a detailed planning with for 
preparing management plans for 
each Tiger Reserve and 
monitoring of its implementation. 
The Headquarter Office 
accommodation also needs to be 
improved. 
A panel of suitable officers in 
each State for posting as Field 
Directors should be prepared by 
the Director, Project Tiger. The 
lower level field staff must be 
rotated periodically and vacancies 
filled up expeditiously. 
All staff posted and working for 
Project Tiger irrespective of their 
source of recruitment, should be 
given special pay including the 
work-charged staff. The 
expenditure should be met by the 
Central Govt. Special pay should 
be 20% of the basic salary plus 
D.A. as admissible. 
Contingent staff employed in 
Tiger Reserves should be 
provided service security and 
transferred to differentareas 
periodically. 
Action being .taken/proposed to be taken 
There are still many Tiger Reserves where the 
administrative control of buffer area is not with 
the Field Director. State Governments must 
take decision to transfer the buffer areas under 
the control of Field Director so as to ensure a 
unified and effective management. 
This does not seem possibl~ as the controlling 
authority of the Director, Project Tiger , . i.e. 
Addl. IGF is already in the . Scale of PCCF . 
Neither the responsibility of Dir-ector, Project 
Tiger justify so. The post was of Conservator 
grade upto 1990. It is only in 1991 that the post 
was elevated to the grade of CCF (JS of Govt. 
of India level). 
As per the guidelines of the Steering Committee 
of the Project Tiger, appointment of the Field 
Director is done with the prior approvEd of the 
Govt. of India by evaluating the suitability of 
the incumbent. Periodical rotation of the lower 
staff & filling up of the vacancies can be taken 
up at the State level. We may forward the 
suggestion in the matter to the State Govt. for 
taking necessary action early. 
A proposal was mooted by the Directorate of 
Project Tiger for giving project allowance to the 
staff working in the Project Tiger areas but 
Planning Commission did not approve the same. 
We may re-open the issue again in the IXth 
Plan. 
The subject falls under the jurisdiction of the 
State Governments. However some State 
Government have got rules/orders not to 
transfer such staff districtwise. We may, 
however, forward this suggestion to State 
Government for their consideration. 

14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
Recommendations 
Funding for Project Tiger will 
have to be increased manifold 
and funds allotted should not 
lapse if unspent within· the 
financial year. Funds must be 
allotted in the first quarter of the 
fiscal year and not at the fag end. 
Dynamic and outreaching 
programmes of awareness 
generation among local people 
must be undertaken to facilitate 
the flow of intelligence regarding 
tiger poaching etc. to the 
management. 
Proper legal support must be 
provided to the Field Directors in 
Prosecution of offenders, and 
defending him . and his staff 
against false cases. 
Govt. of India should give a 
consultancy to the WII, 
Dehradun to study, analyse, 
investigate and suggest ways and 
means to revamp the entire 
Proejct Tiger and its operational 
linkage within a reasonable time 
frame. 
Action being taken/proposed to be taken 
During the VIII Plan, outlay under the Centrally 
Sponsored Project Tiger Scheme has been 
increased from initial 24 crores to Rs. 40 crores. 
In future foreseeing the activities and wages 
increasing year after year, matching funds would 
obviously be required. funds are released at the 
earliest after receiving the APOs from the 
States. The delay normally happens due to non­
receipt of utilisation certificates of previous 
years' release from some States. 
Under Project Tiger adequate funds are given 
for publicity and extension activites. Most of the 
Tiger Reserves do organise eco-awareness 
camps/workshops for local people and do have 
Nature Interpretation centres. However, this 
programme further needs to be expanded 
further and made more realistic and effective. 
Intelligence gathering requires appropriate 
scheme to be adopted in the state level for 
which we have already requested the State 
funding arrangement is there under Project 
Tiger Scheme. 
We have already taken up the matter with the 
State Governments. In fact we also release some 
fund for legal support where demanded. 
If we can follow up the recommendations of 
Subramania Committee, Delhi High Court 
Committee and the present Committees report; 
we will see Project Tiger in much better Status 
in future, but these will require additional 
funding for infrastructure and staff. 

ANNEXURE-III 
CETPs sanctioned and release of GOI funds 
Location of the Total State State's GOI GOI Amount 
CETP proposals cost commit- share release share GOI can 
ment release 
Andhra Pradesh 
Pattancheru 507 40 20+ 10+20-50 50 
Jeedimetla 250 25 25+25-50 50 
Eollaram 350 10 10+10+2- 50 30 
22 
Gujarat 
Vapi 600 20 30 50 20 
Ankleshwar 680 20 30 50 20 
Sachin 965 5 5 50 45 
Sari gam 615 5 5 50 45 
Panoli 1292 5 5 50 45 
Madhya Pradesh 
Urla-Bhanpuri 140 35 35 35 
Maharajpura-Gwalior 76 13.35 13.5 19.0 5.5 
Govindpura-Bhopal 117 29.25 29.25 29.25 
Tamil Nadu 
Pammal 55 50 50 
Pallavarem 
Erode 235 50 50 50 
Tiruppur 150 37.5 37.5 27.5 
Ayyanpay 
Muthialper 50 22.5 22.5 22.5 
Karur* 100 21.14 21.14 22.4 2.5 
Bhavani* 30 7.59 07.5 7.5 7.5 
BP 102 18.0 18.0 28:5 
erode 
Suriampatiny 0.70 17.50 17.50 17.50 17.50 
Kasipalayarau 
Delhi Wazirpur 300 50 50 50 
Punjab Ind. Area 63 2.65 2.65 15.75 13.1 
'A ' 
Batala 278 11.75 11.75 28.20 28.20 
Rabon Road 102 4.30 4.30 25.5 21.2 
Buddah 
Nallah 
Gill Road 32 1.32 1.32 8 6.68 
Ludhiana 
Karnataka 
Kadugon 12 30 25 30 50 20 
dananelli 

Location of the Total State State's 001 001 Amount 
CETP proposals cost commit- share release share GOI can 
ment relea se 
Pai & Pai · 
Chemicals 
Bangalore 
Maharasht('a 
TIC 100 15 15 25 10.00 
Tara pore 400 15 30 50 35 
Dombivili 200 15 1550 325.00 
Lote 76 10 1019 9 
Parasuram 
Taloja 75 10 10 18.75 8.75 
Roha 75 10 10 18.75 8.75 
Jaisingpur 33.65 3 3 8.41 5.45 
Badlapur & 144 10 10 36.0 26.00 
Ambernath 
Thane- Bella pur 35 
Haryana 9.78 
Kendli 
Uttar Pradesh 
Tannery 24 
Camp , Unnao 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
ANNEXURE-IV 
DETAILS OF BUDGET ESTIMATES AS PER THE DEMANDS OF GRANTS 
1994-95 UNDER THE HEAD 'PREVENTION OF AIR AND WATER POLLUTION' 
Scheme Budget Estimates (In crores of Rupees) 
Plan Non-Plan Total 
Grants-in-aid to pollution Control Board. 3.73 4.50 8.23 
Prevention and Water Pollution (Cess) 21.00 21.00 
Prevention of Treatment Plants (Externally aided 
Scheme) 3.00 3.00 
Hazardous Substance Management 3.00 3.00 
Pollution Control Projects (Externally aided 
Scheme) 12.00 12.00 
Environmental Audit 0.10 0.10 
Environmental Statistics and Mapping 0.10 0.10 
Clean Technologies 0.10 0.10 
Environmental Commissi6n and Tribunal 1.00 1.00 
10. Assistance for statement of Pollution 2.00 2.00 
TOTAL: 25.03 25.50 50.53 

MINUTES 

XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday the 17th December, 1996 in Room No. 63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri V. Narayasamy __ Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri K.R. Jayadevappa 
3. Shri K. Karunakaran 
4. Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty 
5. Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar 
6. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
LOK SABRA 
7. Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakarma 
8. Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta 
9. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
10. Shri Kalpnath Rai 
11. Shri A. Raja 
12. Shri K.B. Raut 
13. Shri Harivansh Sahai 
14. Kumari Selja 
15. Shri Soumya Ranjan Patnaik 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer 
Shri R.K. Malhotra, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee considered the draft Thirty-Eighth Report on demonstration by Shri 
P. Ramar on 'Herbal Fuel' and Thirty-Ninth Report on the Action Taken by the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests on Committee's Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (1994-95) of 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests respectively and after some discussions adopted the 
same. Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty withdrew his dissent note which he submitted on 12th 
December, 1996 for being appended to the 38th Report of the Committee on demonstration 
by Shri P. Ramar on 'herbal fuel.' 
3. The Committee decided to present these reports to Rajya Sabha and lay the copies 
thereof on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 19th December, 19~6. 
4. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Dr. Y. Radhakrishna 
Murty and in his absence Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma to present the reports to the Rajya 

Sabha and Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakarma and in his absence Prof. Radhika Ranjan 
Pramanik to lay the reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.40 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 7th 
January, 1997. 