RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1995-96)

TWENTY-NINTH REPORT
ON

THE WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION)
CESS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1995

(Presented on the 24th August, 1995)

aaa

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 1995/Bhadra 1917 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .
Report OF THE COMMITTEE .

BILL AS REPORTED BY THE COMMITTEE
APPENDICES .

MINuTEs OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE.


COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRON-
MENT AND FORESTS
(1995-96)

RAJYA SABHA

1. Syed Sibtey Razi—Chairman

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi

4, Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi

5. Shri K. Rahman Khan
.*6. Dr. 0. Masthan

7. Prof. M.G.K. Menon

. Shri Suresh Pachouri

9, Shri N. Giri Prasad

10. Shri Satchidananda

11. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh

12. Dr. Ranbir Singh

13, Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
LOK SABHA

14. Shri E. Ahamed

15. Shri P.C. Chacko

16. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia

17. Shri Jitendra Nath Das

18. Shri Sharad Dighe

19. Shrimati Saroj Dubey

20. Shri Oscar Fernandes

21. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale

22. Shri P. Kumarasamy

23. Shrimati Mahendra Kumari

24. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee

25. Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy

26. Shri Harpal Panwar

27, Shri Balraj Passi

28. Shri Bheem Singh Patel

29. Shri Chandresh Patel

30. Shri Vijay Naval Patil

*Nominated w.e.f. August 17, 1995.


31. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik

32. Shrimati Vasundhara Raje

33. Shri Rama Chandra Rath

३34. Shri M.G. Reddy

35. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma

36. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh

37. Shri Harchand Singh

38. Shri Ram Prasad Singh

39. Shri K.G. Shivappa

40. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

41. Kumari Sushila Tiriya

42. Kumari Frida Topno

43. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Sceretary

2. Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

3. Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary

4. Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer

5. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer


REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS ON THE WATER (PREVENTION AND
CONTROL OF POLLUTION) CESS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1995

1, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests to which the Bill further to amend the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
Cess Act, 1977 was referred, having been authorised to submit the Report on its behalf,
present its Report, with the Bill, as amended by the Committee, annexed thereto.

2. The Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the Ist June, 1995." The Bill was
referred to the Committee by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker,
Lok Sabha for examination and report.”

3. The Committee held seven meetings in all.
ili the first meeting held on the 29th June, 1995, the Committee held preliminary
हि

n on the provisions of the Bill. At that meeting it was decided to set up a sub-
om fee which would, prepare an appropriate questionnaire which was done. The
questionnaire prepared by the sub-Committee is appended to the Report.

5. In its second meeting held on the 17th July, 1995, the Committee sought clarifications
on certain provisions of the Bill from the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests
and the Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board.

6. In its meeting held on the 18th July, 1995, the Committee sought further clarifications
from the representative of the Ministry of Environment and Forests and sought information
from the Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board on several aspects: concerning
collection of cess, etc.

7. The Committee heard the viewpoint of the Chairman of the State Pollution Control
Board of Maharashtra and the representative of the Confederation of Indian Industry and
the Alkali Manufacturers’ Association of India at its meeting held on the 27th July, 1995.

8. On the 28th July, 1995, the Committee heard in its meeting the viewpoint of the
Chairmen of the State Pollution Control Boards of West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh
and the representative of the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board. The Committee also
heard Prof. Daljit Singh, Department of Chemical Engineering, Punjab University, Chan-
digarh.

9. The Committee held clause by clause consideration of the Bill on the basis of
amendments received thereon at its meeting held on the 17th August, 1995.

10. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 22nd
August, 1995.

11. The observations of the Committee with regard to the principal changes proposed in
the Bill are detailed in the succeeding paragraphs.

12. Item 1 in col. 4 of Schedule II: The Committee is of the view that use of water for

*Published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 2, dated the 1 June, 1995.
**Rajya Sabha Parliaméntary Bulletin, Part वी, dated June 9, 1995.


domestic purpose cannot be equated with its use for purposes of industrial cooling, spraying
in mine pits or boiler feeds because the domestic use of water is a basic human necessity. It
has no commercial significance; it does not create any value added product which may
perhaps be the case in other categories mentioned in item 1 under Col. 1. Hence the
Committee is of the view that domestic purpose should be allowed to continue as a separate
category as it exists in the Act of 1977 (36 of 1977). Whatever cess is collected under the
head ‘domestic purpose’ is not fully realised at present by the State Pollution Control
Boards; and the amount actually collected under this head is not very high. The Committee
is, therefore, firmly of the view that no purpose would be served by increasing the rates of
cess under this category. It, therefore, recommends that the rates contained in Schedule II
of the Act of 1977 (36 of 1977) should be allowed to continue as it is. The Committee
recommends that the proposed amendment of cess rates under the domestic purpose category
may be dropped. The Committee has, accordingly, deleted the words ‘and domestic purpose’
in line 16 from Item No. 1 and added the following after item No. 1:

‘2. Domestic purpose Two paise per kilo litre Three paise per kilo litre’

In lines 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21 the present item Nos. 2 and 3, namely, “Processing
whereby water gets polluted and the pollutants are easily bio-degradable” and “के
whereby water gets polluted and the pollutants are not easily bio-degradable or are
both” have been renumbered as item Nos. 3 and 4.

or’

13. Item 4 of Schedule II: The Committee feels that Hydel Power generation is a clean
method of producing electricity. It provides peaking power which is an important
requirement for any electrical grid. As it is, because of high initial capital costs, long
gestation times and difficulties in obtaining environmental clearances hydel generation in
India has lagged behind significantly, causing serious imbalances in electrical grids between
base loads and peaking power availability. This seriously affects the economics of electric
power generation and supply and its costs. The Ministry of Environment and Forests has
advanced many arguments to show how hydel storage has damaging consequences to water.
The reasons advanced by the Ministry are only technical in nature and do not appear to be
actually convincing. They are not aspectes of real pollution which can be dealt with by the
State Pollution Control Boards utilising the cess collected. This, therefore, appears to be
only a method of augmenting resources collected through the cess which indeed can be done
by other methods of taxation. If a cess is levied on this category, obviously, the cost of
generation of electricity through this method will increase. This will affect not only big
industries but also small consumers of electricity. There has been no unanimity of opinion on
the question of levying cess on units concerned with hydel power generation; rather most of
the State Pollution Control Boards have expressed themselves against the idea of levying
cess on hydel-based power generating units. The Committee, therefore, does not favour the
idea of imposing cess on the use of water for hydel power generation. The Committee has,
therefore, deleted item 4 in lines 22, 23 and 24 which read:

“4, Hydel power generation Ten paise per one hundred Twenty paise per one
purpose kilo litres. hundred kilo litres.’’

General Recommendation

14. The Committee is of the view that all industries which use water and cause pollution
may be covered under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977 for


3

the purpose of levying cess. For this the Ministry may examine the Schedule I of the Water
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977 in a comprehensive manner.

SYED SIBTEY RAZI,

Chairman,
See - Committee on Science and Technology
August 22, 1995 Environment and Forests.

New DELHI;


Bill No. 39 of 1995

THE WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION)
CESS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1995

(As reported by the Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests)


36 of 1977.

Bill No. 39 of 1995

THE WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION)
CESS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1995

(As REPORTED BY THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOL-
oGy, ENviRONMENT AND Forests)

[Words underlined or side-lined indicate the amendments suggested by the
Committee, asterisks indicate omissions]

A
BILL

further to amend the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess
Act, 1977.

Ber it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-sixth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Act, 1995.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. For Schedule Il to the Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Cess Act, 1977, the following Schedule shall be substituted,
namely:—

“SCHEDULE II
(See Section 3)

Purpose for which water is consumed Maximum rate under Maximum rate under

sub-section (2) of sec- sub-section (2A) of sec-
tion 3 tion 3

1. Industrial cooling, spraying in mine pits Five paise per kilo litre Ten paise per kilo litre.
or boilet foods***

2. Domestic purpose Two paise per kilo litre Three paise per kilo

litre.

3. Processing whereby water gets polluted Ten paise per kilo litre Twenty paise per kilo
and the pollutants are easily bio-degrad- litre.

able

4. Processing whereby water gots polluted Fifteen paise per kilo Thirty paise per kilo
and the pollutants are not easily bio- litre litre.”
degradable or are toxic or both

Short title and
commencement.

Substitution of
new Schedule
for Schedule II.


APPENDICES



Appendix-I

Appendix-II

Appendix-III

Appendix-IV

Appendix-V

Appendix-VI

LIST OF APPENDICES

Questionnaire on the Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Cess
(Amendment) Bill, 1995 drafted by the Sub-Committee of the Depart-
ment-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technol-
ogy. Environment and Forests, constituted on the 29th June, 1995.

(i) Reply to the questionnaire furnished by the Ministry of Environment
and Forests.

(ii) Reply to the questionnaire furnished by the NDMC alongwith the
comments of the Ministry of Urban Affairs & Employment.

Replies to the questionnaire received from the State Pollution Control
Boards of the States of:

(i) Andhra Pradesh
(ii) Bihar
(iii) Gujarat
(iv) Haryana
(v) Karnataka
(vi) Maharashtra
(vii) Madhya Pradesh
(viii) Meghalaya
(ix) Tamil Nadu
(x) Uttar Pradesh
(xi) West Bengal
Replies to the questionnaire received from the State Governments of:
(i) Orissa
(ii) Punjab
List giving names and other details about witnesses who tendered oral
evidence before the Committee.

List containing names of individuals from whom Memoranda/ views
were received on the Bill.


: APPENDIX-I
Questionnaire on the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 1995

1. To what extent has the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977
hitherto been able to:

(a) augment the resources of the Central and State Pollution Control Boards/
Committees (normal budget + additionality due to the cess)?

(b) prevent and control pollution?
(c) minimise indiscriminate consumption of water?

2. What is the justification for enlisting only 16 categories of industry in Schedule I of the
Act for cess collection?

3. Whether the Schedule | (list of specified industries) should be deleted and all
industries/activities consuming water exceeding certain limit should be made liable to pay
cess?

4, Whether the Schedule II should continue as it is or it should be simplified?

5. Whether the rates for levying cess are commensurate with the objective of promoting
installation of water pollution control systems and for water conservation? If not, what are
your suggestions in this regard?

6. What, according to you, should be the criteria for deciding whether an industrial unit is
to be assessed for cess?

7. Whether the existing procedure for giving a rebate of 25 per cent of the cess, as
provided in the Cess Act, 1977, amended in 1991, needs any modification?

8. Whether the Pollution Control Boards are facing any difficulty in collection of cess? If
so, what are the difficulties?

9. Whether the industry/municipalities have any objection regarding payment of cess? If
so, what are the details thereof?

10. What is the formula for redistribution of cess to the Central and State Pollution
Control Boards/Pollution Control Committees (at the U.T. level)? Whether any modifications
are required, and if so, what steps have been taken in this regard?

11. What are the activities in which the State Pollution Control Boards / Pollution
Control Committees utilise the cess money?

12. What is the financial support provided to the State Pollution Control Boards/
Committees by the respective State Governments/Union Territory Administrations in
addition to the funds received through cess redistribution from the Central Government?

13. In what manner should the principle of “polluter pays” be applied in the case of
levying of cess?

14. What are the reasons for levying of cess on units concerned with hydel power
generation when it neither causes pollution nor involves indiscriminate use of water?

15. What is your view on the levying of cess for domestic consumers?

16. What is the amount of cess being presently collected under the Act and what is the
anticipated collection after the proposed amendment becomes effective?


17. If the use of water for domestic purpose is not included in category I and is kept as
a separate category as earlier, what difference does it make?

18. Under the proposed amendment in Schedule II, maximum rates under sub-Section
(2-A) of Section 3 of the Act of 1977 have been prescribed but does this section also apply
to those industrial units as well who default in payment of cess levied on them?


APPENDIX-II(i)
Reply to the Questionnaire furnished by the Ministry of Environment & Forests

ANS. 1(a): Water Cess collection is the most significant source of financing for State
Pollution Control Boards. Some State Boards are entirely dependent on the Cess for their
resources. The total Cess collection during the year 1992-93 was Rs. 26.77 crores and in
1993-94 it was Rs. 31.56 crores.

The Central Pollution Control Board is not provided any financial support from the
Cess collections. The Central Board receives grant-in-aid from the Ministry of Environment
& Forests for its plan and non-plan activities.

1(b)&(c): Under the Cess Act, each of the industries included in the schedule is subject
to two different rates of cess. Where the assessee treats its water borne effluents to the
standards prescribed for the industry, a lower rate of Cess is applicable. If not, higher rate is
enforced. Further, a rebate is given if the industrial unit adopts water conserving technology
These provisions act as incentives in reducing pollution

The Cess is levied on the quantity of water consumed by the industry. To reduce the
Cess payable, industries are thus made to consume less water than would otherwise be the
case.

ANS. 2: The 16 categories of industries included in Schedule-I are such selected
industries which use water in large quantities, and generate heavy pollution load. The list
has been subject to modifications from time to time.

ANS. 3: The 16 categories of industries in Schedule-I are selected on the basis of the
quantity of water they consume. The list has been subject to modifications from time to
time. The Central and State Pollution Control Boards have suggested that Schedule-1 may
be deleted and the Cess Act be made applicable to water consuming industries / activities if
the water consumption is beyond a certain limit (20 KL/day).

ANS. 4: The existing schedule-II is already simple and there is no need to further
simplify it. The categorisation of industries is based on the purpose for which water is
consumed and also on the nature of the pollutants generated.

ANS. 5: Ideally, the rates of Cess should be such that the industry should find it
economical to instal pollution control systems and adopt water conservation measures rather
than pay the Cess. But this would mean raising the rates to very high levels compared to the
present levels. This would also show that the Cess rates need to be enhanced.

ANS. 6: The major criteria for deciding 35.10 whether an industrial unit is to be assessed
for Cess are the quantity of water consumed by it and the pollution load discharged by it.

ANS. 7: Earlier, rebate of 70 per cent was given for installation of effluent treatment
plants. It was since reduced to 25 per cent. The exact percentage can be determined only
through .detailed case studies for each industry.

ANS. 8: The following difficulties are being faced by the Boards:
— Local Authorites do not pay Cess;

— There are problems in actual assessment of water consumption due to lack of
installation of water metering devices.

ANS. 9: Some industries like sugar mills and power utilities have raised objection


against payment of Cess on the ground that either they are not covered under the Cess Act or
that they do not cause any pollution. The municipalities have not raised any objection.

ANS. 10: As per the existing formula:

— 25 per cent of Cess is to be retained by the Central Government for installation of
sewage treatment plants and adoption of cleaner technologies;

— 25 per cent of Cess to be utilised by the State Boards for sewage treatment and adoption
of clean technologies;

— 25 per cent of Cess to be utilised for pollution control programmes as per decision of
State Governmenv/State Board.

— 25 per cent of Cess as incentive against achieving set targets (15 per cent against 85 per
cent target and additional one per cent against more than 85 per cent target).

The SPCBs/Committees have petitioned that the redistribution formula should be changed
from the existing one under which 75 per cent is reimbursed to the SPCBs/Committees to one
where 80 per cent is reimbursed to SPCBs/Committees. Ministry of finanace has agreed in
principle to the formula of 80/20 and necessary orders are being issued. This formula will be
effective from 1995-96.

ANS. 11: The Cess money is utilised for strengthening the institutional capacities of
Pollution Control Boards and their day-to-day functioning. This includes:

— Enforcement work;

— Surveys;

— Water quality monitoring;

— Operating the consent mechanism (compliance);

— Assessment of water pollution—inventorisation of polluting sources;
— Cost of litigation.

ANS. 12: Some State Governments provide marginal support to the state Boards. With the
increase in the Water Cess in 1992, many of the State Boards have reduced the State grant..

There are few States, particularly in the North East and some Union Territories where
there is not much industrial activity; here the revenue generation from the Water Cess is
practically nil, with the State Governments providing meagre grants to the Boards. These grants
are not at all adequate for supporting the establishments.

ANS. 13: Ideally, the rates of Cess should be such that the industry should find it
economical to instal pollution control systems and adopt water conservation measures rather
than pay the Cess. But this would mean raising the rates to very high levels compared to the
present levels. This would also show that the Cess rates need to be enhanced.

ANS. 14: Impounding of water for hydel power generation results in deterioration of water
quality in terms of thermal stratification, changing aqyati¢ ecology of the riverine system,
depletion of dissolved oxygen, anoxic conditions, thereby affecting water quality.

In view of the above, the hydel power generating units are brought undér Water Cess.

ANS. 15: Levying of Cess for domestic consumers would lead to double taxation—once by
the Municipalities and again by the pollution‘éontrol authorities. In view of this, so far the
Pollution Control Boards levied Cess only from the Municipalities.


ANS: 16: The present amount of Cess collection is about Rs. 31 crores (1994-95) which
will be enhanced to Rs. 78 crores in the event of proposed Amendment being effected.

ANS. 17: The categories for industrial cooling, spraying in mine pits and boiler feed,
and for domestic purposes (leviable from local bodies) have been brought under one
category because the resultant pollution is of similar nature.

ANS. 18: Industrial units partially complying with the standards and those who default
in installing pollution control systems both fall under the same category for which maximum
rate has been prescribed under Sub-Section 2-A of Section 3. In case of default in payment
of Cess, the industry is liable to pay interest or penalty along with the Cess amount as
prescribed in Sections 10 & 11 of the Cess Act.



APPENDIX-II(ii)

Reply to the Questionnaire furnished by the NDMC along with the comments of the Ministry
of Urban Affairs & Employment

ANSWER
1.(a)
(b)

(c) Since the rate of Cess negligible compared to the rates of water supply which even
are very low, it has not apparently been even felt by the consumers not to talk of any effect
on reducing indiscriminated consumption of water.

2:

3. NDMC pays the Cess to the Govt. through the Delhi Pollution Control Committee as
per the demand raised by them on the total water purchase by the NDMC from the MCD.
The cess, at present, is being charged from us on the entire quantity of water purchased by
NDMC which in turn is distributed to different consumers.

4.

5. In addition to the comments against question No. 3 it is further stated that in NDMC
area the consumption is normally urban consumption and does not have an element of
pollution as in the case of large industries. Presumably the measures required to check the
pollution caused by the industries are far more costly than the type of the urban pollution.
Therefore, it is felt that Cess on industries should be much heavier than that of the normal
consumers of water in the city.

6.
te
8.

9. At present, the Cess is being charged on the entire quantity of water purchased by
NDMC from the MCD. The NDMC is only a distribution agency and is not consuming
water except for its own municipal buildings. Presumably the intention of the act is to levy
Cess on the actual consumers who are causing pollution of water. If that be so, then Cess
should be levied on the sale of water by the NDMC and that too according to the category
of the consumer. In that case the levying of the Cess on the entire quantity of water
purchased by the NDMC would not be reasonable. Therefore, it is suggested that the
NDMC should only act as a collecting agency of Cess on behalf of the Govt. of India or the
actual quantity of water sold by the NDMC as per the rates determined, by the Govt. of
India be collected from the NDMC.

10.
11.
12:


13.We agree that the polluter should pay the Cess and one who causes higher pollution
should pay higher Cess.

14.

15.The Delhi Pollution Control Board is already recovering Cess from us on the total
quantity of water being purchased by us from the MCD and therefore, it automatically
applies to all categories of consumers including domestic consumers.

16.The present rate on which the cess is being collected is 2 paise per Kilo litre from all
categories of consumers uniformly as stated in Para 15 above. And therefore, no comments
in this regard can be offered.

17. Since the pollution caused by domestic consumers is much less than that by the
industrial consumers, the cess of domestic consumers should aiso be considerably less.

18.
Comments of the MCD received from the Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment

The domestic category of consumers should not be put in the same bracket as
commercial establishments, at least to the extent they do not consume beyond the minimum
average requirement of water. Since the consumption pattern of domestic category of
consumers is around 20 kls per water connection per month, higher cess on this category will
not achieve any further discipline in consumption. Therefore, the uniform increase proposed
in the Amendment Bill from 0.2 paise to 0.5 paise per KI, i.e., a sharp rise of 250% will be
regressive on the domestic consumers. The amendment Bill may, therefore, stipulate that
water cess on consumption per water connection upto 20 1९15 per month may be restricted to
the present rate of 0.2 paise per kI only (0.3 paise under Section 3(2A) of the Water Cess
act) and the higher rate of 0.5 paise per KI. [0.10 paise under Section 3(2A) of Water Cess
Act] may be applicable for consumption beyond this level.

Comments of the Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment

(i) Since the water Cess is the major source of revenue for the State Pollution Control
Boards, it is worthwhile to consider revision of the prevailing water Cess rates for
various categories of users. As such the proposed Cess rates as indicated in Schedule
Il of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 1995 are
recommended.

(ii) Availability of raw water for various beneficial uses is becoming difficult day by day.
As such reuse and recycling of effluents after necessary treatment may be included to
the extent possible in order to reduce the ever increasing demand of fresh water and
also to reduce pollution load in the receiving water. Therefore, it is recommended
that suitable incentives may be provided wherever reuse and recycling of effluents are
practised.

(iii) It is also suggested that there must be a provision in the Water Cess Act for suitable
enhancement of Cess rates periodically.


APPENDIX-III

Reply to the Questionnaire received from the Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board,
Hyderabad

1.(a) If the Government of India reimburses 80% of the Cess remitted to Consolidated
Fund of India directly to State PCBs, it will augment the resources of State PCBs. But, as on
today only 40% is being released.

(b) The rates of Water Cess were revised in the year 1992. Rebate is allowed only when an
assessee complies with the standards and consent conditions stipulated by the State PCBs. The
Cess Act enables effective implementation of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,
1974 i.e. Prevention & Control of Pollution.

(c) Under Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Rules, 1992, the maximum
quantity of water required for production of a unit product are prescribed. If any assessee
consumes water more than these quantities, rebate will be disallowed while finalising the
assessment. This helps in minimising water consumption to a great extent.

2. The categories of industries specified under Schedule-I of the Cess Act are of a highly
polluting nature/consume large quantities of water, as such their enlistment is justified.
However, these need to be increased according to changes in technology and environmental
impact.

3. One of the aim of Cess Act is effective implementaion of Water (Prevention and Control
of Pollution) Act, 1974 for Prevention and Control of Pollution. The “ENGINEERING
INDUSTRY AND HYDEL POWER PLANTS” may be deleted, as the pollution from these
units is minimal. All the industries/activities consuming water irrespective of quantities may be
included under Schedule-I of Water Cess Act. If a threshold level of water consumption is
specified for inclusion under schedule-I, the assessees may furnish less quantities of water to
evade water cess.

Another category viz., “AQUAFARMS, HATCHERIES AND MARINE PRODUCTS
PROCESSING UNITS” may be included under Schedule-I of Water Cess Act in view of their
detrimental effects on environment, due to the effluents and solid waste generated from these
units.

4. The Schedule-Il may be simplified. At present there are 2 different sets of rates
applicable to those assessees who are complying with the standards prescribed by the Board and
those not complying. It is better to have one set of rates. If an assessee complies with the
standards prescribed by the State PCBs or stipulated under the Environment (Protection) Act,
1986, a rebate of 25% may be allowed which itself is an incentive for the industries.

5. No. The rates are not commensurate with the objective of promoting installation of
water pollution control systems and for water conservation. The rates may be increased.

6. If an industry falls in any of the categories specified under schedule-I of Water Cess Act,
then, that industry is to be assessed for cess. In addition to that, any industry which is of a highly
polluting nature may be brought under the purview of Water Cess Act.

7. No modification is required as far as rebate is concerned i.e., 25%. But, there may be
only one set of rates. If an assessee complies with the provisions of Section 25 of Water (P&C of
Pollution) Act. 1974 or any of the standards laid under E(P) Act, 1986, a rebate of 25% may be
allowed.

8. Yes. Some of the Government undertakings are not filing water Cess returns and are not
remitting water Cess regularly.


9. The industries are not having any objections regarding payment of water cess. Most
of the municipalities are not remitting the assessed amounts of water cess due to paucity of
funds.

10. The Central Pollution Control Board vide letter No. CCB/79/1994/15828, dated
7.12.1994 communicated a new formula for cess reimbursement to the Pollution Control
Boards as following:

i) The State Boards will be reimbursed 80% of the cess.

— 40% of the cess will be passed on to the Boards without any conditions and

— 40% will be allotted for execution of specific projects.

ii) 20% will be retained by the Central Government. This will be utilised for projects of

national importance to be undertaken by CPCB and for projects in States and Union
Territories which have a low Cess income.

The above formula requires modifications as recommended by the Sub-Group consti-
tuted at the All India Conference of Chairman and Member Secretaries i.e.

Out of the Water Cess credited to the Consolidatd Fund of India
— 80% shall be reimbursed to the respective State PCBs without any conditions and

— 20% shall be retained by the Central Government to take up projects of national
importance.

11. The State PCBs utilise the cess money for

i) Water (surface and groundwater) quality monitoring.

ii) Air quality monitoring.

iii) Inventorisation of polluting industries and control programmes.
iv) Action programmes for problem areas.

v) Zoning Atlas for siting industries.

vi) Research and development.
vii) Environmental awarenéss programmes and training.

12. The ANDHRA PRADESH POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD, HYDERABAD
is receiving the financial support from the Andhra Pradesh State Government as follows:

PLAN FUNDS (Rs. in lacs)
1. For the purchase of Lab Equipment, Tools and Plants, Furniture,

Library Books, Vehicles, etc. Rs. 10.00
2. Environmental Awareness Programme Rs. 03.00
3. Environmental Research Programme Rs. 03.00
4. Common Effluent Treatment Plants Rs. 02.00
5. Krishna Godavari River Basin Studies Rs. 02.00

Tora : Rs. 20.00


NON-PLAN FUNDS

For meeting the salaries of the Employees of the Board
and rents for Board Office. Rs. 65.92

Tora : Rs. 65.92

Out of a total requirement of Rs. 242.51 lakhs per annum on salaries and establishment, the
State Government supports only Rs. 65.92 lakhs as non-plan grant.

13. The “polluter-pays™ principle can be applied by close and continuous monitoring of
effluents from defaulting assessees. Based on the analysis of data generated, an incremental cess
can be levied on a graded scale of magnitude of pollution.

14, The main pollution problems occur only before and during construction of dams and no
pollution problems arise while generating energy from hydel power plants. As per experience in
construction of hydel power plants. There are more positive environmental impacts than
negative, and some of the negative impacts are reversible. Hence, it is not justifiable to levy
water cess on hydel power plan ce enforcing the provisions of water cess Act on hydel
power plants could mean increase in electricity tariff.

15, Cess may be levied on domestic consumers. Most of the rivers in India are being
polluted by domestic sewage and sullage being discharged from towns/cities located on their
banks. In India, 80% of the pollution in rivers is only due to discharge of domestic waste since
most of the municipalities are not having full-fledged effluent treatment plants to treat sewage
and sullage generated by them. Some portion of the cess thus collected may be utilised in
promoting sewage treatment plants to treat the sewage in municipalities where problems due to
domestic pollution are severe.

16. At present our Board is collecting about Rs. 1.70 crores per annum towards Water
Cess. It is anticipated that an amount of Rs. 5.00 crores will be collected after the proposed
amendment becomes effective.

17. The use of water for domestic water may not be included in category-I as the
characteristics of the domestic effluents differ from that of water required for cooling boiler feed
and spraying in mine pits. Further, the sewage contains undesirable parameters such as
Bacteria, BOD Oil & Grease, etc. Whereas it is not the case with the water utilised for cooling,
boiler feed and spraying in mine pits. Hence, the water used for domestic purpose may be
included under Category-II as earlier instead of Category-I.

18. The rates under Sub-section (2-A) of Section 3 of the Act are applicable to an assessee
who fails to comply with any of the provisions of Section 25 of the Water (P&C of Pollution)
Act. 1974 or any of the standard laid downs by the Central Government under the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986. In case of defaulters, penalty not exceeding the amount of cess arrears
will be levied as per the provisions of Section 11 of Water (P&C of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977.
Hence the Rates under Sub-section (2-A) of Section 3 of the Act of 1977 do not apply to those
industrial units as well who default in payment of cess levied on them.

Reply to the Questionnaire received from the Bihar State Pollution Control Board, Patna

1. (a) To a great extent. This Board is not receiving any budgetary allocation from the
State Government.

(b) To a considerable extent.
(c) To a reasonable extent.
2. This needs amendment.

3.. Yes.

All the industries/activities consuming water exceeding 5 KLD or more should be made
liable to pay cess.


4. Schedule-II should continue. However, ‘easily bio-degradable’ and ‘not easily bio-
degradable’ should be defined clearly. BOD to COD ratic greater than 0.4 of raw effluent
may be considered as ‘easily bio-degradable’.

Yes.
. A unit having water consumption of 5 KLD or more.
No.
No.

9. No. The municipalities have not raised any objection, but they are neither filing

water consumption return nor paying any cess.

10. The formula for distribution of cess amount collected between the Central and State
Pollution Control Boards should be the same as prior to the modification of Schedule-II of
Cess Rules in the year 1992 or the proposal submitted by the Oberoi Committee constituted
by the C.P.C.B.

11. Cess amount is being utilised in commensurate with the functions defined in Section
17 of the Water Act.

12. Nil.

13. By imposing penal rate as mentioned in Schedule-II. But this should not be
construed as ‘pay and pollute’.

eI AA

14. No comment.

15. All other bodies entrusted with the duty of supplying water under the law or under
which it is constituted shall pay cess for domestic water consumption. In principle, domestic
consumers also should pay.

16. The target for 1995-96 is Rs. 1.75 crores. In the year 1994-95, Rs. 1.5 crore was
collected. The enticipated collection after proposed amendment would be about Rs. 5
crores.

17. The present proposed modification of Schedule-II i.e. inclusion of domestic water
consumption in category-I will decrease the cess collection.

18. Rates under Sub-section (2-A) of Section 3 do not include the levy of defaulting
payment. However, this has-been taken into consideration by charging 2% interest per
month (24% per annum).

Reply to the Questionnaire received from the Gujarat Pollution Control Board, Gandhinagar

ANSWER-1

(A) It augments the resources of State Boards normal budget approximately 30%

(B) Not effective.

(C) Not much effective.

ANSWER-2 No justifications for enlisting only 15 categories of the industries in the
Schedule-I of the Cess Act.

ANSWER-3 Schedule-I i.e. list of specified industries should be deleted and all
industries or activities consuming water exceeding certain limit should be made liable to pay
cess.

ANSWER-4 Schedule-II should be simplified with regards to the purpose for which
water is consumed and corresponding applicable rates. There shall be only two categories


domestic use and industrial use and suitable cess rate shall be decided based on two categories.
Higher rates can be prescribed for higher limit of use of water.

ANSWER-S No remarks.

ANSWER-6 The industries covered under the Water Act, Air Act & the Environment
(Protection) Act and consuming water should be covered under the Water Cess Act.

ANSWER-7 We may delete the rebate of 25% of the Water Cess as provided in the Cess
Act-1977 amended in 1991.

ANSWER‘8 The State Pollution Control Boards are facing difficulties in collection of cess
from the local bodies and from the sick industrial units because of their financial conditions.

ANSWER-9 The local bodies and municipalities generally avoid payment of cess on the
ground of their poor financial condition.

ANSWER-10 The old formula for redistribution of cess approximately 83% of the cess
amount to the State Boards for the augmentation of its financial resources and without putting
any condition should be revived.

ANSWER-11 Cess money is utilised towards the general activities of the State Boards.

ANSWER-12 1994-95 1993-94 1992-93 (Rs. in lacs)

Budget 340 340 315

Grant-in-Aid

from the State

Government 30 145 105
ANSWER-13 More polluting industries should pay higher rates of cess.
ANSWER-14 No remarks.

ANSWER-1S Leving of cess for domestic consumers may not be implemented. Municipal
authorities/local bodies should however pay the cess.

ANSWER-16 Collection of water cess for the year 1994-95 is Rs. 173.35 lacs. It is difficult
to predict, however, it comes to three times i.e. approximately Rs. 500 lacs.

ANSWER-17 No comment.

ANSWER-18 This may not-be necessary as we are charging 24% interest on the cess
arrears.

Reply to the Questionnaire received from the Haryana State Pollution Control Board,
Chandigarh

1. Most of the state Govts. do not provide grant-in-aid to the State Pollution Control
Boards and all the activities pertaining to abatement of pollution depend on the cess collection.
Thus the cess amount is the main source of State Boards to meet the Budgetary requirement to
continue their pollution control activities. The levy of cess certainly tends to minimise the
indiscriminate consumption of Water.

2. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977 should be made
applicable to all water consuming industries as the schedule-I appended to Cess Act is not
exhaustive to cover all the units and ambiguity regarding applicability of Cess Act to particular
type of industry results in appeals and court cases. Thus the schedule-I may be scrapped so as to
include all water consuming insustries.

3. Schedule-I may be deleted and all industries consuming water should be made to pay
cess.


4. The Schedule-II should continue. hi

5. There must be incentive for promoting installation of water pollution control systems
to achieve the major objective of keeping the wholesomeness of water as envisaged under,
Water Pollution Control Act, 1974.

6. It is very difficult to assess the industrial units every month. The cess amount from
some units is too meagre to meet the postal expenses. The monthly assessment of such units
is not in the interest of the Board. Thus industrial units should be assessed for cess on the
basis of amount of cess due from them. In this connection following categories of industrial
units are suggested for assessment of cess:—

(i) Industrial units having cess amount more than Rs. 5000/ per J Monthly
month.

(ii) Industrial units having cess amount less than Rs. 5000/ but } Quarterly
more than Rs. 1000/4 per month.

(iii) Industrial units having cess amount less than Rs. 1000/ but } Half yearly
more than Rs. 100/ per month.

(iv) Industrial units having cess amount less than 100/ per month. 3 Yearly
7. Existing procedure should continue.
8. The difficulties being faced in collection of cess are given below:—

The realisation of cess from Municipal Committees & other Government Institutions
is very difficult as they are financially weak.

9. Certain types of industries like textile, dyeing and printing, glass, rubber etc. to
object the applicability of Cess Act and payment of cess. These should be covered under the
Cess Act.

10. The State Governemnt do not provide grant-in-aid to the State Boards and their
pollution control activities completely depends on the cess collection and reimbursement of
its share to the Boards. Presently 50% cess share is released to the State Boards and
additional 25% is released if the targets of cess collection fixed by the Government of India
are achieved. The Board will carry on its pollution control activities efficiently and smoothly
if 100% cess reimbursement is made to the State Boards. The modus operandi for cess
utilisation evolved vide Govt. of India letter No. Q-17011/1/89-CPW dated 15/7/92 makes it
difficult to meet the obligatory expenditure. Thus the Board may be allowed to utilize the
reimbursement according to the decisions of the State Boards so that activities like research
development, encouragement of R & D, clean technology for clean environment and
guidelines formulated by the Central Board for abatement of pollution could be
implemented on priority basis.

11. The Board utilises the cess money in running the establishment of the Board,
equipping its laboratories and pollution control activities.

12. State Government does not provide any grant-in-aid to the State Board. However
occasionally some funds for a particular scheme are allotted e.g. state plan etc.

13. Existing procedure for levying cess for polluters should continue. The different
higher cess rates on the basis of nature of process have been prescribed.

14. Cess is also leviable on those specified industrial units which neither cause pollution
nor involve indiscriminate use of water. Likewise the hydel power generation plants are also
supposed to pay cess.

15. The cess should be leviable on domestic consumers but restricted to the local bodies.


16. The cess amount is being collected from the specified industries and local
authorities to achieve the targets fixed by the Government of India which is Rs. 70 lacs/
year. Thus anticipated collection would be about 15% more than the present.

17. Whether the use of water for domestic purpose is included in category ‘I’ or is
kept seperate, it hardly makes any difference in the cess amount collected, as long as the
cess rate prescribed is specific for domestic consumption.

18. The maximum rates of cess are leviable to those industrial units who fail to comply
with any of the provisions of section 25 of the Water Act, 1974 or any of the standards
laid down by the Central Government under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 but these
higher/maximum rates of cess can not be made applicable to those units who default in
payment of cess levied on them. The assessing authority may invoke the clause of penalty
under section 11 of the cess Act which can impose penalty equivalent to 100% of the
amount in arrears, in case the unit defaults in payment of cess levied on it.

Reply to the Questionnaire received from the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board,
Bangalore

1. (a) Karnataka State Pollution Control Board is not getting any budgetary support
from the State Government except some grant$ to the tune of 10-20 lakhs for purchase of
equipments etc., The Board is depending mainly on the consent fee and water cess
collected.

Actual Receipts for the last 3 years (Rs. in lakhs) is :

Year nsent fee etc. Cess collected Total
1992-93 306.31 40.95 347.26
1993-94 349.28 37.76 387.04
1994-95 376.56 73.44 450.00

1. (b) Industries are being encouraged to put up and operate the treatment unit, as
under the Water Cess Act, industries can claim rebate if the effluents are treated to the
standards stipulated by the Board. This has resulted in reduction in pollution load on the
natural bodies.

1. (c) Many industries have started reducing the water consumption by ways of
recycling and process change. *

2. The industries enlisted in schedule I are significant from both water consumption
and pollution point of view.

3. Yes.

4. Industries are expressing their difficulties in providing separate meters for measuring
consumption for different purposes.

5. No, Water cess rates are very much less compared to pollution control costs.

6. The criteria for deciding whether an industry unit is to be assessed depending upon
its quantity of water consumed and extent of pollution it causes.

7. No modification is required. Fy

8. Problems of collection of cess from local bodies, who are expressing their financial
constraints and also asking question what benefit the local bodies will get by paying cess.

Some industries like Rayon graded Pulp, Sugar industries are claiming that they are
not covered in the schedule.

9. Some as para 1 of 8 above.


10. (a) 25% to be utilised according to the decisions of the State Pollution Control
Board for Pollution Control measures.

(b) 25% to be utilised according to the decision of the State Pollution Control Board for
assisting industrial units in the adoption of clean process technologies and sewage treatment
systems in class II & III towns.

(c) 25% will be reimbursed to the State Pollution Control Board on the basis of
collection of the target for the year/quarter i.e., 10% for collecting 85% of the target for
collection of cess at the minimum and additional 1% for each additional amount will be
utilized according to the decisions of the State Pollution Control Board.

(d) 25% of the Total amount will be retained by the Central Government to encourage
R & D of clean Technologies and assist local bodies in class II & III towns to set up sewage
treatment systems according to needs.
REVISED (PROPOSED) FORMULAS FOR CESS REIMBURSEMENT

80% to be reimbursed out of which 40% without any condition and the remaining 40%
for project.

In the conference of Chairman & Member Secretaries, of Pollution Control Boards
during April 7-8, 1995 found it difficult to accept revised formula and it was decided that an
appointment with Hon'ble Minister Shri Kamalanath, may be fixed so that the matter is
sorted out.

11. For Board work

12. ‘Year Rs. in Lakhs.
1992-93 45.86
1993-94 20.00
1994-95 13.16

13. As on now cess rate is being laid, increases with the purpose for which water is
used. The water used for thé process, which causes pollution is charged at a higher rate
compared to the water used for boiler feed, cooling etc., considering the principle of polluter
pays, water consumed for domestic purposes to be charged at a higher rate compared to
water use for boiler feed or cooling purpose.

14. Impoundment of water is expected to cause change in water quality. Himachal
Pradesh Pollution Control Board has prepared a note on such effects. Hence inclusion of
hydel power project in schedule is justified.

15. In case of industries the consumption for domestic purpose is very negligible and in
many cases it will be only a fraction of the total consumption. Therefore levying a seperate
~ cess rate for domestic purposes with reference to industry is not remunerative.

As regards to municipalities, The question is to what extent cess realization will help the
Municipalities in installing underground drainage system and sewage treatment plant.

16. Year Amount Rs.
1992-93 57,36,244.31
1993-94 57,65,510.23
1994-95 1,20,91,950.30

If the new formula is implemented the cess will increase by about 3 times.

17. Domestic usage water will get more polluted compared to water used for cooling or
boiler feed. Considering the principle of polluter pays be applied, higher rate is to be fixed


which also increaes cess collection.

18. Yes, for defaulting industries interests are charged.

Reply to the Questionnaire received from the Maharashtra Pollution Control Board, Bombay

1. (a)
(b)
(०)

Pay

3.

4.

Not to the fullest extent as at present thg cess collection with this Board is to the
tune of Rs. 6 Crores per annum means Rs. 4.80 Crores are reimbursed to the Board
out of which Rs. 2 Crores are utilised for Board’s expenses i.e., salary and other
recurring expenses incurred for strengthening infrastructure in the Board. The
normal budget of this Board sanctioned by the State Govt. is to the tune of Rs. 3
Crores. The total expenditure of the Board is expected to be Rs. 5 Crores per
annum. The present grants from State Govt. and cess reimbursement meet the
requirements of running expenses such as salaries, office contingencies, etc. If the
sub-clauses (b) and (c) are clubbed together, the purpose of augmentation to the
State Board may not fulfil the aim of the Act.

There has been some progress in respect of preventing and controlling pollution by
utilisation of cess funds. The Board has formulated some of the schemes which
includes assistance for adoption of clean technology, waste minimisation, installation
of sewage treatment plant by local bodies, installation of C.E.T.P. by group of
industries not falling under State Industrial Development Corporation Area,
assessment’ of pollution load in industrial estates, etc.

In the State of Maharashtra, more stress is required to be given for cleaning of
rivers of which water is polluted because of domestic effluent. The State Govt. is
also separately considering action plan for clean up of Krishna and Godavari rivers.
Sewage treatment plant with local bodies (especially B & C Class about 150 Nos.) is
a major item of expenditure which may incure total cost to the extent of Rs. 50
Crores. The annual requirement of funds, towards this purpose would ‘be Rs. 2.50
Crores approximately. Other aspects of control of pollution to be undertaken in this
Board such as waste minimisation, recycle, reuse of waste water etc. is also an
important measures to be undertaken costing about Rs. 1.5 Crores per annum.

There is a check in reducing water consumption figures by the industries after
implementation of Cess Act. However, it is not significant, if the recommendations
which are being made in the following paras are implemented, the industries will be
indirectly compel to minimise water consumption.

There is no justification, rather there is confusion in categorising the industries. This
has also resulted in omission of many water intensive industries.

Yes, Schedule-I should be deleted and all industries/activities consuming water
exceeding 50 m/day should be made liable to pay cess. The experience of the Board
in implementation of the Cess Act shows that there are more administrative
expenses involved as compared to the assessment and recovery of cess while dealing
with the cases with water consumption less than 50 m/day. This will simplify and
speed up assessment of cess and recovery. More over it is felt that there is little
scope in achieving the object of minimisation of water consumption in respect of
such industries.

The Schedule-II requires modification. It is felt that there need not be two rates to
be prescribed under sub-section (2) and sub-section 2(A) of Section 3 as at present.
As regards purposes of water consumption, it is suggested that’ there shall be
only two categories of water consumption i.e., (i) Consumption/supply by
local bodies and (ii) consumption by industries. While implementing the Cess Act,
lot of difficulties are encountered for categorising consumption into 4 different
purposes as mentioned in Schedule-Il. There does not appear to be enough


justification for keeping such categorisation. There are difficulties in metering
consumption for different purposes. The proposed rates for two categories suggested
are as under:—

i) Consumption/supply by local : 5 Ps./Kilo
Bodies Litre

ii) Industrial use including : 15 Ps./Kilo
domestic use of water Litre

meeting conditions under
Section 25 of Water
(P & CP) Act, 1974.

and/or
iii) Industrial use including : 20 Ps./Kilo
domestic use of water in Litre

which case the conditions

under Section 25 of Water
(P & CP) Act, 1974 are

not fulfilled.

The present rates are not commensurate with the objective of promoting installation

of pollution control systems and water conservation. With the increased rates as

suggested above, it will be possible to achieve these objectives.

The only criteria should be the consumption of water exceeding 50 m*/day of water

use.

The Board is of the opinion that the provision of rebate of 25% of the cess

assessment may be deleted. The criteria prescribed for deciding entitlement to

rebate as laid down under Section 7 is found to be combersome considering the unit
for grant of rebate. The stipulation for grant of rebate is so stringent that no unit in
the State of Maharashtra has been able to fulfil the conditions and get rebate.

However, if the rebate is to be retained as an incentive for consideration of

undertaking, measures to control pollution by industries, it may be retained with the

simplified conditions related to successful working of the effluent treatment plant.

The difficulties in assessment and collection of cess are as follows:—

(1) As per the Cess Rules, 1978 the industry/ocal body has to sybmit returns of
water consumption before Sth of the succeeding month supported with water
bills from the water supply agencies. This is not possible as the units are not
getting water bills from the water supply authorities before Sth of the month.
The provisions under Rules if not fulfilled has to be followed with the
provisions under Section 6 of the Act i.e. giving notices, deciding average
consumption of water based on records available and assessment. Since it
involve legal formalities, assessment of waters requires more time. It is
suggested that the date Sth of succeeding month prescribed under the Rules
may be extended to 25th of succeeding month.

(2) The periodicity of asessment is also neither prescribed under the Act nor under
the Rules. It is suggested that following periodicity may be considered to be

prescribed:—
Frequency of
cess return &
Average assessment assessment
1. Upto Rs. 100/- Once in a year
2. Rs. 10i to Rs. 999/- Half yearly
3. Rs. 1000/- Rs. 5000/- Quarterly
4. Rs. 5001/- and above Monthly.

(3) The application of rates under Section 2(A) requires issuance of show cause


10.

11.
12.

13;

14.

notice making clear the non-compliance on the part of the units and giving them
a chance of hearing and submission in writing if desired which involves a time
lag and also scrutiny and this involves considerable paper work.

(4) The assessment and recovery of water cess from the small scale industries say to
the extent of Rs. 100/- per month is rather difficult as the units are not careful.
The efforts for recovery i.e., issue of letters, notices involve wastage of energy
and funds for following legal formalities for such small amounts.

(5) Charging of interest and penalty in failure for payment of water cess is also
found difficult for implementation as it involves legal procedure of issue of
notices, giving chances under principle of natural Justice and hearing in
presence or in writing.

No industries/local bodies have raised objections for payment of cess. However,
some of the industries/local bodies during the discussion in pursuing them for
adopting measures to control of pollution expressed that the State Govt./Board
should assist financially in the measures to be undertaken for control of pollution.
The Municipal Councils in Class-B and Class-C categories are facing financial
difficulties in payment of cess becausing of paucity of funds with them. M/s. Tata
Electric Company has filed an appeal on the grounds that saline water use for
condensor cooling cannot be treated as water consumption as laid down under the
Act as the physical and chemical properties of the water are not changed and the
water is discharged to natural sources as it is and that they are entitled for rebate as
lot of funds have been spent for installing machineries for control of pollution.
However, M/s. Tata Hydel Power Station has also filed a Writ in the High Court of
Bombay on the grounds that the categories of consumption of water is not
specifically shown in the Schedule-II prescribing specific use of water and rates
thereof. They have also raised objections to the effect that it cannot be said to be
consumption (use) as they intake and discharge water without causing any pollution.
At present 80% of the cess collected is reimbursed to the State Board after the
approval of the budget for utilization of cess through Central Pollution Control
Board/Ministry of Environment & Forests. It is suggested that 82.5% of the cess
collected may be allowed to be retained by the State Board as recommended by
Sub-Group under the Chairmanship of Chairman, Punjab Pollution Control Board.

As per information in, 1(b) above.

Govt. of Maharashtra releases the grant in aid for the recurring expenses with the
Board under non-plan budget towards salaries and office contengencies. The State
Govt. also allow outlay and grant in aid under the plan budget for the new scheme/
capital expenditure. From the year 1993-94 Govt. of Maharashtra have allotted fund
for providing infrastructure in the form of manpower to utilise the financial
assistance under the World Bank Aid. Additional 268 posts have been sanctioned to
strengthen the Pollution Control Board of which estimated expenditure works out to
Rs. 1.25 Crores per annum. Out of this estimated expenditure State Govt. have
sanctioned Rs. 80 lakhs under the plan budget.

Increased cess charges and deletion of provisions of grant of rebate will compel the
industrial unit to reassess their water requirement. This will ensure motivation to
reduce water consumption through recycle, reuse of treated waste water. Those who
fail to adopt this will be required to pay higher amount of cess in view of higher
water consumption, thereby justifying principle of “Polluter pays”.

This Board is of the opinion that there is no proper justification in levying of cess
on hydel power generating unit.


1S.

16.

VE

18.

The levying of cess for domestic purpose should continue. The review of
performance of local bodies in respect of installation of sewage treatment plant
shows that they contribute major share-of pollution of streams since foolproof
facilities for treatment of sewage is non-existing in most of the towns and cities.
They are also responsible for bacterial pollution of stream which has potential of
spreading waterborne diseases. Therefore, “polluter pays” principle requires levying
of cess on domestic consumption.

At present Rs. 600 lakhs being collected under the Cess Act and it is anticipated it
may go to the extent of Rs. 2964 lakhs per annum after revision as proposed by
Govt. of India.

Clubbing of consumption under industrial cooling and domestic, will have no
significant effect.

Application of maximum rate under sub-section 2(A) of Section 3 of the Water (P
& CP) Cess Act. 1977 does not arise in respect of industrial unit who default in
payment of cess. The maximum rate under sub-section 2(A) of Section 3 relates to
units who do not fulfil the conditions laid down under Section 7.

Reply to the Questionnaire received from the Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board,

Bhopal

The point-wise comments are as follows:

1. (a)
(b)
(c)

2-& 3:

4.

py

6.

Ds

8.

9:

10.

Augment the resources of State Board by about 30%.

Yes, the cess has induced the industries to minimise consumption of water and also
induced consciousness towards pollution control.

To large extent the industries uy to minimise the consumption of water.

In fact the Schedule-1 should be replaced by including all categories of industries
consuming water exceeding 10 KV/day for payment of cess.

As proposed in the amendment bill 1995, with the exception that for domestic
consumption. on account of poar financial status of the local bodies.

Yes. पु

Industries consuming water more than 10KV/day should be liable to pay the Cess.
Yes. Industries haviag complete facilities for effluent treatment and qualifying the
prescribed limits of the Central/State Pollution Control Board and also complying
the conditions laid’ down by the Board under section 25/26 of the Water
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 may be allowed rebate upto 50%.

It will also encourage to industrialists for prevention of pollution and conservation
of water. io

The State Pollution Control Boards are facing problem to collect water cess from
local bodies/Contonment Boards and Govt. Water Supply Deptts. Govt. owned
water supply schemes are at present not paying water cess because State Law
Department has given opinion that these schemes do not fall within the purview of
the Act. Necessary amendments should be made.

Most of the local bodies are not paying water cess due to their financial constraints.
Municipalities are not paying water cess due to their financial problem.

Procedure for release of cess money needs to be simplified. The Board should be
authorised to pay only 20% of the total revenue to Central Government by
retaining the balance of 80% for its own utilisation, as has already been agreed by
the M.O.E.F. in the conference of Chairmen & Member Secretaries.


11. Strengthening of the pollution control activities: Research and Development
activities etc.

12. Financial support provided to the State Pollution Control Boards by the concerned
State Govts., is insufficient to carry out all the activities expected from the
concerned State Boards. Most of provision: for specific projects, which cannot help
in the normal activities of the Board.

Grant in aid from State Govt. (Rs. in lakhs)

1993-94 109.15
1994-95 112.23

13. Principle of “polluter pays” is applicable; as is clear from the provisions in
Schedule-Il of the Cess Act.

14. Generation of hydel power necessitates construction of large dams with max.

Impounding of water so that the water is available for power generation through out
the non-monsoon periods. Construction of large dams capable of storing such
amounts of water, involved submergences of large tracts of forests and cultivable
lands and also results in displacements of tribal habitations. The environment is thus
seriously ultered by these activities. Construction of large dams interference in the
nature’s cycle, the humidity, the ground water storage, the flora and fauna of the
area either altered or affected.

Consumption does not necessarily mean that during the process of utilisation of any
commodity the same be destroyed. The consumption is the act of process of
utilisation for satisfaction of wants, destruction, deterioration or transformation
using up the natural resources.

In view of the above consideration, hydro-generation units should be levied.

15: The levying of water cess for domestic consumers does not appear practical. The
authorities/ocal bodies, etc. are the principal bodies who collect direct tax from
domestic consumers, and they are generally defaulters. The Public places, Hotels,
Swimming pools, etc. may perhaps be considered for payment of cess under the
Act.

16. Present cess collection . : Rs. 232.00 lakhs
Anticipated collection after
the proposed amendment becomes
effective : Rs. 392.00 lakhs

ae Difference will be Rs. 23.00 lakhs which will be only about 6%
Reply to the Questionnaire received from the Meghalaya Pollution Control Board, Shillong

1. (a) The number of water polluting industries in Meghalaya are very few and as such
the collecting of water cess in the State is almost negligible. The projected water cess
collection for 1995-96 is approximately Rs. 1.15 lakh only.

(b) & (c) In view of (a) above the impact on preventicn of pollution & minimisation of
indiscriminate consumption of water could not be accessed.

2. No comments.

3. Perhaps all industries/activities exceeding certain limits should be included in
Schedule-I and be made liable to pay cess to augment financial resources of the small State
Boards like Meghalaya Pollution Control Board which has got limited resources.


4. Perhaps the Schedule-II should continue as it is and no simplification is required at
this stage.

5. The rates for levying cess should be as such so that the industries are motivated to
install water pollution control systems. If the rates of levying cess are low then the industries
shall prefer paying water cess instead of installing jwater pollution control devices.

6. The criteria for accessing water cess for an industrial unit should depend on the
extent of water pollution created by the industry.

7. Perhaps more incentives, including a rebate of 25% of the water cess as provided in
the Cess Act, 1977 may be given to industries who install pollution control systems and
comply to the prescribed standards. This will further motivate the industrial units to provide
proper pollution control measures.

8. Yes, the State Board is facing difficulty in collecting water cess from local authorities.

In Meghalaya, in most of the towns the water supply is looked after by the Town
Committees who have not respond to the Boards queries. Till date no cess has been
collected from such authorities except from Shillong Municipal Board.

9. Till date the Board has not received any objection from industry/municipalities
regarding payment of water cess.

10. The present formula seems alright and no modification is warranted at present.

11. So far the water cess collected has been utilised for development of Laboratory
facilities.

12. The Meghalaya Pollution Control Board has received a meagre grant-in-aid of Rs.
10 lakhs under PLAN and Rs. 8.25 lakhs under NON-PLAN from the State Government.
for the year 1995-96, Rs. 5 lakhs under PLAN and Rs. 10 lakhs under NON-PLAN has been
allocated by the State Government.

13. As per the proposal amendment the industrial units which are polluting more has to
pay more water cess.

14. In the last meeting of Chairman & Member Secretaries of Central/State Pollution
Control Boards held at Chandigarh on 7th & 8th April 95, the Member Secretary of
Himachal Pradesh Pollutiom Control Board presented a paper justifying levying of water cess
on hydel power generation plants by providing reports of the investigation conducted by
H.P. Pollution Control Board which reports that the quality of down stream (after receiving
discharge) of the water body do change and it becomes polluted.

Perhaps more investigations may be conducted for inclusion/deletion of hydel power
generation plants from Schedule-I.

15. The question is not clear enough to give the reply whether it applies only to the
industrial units which consumes water for domestic purposes. If so, then the levying of water
cess for domestic purposes is authentic.

16. For 1995-96 the projected water cess collection is 85. 1.15 lakh and the anticipated
collection as per the proposed amendment rates will amount to Rs. 2.5 lakhs.

17. Perhaps it will not make much difference.

18. The proposed: amendment in Schedule-II should also apply to those who default in
payment of cess levied on them.


Reply to the Questionnaire received from the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board, Madras

la. The Cess reimbursement under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
Cess Act, 1977 augments the resources of the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control
Board, on an average of 25.8% of its total expenditure.

The Water Cess Act, 1977 is an additional tool to the Water Act, 1974 to Prevent
and Control Water Pollution. The industries specified under the Cess Act, 1977 are
establishing Effluent Treatment Plant to achieve the discharge standards Prescribed
by the Pollution Control Board so as to prevent water pollution and as well as to
claim rebate as per the provisions of Water Cess Act. The industries have now
realised the importance of the Conservation of Water reducing the quantity of
water consumption thereby reducing the load on the Effluent Treatment Plant, to
achieve the standards and also to reduce the Water Cess amount to be remitted.

s

c. The units are forced to adopt waste minimization techniques and recycling of the
wastewater at various stages of process to minimize indiscriminate consumption of
» water.

2. The Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board was formed in 1982. However, it is
presumed that 15 types of water intensive industries were identified by the G & I.

3. Yes, a copy of the letter addressed to Central Pollution Control Board by Tamil
Nadu Pollution Control Board regarding issue of deletion of Schedule-I of Cess Act
is enclosed at Annexure-I

4. Schedule-II should be simplified. The views of Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board
for modification of Schedule-Il have already been communicated to Ministry of
Environment and Forests, Government of India by the Secretary to Government,
Environment and Forests Department, Madras-9. Copy enclosed vide Annexure-II
In addition to the suggestion made in this office Lr. No, TSI/13275/93, dated:
10.07.93, the rate under Sub-section (2) of Section (3) may be deleted.

$ Yes.

6. The criteria for assessment of cess shall be based on the quantity of water used for
various industrial purposes.

7. The industries are treating the trade effluent to the discharge standards prescribed
by the Pollution Control Boards and they are not treating the effluents to the
original quality of the raw water utilised for industrial purpose. Hence, the rebate
may by considered on the following lines. “If the industries comply with the
discharge standards prescribed by the Pollution Control Boards continuously for the
assessment year concerned”, the rebate of 25% for that particular year may be
considered.

8. Yes, (i) Pollution Control Boards are finding great difficulty in collection of cess
frorm the Local Bodies due to paucity of funds with them. Hence, Cess may be
levied at a flat rate from local bodies based on the population of the Local Bodies.

(ii) Some of the polluting industrial units such as Restaurants, sea food units, atomic
power plants, etc., which consume huge quantities of water for their industrial
purpose are not covered under the Cess Act. In view of this the Board could not
collect Cess from these industries for which deletion of Schedule-I is suggested.

9. Yes, the Local Bodies object to payment of Cess due to paucity of funds.


10. The Board is given 75% of the Water Cess remittance made to Government of India
in two instalments viz., 50% of the remittance immediately after the remittances and
balance 25% after achieving the target of remittances of the year concerned.
Modification to the effect that 82.5% of cess collection should be reimbursed
without any condition is required as it was in vogue during the initial enforcement.

11. The fund is utilised for the infrastructural development of the Tamil Nadu Pollution
Control Board for the effective monitoring and survilence to fulfil the objectives
envisaged under the Acts.

12. The Assistance under Part-I Scheme to meet day-to-day expenses was sanctioned to
the Board earlier. In fact, the grant sanctioned in 1989-90 was to the extent or 30%
(approx.) of its total expenditures. This slowly tapered off and since 1993-94 no
grant is being sanctioned to the Board under Part-I Scheme. However, the
Government of Tamil Nadu are sanctioning grants for specific schemes as listed
below. This information is provided for the last three years.

1992-93

(1) Emergency Response Centre : Rs. 10.32 Lakhs
(2) Coastal Monitoring Programme : Rs. 1.65 Lakhs
1993-94

Common Hazardous Wastes Disposal Facilities : Rs. 35.00 Lakhs .
1994-95

Setting up of permanent Environmental Exhibition at the

Science Centre, Kotturpur. : Rs. 10.00 Lakhs

Torat Rs. 56.97 Lakhs

13. The principle of polluter pays should by followed fully by bringing in more number
of industries consuming huge quantities of water for their industrial purposes.

14. Cess need not be levied on Hydel power generation.

15. The levying of cess for domestic purpose is covered by levy of cess on local bodies
which may be continued based on the pupulation as indicated earlier in item No. 8.

16. The details of cess being presently collected are at Annexure-III and the details of
anticipated collection after the proposed amendment becomes effective could not be
furnished since the proposed amendment has not been communicated. However the
anticipate collection of after the proposed amendment may be in the order of
Rs. 75 Lakhs.

17. The levy of cess for Domestic purpose is covered by levy of Cess on local bodies
concerned which may be based on population as indicated in item No. 8. But levy
on cess on industries may be based on the quantity of water consumed. Hence,
there may difference in levy of cess for local bodies and industries.

18. The remarks for this item does not arise, in the light of suggestion made under item
No. 4.


Annexure-I

From To
Thiru. G. Rengasamy. B.E.. M. Tech. The Law Officer, |

Member Secretary. The Central Pollution Control
Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board, Board, ;

32, Santhome High Road, Ministry of Environment &
MADRAS-600 004. Forest,

Government of India,
Parivesh Bhawan,
C.B.D.-cum-Office Complex,
East Arjun Nagar,
DELHI-110 032.

Letter No. TSII/23418/93/dt. 25.2.94.
Sir,
Sub: TNPC Board—The Water (P&CP)
Cess Act, 1977-Schedule-1
Hotels-Classification-Reg.

Ref: Your Letter No. Legal/98(3)91.
15100/dt. 30.11.93.

With reference to the letter cited, I am to furnish the following suggestion to scrap the
Schedule-I of the Cess Act.

The basic object of the Cess Act is to conserve the water resources, maintain and
restore its wholesomeness, Prevent and Control its pollution. Thus the ‘Cess Act is a
disincentive for the indiscriminate consumption of Water and Pollution thereon. As such, the
Cess Act should be applicable to every type of use of Water so that maximum economy in
its use is achieved. This can be done only by enlarging the scope of the Cess Act.

The Cess Act specifies the industries in Schedule-I appended to the Act which are liable
to pay cess. The types of industries have been specified and categorised in very wide terms.
The item No. (1) of the Schedule-I i.e., ‘Ferrous Metallurgical Industry’ covers all the
industries where the metals are separated from their ores, making and compounding alloys
and working or heat treating metals so as to give them certain desired shapes or properties.
But the industries are challenging its applicability under the umbrealla of some judicial
pronouncement where it has been declared that in Tax statutes the meaning of the words
should be construed in its popular sense rather than its wider dense or dictionery meaning.
Sugar Industry was alleging that sugarcane is not a vegetable (in its popular sense) and so, it
does not fall under item 15 of Schedule-I namely processing of ‘animal and vegetable
products industry’. Subsequently, the Cese Rules, were amended to read the item ‘15’ of
Schedule-I as ‘Processing of milk, meat, hides and skins, all agricultural products and their
wastes’ by which ‘sugar Industry’ comes under the purview of Cess Act.

Similarly, some large and medium scale industries have considerable labour strength
which consume large quantities of water for demestic purposes and they also consume large
quantities of water for industrial cooling, boiler feed, etc. But these industries are contesting
that they do not come under the provisions of Cess Act simply because the list of industries
furnished in Schedule-] does not cover their types of activity.


Thus the basic object of Cess Act namely Conservation of water resources fails. Hence
it is suggested that the Schedule-I which specifies industries which are liable to pay cess may
be scrapped. Instead, the industries consuming less than 100KL/Month for both domestic
and industrial purposes may be exempted since the overhead charges namely, stationery,
postage, etc. involved in the collection of meagre amounts of cess will be more than that of
the collections from these industries.

Hence I request you to take up above matter with the Ministry of Environment &
Forests, Government of India to scrap Schedule-I of the Cess Act. Meanwhile Hotels and
Restaurants, may be included in the Schedule-I since scrapping of schedule requires
amendment to the Cess Act.

Sd/—
for MEMBER SECRETARY

Annexure-II

Letter No. 12981/EC. 1/93-6
Environment and Forests Department
Fort St. George, Madras-9

Dated: 5.10.94

From
Thiru V. Manivanam, I.A.S.,
Secretary to Government

To

The Joint Secretary to Government of India,
Ministry of Environment and Forests,
Paryavaran Bhavan,

CGO Complex,

Lodi Road,
New Delhi-110 003. a
Sir,
Sub.:— Environment Control-Water Cess-Levy of Cess on water consumed by a

specified activity by local bodies — Preposals to revise the rate of Water
Cess — Assessment — Views — Communicated.

Ref.:— From the Joint Secretary to Government of India Ministry of Environment
and Forests D.O. Lr. No. Q/P!3LF 17011/2/93-CPW, dt. 13.4.93

I am directed to invite attention to the reference cited wherein the comments of this
Government on the Amendment to Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act,
1971 regarding the revision of cess structure proposed by the Government of India were
called for.

2. In this connection, I am directed to convey the following views of this Government in
this regard:—

According to existing provisions of Cess Act, it is envisaged, that different meters would


be fixed by industries and local authorities for each of the different uses specified in column
(1) of Schedule II. This however, was not being done and several industries though
consuming water for different purposes, were not paying the cess as per the rates prescribed
for that purpose. This led to an arbitrariness in determining that rates. The usage may be
distinguished between two categories namely domestic and non-domestic. Accordingly, the
following revised rate are suggested by this Government:—

Purpose for which water is consumed Maximum rate Maximum rate
under Sub-section under Sub-section
(2) of Section (3) (26) of Section (3)

Domestic Purposes Two Paise Three Paise
Kilo Litre Kilo Litre

Non-Domestic purposes including water used 5OP/K1 1 Rupees/KI

for cooling, process, Boilerfeed etc.

If however, it is decided to maintain the 40P & 80P/KI 807 & 160P/K1

difference between process (Pollutant degrad-
able) and process (Pollutant toxic) then the
difference in rates between these categories
must be more i.e., the pollutant (toxic) rates
must be atleast twice that of pollutant (degrad-
able).

Yours faithfully,

Sd/—
For SECRETARY TG GOVERNMENT


Annexure [I-A

From To

Thiru. G. Rengasamy. B.E., M. Tech., The Secretary to Government,
Member Secretary, Environment & Forests

Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board, Department,

32, Santhome High Road, Fort St. George,
MADRAS-600 004. MADRAS-600 009.

Letter No. TSI/13275/93, dated: 10.7.93.
Sir,
Sub.: Water Cess—Levy of cess on Water consumed by a specified activity by local
bodies—Proposals—Comments—Regarding.
Ref.: 1. Government of Tamil Nadu Lr. No. 12981/EC-1/93-1, dt. 29.4.93.
2. GOI Letter No. Q-17011/2/93-CPW/12981, dt. 19.4.93.

With reference to Government letter first cited, enclosing Government of India letter
second referred, wherein the schedule for revised cess has been enclosed calling for
comments, | am to furnish the following:—

According to existing provisions of Cess Act, it is envisaged that different meters would
be fixed by industries and local authorities for each of the different uses specified in column
(1) of schedule I. This however, was not being done and several industries, though
consuming water for different purposes, were not paying the cess as per the rates prescribed
for that purpose. This led to an arbitrariness in determining the rates. It is therefore
suggested to distinguish the usage only between two categories, namely, domestic and non-
domestic. This is justifiable since the cess is levied on water consumed and no extra cess is
leviable if water is recycled.

Hence it is suggested as follows:—

Purposes for which water is consumed Maximum Rate under Maximum Rate under
Sub-section (2) of Sub-section (2A) of
Section (3) Section (3)

Domestic Purposes Two Paise Three Paise
Kilo Litre Kilo Litre

Non-Domestic purposes including water used for 50P/KI 1 Rupees/KI

cooling, process, Boiler-feed ete.

If however, it is decided to maintain the difference 407 & 80P/KI 807 & 160P/KI

between process (Pollutant degradable) and process
(Pollutant toxic) then the difference in rates bet-
ween these categorics must be more i.c., the
pollutant (t ratcs must be atleast twice that of
pollutant (degradable).

Hence I am to request that a suitable reply may kindly be furnished to the Government
of India.

Yours faithfully,

Sd/—
For MEMBER SECRETARY.


Annexure-III
Details of Cess Collection

SI. Year Cess Fee
No. (Rupees in Lakhs)
1; 1992-93 145.73
2. 1993-94 204.31
3. 1994-95 278.83
4. 1995-96 679.23
(upto June, 95) (Target 300.00)

Reply to the Questionnaire received from the Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board,
Lucknow

1. (a) The Water Cess as provided for through the Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Cess Act, 1977 is the main source of revenue for performing various functions of
the Board, as there is no or sporadic state government funding for the Board.

(b) & (c) The Cess Act has made provisions for giving rebate to industries for
installation of effluent treatment plants and for regulating water consumption to specified
consumption rates. With this, certain industries have been forced to modify and change their
manufacturing process resulting in reduced water consumption on one hand and they have
also been prompted to install effluent treatment plants and maintain them satisfactorily on
the other.

Technology upgradation and recycling of water has been initiated for minimisation of
water consumption.

2. In Schedule-I those industries have been listed which are highly polluting and are at
the same time consuming large quantities of water.

3. Schedule-I could be deleted to check and prevent the excessive consumption of water
in the industries. It has been provided in the Act that all domestic consumption through
local bodies is liable to cess while domestic consumption in industries not in Schedule-I is
exempt from cess. Anomalies like this have to be removed. Self assessment procedures could
be introduced below decided slabs of water consumption while more rigorous assessment
procedures introduced for consumption beyond the slab.

4. Schedule-II could be simplified to amalgamate category III and IV. A suggested
bifurcation could be introducing an assessment procedure only for domestic and industrial
use. The BOD, COD ratios of untreated effluents could be fixed as relevant criteria for
different rates under industrial use.

5. Yes, levying the cess has proved to be effective in ensuring conservation of water
resource as well as promotion of installation of pollution control systems in the industries.

6. The criteria for deciding whether an industrial unit is to be assessed for cess should
be:
(i) Consumption of water
(ii) Type of water usage
(iii) Pollution load

7. The existing rebate procedure is a good pollution control incentive. However, further


reduction should not be encouraged as it would go against the “polluter pays” principle and
militate against the conservation of environment.

8. As such the Board is not facing any problem in collection of cess from the industries
which are covered in Schedule-I, but is facing problems in realising cess from local bodies,
because of their poor resource position. The Board to some extent, faces the shortage of
personnel for effective and meaningful follow up.

9. Local bodies have not really objected to payment of cess on principle but expressed
their inability to pay due to severe financial constraints. It is suggested that the State
Governments should make a specific provisions for water cess in the budget allocations to
the Urban Development Department, to be transferred to the State Board against the water
cess. Necessary allocations in this context could also form part of the devolutions of funds to
the local bodies from the Tenth Finance Commission and the State Finance Commission as a
follow up of the seventy fourth constitution amendment.

10. As per the existing formula:—

— 25 per cent of cess to be retained by Central Government for installation of sewage
treatment plants and adoption of clean technologies;

— 25 per cent of cess to be utilised by SPCB’s for sewage. treatment and adoption of
clean technologies;

— 25 per cent of cess to be utilised for pollution control programme as per decision of
State GovernmentState Board;

— 25 per cent of cess as incentive against achieving set targets (10 percent against 85
per cent target and additional one per cent against every one per cent increase
beyond 85 per cent target);

— The Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board has informed that the Ministry of
Environment and Forests has agreed to the following formula;

— Reimburse 80 per cent of cess to SPCB’s;
— Remaining 20 per cent of cess to be retained by Ministry.

The role of State Pollution Contro] Boards is very important. Therefore, it is essential
that these Boards are strengthened through enhanced allocation/transfer of financial
resources. The Government of India enacted the Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution)
Cess Act, 1977. The sole purpose of its enactment was to augment the resources of the
Boards. The fact is, however, otherwise. The cess which is collected by the State Boards is
deposited with the Government of India, Ministry of Environment and they reimburse only
a very small portion to the State Boards. The paucity of funds with the State Boards
contributes towards their not being fully capable of controlling the pollution effectively.
Therefore, the cess which is being collected by the State Boards should be allowed to be
retained by the State Boards to defray the expenditures required for employing the staff,
laboratory and equipment and other overheads.

11. The State Pollution Control Board is utilising its cess receipts for performing the


regulatory functions entrusted to the Board for Pollution Control in the State as well as
protection of Environment specifically with relation to:

— Water quality monitoring

— Noise level monitoring

— Consent compliance

— Inventorisation of industries

— Legal cases and related expenses etc.

— Apart from the above the Board is also spending its resources on modernisation and
upgradation of Board’s infrastructure.

12. At present no financial assistance is being provided by State Government to State
Pollution Control Board on a regular basis. However an amount of Rs. 10 lac for 1992-93,
Rs. 41.25 lac for 1993-94, Rs. 90.00 lac for 1994-95 has been sanctioned as State
Government counterpart funding under the World Bank Scheme on Industrial Pollution
Control. The present budgeted annual expenditure of the Board is about Rs. 5 crore. With a
major proportion of cess reimbursement coming from arrears, the cess collections would
come down after some time. Therefore, it is suggested that the State Governments may
provide funds as provided in the Act.

13. The principle ‘polluter pays” could be applied in the case of levy of cess by
adopting the following policy:

(a) Industries having pollution control equipment and achieving Board’s standards may
be required to pay cess at lower rate

(b) Industries having no pollution control equipment and not achieving Board’s
standard may be required to pay cess at higher rates.

(c) Industries having pollution control equipment and achieving Board’s standard as
well as adopting measures for minimising the use of water may be given further rebates.

14. There is no significant pollution and wastage of water from hydel power plants. But
in long terms it causes degradation by silting as well as results in reduction of wholesomeness
of water quality because of blockage of natural flow of water downstream. This cess could
also be treated in the nature of a royalty to be paid by the industry (the private user) for
drawing upon the nation’s natural resources for which the industrial user would otherwise
pay only for the water consumed.

15. Cess on domestic consumption is levied through local bodies. A separate levy,
amounting to double taxation on domestic consumers, would be counter productive and
unnecessary.

16. In financial year 1994-95 the Board has collected Rs. 12.69 crore out of which Rs.
7.5 crore is cess through arrears. It is estimated that after this proposed amendment the
Board would be in a position to realise the cess to an extent of Rs. 17.00 crore.

17. If the use of water for domestic purpose is included in category-I it would be a
deterrant to the water conservation strategies (because of reduction of rates) and
consequently, the total sewage discharge could also be affected.

18. Assessments under section 3.2(4) of the Act of 1977 are applicable to those units
which fail to achieve the standards of State Boards and also do not comply with the


provisions of standards prescribed under the E.P. Act, 1986. Since fiscal penalties have been
imposed under cess Act and rules, section 3 sub-section 2(A) of Cess Act does not apply to
default in payment.

Reply to the Questionnaire received from the West Bengal Pollution Control Board, Calcutta.

1. (a) It has been possible to augment the resource of the State Pollution Control Board
considerably from water cess collection. The amount of cess collected during 1994-95 has
been Rs. 2,05,48.82

(b) The revenue from the cess is being used for aiding voluntary organisations for
awareness about the provision of the Act, and create consciousness about prevention of
pollution among common people. Projects on generation & monitoring of pollution, both air
and water are being undertaken.

(c) Industrial units and commercial house are gradually becoming conscious of the need
for conservation of water due to the cess, apart from other reasons.

2. Schedule I may be deleted. Any industry liable to obtain water consent may be
required to pay water cess. This principle should include also non-industrial, auusStatutory
bodies having the responsibility of supplyingconsuming water from any sources.

3. As in item 2 above.

4. Schedule Il may be simplified by redefining the purposes as (i) Domestic (ii)
Industrial Cooling & (iii) Industrial Process consumption. These would require a restructur-
ing of rates.

5. The existing rates are not fully commensurate with the prescribed objectives. Upward
revision of water rates for Industrial Cooling & process purposes may force industries to
reduce avoidable consumption and accelerate the pace of generation of awareness for
minimising consumption.

6. Reply already given in item No. 2.
7. No modification is recommended.

8. Present mode of recoveries from defaulters through the P.D.R. Act is time
consuming process (vide Sec. 12 of Water Cess Act, 1977). It is recommended that provision
be made by amending Section 12 so that realisation of arrear cess can be effected in the
same manner as in the case of realisation of Income Tax.

9. Municipalities are unable to pay cess for paucity of resources. For such bodies,
concessional rates may be prescribed.

10. The present Scheme of redistribution of cess is that a State Board would get 80% of
the total collection out of which 40% would be against specific projects and remaining 40%,
as lump share. This Board has earlier recommended that 70% should be disbursed to a State
Board as a lump share & 10% against specific project. Boards should have the discretion to
spend money on projects out of the 70% disbursement also if so required. This scheme
would reduce dependence on State Govt. for both plan and non-plan expenditure.

11. West Bengal State Pollution Control Board has been disbursing the cess money to
voluntary agencies to create awareness among the people and by holding exhibition in fairs
during festivals and other projects relating to environment monitoring. The


money is also used for organising campaigns on special days like World Environment Day,
the Earth Day, etc.

12. For last 3 years the following allocation is received from the State Govt:

|, ५: 737 LESTE IST 1 Fr a el

Year Plan Non-Plan
Rs. Rs.
1992-93 10,52,400 20 lakh
1993-94 6,70,000 40 lakh
1994-95 35,85,400 55 lakh

13. Polluting industries are not entitled to rebate. This practice may continue.

14. This Board does not recommend imposition of Water Cess on Hydel Power
Generation.

15. In replies given in items Nos. 2 & 9 we have recommended concessional rate for
domestic purposes only. Though collect on from big domestic consumer like Housing
Complexes, Multi-storyed Flats, etc. exploiting underground water sources would be
justified, existing machinery of any of the Board would not be adequate for actual
realisation.

16. Total collection figures are as under:-

1992-93 ... Rs. 49.79 lakh
1993-94 ... Rs. 149.55 lakh -
1994-95 ... Rs. 205.48 lakh

It is expected that inclusion of all categories of water consuming industries would
further augment cess realisation.

17. We have recommended retention of domestic category with a concessional rate for
Municipal bodies/Local Self Govt.

18. We do not fully support the proposal. There are actually two penalties for being a
defaulter. We recommend imposition of interest on the defaulted amount without any
upward revision of rate.


मु APPENDIX-IV
Reply to the Questionnaire received from the State Government of Orissa

1. (a) Share from cess has considerably augmented the resources of the State Pollution
Control Board. About 30-40% of the State Board’s budget is met from cess collections.

(b) Its contribution is substantial.

(c) It discourages indiscriminate consumption of water.

2. It concerns Ministry of Environment & Forests.

3. Schedule I should continue, with the inclusion of aquaculture.
4. Schedule-II may continue with minor modification:-

जय schedule-II against item No. 1 the following may be substituted “Industrial Cooling,
Spraying in mine pits and hullage road, boiler feeds and potable water supply inside the factory
premises for employees and workers.”

5. No.

6. The criteria should be:

(i) quantity of water consimption

(ii) quality of effluent discharge

7. Existing procedure should continue. But, as indicated against item No. 13, rebate to the
industries with fullfledged ETP and effluent meeting the prescribed standards, should be

enhanced.
8. Yes, difficulty is encountered for collection of cess from Urban Local Bodies/NACs.

9. In this state, water supply to Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) are executed and maintained
by Public Health Engineering Organisation (PHEO) which comes under Housing & Urban
Development Department, Government of Orissa. The ULBs are indicating that since PHEO is
maintaining the collecting water tax from the consumer, they may be asked to pay the cess dues.
Some of the ULBs have intimated that they may be exempted from payment of cess due to
financial constraint.

10. The present formula for redistribution is as follows:

(1) Central Pollution Control Board 20%
(2) State Pollution Control Board 40%
(3) State Pollution Control Board against specific project/

scheme duly approved. 40%

11. Effluent quality monitoring and related activities.

12. Besides cess proceeds, state Government are providing assistance under plan and non-
plan head which is utilised to meet a part of the Salary Component.

13. Leavying of cess should be made in such a manner that a polluter not conforming to the
prescribed standards of effluent discharge pays cess substantially more than others. In other
words, the difference in the cess paid by a polluting industry and a non-polluting one should be
made large enough to make non-compliance to the regulations significantly less economical.


14. Since hydel power generation unit neither causes pollution nor involves indiscrimi-
nate use of water, levy of cess may not be justified.

15. Domestic consumers are presently covered through agencies responsible for man-
agement and supply of water. Therefore, collection of cess from individual consumers may
not be necessary.

16. In the Year 1994-95 the total amount of cess collected is Rs. 91.50 lakhs. The
anticipated collection after proposed amendment is estimated at Rs. 226.07 lakhs.

17. On this point, views indicated against item No. 4 may be referred to.

18 Sub-section (2A) of Section-3 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
Cess Act, 1977 does not apply to those industrial Units who are defaulters of payment of
cess levied on them. Presently default of payment is being taken care of by the provisions
under Section-10 of Cess Act, 1977.

Reply to the Questionnaire received from the State Government of Punjab
Answers

1. (a) State Govt. has not given any grant-in-aid under non plan to the Board since
1987-88. With the Water Cess Share being received, the board is not able to discharge its
functions as enshrined in the Water (Prevention & Control of pollution) Act 1974, Air
(Prevention and Control of pollution) Act, 1981 Environment (protection) Act, 1986 etc.
Only 30 to 40 percent of the work is being accomplished.

(b) The present provisions of water (prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act,
1977 has been partially able to achieve its objectives in terms of prevention and control of
pollution due to the following reasons:

(i) The amount of cess is not enough to provide for the expenditure for sufficient
number of technical officers and lab. equipment and other infrastructure required
for monitoring and consent management. The State Govt. is not normally giving
any grant under non plan. In view of this the State board has not been able to do
full justice in the consent management as well as in the monitoring system. Only
partial work is being done. Files in respect of 50% polluting industries have been
opened so far.

(ii) The amount of rebate available to an industry in case the industry takes measures
to provide adequate Effluent Treatment Plant/Air Pollution Control Device is not
industry to invest in the treatment plants. Following chart will give an over-view
in terms of operational cost Vs the rebate available in the case:—

Amount of rebate in cess
in case prescribed standard
Type of industry Operation met with

cost of (Rs./KL)
ee ae
Treatment. @ present @ proposed

(Rs./KL) cess rates (3 times rates)
(1) Sugar Industry Rs. 2.00 0.035 0.105
(2) Distilleries Rs. 1.25 0.07 0.210
(3) Steel Rolling mills Rs. 0.02 0.02 0.06
(4) Pulp & Paper Industry (Waste paper Rs. 0.560 0.09 0.27

based)



(5) Pulp & Paper Industry (Agro Waste based)Rs. 1.79 0.89 2.68
(6) Fertilizer Industry Rs. 1.04 0.16 0.48
(7) Dyeing Industries Rs. 2.5 0.05 0.15

(c) At present except in case of thermal and one or two large water consuming
industries, the water Cess rates are not deterrent enough to persuade the industrialists to
save in the use of water by employing improved technology or recirculation method. The
effect of cess in this direction at present rates is about 10-20%.

2. There is no justification for converting the cess Act into one of the tax collecting
device for the Government or the Board. Only major polluting industries should be enlisted
and there is no justification to enlarge the list to take into account each and every industry
even if a minimum limited consumption of water is prescribed. The Board is of the view that
the cess collection should not be construed as one of the Excise and Taxation type of
Department.

3. As stated against Question No 2 above.
4, Following difficulties are being experienced in the administration of Schedule-II:

(i) The definition of “Easily Biodegradable” and “not Easily Biodegradable” is not a
sharpline of division and no such scientific/commercial definition exists and in such cases
often large amount of disputes are arising.

(ii) The rates prescribed are one for having adequate treatment plants and other for not
having. Thus a highly polluting industry is bracketed with a very low level industry which is
not fair justification of penal rates. It is proposed that a third type of rates with very stiff
penalty should be provided for on the basis of polluting load.

S.sNes.

6. As indicated above only such units which are highly polluting should be assessed for
cess and it is particularly mentioned that in Hydel project the water only once passes
through the turbine and is not polluting and should/cannot be assessed.

7. Yes. The present provision as described in Section 7 read with section 3 is not
properly understood and is not transparent. What we understand is that in all there are three
type of categories instead of two as enlisted in Schedule-II. The three categories understood
are as below:—

(i) Those industries/local ‘bodies which are covered under Cess Act and have to pay the
eess but are not polluting at all. These are to be charged the rate under Col. 2 of Schedule-
II less 25% rabate. Also such'industries/ocal bodies which are consuming and polluting the
water but have installed ETPs to achieve the prescribed standards and have also obtained
consent under section 25 of the Water Act, 1974 and are not consuming water in excess than
the prescribed limits.

(ii) There is another type of category of industries/local bodies which are covered under
Cess Act and are consuming water and polluting the same but have provided adequate
treatment plant and are achieving standards but have not obtained consent under section 25
or the industry is using water in excess of the prescribed limit.

(iii) Such industries/local bodies which are covered under Cess Act and are polluting
and not achieving the prescribed standards. It is therefore, proposed that simplified form
should be provided for giving rebate of 25% or it should be abolished and adjusted in Col: 2


because at present the rates provided in Col: 2 of Schedule-II are not at all being levied
without giving a rebate.

8. Some of the departments of the State Govt. Central Government Railway
Authorities, Automous Boards other than local bodies are supplying water to the residents
colonies but are not paying water cess on technical grounds such as not duty bound to supply
water. A clear provision in this regard is required to be made in the Water Cess Act for
payment of cess even by all the Govt. Semi Govt. departments supplying water.

In case a local body does not pay the cess prosecution case cannot be launched in the
Court because under rules permission to prosecute a public servant is required from the
Government which is not made available in any case.

9. Municipal Committees in the State are paying Water Cess regularly. However, some
of the industries consuming water are contesting that they are not covered in 15 categories of
industries specified in Schedule-II of Act. Hydel power units strongly refuse to be covered
by the Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Cess Act 1977 because they are neither
polluting water receiving body nor consuming it. Similarly the Thermal power units which
are using large amount of water for once through system of cooling demand that the rate
may be reduced considerably because its nature and amount of pollution is very nominal.

10. Under the present system of distribution of cess to the State Pollution Control
Boards, whole of the Cess collected is required to be sent to the Govt. of India and
thereafter the Central Govt. releases 80% of the Cess to. the State Boards. This system is
cumbersome and delay the release of cess share required by the Board for implementation
of pollution control activities. Therefore, it needs modification that the State Board may
deposit to Govt. of India only 20% of Cess collected by the Board and retain 80% with
them.

11. As already stated against question No. 1

12. The State Govt. has not been giving any grant-in-aid under non plan to the Board
since 1987-88 and the Board is totally dependent upon the amount of Cess collected and the
Cess Share received by it.

13. The present rate of cess structure is not entirely based on “polluter pays theory”
because equivalent rate is charged from a unit which is highly polluting the same quantity of
water as compared to a unit which is slightly polluting the water. This is an unfair
application of finality and needs to be charged. It is proposed that different rates of cess
should be applicable on the basis of pollution load as well as quantity instead of only on
water quantity.

Similarly large number of polluters are polluting the air which in turn pollutes the water
through precipitation. It is therefore, necessary that such polluters-are roped to pay cess on
pollution load basis.

14. There is no justification to levy Cess on water being passed through hydel Projects.
It has been proved beyond doubt that the water once passed through the Hydel Project does
not pollute the neither it is being consumed in any sense of any definition. The very
proposal to charge water cess on Hydel Power smacks on illogicity and cannot stand the test
of review in legal courts and it should therefore be deleted. ‘

15. Clean water is precious resource and is depleting very fastly due to industrialisation
the conservation is therefore necessary. It is, therefore, proposed that the domestic
consumer be equitably charged through the supplier of water as in case of local bodies.


16. Board collected water cess amounting to Rs. 368.00 lacs during 1994-95 and
anticipated collection after the proposed amendment will be Rs. 1100 lacs except from Hydel
Units.

17. There will be no difference if the use of water for domestic purposes is included in
category I of Schedule-II or it is kept as a separate category so long the rates are same for
both.

18. Sub section (2A) of Section 3 of Cess Act, 1977 applies to those industrial units who
fails to comply with the provisions of section ‘25’ of Water Act, 1974 or any of the standards
laid down under the Environment Protection Act, 1986 and not to those industrial units who
defaults in payment of cess levied on them. A deterent provision is require to be made in
the Act for such defaulting units.


APPENDIX-V

List of Witnesses who tendered Oral Evidence before the Committee

Sl. Name of witness Date of
No. hearing
le Sh. N.R. Krishnan, Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests 17.7,95
2 Sh. D.K. Biswas, Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board 17.7.95
18.7.95
3. Sh. K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Environment and 18.7.95
Forests
4. Representatives of Confederation of Indian Industry: 27.7.95
(i) Shri K.P. Nyati, Head, Environmental Management Division, CII
(ii) Shri T.K. Dhar, General Manager, (Environment Management),
NTPC Ltd.
(iii) Shri Deepak Roy, Deputy Director, CII
Ss Dr. Y.R. Singh, Executive Director, Alkali Manufacturers’ Associa- 27.7.95
tion of India, New Delhi
6. Shri Ajit Nimbalkar, Chairman, Maharashtra State Pollution Control 27.7.95
Board, Bombay.
ie Shri D.K. Bose, Chairman, West Bengal Pollution Control Board, 28.7.95
Calcutta.
8. Shri P. Shankar, Chairman, Tamil Nadu State Pollution Control 28.7.95
Board, Madras.
9. Representatives of Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board, Lucknow. 28.7.95
(i) Shri N.C. Bajpei, Chairman
(ii) Shri C.S. Bhatt, Member Secretary
10. Shri B. Ramaiah, Environmental Officer, Karnataka State Pollution 28.7.95
Control Board, Bangalore.
11. Dr. Daljit Singh, Department of Chemical Engineering, Punjab 28.7.95

University, Chandigarh.



APPENDIX-VI

List giving mames and other relevant details of individuals/institutions from whom
Memoranda/views were received on the Water (Prevention Control of Pollution) Cess
(Amendment) Bill, 1995.

SI. Name of individuals/institutions Remarks Place
No.
Ll. Shri Dinesh Kumar Sharma, District Coor- Memorandum Rishikesh
dinator, Ganga Project received in Uttar Pradesh
Hindi
2. | Major (Dr.) B.K. Chatterjee in English New Delhi
3, Shri N. Das in English Ghaziabad,
Uttar Pradesh
4. Shri R.K. Shah, Project Coordinator in English Ahmedabad,
Ahmedabad Textile Industry’s Research Gujarat
Association
5. Shri Krishan Dixit, Vishva Bharti Paryava- in Hindi Kanpur,
ran Sansthan Uttar Pradesh
6. Shri Savaiyanath Seva Trust in Hindi Sabarkanath,
Gujarat
qs Shri Dayalbhai Lalubhai Vanakar in Hindi Nadiad, Khera
Gujarat
8. Shri Shambhu Dayal, Navaria in Hindi Sikandra, Dausa
, Rajasthan
9. Dr. Mohd. Mohsin in Hindi Farrukhabad,
Uttar Pradesh
10. Shri R.L. Dad, Concept chem in English Delhi
11. Shri Puneet Bhatnagar in English Jaipur,
Rajasthan
125 Shri N. Prakash Raju in English Hyderabad,
Andhra Pradesh
13. Shri Rajesh Kumar Bagda in English Jaipur,
Rajasthan
14. Shri Daljit Singh, Panjab University in English Chandigarh
Punjab
15. Dr. Kaza V, Rama Rao, in English Hyderabad,

Zoological Survey of India

Andhra Pradesh



Sl. Name of individuals/institutions Remarks Place
No.
16. Dr. Prawal Athaiya in English Jaipur,
Rajasthan
AT, Shri Maharadhi Karna in Telugu Warangal,
Andhra Pradesh
18. Shri Deepak Kumar in Gujarati Dahegam,
Gujarat
19: Shri Kashinath Goswami in Gujarati Poshina, S.K.N.
Gujarat
20. Dr. ४.२. Singh, Executive Director Alkali in English New Delhi
Manufacturers’ Association of India
21. Shri Vishnu Prasad Aniruddbhai in Hindi Viramgam,
Ahmedabad,
Gujarat
22% Prof. P.B. Vala, Muni. Arts & Science in Gujarati Mehsana,
College Gujarat
23; Shri A.H. Trivedi in English Umrala, Gujarat
24. Shri V.P. Sharma in Hindi Paonta Sahib,
Sirmur (H.P.)
25. Shri Sanjay K. Singh, President. Biosphere in English New Delhi
Sustenance Society of india
26. Shri V-R. Asrani, Advisor Long Range in English Khar, Bombay

Planning Systems



MINUTES



MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT—RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON _ SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS

Xi
THIRTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 29th June, 1995 in Committee Room
‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi

. Prof. M.G.K. Menon

. Shri N.Giri Prasad

. Shri Satchidananda

. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
. Dr. Ranbir Singh

LOK SABHA

8. Shri P.C. Chacko

9. Shri Jitendra Nath Das
10, Shri Sharad Dighe

11, Shri P. Kumarasamy

12. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
13. Shri Vijay Naval Patil,
14. Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
15. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
16. Shri K.G. Shivappa

17. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

18. Kumari Sushila Tiriya

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
2. Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
3. Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer

2. The Committee took up the Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Cess
(Amendment) Bill, 1995 for preliminary discussions and decided to invite views/suggestions
from the interested individuals/organisations/institutions on the Bill. The Committee also
decided to hear the concerned parties, if necessary, regarding their suggestions on the Bill.
The Committee accordingly directed the Secretariat to issue a Press Communique/
advertisement in the media inviting suggestions in the form of memoranda.

NAWERWN


56

3. The Committee. in order to facilitate detailed examination of the Bill under
reference, authorised its Chairman to constitute a Sub-Committee of the Committee
comprising the Chairman himself and three other Members to prepare a questionnaire on
the Bill.

4. The Committee decided to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests
as well as the Chairman. Central Pollution Control Board on the 17th and 18th July. 1995 in
connection with the aforesaid Bill.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.35 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on the 17th
July, 1995.


XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 17th July, 1995 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House. New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
Shri K. Rahman Khan
Prof. M.G.K. Menon
Shri Suresh Pachouri
Shri N. Giri Prasad

Shri Satchidananda

LOK SABHA

10, Shri Sharad Dighe

11. Shri Oscar Fernandes

12. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
13. Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
14, Shri Harpal Panwar

15. Shri Balraj Pasi ९5.&
16. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
17. Shri Rama Chandra Rath
18. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
19. Shri Harchand Singh

20. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
21. Shxj Bapusaheb Thite

SECRETARIAT

SO 9० 2 हुी tae? BO

1. Shri Satish Kumar, .Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

3. Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
4. Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS

Shri N.R. Krishnan, Secretary
Shri Vijai Sharma, Joint Secretary
Shri N. Bagchi, Adviser

Dr. Shyam Lal, Director

Dr. Rashid Hasan, Joint Director


REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CENTRAL POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD

Shri D.K. Biswas, Chairman

Dr. S.B. Chakrabarty, Member Secretary
Shri Ishwer Singh, Law Officer

Dr. A.B. Akolkar, Scientist

2. The Committee took up for consideration the Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 1995, referred to it by the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha, in consultation with the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha, for examination and report.
The Secretary of the Ministry of Environment and Forests at the outset gave a background
of the necessity for the Bill and enlightened the committee about its various provisions. The
Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board, also supplemented some of the points relating
to the Bill. Thereafter, the Members sought clarifications from them on various points
arising out of the submissions made by them. The Secretary of the Ministry and the
Chairman of the Central Pollution Control Board replied to the points raised by the
Members.

3. The discussion on the Bill remained inconclusive. A verbatim record of the
proceedings was kept.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.55 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday,
the 18th July, 1995.


XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 18th July, 1995 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi

. Shri K. Rahman Khan
Prof. M.G.K. Menon
. Shri Suresh Pachouri

» Shri N. Giri Prasad

. Shri Satchidananda

LOK SABHA

9. Shri E. Ahamed

10. Shri P.C. Chacko

11. Shri Sharad Dighe

12. Shri P. Kumarasamy
13. Shri Balraj Past

14. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
15. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
16. Shri Harchand Singh
17. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
18. Shri K.G. Shivappa
19. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar. Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.C. Joshi. Joint Director

3. Shri 0.0. Miglani. Under Secretary
4. Shri D.P. Ahuja. Committee Officer

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS

Shri K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary
Shri Vijai Sharma, Joint Secretary
Shri N. Bagchi, Adviser

Dr. Shyam Lal, Director

Dr. Rashid Hasan, Joint Director

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CENTRAL POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD

Shri D.K. Biswas, Chairman

Dr. S.P. Chakraborty, Member Secretary
Shri Ishwer Singh, Law Officer

Dr. A.B. Akolkar, Scientist

9० 53 9 ७ + (० ७


2. The Committee took up for further consideration the Water (Prevention and Control
of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 1995. The representatives of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests replied to the clarifications sought by the Members on the
provisions of the Bill. Thereafter, the Chairman and other representatives of the Central
Pollution Control Board explained some aspects relating to the collection of cess and
clarified the position with regard to certain points raised by the Members.

sion on the Bill remained inconclusive. A verbatim record of the
proceedings was kept.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.25 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday,
the 27th July, 1995.


XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 27th July, 1995 in Committee Room
‘D’. Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

1. Syed Sibtey Razi—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
Shri K. Rahman Khan

. Shri Suresh Pachouri
Shri N. Giri Prasad

. Shri Satchidananda

. Dr. Ranbir Singh

LOK SABHA

SIDALWN

9. Shri Oscar Fernandes

10. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale

11. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
12. Shri Harchand Singh

13. Shri Ram Prasad Singh

14, Shri Bapusaheb Thite

15. Kumari Frida Topno

16. Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

3. Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary

4. Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer
5. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS

Shri K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary
Shri Vijai Sharma, Joint Secretary
Dr. Rashid Hasan, Joint Director

REPRESENTATIVE OF THE CENTRAL POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD
Dr. S.P. Chakraborty. Member Secretary

WITNESSES

(1) Representatives of Indian Industry

(i) Confederation of Indian Industry
Shri K.P. Nyati, Head, Environmental Management Division, CII.

61


Shri 1.1. Dhar, General Manager (Environment Management), NIPC Ltd.
Shri Deepak Roy. Deputy Director, CII

(ii) Alkali Manufacturers’ Association of India, New Delhi
Dr. Y.R. Singh. Executive Director

(2) Representative of Maharashtra State Pollution Control Board
Shri Ajit Nimbalkar, Chairman

2. The Committee considered its future programme and decided to undertake study
visits in two groups comprising about 10 Members each in the month of September, 1995 to
acquaint itself with the progress of various projects undertaken by the respective institutions
within the administrative control of the Ministry/Departments falling within the purview of
the Committee located at Bombay, Madras, Calcutta, Ahmedabad, Trivandrum, Port Blair
and Panaji (Goa). The Committee also decided to cover Lakshadweep during these
proposed visits to examine performance and activities of the DOD scientists undertaken on
board Sagar Kanya. The Committee authorised its Chairman to constitute the groups and
seek permission of the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for the proposed study visits
accordingly.

3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for further consideration the Water (Prevention
and Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 1995 and heard the representatives of the
Confederation of Indian Industry, Chairman, Maharashtra State Pollution Control Board
and Dr. Y.R. Singh, Executive Director, Alkali Manufacturers’ Association of India, New
Delhi on various aspects concerning the Bill. The Members also sought clarifications from
them on various points arising out of the submissions made by them.

4. After the witnesses withdrew, the Chairman informed the Members that it was
proposed to invite amendments from them on the aforesaid Bill and accordingly such of the
Members as were interested in giving any amendment (s) should furnish the same to the
Secretariat latest by 6.00 p.m. on August 2, 1995.

5. The discussion on the Bill remained inconclusive. A verbatim record of the
proceedings was kept. \

6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.20 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. था Friday,
the 28th July, 1995.


XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. to 1.05 p.m. and again from 3.00 p.m. to 3.50 p.m.
on Friday, the 28th July, 1995 in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New
Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi —Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
3. Shri Suresh Pachouri
4. Shri N. Giri Prasad
5. Shri Satchidananda
6. Dr. Ranbir Singh

LOK SABHA

*7. Shri Oscar Fernandes

8. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale

9. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
10. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma

11. Shri Harchand Singh

12. Shri Ram Prasad Singh

13. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

14. Kumari Frida Topno

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

3. Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary

4. Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer

5. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS

Shri Vijai Sharma, Joint Secretary
Dr. Rashid Hasan, Joint Director

WITNESSES
(i) Shri D.K. Bose. Chairman, West Bengal State Pollution Control Board
(ii) Shri’ P. Shankar. Chairman, Tamil Nadu State Pollutjon Control -Board

(iii) Dr. Daljit Singh. Department of Chemical Engineering, Panjab University,
Chandigarh.

*In the Chair at 3.00 p.m.

63


(iv) Shri N.C. Bajpai. Chairman, Uttar Pradesh State Pollution Control Board
Shri C.S. Bhatt. Member Secretary, Uttar Pradesh State Pollution Control Board

(v) Shri 8. Ramaiah. Environmental Officer, Karnataka State Pollution Control Board.

2. The Committee took up further consideration of the Water (Prevention and Control
of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 1995. In its sitting spread over forenoon and afternoon
sessions the Committee heard the Chairmen of the State Pollution Control Boards of West
Bengal, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh, Environmental Officer, Karnataka State Pollution
Control Board and Dr. Daljit Singh of Panjab University of various aspects relating to the
Bill. The clarifications sought by the members on various points arising out of the
presentations made by them were duly responded.

3. The discussion on the Bill ‘remained inconclusive. A verbatim record of the
proceedings was kept.

4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.50 p.m.


XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 9.30 a.m. on Thursday, the 17th August, 1995 in Room No.62,
Parliament House. New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi ——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri Satchidananda

4. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
5. Dr. Ranbir Singh

LOK SABHA

6. Shri Jitendra Nath Das

7. Shri Sharad Dighe

8. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale

9. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee

10. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
11, Shrimati Vasundhra Raje

12. Shri Harchand Singh

13. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

14. Kumari Frida Topno

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar. Joint Secretary

. Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

Shri G.C. Miglani. Under Secretary
D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer

. Shri Jagdish Kumar. Committee Officer

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS

Shri N.R. Krishnan. Secretary

Shri K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary
Shri Vijai Sharma, Joint Secretary
Dr. Rashid Hasan, Joint Director

REPRESENTATIVE OF THE CENTRAL POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD
Shri D.K. Biswas, Chairman

ARNE

Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs (Legislative Department)

Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary
Shri Z.S. Negi, Additional Legislative Counsel


2. The Chairman asked the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests if he had
any further comments to offer on the amendments to the Bill. The Secretary clarified that he
had nothing more to add to the note on the amendments already submitted by the Ministry
to the Committee.

3. Thereafter, the Committee took up clause by clause consideration of the Water
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 1995 and the amendments
received thereto.

After some discussion, the following amendments to clause 2 were accepted:—

I. Item 1 in Col. 1 of Schedule-II : the words

‘and domestic purpose’ may be deleted in line 16 from item No. 1 in Col. 1;

II. The following may be added after item No. 1

‘2. Domestic purpose Two paise Three paise
per kilo litre _ per kilo litre’

IIL. In lines 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21 the present item Nos. 2 and 3, namely, ‘Processing

whereby water gets polluted and the pollutants are easily bio-degradable’ and

‘processing whereby water gets polluted and the pollutants are not easily bio-degradable

or are toxic or both’ may be renumbered as item Nos. 3 & 4.

IV. Item 4 of Schedule II:
Item 4 in lines 22, 23 and 24 which reads:

‘4’ Hydel power generation Ten paise per one Twent; paise per one
purpose hundred kilo litres hundred kilo litres’
may be dropped.

Clause 2, was adopted, as amended.

Clause 1, the enacting Formula, and the Title were adopted without any
amendments.

4. The Chairman directed the Additional Secretary and the Additional Legislative
Counsel of the Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs (Legislative Department)
Present at the meeting, to prepare a manuscript copy of the Bill incorporating therein
the amendments agreed to by the Committee and also to make consequential changes
in the Bill, if any.

5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

6. The Committee then adjourned at 10.10 a.m. to meet again at 9.30 a.m. on
Tuesday, the 22nd August, 1995 to adopt the draft Report and the Bill as amended by
the Committee.


xIx
NINETEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 9.30 a.m. on Tuesday, the 22nd August, 1995 in Room No. 67,
Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Dr. M. Aram

. Shri K. Rahman Khan
Dr. D. Masthan

. Shri Satchidananda

. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
. Dr. Ranbir Singh

LOK SABHA

8. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
9. Shri Jitendra Nath Das
10. Shri Sharad Dighe

11. Shri Oscar Fernandes

12. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
13. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
14. Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
15. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
16. Shri Harchand Singh

17. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
18. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

19. Kumari Frida Topno

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
3. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer

५० > ७ + ० ९७

2. The Chairman of the Committee welcomed Ds. 9. Masthan, a newly elected
Member nominated to the Committee, to the meeting.

3. The Committee, thereafter, considered and adopted the Water (Prevention and
Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 1995, as amended.

4. The Committee then considered its draft Twenty-ninth Report on the Bill and after
some discussion, adopted it without any changes.

5. The Chairman announced that the Minutes of Dissent by the Members, if any, may
be sent to Rajya Sabha Secretariat so as to reach them by 4.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 23rd
August, 1995.

67


7. The Committee also decided to lay a copy of the oral evidence tendered before it in
connection with the Bill. on the Table(s) of both the Houses of Parliament alongwith the
Report.

8. The Committee reviewed its programme of study visits to Ahmedabad, Bombay,
Panaji (Goa), Lakshadweep. Calcutta, Port Blair, Madras and Thiruvananthapuram, as
finalised in its meeting held on 27th July, 1995 and decided to cover Bhubaneshwar as well
in its itinerary. The Committee also decided to undertake these proposed visits from 12th to
23rd September, 1995.

9. The Committee then adjourned at 10.10 a.m.