18th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/18threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENTAND FORESTS (1995-96)
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1995-96) OF THE DEPARTMENT
                                                       OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
(DEMAND NO. 72)
 
(Presented on April 26, 1995)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
April, 1995/Vaisakha, 1917 (Saka)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONTENTS
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
2.INTRODUCTION
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
 4.SCHEDULE 
5.MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF COMMITTEE
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
 PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND  TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT
 AND
FORESTS (1995-96)
 
1.      Syed Sibtey Razi - Chairman
 
      RAJYA SABHA
 
2.      Dr. M. Aram
3.      Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
4.      Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
5.      Shri K. Rahman Khan
6.      Prof. M.G.K. Menon
7.      Shri Suresh Pachouri
8.      Shri N. Girl Prasad
9.      Shri Satchidananda
10.    Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
11.    Dr. Ranbir Singh
12.    Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
 
LOK SABHA
 
13.   Shri E. Ahamed
14.   Shri P.C. Chacko
15.   Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
16.   Shri Jitendra Nath Das
17.   Shri Sharad Dighe   
18.   Shrimati Saroj Dubey
19.   Shri Oscar Fernandes

18th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/18threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
20.   Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
21.   Shri P. Kumarasamy
22.   Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
23.   Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
24.   Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
25.   Shri Harpal Panwar
26.   Shri Balraj Pasi
27.   Shri Bhim Singh Patel
28.   Shri Chandresh Patel
29.   Shri Vijay Naval Patil
30.   Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
31.   Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
32.   Shri Rama Chandra Rath
33.   Shri M.G. Reddy
34.   Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
35.   Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
36.   Shri Harchand Singh
37.   Slui Ram Prasad Singh
38.   Shri K.G. Shivappa
39.   Shri Bapusaheb Thite
40.   Kumari Sushila Tiriya
41.   Kumari Frida Topno
42.   Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
            Shri N.C. Joshi,            Joint Director
            Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTRODUCTION
 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by
 the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, present the Eighteenth Report, on the Demands for Grants pertaining
 to the Department ofScience and Technology (Ministry of Science and Technology) for the year 1995-96 (Demand No.
 72).
 
2. In its meetings held on April 4 and 5, 1995 the Committee considered the Demands for Grants of the Department
 of Science and Technology on the basis of the documents made available to it and the submission made before it by the
 Secretary and the other representatives of the Department.
 
3. The Committee thanks the officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the Hon'ble
 Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of
 the Department of Science and Technology.
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on April 25, 1995.
 
New Delhi;
April 25, 1995.
SYED SIBTEY RAZI
Chairman
  Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
and Forests
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REPORT
 
            The Department of Science and Technology (DST) has been assigned nodal responsibilities for coordinating
 areas of science and technology in which a number of institutions and departments have interest and capabilities as also
 in regard to issues relating to administration, personnel, etc. in which all scientific departments and institutions have a
 common interest.  The Department has also been assigned specific responsibilities relating to meteorology and survey as
 also a number of autonomous institutions.
           

18th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/18threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
2. The Secretary, Department of Science and Technolo9gy, in his presentation before the Committee, gave an
 account of the thrust areas which the Department intends to take up during the year 1995-96, for which allocations were
 made in the budget for the year 1995-96 for DST. The Committee was informed that the Science and Engineering
 Research Council (SERC) is a mechanism for promoting research in inter-disciplinary and emerging areas of basic
 science and engineering in the country.  The Council has made an impact by initiating major research programmes over
 the years since it was set up two decades ago.  The Committee as told that while the ongoing programmes will continue
 to get support during the year 1995-96, activities in some other important areas of science and engineering would be
 initiated.  The Instrument Development programme of the Department aims at indigenous development of instruments. 
 Under this programme 16 new projects were sponsored during 1994-95.  Some technologies were also transferred to
 industries.  The Committee was also given an idea about the activities proposed under this programme for the year
 1995-96.  Under the programme Seismicity, the Secretary informed the Committee about the work being done in the
 area of Himalayan Seismicity and of the peninsular shield.  Under this programme during the year 1995-96 three digital
 telemetered seismic clusters are proposed to be set up in Kangra (HP), Pithoragarh (UP) and in Delhi.  After the Latur
 earthquake, DST formulated a project on seismology in the Deccan shield area, for which it is getting a World bank loan
 of US$ 7.5 million towards capital equipment.   Recurring and operational cost to the tune of about Rs. 14 crores are to
 be made by Government of India, the total cost of the project is to the tune of Rs. 39 crores.  The Department has also
 taken up technology projects in the mission mode on sugar technologies, advanced composites and fly ash utilization. 
 The Committee   was informed that the Department supports 13 autonomous institutions out of which four institutions,
 namely, the Bose Institute, Calcutta, Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore, Indian Association for the Cultivation
 of Sciences, Calcutta and Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram
 would be particularly supported for modernization during the year 1995-96.  As regards International Science and
 Technology programme, the Committee was informed about the programmes for cooperation with CIS countries, and
 several developed and developing countries.  The society-related programmes of the Department cover a number of
 important activities such as Science and Society Programmes, Assistance to the State Councils on Science and
 Technology, Science and Technology Communication and Popularisation, Science and Technology Entrepreneurship
 Development Programmes, Employment Generation and Natural Resources Data Management System (NRDMS). 
 Survey of India (SIO) which forms part of the Department intends to carry out during 1995-96 two-dimensional
 simulataneous adjustment of geodetic network of one quadrilateral.  It would also continue to generate post-earthquake
 studies in Latur and analyse them.   Phased conversion of analog plotting instruments with digital output is another area
 in which SOI is working. The Committee was also given an account of the digital cartographic work done by SOI.
 National Atlas and Thematic Mapping Organisation (NATMO) will bring out various types of maps which provide
 useful S&T inputs for planning developmental activities. It is trying to develop the new technology of reverse printing
 for NATMO maps on experimental basis. The India Meteorological Department (IMD) is making constant endeavours
 to modernise its facilities and to improve the quality of its service. The Committee was told that, under the extension
 programme of DisastEr Warning System (DWS) (Phase-III), 120 DWS receivers are under supply to cover more coastal
 areas. The plan concerning modernisation of seismological observatories has been taken up by IMD. The Committee
 was also given an account of the proposed programmes of IMD for the year 1995-96. National Centre for Medium
 Range Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF) is a multidisciplinary project for which DST has been taking parallel actions to
 develop infrastructural facilities and expert manpower to meet the specific and nationally urgent objectives of the
 project which, inter-alia include setting up of major infrastructural facilties like Supercomputer and Communication
 Network, development, preparation and dissemination of agrometeorological operational advisories, etc. One of the
 proposed programmes for NCMRWF for the year 1995-96 concerns operational issue of medium range weather forecast
 upto three days in 'advance:
 
3. After listening to the presentation made by the Secretary, DST, the Committee examined the budgetary allocation
 of the Department for the year 1995-96'. While considering the Demand~ for Grants of the Department, the Committee
 also got an opportunity to review the work of various projects and programmes which fall within the mandate of the
 Department.
 
4. The Committee had noted in its Twelfth Report the fact that the total Eighth Five Year Plan outlay made for the
 Department by the Planning Commission was kept at     Rs. 640.00 crores. Out of this amount the Department would
 have spent Rs. 563.80 crores till 1994-95. This would mean that the Department would actually be left with an outlay of
 Rs. 76.20 crores for the next two years of the Eighth Plan period. This allocation was hardly sufficient for the
 Department for running its various programmes and activities. The Committee, therefore, wanted to know the outcome
 of the mid-term appraisal of the Eighth Five Year Plan concerning the Department. The Committee was informed that,
 during the mid-term appraisal of the Eighth Five Year Plan in August 1994, DST projected to the Planning Commission
 an outlay of Rs. 1127 crores as against the approved outlay of Rs. 640 crores for the entire Plan period. The Planning
 Commission also recognised that the total requirement of the Department during the years 1995--97 would be to the
 tune of Rs. 521 crores, though the Department had actually projected the demand of Rs. 591 crores for this period. The
 Planning Commission was of the view that the plan outlay for DST for the remaining two years could be finalised at the
 time of formulation of the Annual Plans. As against demand of Rs. 521 crores agreed to by the Planning Commission

18th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/18threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
 for the years 1995--97, for the year 1995-96 the budget estimates of DST have been placed at Rs. 240 crores though the
 Department had actually demanded a sum of Rs. 299.12 crores.
 
4.1 The Committee is of the view that the Planning Commission may consider recommending a sum of Rs. 521
 crores to DST for 1995--97 which it had already agreed and the Department may, if possible, try to get some more
 money during this year while preferring revised estimates.
 
4.2 The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the fact that the Plan allocation for DST has been gradually
 increasing over the years, but in order to increase this allocation in real terms, care has to be taken to neutralise the
 effect of inflationary trends which reduce the actual value of allocation. DST is playing an important role in the
 promotion of science and technology in the country. Services rendered by SO1, NATMO and IMD are valuable. There
 are also many important autonomous institutions which are supported by DST. The Committee, therefore, feels that
 realistic allocation may be made for the Department for the remaining Eighth Plan period.
 
5. In its Twelfth Report the Committee had noted last year that the Department could not utilise its plan funds fully
 and there was excess utilisation on the non-plan side. It was explained to the Committee then that the savings of the plan
 components was mainly due to non-procurement of equipment, and delay in construction activities particularly with
 regard to the building plan of NCMRWF. The Committee was told that this year the revised building plan of NCMRWF
 has been approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). The two revisions of office and residential complex
 for NCMRWF had resulted in a reduction of the building cost from Rs. 27 crores to Rs. 12.14 crores. The approval of
 the Government was obtained in January, 1995 for the construction of office and residential complex for NCMRWF at
 NOIDA. The contract for the construction of residential complex has been awarded° and it is expected that the
 construction work will start from May, 1995.
 
5.1 On a specific query from the Committee about any surrenders this year from the plan funds, the Committee was
 informed that this year the gap between the allocations made and their utilisation would be very marginal. As against the
 revised estimates of Rs. 213.95 crores of the Department for the year 1994-95 the likely expenditure of the Department
 would be Rs. 213.78 crores. Therefore, the under-utilisation would come to about Rs'. 17 lakhs.
 
5.2 The Committee is glad that in the year 1994.95 the Department could utilise the plan funds allocated to it almost
 fully; this has been possible by permissible reallocation from one plan head to another; accordingly, there are plan
 allocations for specific programmes, e.g., drug design and development that have remained underutilised. The
 Committee hopes that the trend to utilise fully the allocated plan funds would be maintained in the coming years and
 more specifically as earmarked.
 
6. The Committee wanted to know the reasons for the wide gap between the plan an€ non-plan allocation made for
 SOl for the year 1994-95, and the similar trend seen in the budget estimates for the year 1995-96. The Committee also
 wanted to know whether in the past any exercise was done to reduce the non-plan expenditure of SOl. To this, the
 Secretary, DST replied that SOl is a service organisation with assigned charter of duties such as topographic mapping,
 geodetic surveys, etc. The staff for this work is supported under non-plan component. Plan budget is allocated for
 specific new projects and for its modernisation plans. This component, therefore, is small compared to the regular non-
plan activities of SOI. He also informed the Committee that in 1990, SOl fixed staffing norms and field squad strength
 norms for its topographic operations to reduce the non-plan expenditure. Further measures to reduce non-plan
 expenditure were taken such as 10% cut in staff strength and curtailment in office expenses and other austerity
 measures.
 
6.1 The Committee realises the fact/hat SOl is a very old service organ|sation; and, therefore, its non-plan
 expenditure is bound to be higher compared to the plan expenditure. The Committee, however, expresses its concern
 over the continuous rise in the non-plan expenditure of SOI despite the fact that modern tools and technologies of
 survey are available. The Committee, therefore, recommends that DST should prepare a modernisation plan for the
 operations of SOI which should ultimately aim at sharpening the activities of SOI and reducing its non-plan
 expenditure.
 
7. To a specific question about strengthening SO1 to indigenously develop technologies for cadastral surveys and
 observations by fabricating suitable instruments, the Secretary, DST informed that SO1 in February 1992 undertook a
 pilot project in Angul-Nelco sub­division of Orissa for streamlining a procedure for modern cadastral survey. The
 technology of aerial photography is being used for such work for the first time. In order to apply digital mapping
 technology in cadastral survey work, the existing, analog photogrammetric instruments are to be converted into digital
 work stations. This technology of conversion has been developed and is being used in this pilot project. The project is
 still continuing.
 

18th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/18threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
7.1 The Committee hopes that soon final evaluation of the Project would be completed and the area of developing
 indigenous technologies for cadastrai survey would soon become the strength of SOI. The Committee also hopes that
 the conversion of analog to digital work stations would also be accorded priority by SOI.
 
8. The Committee also wanted to know the steps being taken by DST for bridging the gap between plan and non-plan
 expenditure of IMD. The Committee has, particularly, noticed that there is little increase in the expenditure on the plan
 side in the budget estimates for IMD for the year 1995-96, but on the non-plan side the allocations have been enhanced
 substantially. The Secretary informed the Committee that most of the activities of IMD are service-oriented, and are of a
 continuing nature. These activities are manpower intensive. There is, therefore, little scope for reduction of non-plan
 expenditure. However, over the years, he informed the Committee, that the plan expenditure of IMD is increasing at a
 faster rate compared to non-plan expenditure thus reducing the gap. Taking 1992-93 as the base year, while non-plan
 allocation in 1994-95 was 17.6% higher, on the plan side the allocation was higher by 25.8%. He also informed the
 Committee that development and improvement of seismological system of IMD is being supported to a significant
 extent through allocation from the World Bank/DST budget which was Rs. 3.95 crores during the year 1994-95.
 
8.1 The Committee noted the fact that with regard to SO1, NATMO and IMD the available budgetary figures
 indicates that there was under-utilisation of the allocated plan component, but on the non-plan side the expenditure
 exceeded the approved outlay. The Committee, therefore, feels that while DST should devise methods to curtail the
 growth of non-plan expenditure of these organisations, it should also be seen that the plan component of their budget is
 fully utilised, as this would indicate clearly that these organisations are engaged in promoting scientific activity
 concerning their area of operation.
 
9. In order to strengthen the capabilities for independent drug design and development through a multi-agency, multi-
institutional programme a sum of Rs. 10 crores was allocated to DST last year. The Committee wanted to know about
 the development under this project. The committee had also noticed that in the Budget Estimates for the year 1.995-96
 the allocation for this programme had been reduced to Rs. 6 crores. The Secretary, DST informed the Committee that
 there are two  Committees-one is an Expert  Committee at the operational level and the other is an Apex Executive
 Committee to steer the progress of the programme.   Experts from national laboratories, academic institutions, Planning
 Commission and the related government Departments from the Expert Committee. The Apex Executive Committee is
 headed by the Secretary, DST and representatives from DBT, CSIR and Planning Commission are on it. In both these
 Committees the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has been given representation.  DST had so far organized
 three ‘Interaction Meets’  at Delhi, Bombay and Hyderabad, in which representatives from pharmaceutical industries,
 financial institutions, national laboratories, etc. participated. These 'Interaction Meets' were organised in order to work
 out the modalities of funding. It has been decided to start collaborative research programmes in the areas of new drug
 discovery, innovative routes for development of generic drugs and intermediates, standardization of traditional
 medicinal formulations and Chiral synthesis of drugs. As regards reduced outlay for this programme in the current year's
 Budget, the Secretary informed that the lower allocation has been recommended by the Planning Commission keeping
 in view the new drug policy under which cess will be utilised for R&D purposes.
 
9.1 The Committee hopes that this programme of DST would help Indian drug industry to be more competitive in the
 world market. But this can come about only if much greater thrust and higher priority is given to this, The Committee
 notes that under the new intellectual property regime, the area of drugs and pharmaceuticals is one which will be
 affected most critically. This area calls for a determined and concerted thrust in terms of indigenous design and
 development. The amount allocated for this area appears to be quite insignificant. The progress on this programme has
 also been slow.
 
10. The Committee wanted to know the progress of the Mission Mode Project on Cyclone Warning and Seismic
 Observation which was formulated by DST during the year 1993-94. The Committee expressed its concern over the
 upgradation and modernisation of the existing seismological network. The Committee was told that Mission Mode
 Project on Cyclone Warning and Seismic Observation was allocated a sum of Rs. 1.85 crores in 1993-94. Assistance of
 the World Bank was secured in 1994-95. The total cost of this project is Rs. 39 crores, with the World Bank assistance
 of Rs. 25 crores (US $7.5 million). Rs. 14 crores would be provided by the Government of India. This is for the
 peninsular shield region. The total duration of the Project is three years and the Project has been formally launched.
 After the meeting of the International Advisory Committee in December, 1994, processing for procurement of
 equipment for upgrading 10 existing seismic observatories of IMD to Global Seismic Network (GSN) standards has
 been pursued. Global tenders for the purchase of the equipment have also been floated. The first batch of trainees will
 be deputed to USA by July 1995. The existing 20 observatories of IMD falling in the peninsular shield region are being
 taken up for up gradation under the World Bank assisted project. Out of the 20 observatories, 8 fall in the coastal region.
 These are at Calcutta, Visakhapatnam and Madras on the east coast, Bhuj, Bombay, Goa, Mangalore and Trivandrum in
 the west coast. In addition, one new observatory has been set up at Bhubaneswar in February 1995. While the
 seismological network for the shield region is being strengthened, for the Himalayan region a comprehensive plan for

18th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/18threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
 upgrading and strengthening of the network is being drawn up by IbiD. This plan would take into account the
 requirements of the Himalayan and contiguous regions. There is an increase in allocation from Rs. 1 crore in the
 Revised Estimates for the year 1994-95 to Rs. 4.2 crores in the Budget Estimates for the year 1995:96. The Committee
 had also learnt that the Department was projecting a request for an additional outlay of Rs. 18 crores for seismological
 activities in the Himalayan and contiguous regions for the remaining years of the Eighth Five Year Plan.
           
      10.1 The Committee is deeply conscious of the fact that the Himalayan region is seismically very active and likely to
 be highly hazard-prone. It requires a special plan for creating an efficient seismological network and upgrading the
 existing facilities available In the region. The Committee, therefore, feels that the demand of Rs. 18 crores for the years
 1995-97 appears to be reasonable. What Is important In all of this activity is not only the seismological network but a
 total plan for disaster mitigation; through proper zoning, building codes, strengthening of vulnerable points ( e.g.,
 telecom centres, hospitals, bridges, command structures, etc.).
 
11. As regards Technology Information, Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC), the Committee noted that in
 the Budget Estimates for the year 1995~96, the allocations have been reduced to Rs. 5.10 crores from Rs. 7.16 crores
 made last year. The Committee wanted to know the reasons for this. The Secretary informed the Committee that for
 TIFAC the plan allocation for 1994-95 was Rs. 7 crores with a non-plan component of Rs. 16 lakhs. The major
 component of this was meant for Home Grown Technologies (HGT). The Projects on CFC substitutes, CO based
 chemicals and vitamin A were initiated in 1992-93. In 1993-94, High energy rare earth permanent magnet, Flosolver,
 Cobalt recovery, high performance synthetic thickener for substitution of Kerosene in pigment printing and rapid
 diagnostics projects were initiated. Three more projects were initiated during the year 1994-95 which were concerning
 biofertilisers, membrance cell process for Chlor-alkali production and Denox and SO2 oxidization catalysts for pollution
 control. Taking into account the already approved projects under HGT and in view of the Fund for Technology
 Development to be cited, certain HGT projects in the pipeline were focussed on a few select areas. Hence certain
 reductions were made in the Revised Estimates for the year 1994-95 for TIFAC.
 
11.1 The Committee is of the view that TIFAC has a special role to play in providing technology assessment
, forecast
 and information. The Committee hopes that TIFAC would dedicate itself in a more intense manner to its specific
 mandate technology information forecasting and assessment, and have a special thrust relating to patents. The
 Committee noted the fact that a Patent Facility Cell has already been established in TIFAC. The Committee is, however,
 of the view that efforts of various agencies in the area of patenting are not adequate to meet the challenges. There is no
 major effort relating to creation of awareness and understanding relating to patents and the challenges and opportunities
 in this area; nor of training, particularly of patent attorneys. The newly developing area of intellectual property rights in
 the competitive global atmosphere of today calls for far greater concerted efforts than ongoing at present. There is,
 therefore, urgent need for DST to strengthen its efforts in this area. DST should coordinate its efforts with different
 science departments such as DSIR/CSIR, DBT, ICAR, ICMR and Ministries of Industry, Commerce and Law, as also
 technology generating efforts under science agencies of Government, the educational system and private and public
 sector industry. It was never intended for TIFAC to take on individual technology projects. This diverts its attention
 from it principal mandate which is of great current significance.
 
12. The Instrument Development Programme of DST is an important programme. It aims at indigenous development
 and production of instruments. In the budget estimates for the year 1995-96 there is a marginal increase of Rs. 50 lakh
 for this programme over the allocation made in the budget estimates for the year 1994-95. In its Twelfth Report the
 Committee had recommended strengthening the area of Instrument Development.
 
I2.1 The Committee was informed that DST has been promoting and supporting activities related to indigenous
 development of selected instruments for production in the country. This programme is promoted through (i) Instrument
 Development Programme, (ii) TIFAC-Central Scientific Instruments Organisation (CSIO) Joint Board, (iii) Instrument
 Development via SERC Projects & (iv) Instrument Development through DST Institutions. The R&D Instrument
 Advisory Council has identified four critical areas, namely, Analytical, Medical, Test and Measuring, Geo-Scientific
 and Agri-Electronics Instruments which would be supported for instrument development. Under the TIFAC-CSIO Joint
 Board, an updated directory of industries and institutions in the instrumentation area has been brought out. In addition, a
 major study with Strength Weaknesses Opportunities and Threats (SWOT) Analysis has been completed, Further,
 special market surveys and market studies have been conducted in a few selected areas. A number of industry-
institutions interactions have also taken place. These efforts are likely to result in a few major joint projects with
 industry. Through the SERC Programme, a number of projects have been supported involving specific
 instrument/equipment development. Some of the specific examples of successful development of instruments are
 computerised autoclave facility," fabrication of four circle single crystal X-ray diffractomer, infra-red photopolarimetry
 for astrophysical investigations and low energy invert photo emission spectrophotometer. Some of the DST funded
 autonomous institutions like the Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Indian Institute of
 Geomagnetism and Indian Institute of Astrophysics have also developed some sophisticated instruments.

18th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/18threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
 
12.2 The Committee has noted with satisfaction these developments in the area of instrument development and that,
 some of the autonomous institutions supported by DST have done good work in this area. The Committee hopes that
 while making allocations for the autonomous institutions supported by ])ST for their modernisation, in a phased manner
 and on a selective basis, due priority would be given to modernise such institutions as are capable of working in the area
 of instrument development. The Committee would like to stress that instruments are the backbone of modern scientific
 and technological developments. An attitude of confidence in being able to design and build ones instrumentation at the
 frontiers of current development is of the greatest importance for advanced research. It is also an area of challenge and
 opportunity to develop ones own intellectual property rights. In this context, the situation obtaining in India,based
 on'imported instruments and related technology is far from satisfactory. A national analysis of the situation and a
 carefully planned strategy for concerted action is called for.
 
13. In view of the liberalised economy and an all pervasive trend towards globalisation, the accreditation of testing
 and calibration activities have assumed importance. The Committee, therefore, wanted to know about the setting up of
 an autonomous body which would deal exclusively with accreditation of testing and calibration laboratories. The
 Secretary, DST informed the Committee that setting up of an autonomous body, the National Accreditation Board for
 Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) is linked with the formation of the National Quality Council. The
 Department has, however, strengthened this programme by developing documents, organising training courses and by
 promoting accreditation activities.
 
13.1 While the Committee appreciates the work done by DST in the area, it notes that the start of this activity goes
 back to a decade and a half ago, and that in the present competitive trade environment, there will be need for
 certification from a variety of angles e.g., quality, environment, etc. Such large scale certification would call for a large
 number of laboratories certified and accredited for this purpose. This is vital for our export drive. DST must, therefore,
 take urgent measures to coordinate its efforts with other Departments, institutions and laboratories to finalise quality
 manuals and the setting up of such a board and a chain of suitably accredited facilities.
 
14.The Department of Science and Technology is the nodal department dealing with the Science and Technology
 Policy of the country and all matters of management, administration, personnel policies, etc. of relevance to science and
 technology. The Committee, therefore, feels that it should be in a position to give an integrated picture of the scientific
 efforts in India.  The department should be in the know about various research programmes being conducted by other
 scientific departments and the R & D components of the Ministries/Departments of the Government which are not
 scientific per se. DST should be able to present a complete picture with regard to the scientific activities of the various
 Government departments, research institutions, universities etc., as a whole. Not only this, it should also be in a position
 to give an idea about the R & D component of private industry and its priorities. With the introduction of the new
 Industrial Policy and consequent liberalisation of the Indian Economy there is a possibility that the type of funding may
 lead to priority to R & D relating to industry and aspects that lead to immediate results. This may possibly give rise to
 reseach in pure or basic science being relegated to the background. This would be unfortunate for the progress of
 science in" the country. The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that DST may have to make concerted efforts to check
 the emergence of any such trend. The Committee is of the view that freedom and autonomy in the functioning of science
 departments is of vital importance. Bureaucratic approaches, in fact, hamper the progress of science. The Committee,
 therefore, recommends that DST should play an active role in ensuring that scientific activities are provided the
 environment in which they can flourish.
15. After considering the' Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology and assessing the progress
 of various important programmes aqd projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for
 Grants of Rs. 421.85 crores, as sought by the Department of Science and Technology for the year 1995-96, under
 Demand, No. 72, are in order and may be approved. 
New Delhi;    
April 25, 1995           
SYED SIBTEY RAZI
            Chairman,
Committee on Science and Technology
    Environment and Forests.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- MINUTES
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
 COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
            XXIX
            TWENTY NINTH MEETING
 
The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. to 1.35 p.m. and again from. 3.00 p.m. to 4.55 p.m. on Tuesday, the 4th April,

18th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/18threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
 1995 in Committee Room 'A' Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT      
 
1. Syed Sibtey Razi--Chairman
     
 
RAJYA SABHA
     
 
2. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
     
3. Prof. M.G.K. Menon      
4. Shri Suresh Pachouri      
5.ShriSatchidananda
 6. Dr. Ranbir Singh
 
     
LOK SABHA
 
     
7. Shri E. Ahamed      
8. Shri Sharad Dighe      
9. Shri Oscar Fernandcs      
10. Shri Harpal Panwar      
11. Shri Balraj Pasi      
12. Shri Vijay Naval Patil      
13. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik      
14. Shri Ram Prasad Singh      
15. Kumari Sushila Tiriya      
 
SECRETARIAT
 
     
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary      
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director      
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary      
Shri Dost mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
Shri jagdish kumar, Committee Officer
 
 
    
 
Representatives of the department of Science and Technology and some other Government Bodies/Organisations.
 
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Shri Y.S. Rajan, Advisor
Dr.U. Trivedi, Advisor
Dr. A.P. Kulshreshtha, Advisor
Dr. A.K. Chakraborty, Advisor
Shri S.B. Krishnan, JS &FA
Dr. R.K. Midha, Joint Advisor
Shri V.R. Aiyagari, Joint Advisor
Dr. Laxman Prasad, Joint Advisor
Dr. (Mrs.) Kamla Kumar, Joint Advisor
Maj. Gen. S.P.Mehta, Surveyor General of India
Dr. N. Sen Roy, DG, IMD
Dr. V.B. Kamble, Addional DG, IMD
Dr. S.K. Mishra, Director, NCMRWF
Smt. Meenakshi Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shri R.P. Singh, Under Secretary
 
Representatives of the department of Ocean Development and some of the Scientific Organisations / Laboratories
 
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Shri J.V.R. Prasada Rao, Joint Secretary
Shri S.W. Oak, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Dr. S.A.H. Abidi, Director
Shri H.P. Rajan, Director
Shri B.N. Krishnamurthy, Director

18th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/18threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
Shri S.K. Das, Director
Dr. B.R. Subramanian, Director
Dr. V.S. Rao Chintala, Principal Scientific Officer
Dr. M.D. Zingde, Scientist In.charge, NIO, Bombay.
Dr. V.P. Kamboj, Director, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow.
Prof. M. Ravindran, Executive Director, National Institute of Ocean Technology, Madras.
Shri Narayanan Pillai, Principal Scientist, Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, Cochin,
Dr. Hardayal Singh, Director, Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur.
Smt. Suchitra Goswami, Deputy Secretary.
Shri Prabh Das, Deputy Secretary.
Shri S.T. Chari, Head, Water Resources Division, National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad.           
Dr. P.K. Sen, Senior Manager, Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi.
Dr. G.K. Patnaik, Scientist, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow.
Dr. Dasgupta, Scientist, Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur.
Shri B.K. Mukhopadhyaya, Under Secretary
Shri Mahesh Kumar, Under Secretary
 
2. In the forenoon session, the Committee took up for consideration the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
 Department of Science and Technology. The Secretary of the Department briefly explained for the benefit of the
 Members the allocations on different activities/projects of the Department as proposed in its Demands for Grants. The
 Members then sought clarifications from him and other representatives of the Department on various points relating to
 the Demands for Grants.
 
3. In the afternoon session, the Committee took up for consideration the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
 Department of Ocean Development. The Secretary of the Department assisted by other officials gave an overview of the
 allocations as proposed for its different activities/projects in the Demands for Grants and the Members sought necessary
 clarifications relating thereto.
 
4. The discussion on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Departments of Science and Technology and Ocean
 Development remained inconclusive.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.55 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 5th April, 1995.
XXX
 
THIRTIETH MEETING
 
The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. to 1.28 p.m. and again from 3.00 p.m. to 4.53 p.m. on Wednesday, the 5th
 April, 1995 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1. Prof. M.G.K. Menon--in the Chair
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.  Dr. M. Aram
3.  Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
4.  Shri Suresh Pachouri
5.  Shri Satchidananda
6.  Dr. Ranbir Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
7.   Shri E. Ahamed
8.   Shri P.C. Chacko
9.   Shri Sharad Dighe
10. Shri Oscar Fernandes
11. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
12. Shri Harpal Panwar

18th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/18threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
13. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
14. Shri Harchand Singh
15. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
16. Kumari Sushila Tiriya
17. Kumari Frida Topno
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan. Parliamentary Interpreter
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
Representatives of the department of Science and Technology and some Government Bodies/ Organisations
 
Dr. P. Rama Rao,. Secretary
Shri Y.S. Rajah, Advisor
Dr. A.P. Kulshreshtha, Advisor
Dr. A.K. Chakraborty, Advisor
Shri S.B. Krishnan, JS & FA
Dr. R.K. Midha, Joint Advisor
Shri V.R. Aiyagari, Joint Advisor
Dr. Laxman Prasad, Joint Advisor
Dr. (Mrs.) Kamla Kumar, Joint Advisor
Maj. Gen. S.P. Mehta, Surveyor General of India
Dr. N. Sen Roy, DG, IMD
Dr. S.K. Mishra, Director, NCMRWF
Smt. Meenakshi Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shri R.P. Singh, Under Secretary
 
Representatives of the department of Ocean Development and some of the Scientific Organisations/Laboratories
 
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Shri J.V.R. Prasada Rao, Joint Secretary
Shri S.W. Oak, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Dr, S.A.H. Abidi, Director
Shri H.P. Rajan, Director
Shri B.N. Krishnamurthy, Director
Shri S.K. Das, Director
Dr. B.R. Subramanian, Director
Dr. V.S. Rao Chintala, Principal Scientific Officer
Shri Prabh Das, Deputy Secretary
Smt. Suchitra Goswami, Deputy Secretary
Dr. M.D. Zingde, Scientist lncharge, NIO, Bombay.
Dr. V.P. Kamboj, Director, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow.
Prof. M. Ravindran, Executive Director, National Institute of Ocean Technology, Madras. Shri Narayanan Pillai,
 Principal Scientist, Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, Cochin.
Dr. Hardayal Singh, Director, Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur.           
Shri S.T. Chari, Head, Water Resources Division, National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad.
Dr. P.K. Sen, Senior Manager,. Engineers India Ltd., New Delhi.
Dr. G.K. Patnaik, Scientist, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow.
Dr. Dasgupta, Scientist, Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur.
2. In the forenoon session, the Committee took up further consideration of the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
 Department of Science and Technology. The Secretary, of the Department, assisted by other officials, supplemented
 some of the points earlier made before the Committee on the subject in its meeting held on the 4th April, 1995 and
 replied to the clarifications sought by the Members.
3. In the afternoon session, the Committee took up for further consideration the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
 Department of Ocean Development. The Secretary of the Department, assisted by other officials, replied to the
 clarifications sought by the Members in its meeting held on the 4th April, 1995.
4. The discussion on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Departments of Science and Technology and Ocean

18th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/18threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
 Development was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.53 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 6th April, 1995.
V
FIFTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday. the 25th April, 1995 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.   Syed Sibtey Razi--Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.   Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
3.   Shri K.Rahman Khan
4.   Prof. M:G.K. Menon
5.   Shri Satchidananda
6.   Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
7.   Dr. Ranbir Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
8.   Shri Jitendra Nath Das
9.   Shri Sharad Dighe
10. Shri Oscar Fernandes
11. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
12. Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
13. Shri Chandresh Patel
14. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
15. Smt. Vasundhara Raje
16. Shri Harchand Singh
17. Kumari Frida Topno
18. Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
2. The Committee took up consideration of its draft Eighteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
 Department of Science and Technology (Ministry of Science and Technology) and after some discussion, adopted the
 same unanimously.
 
3. The Committee decided to present this Report to both the Houses of Parliament on the 26th April, 1995. The
 Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence, Shri K. Rahman Khan to present this Report to the Rajya Sabha
 and  Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy and in his absence, Shri Harchand Singh to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.25 a.m.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 