RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1995-96)

TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
ON
THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH FOR
THE YEAR 1993-94
(R&D PROGRAMMES IN THE AREA OF CHEMICALS)

(Presented on Ist August, 1995)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 1995/Sravana, 1917 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PaGEs
COMPOSITION OR THE COMMITTEE ००६०००००००७««»«««२«ू८०२००२०+०२०६०२२६३००४४०३४९०५७४७०४००४४ (i)-(ii)
EMER UMM ions. कमल की कदक कक कक तक निकल कक जब कप न ज ज कक मल ल जन नव न लक कलम नकली कर (iii)
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ८८८४६ ०७७७३७०६६३४०००६६४००२३३५३७४५४७५७०२३६३०१७३७७७४९% 1—24


COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1995-96)

RAJYA SABHA

Syed Sibtey Razi—Chairman
Dr. M. Aram

Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
Shri K. Rahman Khan
Prof. M.G.K. Menon ,
Shri Suresh Pachouri
Shri N. Giri Prasad

Shri Satchidananda

10. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
11. Dr. Ranbir Singh

12. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav

LOK SABHA

13. Shri E. Ahamed

14. Shri P. ९. Chacko

15. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
16. Shri Jitendra Nath Das

17. Shri Sharad Dighe

18. Shrimati Saroj Dubey

19. Shri Oscar Fernandes

20. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
21. Shri P. Kumarasamy

22. Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
23. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
24. Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy

25. Shri Harpal Panwar

26. Shri Balraj Pasi

27. Shri Bhim Singh Patel

28. Shri Chandresh Patel

29. Shri Vijay Naval Patil

30. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
31. Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
32. Shri Rama Chandra Rath
33. Shri M.G, Reddy

34. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
35. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
36. Shri Harchand Singh

37. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
38. Shri K.G. Shivappa

39. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

40. Kumari Sushila Tiriya

के =) Oh Sr,

6)

RS3739


(ii)

41. Kumari Frida Topno

42. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

3. Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary

4. Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer

5. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the
Committee to present the report on its behalf, present this Twenty-seventh Report of the
Committee. This Report deals with the R&D programmes in the area of chemicals of CSIR,
which is under the administrative purview of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (DSIR).

2. The Committee held in all five meetings: on the 26th, 27th October, 9th, 10th
November, 1994 and the 19th June, 1995. The Secretary, Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research who is also the Director-General of the Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR), made a presentation before the Committee on the areas chosen
by CSIR for R&D in the chemicals sector and their broad thrust. The Committee also heard
the Directors concerned of the Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad, Central
Electro-chemical Research Institute, Karaikudi, National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, Indian
Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun and Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute,
Bhavnagar, which are the five premier CSIR laboratories engaged in chemicals sector.

3. The Committee expresses its appreciation of the officials of the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research as well as the Directors and other scientific personnel
representing the aforesaid CSIR laboratories for giving the Committee necessary
information, and placing before it the relevant papers/background note, which helped the
Committee to undertake an in-depth examination of the working of these laboratories,
particularly with reference to the R&D programmes in the area of chemicals.

4. The Committee considered and adopted the report at its meeting held on the
19th June, 1995.

New DELut; SYED SIBTEY RAZI
19th June, 1995 : Chairman,
Committee on Science and Technology

Environment and Forests.


REPORT

Chemicals constitute an important component of the industrial scene. There is hardly
any manufacturing activity which does not have a chemical component to some extent.
Chemicals are a part of our daily life. There is hardly any major sector of national activity,
whether it be agriculture of pharmaceuticals or petroleum where chemicals are not of prime
importance. The chemical industry in India accounts for approximately 12—15% of
industrial (manufacturing) production. It is one of the areas of Indian industry where
indigenous R&D and technology have contributed in a significant way. There are 400 in-
house R&D units in the chemical industry, which account for 30—33% of all industrial in-
house R&D Units. The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), which is the
premier pational science and technology agency for industrial research, with a large network
of national laboratories, Regional Centres and Complexes throughout the country, has
several of its major laboratories engaged in R&D work in the chemicals Sector. Five of its
laboratories, namely National Chemical Laboratory (NCL), Pune, Indian Institute of
Chemical Technology (IICT), Hyderabad, Indian Institute of Petroleum (IIP), Dehradun,
Central Electro-chemical Research Institute (CECRI), Karaikudi and Central Salt and
Marine Chemical Research Institute (CSMCRI), Bhavnagar are the main ones focussing on
R&D in the Chemicals Sector. As per the information given to the Committee, the sub-
sectors included under the generic head of chemical industry and related research are: (a)
fertilizers; (b) agrochemicals particularly pesticides; (c) chloro-alkali and inorganic chemicals;
(d) petro-chemicals; (९) polymers and synthetic fibres; (f) soaps and detergents; (g) drugs
and pharmaceuticals; (h) leather chemicals; (i) catalysis; and (j) other miscellaneous
chemicals. Some of these sub-sectors have acquired quite a mature level in the country in
terms of production, where the innovations in chemistry are relatively few e.g., fertilizers,
chloro-alkali, soaps and detergents, etc. R&D in CSIR is, therefore, directed toward those
sub-sectors which are highly chemistry and knowledge based. CSIR laboratories have
focused on R&D that adds or enhances the value of the products or proc
agrochemicals, chemical synthesis of drugs and intermediates, petrochemicals and catal
leather chemicals and a few polymers.” The annual expenditure of the five chemical
laboratories is around Rs. 55 crores; this is met to the extent of 75% through Government
grant; and rest of the funds (25%) are generated through other sources by these laboratories
themselves. These laboratories are amongst the oldest CSIR labs and file nearly 100 patents
and generate around 30 new technologies annually. The annual value of industrial
production based on their technologies is estimated to be around Rs. 1200—1300 crores.
With so much of work being done by the CSIR laboratories, the Committee decided to
examine in some detail the R&D programmes being pursued by them in the important area
of chemicals, which are vital not only from the point of view of industry but also as a
potential foreign exchange earning.

2. Through a detailed note, the Committee was informed by the DSIR that in the 1970s
CSIR mounted an integrated R&D programme on the development of technologies for over
25 of the pesticides then identified as essential for India on the basis of crops grown and
their pests. Through this effort, CSIR labs have developed technologies ‘for a number of
pesticides which have been successfully commercialised by industry. Monocrotophos (a broad
spectrum organophosphorus insecticide for grain crops and vegetables); Chloropyriphos
(another broad spectrum insecticide for vegetable crops, storage of grains, etc.), Butachlor

1


2

(an important rice herbicide) and Phosphamidon (a broad spectrum insecticide for rice pests)
are some of the important pesticides based on CSIR technologies which are successfully
produced by industry. In respect of quite a few of them CSIR labs have been able to break
the monopoly of multi-nationals. CSIR has now initiated programmes for development of
target specific chemicals, and biological methods of pest control that do not have adverse
effect on the eco-system. As a step in this direction, CSIR has synthesized Pheromones
which are sex attractants. These non-toxic chemical substances help to trap the pests at one
place. Pheromones have been developed for a range of insects affecting cotton and
sweet potato. The focus of R&D programmes on pesticides is to develop technologies for
optically pure, bio-degradable, environmentally less toxic and less hazardous agrochemicals
for use by the Indian farmers for cereals, pulses and cash crops. Attention is being paid to
develop cleaner technologies for pesticides which avoid the use and generation of poisonous
and hazardous materials in process operations. Synergestic alliances with R&D
organisations/industry, within and oustside the country, are being/have been established for
this purpose. The main emphasis of the R&D programmes of CSIR in this area is basically
on cleaner technologies and safer pesticides. These relate to Monocrotophos, Pyrethroids,
Organophosphorus, Carbamates and Pheromones. Besides, NCL and IICT are developing
technologies for extraction of active ingredients from indigenous natural plants for their
potential use as pesticides. NCL is also working on Paclobutrazol, which improves flowering
and fruiting and is presently imported. the regular use of this product is likely to boost the
output of cash crops. NCL and IICT are also working on synthesis of novel pesticides. NCL
has synthesized a number of oximes others from terpenoids as well as from aromatic
carbonyl compounds. Some of these have shown insecticidal activities against mosquitoes
and termites. IICT is working on synthesis of Chiral (optically pure) pesticides. In order to
synergise its efforts for search of new pesticide molecules, CSIR has:entered into agreements
with leading multi-nationals like American Cynamid and DuPont for screening of molecules
synthesized in CSIR laboratories for potential pesticidal activity. These will be developed
further as a commercial product jointly by CSIR labs and these companies.

3. In the area of Catalysts, which are at the heart of the chemical process industry, the
CSIR laboratories have also made very useful contributions, and some of the new catalysts
developed by them have been commercialised. Among these are the Zeolite Catalysts
notable in respect of conversion of ethyl alcohol to ethyl benzene in a single step,
isomerisation of Zylenes to p-xylenes, mild hydrocracking of heavy petroleum fractions to
lighter ends, Methanol to middle distillates and Linear Alkyl-Benzene. A novel non-zeolite
catalyst has been developed at the Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun. This is a major
breakthrough for the conversion of cyclohexane into adipic acid and (needed in the synthetic
fibre industy) in a single step; the only technology presently available is with a multi-national
and involves a two step processes. Negotiations are going on with an Indian firm and a
foreign engineering company for international marketing of the catalyst and the process. Bi-
metallic Reforming. Catalyst, Styrene Catalyst, Para Diethylbenzene (DEB), Methanol to
Formaldehyde and Methyl Ethyl Ketone are the catalysts which were hitherto not being
manufactured indigenously.

4. The focus of R & D in the area of catalysts is to develop catalysts, and the processes
to establish not only indigenous manufacturing facilities for both the catalysts and chemicals,
but also to export them. NCL, Pune has entered into agreements with companies in USA,
Finland etc. to develop and market catalysts and their application processes internationally.

5. Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (IICT), Central Durg Research Institute
(CDRI) and National Chemical Laboratory (NCL) have been engaged in devising innovative

7799


3

and cost-effective processes for generic drugs for diseases of special relevance to the country,
and have substantially helped the Indian drug industry achieve some’ degree of self-reliance.
Some of the important drugs for which technologies have been developed are: anti-AIDS,
anti-bacterials, cardiovascular, anti-malarial, analgesics and vitamin B6. Besides,
technologies have also been developed for a number of drugs such as Omeperazole (anti-
ulcer), Acyclovir (anti-viral Herpes), Ibuprofen/flurbiprofen (anti-inflammatory),
Pentamidine (anti leishmaniasis) etc. The thrust of the R&D on chemical synthesis of drugs
will be not only to develop innovative and cost-effective process routes for known/newer
drugs, but to increasingly resort to chiral synthesis where only the desired pure optical from,
either S or R, is produced.

6. In the area of electrochemicals, the Central Electrochemical Research Institute
(CECRI) has been focusing its R & D on diverse uses of electrosynthesis such as chemical
processing, reclamation and recycling of raw materials and by-products, waste minimization
and recovery. It has been instrumental in developing several technologies which have
enabled the commerical production of chlorates, iodates, perchlorates, calcium gluconate,
etc. Its role has also been quite significant in developing technologies for catalytically
activated electrodes. The other developments which are ready for commercialisation are in
respect of processes for electrochemical preparation for Monochlorotoluenes, (which find
applications in insecticides, dyes, herbicides, fungicides and pharmaceuticals), reflective road
marking paint and fluorescent and reflective composition for traffic signal boards; shop
coating for efficient corrosion protection even under accelerated corrosion test conditions;
aqueous passivating solution which gives complete protection to the stressing steel against
general corrosion, pitting corrosion, crevice corrosion and stress corrosion cracking; inhibitor
admixture to the cement grout which increases its corrosion resistance even in the presence
of 1% sodium chloride and also improves workability of the grout without adversely
affecting other properties; betaphenylethylamine, benzylamine, polyphenylene oxide coating;
sodium perborate; and sodium hypochlorite. R&D efforts are also directed at developing
processes for Eosin, Anthraquinone, Diacetone, Antimony trioxide, Hydrogen peroxide via
trickle bed reactor and aluminium hydroxy chlorides.

7. Coming to the area of leather chemicals, the Central Leather Research Institute
(CLRI) of CSIR has, over a period of time developed a range of leather processing
chemicals such as synthetic fat liquors, synthetic tanning agents, lacquers and lacquer
emulsions which have helped substitute imports. CLRI is now engaged in developing
processes for cleaner and better chemicals e.g., aqueous based top-cost formulations,
polyurethane emulsions, water borne adhesives, vegetable tanning and improved basic
chrome tanning salts, white syntans and acrylic syntans and new formulation for leather
finishing.

8. CSIR’s technological contributions to petrochemicals industry have ranged from oil
field chemicals, additives for drilling, transportation and valorisation of crude oil to refinery
processes. On account of excellent rapport between R & D engineering consultants and the
industry, most of the technologies have been successfully licensed and implemented. In the
area of polymers, CSIR’s R&D ranges from simple polymer surface coatings to high
performance composites and enginneering plastics. The focus of R&D programme is to
continue to develop new, innovative and environmentally safe processes for synthesizing
polymeric materials.

9. The Secretary of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, in his
presentation, emphasised that the CSIR has chosen those areas of chemical industry which
are mainly based on a high degree of innovation in chemistry and in which engineering and


design do not have the major role to play, because the Department has not been able to
achieve a high degree of success in design and engineering, though it is seriously engaged in
overcoming problems even in these areas. Dwelling on different sectors of chemical industry
in which the CSIR laboratories are engaged, the Secretary explained that in the health sector
the work of the laboratories was quite substantial. However, he underlined the point that a
major part of this work has so far been devoted to new processes for known drugs. The
post-GATT situation would definitely have an impact on the nature of work of the CSIR
laboratories in this vital area. The work being done by CSIR in the area of chemical
intermediates and fine chemicals is well known. Over the years the Indian Institute of
Chemical Technology, Hyderabad, the National Chemical Laboratory, Pune and the Central
Drug Research Insititute, Lucknow have emerged as centres of excellence in organic
synthesis. These laboratories are using this expertise to develop new molecules as potential
durgs, pesticides and perfumery chemicals. In India the total drug production amounts to
Rs. 7,500 crores; and exports of drugs have touched a figure of Rs. 1000 crores for basic
drugs, and Rs. 750 crores for formulations. According to the new patent laws, there will be
product protection which will last for 20 years; thereafter one can develop new processes for
known molecules, but it is clear that more determined efforts will be required to find new
molecules which can constitute new drugs. This will all the more necessary from the point of
view of the health of our people, because several major diseases such as tuberculosis,
leprosy, malaria, filariasis, gastro-intestinal and diaorrheal disorders etc. are particularly
common in India and are fairly widespread. These call for treatment but also for diagnostic
and prophylacho measures. The developed countries will not target their R & D efforts in
respect of diseases of this nature. India will therefore have to mount a sustained effort on its
own to attack these diseases. In addition to these, various other diseases related to
cardiovascular and neural systems, cancer, diabetes, arthritis, viral infections and AIDS will
also have top be attended to.

10. The Committee was informed that different industries were joining hands with CSIR
in tackling these overall problems and concrete plans have been formulated by CSIR
laboratories along with other institutions. Government has also provided financial support to
the extent of Rs. 10 crores to the Department of Science and Technology for the drug
development programme. The “Secretary, however, struck a note of caution by saying that
the task of developing a drug was not an easy one as it was necessary to screen about 10,000
compounds for an effective drug to be introduced and this takes about 10 to 15 years. The
cost of developing a drug is also substantial, being in the vicinity of Rs. 700 crores. The
Cental Drug Research Institute, Lucknow has so far developed eight drugs, one of which is
Centcroman, not developed elsewhere in the world, which*is valuable both as oral
contraceptive and for the treatment of Osteoporosis. This drug is also being tried against
breast cancer. CSIR is also looking into the Ayurvedic and Unani systems for directions to
screen plants that can be potential sources of drugs. The laboratories of CSIR are also
engaged in separating active principles from a large number of marine organisms; so far 600
species of marine flora and fauna have been collected and evaluated. The results have been
quite encouraging in that 34% of the organisms have shown promising biological activities
which include anti-viral, anti-fertility, anti-hypertensive and anti-diabetic properties.
However, these have still to go through many stages of screening and trials. The Secretary
also informed the Committee पथ कटा, Hyderabad has taken up in an important manner
the task of chiral synthesis of drugs as this is going to be a future technology in the drug
sector.

11. As regards pesticides, the Committee was informed by the Secretary that 14th of
the pesticides used in the country come from technology that has been developed by CSIR;


but one serious lacuna is that not a single effective pesticide has been developed de novo in
India except neem-based pesticides. Greater effort will be required to synthesise new
molecules and ICT, Hyderabad has initiated steps in this direction along with some
international companies like Du Pont. If this turns out to be successful, CSIR will have
equal rights in terms of technology and royalty that will flow. The Department is conscious
of the need for cleaner technology and safer pesticides and efforts are being mounted to
have plant-based pesticides. The National Chemical Laboratory is working on Sunana
Squamosa and Aerous Calamus to study their properties in order to get active material
which could be used as pesticides. Work on ‘plant growth regulator’ is also in progress. The
use of these can help in growth as well as flowering of the plants.

12. The Committee feels that CSIR’s achievements in the area of pesticides have been of
a fairly significant nature which is not widely known. The emphasis on environment friendly
pesticides is entirely appropriate. The Committee is also happy with the results in introducing
successful new drugs in important areas (eg. centchroman) as also production of existing
drugs through new routes. Committee appreciates that considerable research is in progress to
tap properties of natural plants to extract material for pesticides and for drugs. The
Committee hopes that the efforts in this direction would result in finding new molecules for
pesticides and drugs which have hitherto been based on new routes for existing products.

13. The Committee was informed that in the area of catalysts there is a market worth
Rs. 100 crores and several laboratories of CSIR have built up expertise which caters mainly
to catalysts relevant to the petrochemicals and fine chemicals sectors. In this context, the
Secretary referred to the success in the area of Linear Alkyl Benzene (LAB) which is used
for making detergents; and said that by the year 2000 India would become a big player in
detergents. Reliance Industry is already producing detergents through LAB process. Not
only this, the Indian Institute of Petroleum has worked on bi-metallic catalysts which are
used in reforming of naphtha. I[CT is engaged in working on the application of catalysts in
fine chemical production, and in making fine chemicals which can be used for different
purposes. The expertise of CSIR has been marketed internationally. National Chemical
Laboratory has entered into agreements with companies in USA and Finland to develop and
market catalysts and their applications internationally. This is a field where the CSIR has
developed its own expertise which is very competitive.

14, The Committee is happy to note that the CSIR laboratories have made significant
strides to develop catalysts as also an export base which can grow to a fairly good size. The
Committee would like to emphasise that this area is a highly competitive one and represents a
key technology. It is an area which might be increasingly difficult to penetrate in the new
situation developing in regard to intellectual property rights and the approach of
multinationals to take out hedging patents. It is important to grow a powerful group in this
area which can take care of this situation.

15. The Secretary of the Department also referred to two major topics in the area of
environment, namely, substitution of ozone depleting substances and the management of
industrial waste. A process for HFC 134a has been evolved which can replace several CFCs
in refrigeration and airconditioning systems; he said that considerable work is needed to
recycle waste and to develop zero-waste technologies. Affirming that the development of
cleaner technology was one of the major thrust areas of DSIR, the Secretary informed that
the Central Leather Research Institute, Madras has developed new tanning agents based on
aluminium to replace existing tanning agents which are chromium-based, and are highly
toxic. The Department has launched 4 leather mission which would propagate this

)RS3739


technology in various parts of the country; cost will not be an inhibiting factor. The Central
Leather Research Institute has also developed an enzyme (Clarizyme) which relates to an
environmentally clean process of dehairing skins. This process eliminates the use of toxic
sulphide material. The Department is also trying to see how, in some of the processes, the
electro-chemical route can be used to develop cleaner technologies, but the experience
hitherto been that these are not as efficient as the known chemical routes.

16. Referring to the work being done by the CSIR labs in the petro-chemicals sector,
the Secretary stated that the Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun has developed not
only lab-based knowhow but also total basic engineering packages on its own or with firms
like Engineers India Ltd. The Institute is also providing technical services to the industry by
way of product evaluation, physical-chemical analysis, plant recommissioning, trouble-
shooting and catalyst regeneration. IIP has recently developed a single step process for
converting Cyclohexane into Adipic Acid which is used in the synthetic fibre industry. This
milestone has been achieved in collaboration with M4. Adarsh Chemicals and Fertilizers and
Lummus Crest of USA. As per the terms of the agreement, this would involve an exclusive
transfer for the first three years. Replying to a query from the Committee, the Secretary
stated that IIP has established good links with the petroleum industry, and out of the
resultant technology transfer, CSIR’s product value is somewhere near Rs. 1700 crores; Rs.
650 crores being from its own technology. The CSIR has been responsible for the setting up
of a Rs. 200 crore plant for aromatic extraction of benzene, which is one of the largest in
terms of product value, and is completely based on indigenous technology developed by IIP.

17. The Committee was told that though this did not fall strictly with the areas
presently under consideration of this Committee, CSIR was also engaged in R&D in the
energy sector. The Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad has studied the
combustion characteristics of certain varieties of Indian coal whose ash content various
between 20 to 40%. The Department has been trying hard to take the pilot plant based on
the ‘Integrated Gasification Combinede Cycle Power Generation (IGCC)’ to a
demonstration stage of 100 MW. This is a cleaner technology which would avoid fly ash
pollution and other benefits. The technology is ready but the Department has not been able
to make headway in progressing this despite taking up the matter at various levels. This
technology, no doubt, requires a very large investment, but when the future power needs are
taken into account it is clear that the technology developed can be of great value and should
be taken further by the Ministry of Power. The Department can provide all the inputs, but
others concerned will have to participate effectively in the implementation. On being
specifically asked as to what the response of the Ministry of Power was, the Secretary
clarified that his Department had a number of meetings with the Ministry of Power. The
Ministry has stated that this would be included in its annual plan, but somehow this was not
done. The Ministry of Power basically agrees that this is an important programme, but when
it comes to arranging investment, real problems are encountered. It was pointed out to the
Secretary of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research that the Department
would have an additional argument that, in the event of this technology being adopted,
considerable amount will be saved which is presently spent on removing the fly ash. The
Secretary, however, expressed his helplessness in the matter, saying that the arguments of
his Department are not effective enough in getting the required allocations. The Committee
wanted to know as to how much money was needed to put this technology on the rails. The
reply was that a 100 megawatt plant was estimated to cost about Rs. 400 crores. The
Department was, however, ready to obtain a share of Rs. 80 crores from industry. Recently,

&)RS3739


7

some companies from the USA and other countries have approached the Ministry of Power
for setting up a 500 megawatt plant with similar technology; the query posed, by the
Secretary of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research was why Indian
technology should not be exploited when it had been developed.

18. The Committee feels that these indigenous efforts which have great potential for
power generation in the circumstances obtaining in India need to be suitably encouraged and
fully tried out. The Committee fails to understand why CSIR has not been extended necessary
facilities and funds to carry its pilot plant based on Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle
Power Generation to a demonstration stage. The Committee is of the view that since the said
project of CSIR represents a clean technology, which avoids fly ash pollution and has other
advantages all concerned Ministries/Departments should be asked to co-ordinate with CSIR
and extend necessary cooperation to it.

19. The Secretary of the Department also informed the Committee that CSIR was
engaged in intensive R&D on chemistry-based aspects of materials such as polymers,
alternative building materials and sensor polymers. The focus is principally on composites
and engineering plastics and development of technologies for the use of engineering plastics.
In this context he cited Polyphenylene Sulfide (PPS), which has temperature and chemical
resistance, and is used for non-stick cookware. Work is in progress on water absorbing
polymers, engineering plastics and technologies for plastic blends, etc. which are used for
two-wheeler parts. Besides, there is work on polyurethane which is used for water-proofing.
The efforts of the Department in finding wood substitutes have also had considerable
success. In association with CPWD, DSIR has developed and tested red-mud polymer and
door shutters, which have been accepted by CPWD; work on their commercialisation is in
progress.

19.1 The Committee lauds the efforts of CSIR in these areas, particularly in developing
engineering plastics polymers and wood substitutes.

20. The Committee wanted to know whether knowledge of the Indian systems of
medicine is being used in the development of drugs in CSIR and whether traditional
knowledge has been used to develop pesticides and dyes/colours from plant sources. It was
explained that the Central Drug Research Institute (CDRI) has a systematic programme to
evaluate Ayurvedic formulations from the viewpoint of isolating compounds of therapeutic
values. CDRI has extracted the active fraction, Gugulipid, from Gugal which is a gum of the
plant commiphora mukul; this has been found to reduce cholesterol levels. Similarly, CDRI
has isolated active principles Bacosides A & B a memory enhancer from the herb ‘Brahmi’
which has beén known to possess memory improvement properties. Several other examples
of how the CSIR labs are developing drugs from plants were cited. As regards the use of
traditional knowledge to develop pesticides and dyes, etc. from plant sources, the reply
given was that the active principles from plant sources such as Acorus calamus, Annona
squamosa known to possess insecticidal activities have been isolated and are undergoing field
trials. CSIR laboratories are also working on natural plants for development of food colours
and dyes. Laboratory scale work has been carried out on isolation of food colours from
Curcumin, Kamala seed and flowers, Annato seeds, etc.

21. In response to a pointed query as to what R&D programmes were in hand for the
development of drugs to combat malaria which has recently come back in some parts of
country with a vengeance, the Committee was informed that IICT has developed technology
for Mefloquine, the only drug effective in cases resistant to Primaquine. Besides, CDRI has
isolated Arteether, an effective drug for cerebral malaria from a plant Artemisia annua,


8

native to China, and introduced by Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants
(CIMAP) in the country. Phase II clinical trials are over and now multicentric Phase III
trials ae to commence. CDRI is developing a new drug, designated as compound 8053,
which has been found to be an effective anti-relapse anti-malarial drug. The laboratory has
signed an agreement with a company for carrying out clinical trials and the drug is expected
to be marketed by 1997.

22. The Committee has noted that the CSIR laboratories engaged in R&D in the health
sector have established good capabilities for synthesising chemicals of value as drugs. These
capabilities need to be utilized fully through careful planning and management. As yet
achievements in discovering new molecules for drugs have been limited; this is very vital to
respond to the post GATT situation in which we will have to deal with product patents. It is
noteworthy that the CSIR laboratories have focussed attention on problems of tropical
diseases, common to Indian conditions. Their R&D efforts in this direction will have to be
sustained. The Committee feels that with the strong infrastructural base in the chemical sector
relating to drugs, already established, and by taking full advantage of the vast store-house of
traditional knowledge available in our indigenous systems of medicine as also the rich
biodiversity that the country is blessed with, through a sustained effort it should be possible to
make breakthrough in dealing with our major health problems as well as in becoming a force
to reckon with in this area internationally.

23. The Secretary of the Department was pointedly asked by the Committee as to what
measures CSIR was taking: to strengthen the area of transfer of technology, which appeared
to be weak; to ensure that the technology of aromatic extraction is utilised by industry which
appeared to be somewhat lukewarm to it; to improve its design and engineering capabilities;
and to publicise its capabilities and technologies more effectively in attracting potential
clients. The Secretary in his reply conceded that the CSIR’s technology
marketing efforts, including those relating to technology transfer, have been rather weak
steps are afoot to strengthen them. The Research Councils of the laboratories have eminent
industrialists as members; out of five external experts at least three are from industry. The
recommendations of the Mashelkar Committee which had been appointed to go into various
aspects of this problem have been accepted and are being implemented. There are Business
Development & Marketing Groups in each laboratory; they been given the flexibility to
engage consultants for business development; several other related reforms have also been
put in place. As regards adoption by industry, of technology for aromatic extraction it was
pointed out that the the technology developed by CSIR for extraction of aromatics (benzene
and toluene) from reformed naphtha has been commercialised by M/s Bharat Petroleum
Corporation Ltd. (BPCL), Bombay and Cochin Refineries Ltd., Cochin; production around
of Rs. 200 crores is taking place. It is the single largest output from a CSIR technology
which has already been offered to Haldia Petrochemicals, and to the petrochemical complex
coming up at Madras. CSIR is also mounting vigorous efforts to strengthen its design
capabilities; for this design engineering groups are being created/strengthened in its chemical
laboratories. Alliances with leading design engineering and consultancy firms are also being
formed by CSIR to offer its technologies jointly; for example, IIP with Engineers India Ltd.
(EIL) and Lumus of USA, NCL, with Adarsh Chemicals, etc. CSIR has also recently made
several efforts to create necessary awareness about its capabilities. A book on S&T
capabilities/facilities of its laboratories has been published, and another book on technical
opportunities has also been brought out recently and widely circulated. The book contains
techno-economic data on selected 100 technologies. Besides, every laboratory has brought
out publications on its expertise, facilities and programmes. The Secretary of the


Department was, however, candid in admitting that notwithstanding these efforts, much still
remains to be done to publicise the capabilities of CSIR.

24. The Committee wanted to know details about the acceptance of the drug
Centchroman; and also what was the progress in the area of development of drugs for
AIDS. The Committee was informed that Centchroman, which is being manufactured in the
country, is available under the brand names of ‘Saheli’ and ‘Centron’; it has been generally
preferred over other oral contraceptives as it is non-steroidal and free from side effects. The
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is activley considering inclusion of this drug in its
family welfare programme. The Committee was further apprised that insofar as AIDS is
concerned, the technology for Azidothymidine (AZT), the FDA approved drug for AIDS,
has been developed by IICT and licensed to M/s CIPLA, Bombay, who are manufacturing
the drug and making it available to patients on a ‘no profit’ basis. IICT and CDRI are
working on the development of lead compounds from natural plant sources as potential anti-
AIDS drugs. IICT is also working in collaboration with M/s Abbott Labs of USA on HIV-
Protease.

25. A question was posed to the Secretary as to what mechanism has been evolved by
the CSIR laboratories to market their technologies. It was explained that since 1988,
following the recommendations of the Abid Hussain Committee, the CSIR laboratories have
been given the option to market their technologies directly or through the National Research
Development Corporation (NRDC). The chemical group of laboratories, however, due to
their close linkages and contacts with the users/clients prefer to market their services and
technology directly.

26. In his presentation before the Committee the Director, Indian Institute of Chemical
Technology, Hyderabad briefly referred to the achievements of the Institute over the years,
and emphasised the level of excellence it has acquired. The Institute handles specific needs
relating to the design engineering of plants. Some of the modern concepts concerning
structure and synthesis of relevant molecules and engineering-intensive and science-based
areas constitute the base of its sustained R&D efforts. The areas of agro-chemicals, building
materials, energy, dyes, colours and perfumeries for which there exist huge markets are

“being focussed on; considerable software has also been developed by the Institute. The area
of drugs is of special interest; and the institute is looking into various aspects of a whole
range of drugs: anti bacterials; new drugs against TB instead of conventional drugs; anti-
inflammatory; -and anti-asthma drugs; as also vitamin derivatives and Taxol which is
important for uterine and ovarian cancers. The Instiute has technology for vitamin A, which
is used both for human consumption as well as in animal feeds and is presently imported in
large quantities; this is on a bench-scale, but the pilot project in this regard is beset with
several problems. The Institute has also felt the need to contribute in some way towards
population control. In this context the Director referred to an abortion pill called RU 486
which was developed by a French firm two years back but had to be withdrawn becuase of
certain problems. Rights of this pill were, however, passed on to the World Health
Organisation (WHO). Since India is a member of WHO, it has offered to develop this
complex technology not only for the benefit of the Indian continent but also for the other
under-developed countries which are faced with the problem of growing propulation. An
offer was also made to pass on the technology to WHO did not however want to part with
their existing rights. The Institute has nevertheless developed the technology on a bench-
scale, and has signed with a Bombay firm to take it up commercially. The Director,
however, expressed his apprehensions as to whether this drug could be introduced into the
Indian ‘market.

Wi ६99...


10

27. Director, ICT informed the Committee that the Institute was responsible for a
major dent in the agro-chemicals sector; a large part of the agro-chemical production based
on CSIR technology derives from IICT. Chlorpyriphos has been licensed to 13 parties during
the last two years; there is no technology for this chemical other than that of IICT.
Butachlor and Phosphamidon are the other agro chemicals. The Insitute has also come out
with formulations based on natural products, and is looking into compounds that relate to
insect behaviour. The Institute is currently working on several intermediates, which are at
present imported to manufacture end-products. Reference was made to Cynauric Chloride,
which is highly toxic, and is used in dyes. There are only two leaders for this product,
imports of which are within the vicinity of 1000 tonnes. Several of the user companies have
attempted to bring in the technology for this product, but the companies having this
technology were not ready to part with it. IICT, however, has developed this technology and
passed on the knowhow for commercial production; in the next two years indigenous
production will be 2000 tonnes. In the field of CFC substitutes, the Institute is going to be a
competitor to DuPont. Its pilot project is going to cost about Rs. 500 crores. IICT will also
produced carbon monoxide, a highly toxic chemical, which is a key raw material for various
pesticides. The Institute will also be concentrating on the production of pencillin, the
requirement of which within the country is around 4000 tonnes. As a result of induction of
this technology the cost of pencillin is likely to be somewhat reduced. In so far as adhesive
polymers are concerned, they are required as adhesives for wood to wood, wood to metal
and shoes/garments; the tonnage is large; but since the production is by small-scale
industries, the technology has been given to 50 parties.

28. The Committee was also informed that IICT is the only organisation where there is
expertise for oils, fats and chmicals. It is a participant in the Mission Mode Programme
relating to edible oils. It has successfully dealt with stabilisation of rice bran oil for human
consumption. Recently, technology for 10-undecenoic acid from castor oil has been passed
on to China.

Elaborating on the area of drugs, Director IICT referred to the problems inherent in
the discoveries of new drugs, particularly in the context of the new GATT regime. Any new
drug discovered in the world has a life of 7 to 10 years, though the patent is valid for 20
years. Most of the molecules, however, drop out by the time they enter the market. In our
country, 4 years are normally taken to develop a new process. to discover a new drug better
than the existing one, which is not only highly science-based but is very expensive, is very
difficult. Unfortunately expertise available in the country in this regard is very limited. The
area of biology constitutes a weakness. he was, however, optimistic that in the next few
years, IICT will be in a position to come out with some molecules against cancer and HIV as
also for certain tropical diseases. For cerebral malaria he mentioned that there are two drugs
which act positively-Mefloquine which came from the US Army and for which there is no
patent, and another drug from China; Government has permitted these to be imported. In
cases of cerebral malaria no doctor would want to take a chance; as a result, in cities like
Bombay, the prices have gone up to Rs. 200 per tablet. Having regard to the importance of
the drug for an important disease with high mortality, the Institute filed for patents both in
India and USA. The Institute has also signed with Cipla and Unichem for commercial
production with an informal arrangement that the price should be Rs. 20८ a tablet. The
Insitute is, however, facing some problems in this area; there is apprehension that the Drugs
Controller may not allow production of the drug. The Director was, forthright in his
assertion that India should have the right to produce these at much lower price based on
indigenous technology to meet social needs.


ll

29. Referring to some of the other problems faced by the Institute, the Director, ICT
explained as follows:—

“We develop a particular technology and we want to commercialise it. But we are
unable to do it for various reasons.... we go to the ICMR. They say that they don’t
have money to buy this technology by which cheaper medicines could be produced.

ee ee tee aoe

If we develop pyrethroids, the biggest problem before us will ०९ its registration.
Registration formalities are too cumbersome to be met with. Our registration rules
are the same which were made by the Britishers. They need to be changed. We need
a relaxation of the registration rules so that we will be in a position to register our
formulations without much difficulty. They say that all the documents have to be
disclosed. Nobody will disclose everything because it is likely to be copied. All the
pyrethoids are chemically equivalent to what is now being sold in Europe and the
United States of America.

ee ee eee eee

We do face a lot of problems in the transfer of technology..... We do not know for
whom we are working, because the Government is funding us. But when we have
technology, we are asked to go and find our own funds. When we take up a
technology, we go to industry and most of the industries say you first demonstrate in
a plant where they can go and see the things for themselves....., this still remains a
problem because we do not have commercial plants.

ee ae कंकेके कंकंके

There is no co-ordination even between the Government Organisations and CSIR;
and they are the first people who reject CSIR. Inspite of my efforts in all the
meetings, both in the public sector and the Government of India, I am unable, in
fact, unsuccessful, to transfer even one technology. There is a total lack of
coordination and they are the first people to suspect the CSIR laboratories.”

30. A question was asked from the Director as to what was the extent of interaction
between the scientists and technocrats in the country; whether due emphasis was being given
to fundamental research; a detailed question was asked concerning R&D in carbon fibre
technology. The Director explained that technocrats usually run small-scale industries; they
do come to CSIR for small volume production of chemicals; this is the only form of
interaction that presently exists. As regards fundamental research it was submitted that it
was being done but it was important that research be in relevant areas; but unfortunately it
was lacking in this. IICT, no doubt, is operating a system where fundamental research has
been assigned a significant priority; and proper orientation has been given to ensure that it is
done in relevant areas. As for carbon fibre technology it was submitted that considerable
work was in progress in the National Physical Laboratory. Supplementing this point, the
Secretary of the Department clarified that for making carbon fibres, technology was
available for both Grade I and Grade II; applications were in fields like very high strength
racquets and sports goods. Needs for this technology exist in the area of defence and
aerospace. However, this technology has not been commercialised because commercial
incentives are very few.

31. The Committee appreciates that the Indian Institute of Chemical Technology,
Hyderabad has been doing valuable work over a wide range of chemical technology,
particularly drugs, agro-chemicals, CFC subsitutes, oils, polymers, pheromones, vitamin
derivatives; it holds out great promise of developing new molecules for drugs. The Committee
has further noted that the Insitute is finding difficulties in commercialising its technologies,

४)753739


12

particularly on account of inadequate support to set up commercially operational plants to
demonstrate its technology to potential buyers. IICT is a premier CSIR laboratory and the
Committee feels that if with these accomplishements the nation cannot derive the benefits of
work in Scienc.: and Technology it is an extremly serious matter. The Committee recommends
that an appropriate high level group be constituted with involvement of Ministry of Finance,
Planning Commission and CSIR to see how this need to be set right. The solutions evolved in
this case would certainly have wider application.

32. The Committee has noted that a few CSIR laboratories have been successful in
marketing their technologies abroad, but if there are no commercially operational plants of
CSIR to demonstrate these technologies, how is it that such technologies have been exported.
The Committee feels that CSIR should examine this issue and report back. Since non-
availability of comercially operational demonstration plants has been cited as a problem, the
Committee recommends that CSIR should examine the feasibility of enlisting the support of
public sector units or even private sector enterprises in getting their facilities on a rental basis
for technology demonstration purposes.

33. The Director, Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi submitted before
the Committee that the main thrust of his Institute is to do pure and applied research on a
range of aspects of electrochemical science and technology. Over the years the Institute has
carved out a name for itself as one of the primary institutions not only in the country but
also in the entire South East Asian Region. It is one of the leading laboratories in the area
of electrochemical science and technology. One of the mandates given to the CECRI is to
develop technology for import substitution and also to develop new technologies for strategic
materials. The most important thrust areas are: corrosion science and engineering; fuel cells;
all types of batteries primary and secondary, of low density and high current density and
deep discharge stable batteries including automobile and tank batteries.

34. There are nine Divisions for R&D work at Karaikudi. The areas covered are: metal
plating, both fine and coarse; electro-polishing; electro-machining; iron sensors and various
other types of sensors; solid and liquid electrode systems; fabrication and testing and
certification of equipment used in electrochemical science and technology.

35. The Committee was informed that the research component of the work in the lab is
apportioned as 25% basic and 75% applied; the Institute handles consultancy projects and
sponsored projects both from private industry as well from Government agencies. The
Institute provides technical services and executes grants-in-aid projects from Government
agencies. Over the years the Institute has been able to file about 600 patents and develop
more than 160 processes; out of these 110 processes have been successfully transferred to
industry both in the small scale and medium scale. As a result of this a fairly good amount is
receiyed as recurring royalties and lump sum premiums. The Institute has laid equal
emphasis on human resource development and upgradation of knowledge for which short
term and refresher courses are given particularly for those involved in this area of science
technology and industry. Over the last five years the major contributions of the Institute
have been in the area of perfecting the Supervisory Control and Monitoring and Data
Acquisition System for monitoring the corrosion in off-shore and on-shore structures, oil and
water pipelines, etc. The Institute was given a specific responsibility to develop a particular
type of battery for use in the National Literacy Mission; the Institute has. perfected the
technology which has been transferred to five Industries which are now making the product
and selling it at subsidised price. The Institute’s work in the area of chromium metal plating,
development of sensors for monitoring pollution, and development of electrocarboxylation
and sulpha-oriented products has also been quite significant.


36. The Committee was told that for the last 10 years the policy of the Central
Electrochemical Research Institute (CECRI) has been to interact with strategic departments
like the Department of Atomic Energy, Defence Research and Development Organisation
(DRDO), and its laboratories like DMRL and the Department of Space and its scientific
institutions such as the Vikram Sarabhai Space Research Centre and the Liquid Propulsion
Centre. The Institute has been a successful participant in developing electroforming
techniques for rocket engines which can be used for liquid fuel burning. This is a part of the
programme for developing the cryogenic engine for GSLV. The Institute has been able to
successfully fabricate both one tonne and prototype of 12 tonne rocket cryogenic engines,
and electroform them according to the strict space regulations, and to deliver them for
testing. The Institute has been doing metal and titanium coating on a variety of other stable
electrodes for nuclear processing of fuels; in this area the Institute has been extending all
necessary help to the Department of Atomic Energy. The Institute has also offered some
major turn-key technologies to various industries. However, out of 170 processes, the
Institute has not been able to generate more than a dozen real turn-key technologies in the
sense of planning, engineering, structuring, final fabrication and delivering or establishing
them. The Institute has also been engaged on doing almost 200 consultancy and technical
services every year; interaction with public as well as private sector undertakings has been
on an ongoing basis.

37. Around 6.5% of the world’s production of chemicals is contributed by
electrochemicals; and India’s share of production of electrochemicals is valued at Rs. 2500
crores. In comparison with U.S.A., Japan and other developed countries where 20% of the
electrical energy produced is consumed by the electrochemical industry, only about 9% is
consumed in India. The electrochemical route for production of chemicals provides a cleaner
and more effective method of production of chemicals, but unfortunately, electricity in India
is not only expensive but also unreliable and there have been persistent problems in
supplying it at a fixed voltage. Unless these difficulties are overcome, very few industries
and entrepreneurs would like to proceed through the electrochemical route.

38. The Director, CECRI mentioned that the important inorganic chemical technologies
developed by his Institute over the years relate to sodium hydroxide, chlorates and
perchlorates of ammonium, potassium, sodium, etc. which are extensively used in bleaching
of pulp and fibres; these are also used by match box industry, and have use as explosives
and solid rocket propellant. Besides, the process for potassium iodate which is mixed with
common salt for use as iodised salt for human consumption has also been developed.
Technologies for reactive metals like lithium, sodium, calcium, magnesium, rare earth metals
and non-feactive but highly useful chromium, gallium, nickel metals have been developed
and perfected. Calcium metal has now been declared as one of the strategic metals which is
needed for making uranium and thorium. Because of the ban imposed on this metal due to
this reason, access to it in the foreign markets has become difficult. The Institute has
developed the technology and is continuously interacting and exchanging information with
the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre and the Department of Atomic Energy. The process of
recovering gallium has also been perfected by the Institute; the rate of recovery is of the
order of 60 to 70 mgms for one kilolitre solution. But because of various other problems,
not many companies are coming forward to take this on. Electrochemical fluorination to
produce value added organic compounds has been established at CECRI for the first time in
the country. The most important contribution, from the Institute, however, has been the
development of so-called Titanium Substrate Insoluble Anodes (TSIA) which, as a substitute
for degradable graphite anode, has been able to contribute to an energy saving of 400


million units of electricity every year in the electrochemical production in the country. This
apart, CECRI has developed alternative chemicals for anti-corrosive pigments e.g.,
replacement cf the toxic chromic solution with non-toxic molybdates and permanganates.
Several chemical formulations for electroplating of chromium, gold, silver, zinc, etc. have
been developed and successfully transferred to industries. In so far as organic chemicals are
concerned, the Institute has perfected the transfer of technologies for calcium gluconate and
succinic acid which are drug intermediates. The Institute is also doing work on fluoro
organic chemicals which are mainly used as surfactants and are very expensive, costing
between Rs. 85,000 to Rs. 90,000 per litre. The Institute has been using the electro-chemical
route in this process and taking help from German institutes.

39. As regards chloro-alkali industry, the technology has not been perfected as yet
vecause it requires continous upgradation, knowledge and information. Moreover, the
mercury cells have a lot of poisoning effects. The Ministry of Environment and Forests has
banned any fresh industries to be established in this area.

40. Turning to the future priorities of CECRI, the Director informed that the efforts
will be to concentrate on: high-technology-low volume products; extensive collaboration with
the strategic Departments like Atomic Energy, Defence and Space; and to contribute to the
development of products as well as processes for them. Drug intermediates will also continue
to engage the attention of CECRI with necessary collaboration with IICT, CDRI, etc.
Responding to a question as to how the Institute disseminates information about its
activities, the Director stated that one of the mandates of the CSIR is to try to serve the
interests of the region where the lab is situated; and based on this principle, information is
disseminated by CECRI widely so that the research and development work helps in
exploiting the natural resources available locally for the benefit of the people of the region.
Through pamphlets, brochures, radio talks—both in English and Tamil—, Video tapes,
refresher courses, symposia, workshops, etc. constant interaction is maintained with rural
people and those running small scale industries in the region. The Institute also publishes
regularly Journals, Bulletin of: Electro-Chemistry and ‘Current Titles’.

41. The Committee wanted to know the rationale for giving low priority to basic
research when there was greater need for it in view of the fact that developed countries were
not ready to part with front-line technologies and the country had to evolve its own
technology to emerge as a potential player on the global scene.

42. The Committee also wanted to know whether any work had been undertaken by
CECRI for development of battery operated vehicles to cope with the menace of increasing
pollution from petrol/diesel run vehicles. The Director, CECRI clarified that there was
nothing sacrosanct or special about the 75:25 percent ratio between applied and fundamental
research which was determined by the conditions as they developed. Elaborating this point
further, the Secretary of the Department said that there are no fixed guidelines for this and
enough room for flexibility is there. The ultimate plan is to focus on a few areas and be
dominant internationally with full back up of needed basic research. As regards the question
of developing battery operated vehicles, the Director, CECRI informed that the Ministry of
Non-conventional Energy Sources, Department of Electronics and the Ministry of
Environment and Forests have joined together alongwith the CSIR in a Battery Vehicle
Programme. The Secretary, however, cautioned that there are some bottlenecks facing this
programme. First, there is the question as to the distance upto which the vehicle with
battery of such a high density metal could be run before it had to be recharged. Secondly,
the weight of the vehicle is also a crucial factor. Another area is of control systems where


some good work has been done at the Electronics Laboratory at Pilani. BHEL has run some
vehicles in Delhi but the control systems in them are mostly imported. CECRI, Karaikudi
has developed some batteries, but these developments do not provide a final solution. The
battery, in fact, still remains a problem and the proposition has not yet become
commercially viable.

43. The Committee is happy that the Central Electro-chemical Research Institute,
Karaikudi has been working not only over broad areas of Electrochemical Science and
Technology of national interest, but also focusing on strategic areas of atomic energy defence
and space. Its output, in terms of the offer of major turnkey technologies to various
industries, has also been of a high order. The Committee feels that there is scope for raising
the current level of production of electrochemicals in the country, more so when it provides
an environment friendly route but the Committee realizes the problems posed by the power
situation. The Committee is happy with the role that the institute is playing with regard to the
local area in terms of. dissemination of information to enable maximum use of available
natural resources. The Committee trusts that the Institute will aslo contribute in making the
Battery Vehicle Programme a success.

44. The Director, National Chemical Laboratory, (NCL), Pune informed the Committee
that NCL is the first laboratory of CSIR to start the process of globalisation of its services.
In 1991 hydrodewaxing catalyst technology was sold to a company in Holland. Consultancy
services also have been offered to many countries. A major contract in China has been
obtained through the World Bank. Another contract has been won in U.S.A. Of the 250
patents filed by CSIR-every year, on fourth are filed by NCL, which has tremendous
industrial development strength and interacts closely with industry. NCL has a professional
marketing mechanism. It undertakes research on contract and offers technical services. The
focus of NCL is mainly on four areas, namely: catalysts; polymers; biotechnology; and
organic chemical technology. These are pursued with due emphasis on green and eco-
friendly technologies. For example, technology for important carbonate pesticides (carbaryl
and BPMC), which do not involve the production and use of Methyl Isocyanate (MIC) has
been developed and is being commercialised. Similarly, technology for Linear Alkyl Benzene
(LAB) has been developed through a process based on zeolite catalysts and this technology
too is being commercialised. Technical know-how on Ranitidine intermediate, based on a
safe process, has also been given by NCL; a US patent for it has been obtained. The
underlying philosophy of NCL is value addition to the available resources to make
indigenous industry more competitive.

45. The Committee was told that the polymers for which technology has been developed
by NCL have very limited market, their applications being in the fields of agriculture,
horticulture , etc. But usefulness and efficacy of the water absorbing polymer was gradually
realised after its effectiveness was demonstrated in an open cast mine. India Dipers use it
and now this will have applications in a wide range of industries, namely fly ash, Cement,
etc. NCL, according to its Director, aims at bringing high technology not only to the
industry but also to the common man; an example of this are the membranes which are
polymer materials capable of separating materials very selectively. This is of use in providing
bacteria free water, and to eliminate scope for water borne diseases, NCL has developed a
membrane filter water which can be put on a tap and its cost is just Rs. 15,00. A contract
has been signed with Thermax who will manufacture it. Similarly, NCL has been devising a
small membrane device with KEM Hospitals, with funding from the Department of Science
and Technology. It is expected that within a period of one and a half year this membrane
will be ready to be used in hospitals with a lot of advantage. With the use of membrane


technology, the processing time of 20 days for foot and mouth disease vaccine will be
reduced to 10 days.

46. Referring to the concern about the biodegradibility of polymers, the Director ,
mentioned that NCL has joined hands with Hindustan Lever for developing a composite
package using jute. Elaborating on other R&D aspects of NCL’s work in organic chemical
technology, he said that a number of pesticides, drugs, drug-intermediates, etc. have been
produced. Vitamin B6 (40% of which is exported), for example, is produced by Lupin India
Limited based on NCL technology. Godrej has taken up a project on Homobracinoline and
have started marketing it. NCL has also been successful in developing chemical synthetic
strategies for Epibatidine, which is 200 times stronger than morphine as a pain killer for
which a US patent has been applied for.

47. Responding to a question on the likely scenario for the chemical industry in the
post—liberalisation period, the Director, NCL submitted that the situation in the chemical
industry is rapidly changing and some chemical industries have become sick. Some industries
based on alcohol are on the verge of closure. NCL too has lost a lot of its business because
now no protection is available to it.

48. As regards the impact which the new GATT regime was going to have on the R&D
in science and technology in the country, the Director NCL pointed out, in a Note submitted
to the committee, that the Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement
was going to present the Indian S&T community with the biggest challenge, and it is in the
area of patents that the impact will be more discernible, for the reason that the norms and
standards of protection envisaged in the TRIPS Agreement are significantly different from
India’s own policies, laws and regulations. The impending change in the patent regime will
force the Indian industry as well as the R&D laboratories to move away from the well
trodden path of reverse engineering. The Indian Patents Act, 1970 provides virtually no
patent protection in the food pharmaceutical and chemical industry, whereas in terms of the
TRIPS Agteement a product patent will be required to be given in all fields of technology
without exception, and the duration of the patent has also to be at least 20 years. The
TRIPS Agreement even makes it obligatory to provide patents for engineered micro-
organisms and micro-biological processes to the exclusion of natural plant and animal
systems. The TRIPS regime poses a serious challenge to R&D institutions and the industry
in the country. R&D institutions which have so far focused on imitative research will have to
turn to innovative research. They will have to withstand the pressures of earning, and to
move away from short term revenue earning R&D programmes. R&D itself as a business,
with export potential, will emerge as a preferred strategy for both R&D Institutions and
technology-based Indian firms, provided they are able to deliver results of international
quality in time, and their costs are competitive. The area of durg research will also have to
undergo a sea change in strategy. With the acceptance of product patents, research on new
molecules will require different strategies and expensive and sophisticated infra-structure.
Since filing international patents and licensing them out will become an increasingly accepted
strategy, skills in patenting, filing reading and exploiting patents will be most crucial in the
years to come. Besides, scientific and industrial organisations such as CSIR will have to
formulate policies catering to diverse aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs). They
will be required to address themselves to the question of retaining the talent in their
institutions, because establishment of R&D centres by multinationals in the country would
attract the talented S&T people to join them due to very high remunerations and world class
facilities.

49. The Committee wanted to know the extent to which the:NCL had collaboration


arrangements with multinationals. In reply, it was pointed out that 95% of clients of NCL
are Indian companies; this include public sector as well as private sector companies.
Hindustan Organic Chemicals have a large number of technologies based on NCL processes.
Indian Petrochemical Corporation Limited (IPCL) have a Rs. 50 crore plant for producing
acrylates based essentially on NCL technology. NCL is, however, trying to do R&D by
joining hands with some multinational companies.

50. In reply to another query as to whether NCL has been successful in its efforts to
develop bamboo flowering, it was explained that something remarkable has been achieved in
this area of research. Bamboo plant normally takes 12 to 120 years to flower, but this has
now been accomplished over 4 years. Modern bio-reactor technology for increasing the seeds
is being tried to take this to the field.

Reacting to a pointed question about the standing of NCL in the area of chemical
technology today, the Director NCL stated that his laboratory is quite good in fine
chemicals, drugs, dyes and certain intermediates. Synthesis has been a very strong area,
whereas in the matter of finding new molecules for drugs not’ much has been done.

51. The Committee noted that NCL has a number of achievements to its credit and its
R&D in the chemical sector has been of a high order. It has registered a number of patents
and entered into agreements with a number of foreign companies with the aim of globalising
its services. Indian industry has also been quite responsive in taking up NCL technologies.
The Committee hopes that the technologies which are in the pipeline would be quite
productive and foreign exchange earners. The scenario vis-a-vis chemical industry in the post
liberalisation period protrayed by the Director, NCL, reflects a grim picture, as some
chemical industries have become sick and are facing closure. The Government, therefore,
would need to have close look on the problem areas of the chemical industry, which has to
play a vital role in the industrial growth of the country. Even more, of vital importance in the
long term, to effectively deal with the post-GATT era challenges, there is need for new
strategies to focus more on innovative research: this calls for high level planning, significant
financial support and non-bureaucratic approaches to management.

52. The Director, Indian Institute of Petroleum (IIP) Dehradun informed: the
Committee that IIP’s main mandate is to develop technologies, and do related basic and
applied research, in the area of petroleum refining and selected areas of petro-chemicals. In
terms of applied research, various aspects relating to technology development, as also
product or process development, and reseach projects supporting activities in the petroleum
refining and petro-chemicals industries automobiles combusion are attended to. A lot of
support work for find short term solutions to problems is also undertaken. 20 to 30% of
IIP’s work is related to basic and fundamental reseach programmes. In petroleum refining,
IIP’s strength is in separation processes, catalyst conversion processes and thermal
conversion processes. IIP is also placing due priority to the area of biotechnology, which has
a potential for dewaxing, conversion processes and oil exploration, in this connection a large
project with the Department of biotechnology is already in hand.

53. The work of IIP includes reforming (SR & CCR), hydrotreating, autoexhaust and
novel transformations using zeolite based catalysts. Expertise in separation processes has
been built through the use of liquid membranes. One of the largest technologies which the
IIP has delivered in a separation process is aromatic extraction. This technology has been
commercialized in Cochin Refineries Ltd. and Bharat Petroleum Coporation” Limited
(BPCL), Bombay. In chemical sciences, additives, intermediates, specially chemicals,
chemicals from biomass, electro-chemistry and corrosion are the areas where very extensive


research is undertaken. Aspects such as how to improve the fuel quality and reduce
emissions from engines are looked into contrinually. Major emphasis in research relating to
petroleum products is conversion of fuel and lubricants. I[P does not do only laboratory
research, but converts it into technology and makes an engineering package in collaboration
with Engineers India Ltd. which is then transferred to refining industry. Some of the major
achievements of IIP are: in the area of benzene and toluene through solvent extraction of
naphtha, solvent, dearomatization of naphtha, food grade hexane through solvent extraction.
superior kerosene/ATF through solvent extraction, solvent dewaxing and deoiling,
visbreaking technology, delayed coking technology, catalytic reforming, process for Adipic
Acid, desulphurisation of fuel gases, polymer grade hexane, process for electrode’ pitches
form petroleum heavy fractions, and antiexhaust catalysts. IIP is also working in the area of
alternative fuels, and has a collaboration with the Ministry of Non-conventional Energy
Sources. IIP has been able to replace diesel with methanol and about 100 buses of Gujarat
State Roadways Corporation are going to conduct trials by replacing diesel with methanol.
This will result in 20% savings in diesel.

54. IIP, according to its Director, has licensed 40 refining technologies. 17 plants are
under commercial operation and 23 are under implementation. IIP has developed small
technologies for refining process, and a very small smoke meter at the exhaust gas tail. It
has also recently improved the LPG stove, upgrading its thermal efficiency from 68 to 72%
Sixty manufacturing companies in the country have adopted IIP’s technology and are coming
into market. As regards popularisation and marketing of technologies and products,
developed by IIP, the Committee was informed that IIP-Industry meet is organised in
different parts of the country staff from IIP go to the metropolitan cities and make
presentations. A new system of ‘product in the shelf’ has been evolved, under which
requirements of each Industry are examined, as to what it actually wants; and based on that,
proposals are mooted and technologies are passed on to industry, As a result of this, IIP has
now Rs. 40 crores worth of projects in the shelf. The Institute is now undertaking a deep
internal exércise to try to integrate its economy with the global economy.

55. Last of all, the Committee, in its series of discussions with the laboratories of CSIR
engaged in the area of chemicals, heard the Director, Central Salt and Marine Chemicals
Research Institute, (CSMCRI) Bhavnagar. The Director explained that the purpose of the
Institute was mainly to improve salt production, both in terms of quality as well as quantity.
Over the 40 years of existence of the Institute, salt production in the country has gone up
from 27 lakh tonnes to almost 130 lakh tonnes, out of which more than 50 per cent goes to
the industry and rest is used for edible purposes. Nearly 4 or 5 lakh tonnes is exported to
other countries, mainly Gulf countries. The Institute has developed a number of middle level
and low level technologies, and the Institute is concentrating on: salt and marine and
inorganic chemicals; desalination; developing membranes for use in elctro-dialysis and
reverse osmosis technology; and devleoping technology for cultivation of plant species which
can grow in wasteland or saline land. The Institute is conscious that in the new liberalised
environment there is no scope for just remaining content with the development of indigenous
technology based on reverse engineering and reasonable interaction has io be there to
ensure that the technologies developed are of a global nature. Most of the technologies
developed so far have been more or less for import substitution. For instance, the Institute
has been trying to develop a technology for bromine production after the salt is removed
from sea water by evaporation. The cellulose-acetic membranes which are used in water
machines have been developed; five years back, membranes of the value of $ 150 thousand
were exported to Thailand. In the post-liberalisation period the Institute felt that there was


need for some technology which is competitive at international level, and accordingly 3 or 4
technologies are currently in the process of being marketed. Phosphate has been banned in most
developed countries for environmental reasons, and realising the need for a substitute for
phosphate, the Institute has developed necessary technology for it. The National Aluminium
Company Ltd. has come forward to take this technology for production from a waste material
which is rich in aluminium silicate. Only Sourthern Petrochemical Industries Corporation Ltd.
(SPIC) is producing this material in the country through imported technology, and the product
based on CSMCRI technology does not only match with the SPIC product but in some respects
is better than that.

56. The Committee was infomed about some other technologies which have either been
developed by CSMCRI or are in the pipeline. Refractive grade magnesia has been developed
from bittern which is left out after salt production. As at present this material is not produced
indigenously and is totally imported to meet the requirement of about 50,000 thousand tonnes
per annum. The technology developed by CSMCRI has been assessed by the Associated
Cement Companies (ACC), which has found that the material not only meets the specifications,
but also is very competitive cost-wise. Besides, on the basis of the experience gained by the
Institute in membrane technology, TFC for desalination purposes has been developed which
meets international standards. The membrane which is used in this technology was earlier
available from a few companies in USA and Japan. The Institute did not have the technology to
manufacture this membrane and the companies would not be ready to part with their
technology. The Institute could not buy this membrane technology and only modules from some
companies could be bought. The membrane produced by the Institute was tested along with the
imported membrane and it has been found to be as good as the imported one and cost-wise it
would be much cheaper. The Institute has a Department of Science and Technology project for
this; and is in the process of commercialisation of this membrane jointly with the Madras
Refineries Ltd., which has a big desalination plant. The Institute has also undertaken work for
development of technology for cultivation of certain plant species in salt or wastelands near the
coast. One of the plant which has been developed is known as Jojoba. This is a plant which
grows in Mexico deserts and California. The work in the Institute on this was started almost 15
years back in a farm 60 kms away from Bhavnagar. Certain elite varieties have been developed
and technology has been given to a number of companies as well as Government agencies in
various States such as Gujarat, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Orissa. The
speciality of this plant is that its dried seeds contain oil which is called liquid wax and is used for
leather finishing and important high value cosmetic applications. The market price for this oil is
around $ 30 per kilogram. Similarly, another technology for salvidora cultivation has been
developed. The salvidora again is an oil seed which grows in waste and saline lands. There are a
number of companies which are growing these plants. Both Jojoba and salvidora are now
being grown through tissue cultures. The emphais has all along been on developing clean
technologies. The Institute has been a pioneer in the field of iodisation of salt, technology for
production of iodised salt by the small scale industries is given by the Institute free of cost as per
Government’s regulations.

57. The Committee was told that the CSMCRI has been making concerted efforts in
developing technology for cultivation of marine algae which is used for agar agar production.
The emphasis is also to develop technology to produce marine algae for food purposes and
biomolecules. The Institute has a “Drugs from the Sea” programme funded by the Department
of Ocean Development, under which some 2-3 leads for different diseases such as cancer and
AIDS have been isolated from marine organism. This is a 14 laboratory coordinated
programme.


58. The Director emphasised that his Institute has been working primarily on a
commodity of low value but large volume. As a result of the training imparted by the
Institute to a large number of people, the quality of salt in the Runn of Kutch has gone up
so much so that the salt is now going for industrial use whereas earlier it was mainly
confined to edible sector. Through this the labour force has benefited, industry has benefited
and the market price of salt has gone up. The Institute has a number of strategies for the
post-liberalisation period. It wants to re-orient its activities and focus on economically viable
processes and emphasise commercialisation. Fully conscious of the challenges that the post
GATT regime poses, the Committee was told that the Institute would accord necessary
priority to research relevant for its future programmes. Modern methods, biotechnology and
other techniques would be employed to develop better species of Jojoba, Salvidora, etc. and
even better sea weed, which has great potential in terms of protein and could be used for
edible purposes. The Institute is also closely interacting with the Central Leather Research
Institute (CLRI) and National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI),
Nagpur etc. The Institute has developed a number of products which are patented in India;
in the coming years the Institute proposes to file patents abroad as well. Out of 42 processes
developed, 35 have been released and 300 licences for the processes have been awarded.
The Institute has 85 consultancy projects to its credit and the number of total patents filed is
284.

59. When asked about the involvement of some foreign companies in the manufacture
of salt, and the capabilities of indigenous industry in producing enough good quality salt, the
Director of the Institute replied that the standards of salt required by the industry have been
increasing all the time. The latest standards call for very low magnesium and calcium
content. The Institute has been working on this for quite some time and it has acquired a
technology with which this kind of salt could be produced.

60. As regards the point as to why indigenous salt is not as good as the American salt or
the Australian salt, it was explained that for improving the quality of indigenous salt the
Institute has a technology which has to be applied on a large scale. This aspect is engaging
the attention of the Institute. and some international companies are being consulted. The
Committee wanted to know as to why there was any need for collaboration with multi-
national companies in a sector like salt. It was stated that the Institute wanted to do it with
GHCL in one of its factories, and a demonstration was also given to them but finally they
compared this with the imported technology which was superior. The Director was candid
enough in admitting that the Institute does not yet have expertise in the country on
engineering aspects to compete with foreign technology, and hence they have to build up
necessary expertise by importing the technology.

61. The Committee feels that India has a vast coastline and there is enough potential for
production of both average as well as high purity salt. There does not appear to be any need
for entry of multinationals into an area like this. The Central Salt and Marine Chemicals
Research Institute, which has a clear mandate to bring about improvements both in terms of
quality as well as quantity in salt production in the country, should strengthen its R&D
appropriately and interact appropriately with other CSIR laboratories and engineering design
and consultancy organizations so that high purity salt is produced indigenously, requirements
of industry are met substantially and the need for import of salt or technology therefor, is

62. The Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research again, who clarified some of the points which had emerged in the light of the

*scussions which the Committee had with the Directors of 5 CSIR laboratories working in


21

the chemical sector. Explaining a point as to why the cost of the drugs manufactured in
India is lower, he said that it is partly due to the reason that product patent is not being
observed, with the result that the expenses which are incurred in developing a new drug are
not there. High drug prices are a way for the large pharmaceutical companies abroad to
recover research costs as also to generate high profits. Besides, the laboratories in the
country are very good in finding new and innovative processes which, as compared to the
processes adopted in other countries, are often more efficient. Then there are the standard
aspects relating to lower costs of production in India. However, because of the product
patent coming in with the new TRIPS based regime, the scenario will change in the coming
years. As regards the results of trials to assess the potential use of centchroman as an anti
breast cancer drug, and against osteoporosis, the Secretary stated that one foreign company,
Zymo Genetics, is working on it along with the Central Drug Research Institute. If this
succeeds, this will be the only drug for osteoporosis and will have an enormous market.
There is an agreement that the royalties and other profits which will accrue on this account
will be shared with CSIR. Taking due notice of the concern expressed by the Committee
about the weakness of CSIR in the area of technology transfer and marketing mechanisms,
the Secretary submitted that not only the CSIR Headquarters but all its laboratories have
been treating this as their number one priority. as a result of which the linkages with
industries have grown and the confidence of the industry in CSIR technology, particularly in
the chemical sector, is very high today. Notwithstanding this, he, however, conceded that
CSIR’s total external cash flow from transfer of technology is still not as high as it should
be. To a question as to why the technology for mosquito repellant is still being imported and
indigenous industry, particularly CSIR, was not taking necessary steps even in such a small
sector, the Secretary replied that the mosquito repellant is an insecticide called allethrin and
the domestic demand for this is just 12 to 15 tonnes annually which is not sufficient for
setting up a commercially viable plant. Nevertheless, the IICT is coordinating with one of
the major producers of mosquito repellant for development of this technology on a
sponsorship basis and the possibility of the use of Azadrachtin derived from Neem is also
being explored.

63. Replying to a question from the Conimittee as to what were the specific industries
which were using catalyst technologies, the Secretary of the Department stated that M6
United Catalysts India Ltd. and M4 International Catalysts Ltd. are manufacturing and
supplying CSIR developed catalysts. Besides, a number of CSIR developed catalysts are
being used by the industry. In this context he referred to bimetallic reforming catalyst for
aromatics production—Indian Petrochemical Corporation Limited (I.P.C.L.); Octane
number improver for gasoline—Madras Refinery Ltd. (M.R.L.); zeolite catalysts for
isomerisation of xylenes—Indian Petrochemical Corporation Limited (I.P.C.L.); alkalisation
of Benzene (Hindustan Polymers); hydrodewaxing of heavy fraction of crude petroleum
(AKZO, Holland); iron-molybdate catalyst for Formaldehyde production (Cibatul), etc.

64. The Committee wanted to know the status of development of biopesticides and
biofertilisers in CSIR, to which it was pointed out that CSMCRI has carried out some
studies on the use of marine algae grown in Saurashtra and Coromandal coasts as
biofertilisers. Further work is in progress but still no standard technology is available to be
offered. ILCT has, however, done some work in the area of biopesticides . This is an area
that the Department of Biotechnology has been pursuing with various other national
institutions.

65. The Committee is very appreciative of the R&D work undertaken by the CSIR
laboratories in the area of chemicals. A great deal of this has involved reverse engineering,


import substitution and development of innovative process technologies for known products.
This had led to large volume production of many chemicals needed in various sectors of
national development. It is equally heartening that the R&D effort is constantly focussing on
environmentally clean technologies and on safer chemicals and process routes which is
essential. The Committee has, however, on the basis of its examination of the working of these
laboratories, found that there are weak spots which need immediate attention if the challenges
posed in the post-liberalisation era in the country and new TRIPS based regimes are to be
seriously met, and India has to emerge as a self reliant economic force on the global platform.
The Committee has been informed that CSIR has entered into agreements with quite a few
foreign companies, as part of its new strategies; but its own programmes relating to
innovative research and development of new technologies have to be considerably strengthened
before it becomes a serious international player. This calls for much more. integration and
coordination of work of the various CSIR laboratories as also with engineering design and
consultancy firms. The Committee is concerned that even though technologies in some
important areas of chemical industry have been developed by the CSIR laboratories yet the
response from the industry in taking these up has not been as positive as it should have been.
The Committee feels that this is not so much due to the lack of quality of these technologies
but is largely due to the lack of awareness in industry about the capabilities of CSIR and a
tendency to go in for proven production technologies from abroad. The Committee has noted
that CSIR has taken some initiative to publicise its technologies, but it appears that individual
laboratories are dealing with this largely on their own. Inter laboratory coordination within
CSIR and development of a proper mechanism for marketing and transferring technologies to
the industry is called for. The Secretary of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research has admitted that these aspects are seriously engaging the attention of CSIR; and
strategies are being devised to suitably strengthen these aspects. Linkages with industry are
being established, and in some of the laboratories transfer of technology is now a part of the
project right from its inception; the project itself is designed in consultation with the
concerned industry; fairly high representation is given to industry in the Research Advisory
Councils. The Committee, however, feels that there is need for a more dynamic perspective
planning to remedy the weaknesses in these vital areas. Coupled with this is the need for
CSIR to strengthen its capabilities in fundamental and basic research. The Committee feels
that this is not getting the necessary priority. The basic research capabilities have to be
broadly in the area of relevance to CSIR’s programmes. Universities and other academic
institutions too have to be involved in the gigantic task of developing a very strong base of
fundamental research in the country to cope with the emerging area of knowledge based high
technologies. CSIR has done a commendable job over the years in supporting such research in
the educational sector of India through its Extra Mural Programmes.

66. The Committee is concerned that the CSIR laboratories do not have a strong base in
respect of design and engineering capabilities. CSIR is no doubt seized of its handicaps in this
regard and efforts are under way to join hands with design organisations like Engineers India
Ltd. The Committee, feels that such. linkages have to be put urgently on a realistic and sound
basis so that the technology packages offered by CSIR are readily acceptable by industry.
Such linkages are no doubt, related to projects and technologies and some laboratories seem
to have established better linkages in this regard.

67. The Committee has found that many hazardous chemicals which pose a danger not
only to the health of the people but also to the environment still continue to be in use in our
country. The Committee recommends to the Government to examine this problem in its


entirety, particularly the implications arising from the use of toxic chemicals and of hazardous
industrial process routes, and ensure expeditious action for replacement of these chemicals
with less toxic and environment friendly chemicals and better processes.

68. On the basis of the evidence of the Directors of the 5 chemical laboratories of CSIR,
view has clearly emerged about the problems inherent in dealing with the scenario that is
unfolding with the operationalization of the new TRIPS regime. The Committee notes that
there exists a patenting unit in the CSIR; but the Committee clearly feels that its operations
are not of a scale as to match with the requirements of CSIR and on a national scale. CSIR
has plans to expand this unit, but the Committee feels that the area of patenting needs to be
looked at on an urgent basis with far greater strengthening than appears from current plans.
The emerging situation is serious and calls for determined efforts. The Committee
recommends that suitable steps be initiated by government in this area at the highest level and
services of experts and professionals be engaged. This will call for orientation of research
towards innovative research that can lead to patents, support for such research and for filing
patents nationally and internationally, strengthing patent search mechanism ability to deal
with patent violations awareness building relating to patents and patentability of research,
creating legal system capable of dealing with these new developments, and ensuring that
national interests are safeguarded in the many grey areas of emerging science and technology.

69. The Committee has noted that most of the CSIR laboratories engaged in the chemical
sector are quite old having been set up 30-40 years back; modernisation of these labs in a big
way is essential if they have to emerge as potential global players. Modernisation apart, for
which substantial funds are needed, the CSIR labs are not even in a position to manage their
regular operations with the help of existing allocations; substantial amounts are diverted from
plan to non-plan areas and what is left for plan purposes is greatly reduced. This is in spite of
the fact that they have been able to generate extra-budgetary resources. In such a situation it
would be unfair to expect them to compete effectively in the international arena. Government
has, therefore, to seriously examine the financial implications of their operations, iheir
viability and a way has to be found to ensure that they are effective instruments of not only
national development but also global competition. This will call for significant additional
funding by Government. It is equally important that the CSIR management evolve suitable
ways to make the CSIR labs operate on a self sustaining basis which is possible only if they
come out with technologies in which industry is interested and willing to pay for. If the
Government is not in a position to make immediately available all the funds required for a
meaningful modernization programme, then the Committee feels that the CSIR management
should identify core areas and projects which need immediate attention and the Government
should meet the full financial requirement of CSIR for these areas. This will result in
modernization in some way. CSIR should also appreciate that modernization has to be not
only in terms of facilities, infrastructure and equipment. It is necessary that the personnel are
also of the highest quality and imbued with a sense of elan and enthusiasm. This calls for
attention to human resource development and personnel policies appropriate to this need.

70. The post-GATT era places a lot of responsibility not only on the Government but also
on industry. With the advent of foreign companies into some significant sectors of industry in
our country, indigenous industry will have to compete with their technologies. For this
matching effort will have to be made by substantially increasing allocations for their own
R&D units, which are at present abysmally low. The country cannot indefinitely depend upon
import of foreign technologies; these in any case are, as submitted to the Committee, 10 to 15
years old and there is a general approach’ of foreign companies not to part with their latest


technologies. Therefore, in order to meet the requirements of the post—liberalisation period,
technologies will have to be evolved which would stand on a par with those of the foreign
companies. This calls for an integrated approach among all the scientific institutions and
laboratories engaged in R&D in different sectors and industry.

SYED SIBTEY RAZI

Chairman

New ऐप; Committee on Science & Technology
19th June, 1995 Environment & Forests


MINUTES



MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS

XVII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 26th October, 1994 in Room No.
63, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi——Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi

. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
Shri N. Giri Prasad

Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
. Dr. Ranbir Singh

. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav

LOK SABHA

8. Shri P.C. Chacko

9. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
10. Shri Jitendra Nath Das
11. Shri Oscar Fernandes

12. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
13. Shri Harpal Panwar

14. Shri Chandresh Patel

15. Shri Vijay Naval Patil

16. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
17. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
18. Shri Harchand Singh

19. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
20. Shri K.G. Shivappa

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

2. Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary

3. Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
4. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL
RESEARCH

Dr. S.K. Joshi, Secretary of the Department and Director General, Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)

Shri Dilip Kumar, Joint Secretary

Dr. A.V. Rama Rao, Director, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad
Dr. G.V. Subba Rao, Director, Central Electrochemicals Research Institute, Karaikudi
Dr. H.R. Bhojwani, Head, Technology Utilisation Division, CSIR

५3 9४ ७ + ० ७


Dr. S.D. Garg, Head, Planning Division, CSIR
Shri S.K. Chakladhar, Scientist

Shri S.N. Sharma, Scientist

Smt. C.B. Lakshmi, Scientist

Shri R.P. Sharma, Under Secretary

2. At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed Dr. Ranbir Singh a new
member nominated to the Committee.

3. The Committee thereafter, took up consideration of the R&D programmes of the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) in the area of chemicals. The
Secretary of the Department, who is also Director General, Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research assisted by other officials gave an overview of the work being done by
different laboratories of the CSIR in the area of chemicals and the Members sought
clarifications from him on points arising therefrom.

4. The discussion on the subject under consideration of the Committee remained
inconclusive. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.48 p.m. to meet againt at 11.00 a.m. on October
27, 1994.


XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING

The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. to 1.42 p.m. and again from 3.00 p.m. to 4.34 p.m.
-on Thursday, the 27th October, 1994 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri N. Giri Prasad

3. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
4. Dr. Ranbir Singh

5. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav

LOK SABHA

6. Shri P.C. Chacko

7. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia

8. Shri Sharad Dighe

9. Shri Oscar Fernandes

10. Shri P. Kumarasamy

11. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee

12. Shri Balraj Passi

13. Shri Chandresh Patel

14. Shri Vijay Naval Patil

15. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
16. Shri Rama Chandra Rath

17. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
18. Shri Harchand Singh

19. Shri Ram Prasad Singh

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

3. Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary

4. Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
5. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL
RESEARCH

Dr. S.K. Joshi, Secretary of the Department and ‘Director General, Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)

Shri Dilip Kumar, Joint Secretary

Dr. S.D. Garg, Head, Planning Division, CSIR
Shri S.K. Chakladhar, Scientist

Shri S.N. Sharma, Scientist

Smt. C.B. Lakshmi, Scientist

Shri R.P. Sharma, Under Secretary


REPRESENTATIVE OF INDIAN INSTITUTE OF CHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY,
HYDERABAD

Dr. A.V. Rama Rao, Director

REPRESENTATIVE OF CENTRAL ELECTROCHEMICALS RESEARCH INSTITUTE,
KARAIKUDI

Dr. G.V. Subba Rao, Director

2. The Committee took up further consideration of R&D programmes of the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research in the area of chemicals and heard the
Directors of Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad and Central
Electrochemicals Research Institute, Karaikudi (Tamil Nadu) on the specific R&D
programmes being pursued by their laboratories. The Secretary of the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research and Director General, CSIR who was present also
supplemented some of the points made by the Directors of the said two laboratories. The
Members sought clarifications on the submissions made by them which were duly replied.

3. The discussion on the subject under consideration of the Committee remained
inconclusive.

4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.34 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on
November 9, 1994.


XxX
TWENTIETH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday the 9th November, 1994 in Room

No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT

1:

Syed Sibtey Razi—Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

2.
3.
4.
GH

Shri Suresh Pachouri
Shri N. Giri Prasad

Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
Dr. Ranbir Singh

LOK SABHA

. Shri Jitendra Nath Das
. Shrimati Saroj Dubey

. Shri Oscar Fernandes

. Shri Harpal Panwar

. Shri Balraj Passi

. Shri Harchand Singh

. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
. Shri K.G. Shivappa
14.

Kumari Frida Topno

SECRETARIAT

1.
2.
3:
4.
3:

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary

Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer.

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL
RESEARCH

Dr. S.K. Joshi, Secretary of the Department and Director General, Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)

Shri A. Parthasarthi, Additional Secretary

Shri S.D. Garg, Head, Planning Division, CSIR
Shri K.V. Srinivasan, Joint Advisor

Shri 5.6. Chakladhar, Scientist

Shri S.N. Sharma, Scientist

Smt. C.B. Lakshmi, Scientist

Shri R.P. Sharma, Under Secretary

REPRESENTATIVE OF INDIAN NATIONAL CHEMICAL LABORATORY, PUNE

Dr. R.A. Mashelkar, Director

REPRESENTATIVE OF INDIAN INSTITUTE OF PETROLEUM, DEHRADUN

Dr. T.S.R. Prasada Rao, Director


2. The Committee, after some discussion, in order to acquaint itself with the working of
the National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI), Nagpur, particularly
with regard to the work being done by it in the area of catalytic convertors decided that a
small study group comprising of seven members of the Committee to be nominated by the
Chairman of the Committee should visit the Institute for the purpose. The Committee also
authorised its Chairman to decide about the dates of the proposed visit and to obtain the
permission of the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha therefor.

.3. The Committee thereafter took up further consideration of R&D Programmes of the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research in the area of chemicals and heard the
Director, National Chemical Laboratory, Pune on the specific R&D Programmes being
pursued by the Laboratory. The members sought clarifications from the Director on some of
the points arising out of the submissions made by him which were duly replied.

4. The discussion on the subject under consideration of the Committee remained
inconclusive. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on
November 10, -1994.


TWENTY FIRST MEETING

The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. to 12.53 p.m. and again from 3.00 p.m. to 4.35 P.M.
on Thursday, the 10th November, 1994 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi—Chairman*
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
. Prof. M.G.K. Menon

. Shri Suresh Pachouri

. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
. Dr. Ranbir Singh

7. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav

K SABHA

8. Shrimati Saroj Dubey

9. Shri P. Kumarasamy

10. Shri Harpal Panwar

11. Shri Balraj Passi

12. Shri Vijay Naval Patil
13. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
14. Shri Rama Chandra Rath
15. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
16. Shri Harchand Singh

17. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
18. Shri K.G. Shivappa

19. Kumari Sushila Tiriya
20. Kumari Frida Topno

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

2. Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

3. Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary

4. Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
5. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL
RESEARCH

Dr. S.K. Joshi, Secretary of the Department and Director General, Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)

Shri A. Parthasarthi, Additional Secretary

Shri S.D. Garg, Head, Planning Division, CSIR
Shri S.K. Chakladhar, Scientist

Shri S.N. Sharma, Scientist

Smt. C.B. Laxmi, Scientist

Shri R.P. Sharma, Under Secretary

*At 4.30 p.m. Prof. M.G.K. Menon was in the Chair.

Anew



REPRESENTATIVES OF THE INDIAN INSTITUTE OF PETROLEUM, DEHRADUN

Dr. T.S.R. Prasada Rao, Director
Shri K.S. Jauhari, Scientist
Shri S. Singhal, Scientist

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CENTRAL SALT & MARINE CHEMICALS RESEARCH
INSTITUTE, BHAVNAGAR

Dr. P. Natarajan, Director

2. The Committee took up further consideration of R&D Programmes of the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research in the area of chemicals and heard the
Directors/Officials concerned of the Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun and the
Central Salt & Marine Chemicals Research Institute, Bhavnagar on the specific R&D
Projects being pursued by their Laboratories. Thereafter, the Committee in its final Session,
while concluding the discussion on the subject, heard the Secretary, Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research and Director General, CSIR who also responded to the queries
raised by the Members.

3. The discussion on the subject was concluded.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
+The Committee then adjourned at 4.35 p.m.


TWELFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 19th June, 1995 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Prof. M.G.K. Menon
3. Shri N. Giri Prasad
4. Dr. Ranbir Singh

LOK SABHA

5. Shri Sharad Dighe

6. Shri Oscar Fernandes

7. Shri P. Kumarasamy

8. Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy

9. Shri Balraj Passi

10. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
11. Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
12. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
13. Shri K.G. Shivappa

14. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

15. Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

2. Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary

3. Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer

4. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer

2. The Committee took up consideration of its draft Twenty-seventh Report on the
Annual Report (1993-94) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research with
reference to its R&D programmes in the area of chemicals and adopted the same
unanimously.

3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration its draft Twenty-eighth Report
on the Annual Report (1993-94) of the Department of Electronics with reference to
Software Technology Parks; Electronics Hardware Technology Parks (EHTPS); Electronics
for weaker sections including women; Employment potential of Electronics; and Support of
Department of Electronics for Research and Development, particularly with regard to
Technology Development Council, National Radar Council and Industrial Promotion and
adopted the same unanimously.

4. The Committee decided to present these Reports to both the Houses of Parliament
on the 2nd day of the ensuing monsoon session. The Committee authorised its Chairman
and in his absence, Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh to present these Reports to the Rajya Sabha
and Shri Oscar Fernandes and in his absence, Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik to lay the
Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 p.m.