TWO HUNDRED FORTY SIXTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th December, 2013)
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Thirty Ninth Report of the 
Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the 
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of 
Atomic Energy
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
246
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS


Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

33
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED FORTY SIXTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Thirty Ninth Report of the
Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of
Atomic Energy
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  18 th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  18 th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—13
5. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS .................................................................................................. 15—18
6. I NDEX OF R EPORTS ................................................................................................................. 19—32

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2013-14)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
3. Shri M. Rama Jois
4. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
5. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi
8. Shrimati Maya Singh
9. Shri Alok Tiwari
10. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
12. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
13. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
14. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase
15. Dr. Ajay Kumar
16. Shri O.S. Manian
17. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
18. Shri Basori Singh Masram
19. Shri Vincent H. Pala
20. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
21. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
22. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
23. Shri M.B. Rajesh
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
25. Shri Yashvir Singh
26. Shrimati Supriya Sule
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
30. Shri Ramakant Yadav
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Forty-sixth Report on the Action Taken by the
Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations contained in Two Hundred Thirty-ninth
Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2013-2014) of the Department of Atomic
Energy.
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Atomic
Energy on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Thirty-ninth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2013-2014) of the Department of Atomic Energy which was
presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8
th May, 2013.
3. There were 17 recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Thirty-ninth Report of the
Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the
Department on 2
nd August, 2013.
4. In the meeting held on 17 th December, 2013, the Committee considered the draft Action
Taken Report and adopted the same.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
17th December , 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests

(iv)
ACRONYMS
AMD : Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration and Research
ASCs : Area Standing Committees
BARC : Bhabha Atomic Research Centre
BHAVINI : Bharatiya Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Ltd.
BRIT : Board of Radiation and Isotope Technology
BRNS : Board of Research in Nuclear Sciences
DAE : Department of Atomic Energy
DST : Department of Science and Technology
KPM Project : Kylleng-Pyndengsohiong Mawthabah
MDWS : Ministry of Drinking W ater Supply
NPCIL : Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd.
PFBR : Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor
SHRI : Sewage Sludge Hygenisation Research Irradiator
TMC : Tata Memorial Centre
UCIL : Uranium Corporation of India Ltd.

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Atomic
Energy on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Thirty Ninth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Atomic Energy, which was
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 8 th May, 2013. The Committee had in all made
seventeen recommendations and observations each in the report. Action Taken Note on the report
was received by the Committee on 2 nd August, 2013. The Committee, on examination of Action
Taken Notes, however, is not satisfied with action taken by the Department in respect of eight
recommendations/observations and would like the Department to take further action in respect of
such recommendations as indicated in the Report.
General observations on the Action Taken Note
Before coming to the Action Taken Report, the Committee would like to make some critical
remarks on the manner in which the Action Taken Note has been prepared by Department of
Atomic Energy. The Committee had made 17 observations in its report, which contained very
critical and crucial comments on the functioning of the Department and called for action on the
part of the Department. But the Department of Atomic Energy has quite conveniently sidelined and
ignored those observations terming them ‘for information only’. Observations contained in the
report of the Committee constitute an important and integral part of the report which underline
deficiencies, discrepancies and laxity in implementation of the programmes/schemes of the
Department and as such it becomes imperative for the Department to apprise the Committee of the
steps taken to overcome them. The Committee, therefore, taking a very serious view on the
matter, recommends that henceforth the Department should furnish Action Taken Note on
actionable observations of the Committee also as per the usual practice wherever critical
comments highlighting lacunae and laxity have been made in the Report.
Yet another grey area in the Action Taken Note of the Department lies in the fact that the
Department instead of responding to each recommendation of the Committee individually and
separately has bunched together several recommendations and furnished a common and
consolidated reply. This has resulted in the crux and essence of the recommendations getting lost
sight of and the replies becoming neither specific, nor pointed. As such, the Committee
recommends that in future Action Taken Note in respect of each and every recommendation
should be given separately and individually.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee
on the Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy are set out in the subsequent
paragraphs:-
Recommendation (Para 11.2)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that while the Department of Atomic Energy
should ensure full utilisation of allocated budgetary resources and should ask for additional funds
only when it is in a position to utilise additional funds asked for by it. The Committee also
recommends that Ministry of Finance should adequately accommodate the demand of the
Ministry to obviate adverse effects on the critical or core activities of the Department due to
shortage of funds.

2
Recommendation (Para 13.3)
The Committee is constrained to observe that if such lame, flimsy grounds for
underutilization of approved outlay are allowed to persist year after year, the Department of Atomic
Energy will never be in a position to come out of the malady of underutilization of budgetary
resources which are not in plenty and surplus, but limited and allocated to scientific departments
with the high hope of reaping their benefits in the larger interests of the society more than what
other sectors of the economy could have produced. This is the aspiration, this is the expectation
that drives the Minister of Finance, Government of India to stand in the Parliament and declare
“Despite our constraints, we must find resources for science and technology and for Space,  Atomic
Energy, etc.”. The Committee is of the considered view that Department of Atomic Energy must
seriously realize and feel the constraints pointed out by the Finance Minister and try to grab the
opportunity with both the hands and leave no stone unturned to rise to the occasion and utilize fully
the scarce resources that are allocated to it denying and ignoring other needy and performing
Sectors of the economy. By doing this, the Department will not only be doing justice to the faith
reposed by the people and the Government in its ability to deliver, doing great service to the nation
and the people but also be able to upkeep its image as a scientific department of great credibility,
repute and excellence. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department must make a
firm resolve and unflinching commitment to fully utilize the resources allocated to the Department
in 2013-14.
Recommendation (Para 13.5)
In view of the above, the Committee feels that the business as usual approach adopted by
the Department, hitherto, is not at all acceptable and, therefore, recommends that the Department
must strive hard to work out some mechanism/modalities so as to ensure that realistic projections
are made of its budgetary requirements and the allocated outlay optimally utilized. The Department
should not ask for more funds than what it can optimally utilise for. By underutilizing its allocated
resources, the Department becomes responsible for unjustified denial of resources to other priority
areas thereby adversely impacting the development of the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should give sincere and serious consideration to the suggestions
given by the Committee for optimal utilisation of allocated budgetary resources and take necessary
steps in this regard, so that it need not come to the Committee next year with the same old
excuses for underutilization of budgetary resources.
Action Taken by Government
In the Department, a multilayer monitoring system is available to monitor and review the
progress of Plan projects. To further strengthen the system, a computer based monitoring system
is being developed by the Department to monitor and review the progress of expenditure which will
eliminate any possibility of underutilisation/non-utilisation of funds. Further, the Department has
codified all the important orders/instructions issued by the Planning Commission and the Ministry
of Finance for Plan Schemes/Projects during Eleventh and Twelfth Plan as a handy compendium.
The compendium is supplied to all the end users who are engaged in implementation of Plan progress.
The recommendations of the Committee have been brought to the notice of all the Heads
of Constituent Units/Aided Institutions/Public Sector Undertakings of the Department. All efforts
will be made for full utilisation of the budget allocation.
Further, the recommendation of the Committee that “the Department’s Demand for funds
should be adequately accommodated to obviate adverse effects on the critical or core activities due
to shortage of funds” will be brought to the notice of the Ministry of Finance at Revised Estimate
stage.

3
Comments (Paras 11.2, 13.3 and 13.5)
The Department has reproduced a portion of its reply which was given in the Action
Taken Note on the Two Hundred and Twenty Second Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants 2012-13. Moreover, the Department has not made any comment on the
suggestions/solutions put forth by the Committee in Para 13.4 of its Report, implying
thereby that it has not given serious thoughts to them. The Committee also takes note of
the fact that the Department has not cared to respond to the recommendation of the
Committee to work out some mechanism/modality to ensure realistic projections of its
budgetary requirements. This fails to manifest the seriousness of the Department in
tackling the malady of underutilization of budgetary allocations. The Committee hopes that
the computer based monitoring system being developed by the Department to monitor and
review the progress of expenditure will be backed by human efforts too to eliminate
underutilization/non-utilization of funds. The Committee withholds its further comments on
the issue and will wait for the results of its new computer based monitoring system which
it hopes will be made operational in time to monitor fund utilisation in this fiscal itself.
RECOMMENDATION (Para 14.4)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that to earn the goodwill, trust and confidence of
the people, the Department should revisit the whole gamut of strategy and communication and
evolve a long term programme and allocate adequate budgetary resources for it. The Committee
also recommends that to take the authentic and authoritative messages to the public about safety
and security of the nuclear power programmes, the Department should think in terms of
constituting Area Standing Committees on public understanding of nuclear technologies consisting
of reputed, respected and prominent public men of the area and scientists which should undertake
the task to educate and enlighten the people of the area of the benefits of the project to them and
allay their fears and apprehensions. The Committee also recommends that even before a project is
conceived, the Department should take stock of the likely concerns of people and formulate suitable
strategy/plan to address concerns and apprehensions of the people. The Committee further
recommends that efforts on the lines suggested by the Committee should be initiated in and around
the areas where projects are pending for long due to public protests such as Lambapur area in
Andhra Pradesh and Kylleng-Pyndengsohiong Mawthabah (KPM Project) at Meghalaya or where
projects are likely to come up. The Committee recognizes that efforts across the country in the
areas of extension of DAE societal outreach programme, implementation of appropriate mechanism
of communication through various media, and implementation of specific projects in different parts
of the country will need funding under Non-Plan. In view of this the Committee recommends that
DAE should be provided money to the extent of approx. hundred crores of rupees per year, based
on annual requirement, to set up a fund for public outreach and public information activities.
Action Taken by Government
The observations of the Committee, that the Department should be provided Rs.100 crore
approximately to set up a fund for Public Outreach and Public Information Activities have been
noted in the Department and appropriate action will be initiated to get the additional funds from
Ministry of Finance for the above purpose.
DAE has drawn up a detailed plan to strengthen the Public Outreach activities. A proposal
to this effect is being placed before the Atomic Energy Commission for its approval. Apart from
above, a long term Public Outreach Program has also been evolved and instituted in Nuclear Power
Corporation of India Ltd. (NPCIL), which includes permanent capacity addition, sustained on-going
public outreach programmes and new initiatives for rural outreach. A detailed action plan with a

4
set of objectives, actions and timelines has been drawn up and issued. Organisational mechanism
has been put in place with an Apex Committee at Headquarters with working groups at each site
and at Headquarters. A Review and monitoring mechanism is put in place. Detailed monthly reports
are being sent to DAE/Government on various Public Awareness activities carried out by NPCIL.
Approval of the NPCIL Board has been obtained in-principle for allocation for Public Awareness
programmes over five years and adequate allocation of funds for the programme are being made
in the annual budgets.
The thrust areas of Public Awareness activities of NPCIL have been upon people living in
the vicinity of existing nuclear power plants in operation and under construction, around the sites
accorded ‘in principle’ approval for locating nuclear power plants in future and around the
prospective sites which have been offered by State Governments for setting up nuclear power
plants and are currently under evaluation.
The target groups of outreach, apart from the local communities around nuclear power plant
sites have been people’s representatives, community leaders, local opinion makers, Central and State
Government Officials at various levels, Doctors and Paramedical staff, local Press and Media and
School and College Students and Faculty. These groups have been identified to achieve a multiplier
effect of the efforts at allaying the concerns of the people.
As a part of its strategy of outreach, DAE/NPCIL has also partnered with more than 35
professional organisations such as Vigyan Prasar (DST, GOI), National Council of Science
Museums (Ministry of Culture, GOI) etc. DAE/NPCIL plans to pursue its public awareness
programme over the long term in a sustained manner, adopting a multi pronged approach.
Uranium Corporation of India Ltd. (UCIL) shall continue its efforts to allay the fear of the
people around of uranium mining projects at KPM in Meghalaya and Lambapur in Andhra Pradesh
on the issues of radiation and health effects. Assistance of local opinion makers will be taken to
explain on these issues to the people in their own languages. The documents in local languages
explaining the positive effects of nuclear energy, uranium mining and other relevant issues will be
made available to public.
Comments (Para 14.4)
The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the reply.
Recommendation (Para 15)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the construction work of High Flux Reactors
proposed to be undertaken at Visakhapatnam needs to be put on fast track and all out efforts
should be made to ensure its completion in the shortest possible time by devising a time schedule.
Action Taken by Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been taken note of and every possible effort is
being made to put the project on fast track and implement it at the earliest. The Project ‘High Flux
Research Reactor and Isotope Processing Laboratory Building’ is in progress and the Detailed
Project Report is under scrutiny in the Department for issue of financial sanction.
Comments (Para 15)
The Committee takes note of the reply but would like the Department to lay a time
schedule for completion and commissioning of High Flux Reactors at Visakhapatnam for
effective monitoring of its progress.

5
Recommendation (Para 16.3)
The Tata Memorial Centre (TMC), therefore, needs to rise to the occasion and try its level
best to meet the expectations of the poor and the needy. The Committee believes that TMC has
the potential to do this and resource constraint is not coming in the way of its extension activities
because despite repeated query about the funds allocated to the Centre being sufficient or
otherwise, the Department did not come out with the categorical demand for additional resources.
The Committee expresses its anguish over the fact that as against the Plan allocation of Rs. 77.95
crores at the BE Stage in the year 2012-13, TMC has revised Plan allocation of Rs. 31.00 crores
and worst, it was not able to incur even a single penny upto January, 2013. Out of the total
allocation both Plan, as well as, Non-Plan of Rs. 248.14 crores, only an amount of Rs. 162.43
crores was expected to be utilised upto January, 2013. This sorry state of affairs, the Committee
feels stands in a stark contrast to the aspirations, expectations and requirements of the people of
the country which Centres of repute and excellence like TMC are expected to fulfill. The
Committee takes a very serious view on the matter that the approved outlay has been allowed to
go waste and ultimately lapse in such a manner. When the Committee enquired about the reasons
for reduction in allocation at the RE Stage, the replies were – approval was still awaited for the
establishment of Cancer Hospital in Vizag; delay in receipt of approval for project titled Advanced
Facilities for diagnostics and services; advanced facilities for cancer research and nuclear
medicines; delay in construction activity for the project “Centre for Cancer epidemiology”, etc. The
Committee notes that there has been undue delay in the approval of plan projects by the Planning
Commission practically ruling out the possibility of making any significant expenditure under new
plan projects in the financial year 2012-13. The Committee is of the view that the procedural
aspects ought to have been handled better and a proactive approach adopted to get the desired
results which sadly was lacking. The Committee also feels that considering the very large number
of projects as well as their higher value, Secretary, DAE and the Atomic Energy Commission
should be delegated enhanced financial powers for approval of projects in an expeditious and timely
manner.
Action Taken by Government
Since Twelfth Plan allocation by the Planning Commission, the Department is taking
expeditious action for administrative and financial sanctions of Plan Projects.
As per the recommendations of the Committee, the Department is preparing a paper on
seeking enhancement of financial powers for approval of projects by Secretary, DAE and Atomic
Energy Commission.
Comments (Para 16.3)
The Committee notes its displeasure that the Department has not explained the
reasons why TMC has not been able to expand its activities despite the fact that there was
no budgetary constraint. It has, instead, reiterated its routine and hackneyed reply that the
Department is taking expeditious action for administrative and financial sanctions of plan
projects. The Committee, therefore, recommends that administrative and procedural matter
should in future be handled in a more proactive manner.
Recommendation (Para 16.4)
The Committee feels that TMC must see its responsibilities through the prism of those who
are suffering from the dreaded and deadly disease of Cancer, but has nobody to come to their
rescue or their succour. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department must ensure

6
that the enhanced allocation is not only fully utilised in expanding facilities and services but should
also do so efficiently and quickly so that it could present a sound case for additional resources
at RE Stage.
Recommendation (Para 16.5)
The Committee takes a very serious view of the evasive, vague and casual reply to the
Question as to whether TMC had any coordination/cooperation with the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, the nodal agency for treatment of Cancer. What was said was that TMC were the
expert advisor to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for developing of the National Cancer
Institute in Jharjhar, Delhi. The Committee feels that since Cancer treatment is not the primary
mandate of the Department of Atomic Energy but has come as a spin off technology with the
Department and the Department is helping the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare by providing
economical and effective Cancer treatment, it recommends that the Department of Atomic Energy
must partner with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare – to achieve the rapid expansion of
quality diagnostics and treatment facilities of Cancer at affordable rates so as to cover the entire
populace of the country in a time bound manner. This will help the spread of know-how and
expertise available in Tata Memorial Centre (TMC) across the country through the larger reach, in
the health care field, of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee also
recommends that the proposed establishment of Cancer Hospital in Vizag, Chandigarh and creation
of infrastructure at other places, must be expeditiously completed in a given time frame, so that
their benefits start reaching the needy at the earliest. The Committee further recommends that the
Department must focus its attention on more and more research in the field of preventive oncology
so that the incidence of Cancer could be contained.
Recommendation (Para 17.2)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that in view of the gravity of the situation, which
in all likelihood may aggravate in time to come, the Department should seriously think of opening
Cancer Registries in Patna and at a location to be decided in U.P. to assess the severity of the
problem and identify those suffering from Cancer. The Committee also recommends that in order
to provide cheap and affordable treatment in the vicinity, the Department should as a short-term
measure, start a Cancer Centre under handholding scheme in the State Government Hospital, i.e.,
Indira Gandhi Institute, Patna within one year as assured, but in the long run a full-fledged
extension of Tata Memorial Centre should be started in AIIMS, Patna preferably in the Twelfth Five
Year Plan itself. Based on the response of Government of Uttar Pradesh decision on starting cancer
treatment facilities at Lucknow or Kanpur should also be taken expeditiously.
Action Taken by Government
Tata Memorial Centre(TMC) has carried out research to evolve treatment for common
cancers in India. The results of the research are shared with the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare for their implementation across the Country. Two such examples are (i) Low cost
screening modality by (VIA) visual inspection of cervix using ascetic acid which in the trial at
TMC conducted showed at 31% reduction in deaths. The technology and the procedure of training
to trainers has been shared with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for national
implementation. It is anticipated that once implemented, it could save over 22,000 lives of women
in India every year. These results have also been shared with the Ministry of External Affairs to
share with other developing countries for implementation which has the potential to save more than
75,000 lives globally. The intervention costs USD 1½. (ii) Low cost injection given prior to surgery
of breast cancer could save 28% of the patients who would have otherwise died of the disease.

7
TMC trains more than 300 established doctors across the country annually for upgrading
their skills and also creates about 100 new manpower every year for cancer care in the fields of
surgery, medical oncology, radiation oncology, pathology, radiology, nuclear medicine and
anesthesia.
The Project “Establishment of Cancer Hospital in Vizag” has been approved. It is proposed
to setup the Radiation Oncology and Day care Centre within the next 1½ to 2 years. An amount
of Rs.25 crore has been approved towards pre-project activities of Establishment of Cancer
Hospital in Punjab. Action is on hand to set up the Radiation Oncology and Day Care Facility in
the Sangrur District Hospital.
As far as the recommendations regarding the Cancer Centre at Indira Gandhi Institute. Patna
is concerned, a team of four eminent Doctors from Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai under the
instructions of Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission and Director, Tata Memorial Centre has
visited Indira Gandhi Institute, Patna. Report submitted by them is under consideration for
implementing.
As far as the cancer treatment facilities at Lucknow or Kanpur is concerned, it may be
stated that the Director, Tata Memorial Centre has met the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh and had
discussions regarding setting up a Hospital specializing in cancer treatment in the vicinity of
Lucknow. Director, Tata Memorial Centre is one of the advisors for technical input as well as
identifying human resources.
Comments (Para 16.4 and 16.5)
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Comments (Para 17.2)
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply given by the Department as the
position regarding setting up of a Centre of TMC in Patna remains more or less the same
as it prevailed in April, 2013, i.e., at the time of visit of a team to Patna. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates its recommendation and desires that the report submitted by the team
be expeditiously considered and appropriate action be taken so as to ensure that the TMC
Centre at Patna becomes operational by April, 2014.
Recommendation (Para 18.1)
The Committee, however, is not, at all, satisfied with the pace of progress of technology
transfer and feels that it needs to be intensified and expedited because it is only through transfer
that the benefits of technology reach the society. The Committee understands that the
Department of Atomic Energy had established an institute in the form of Board of Radiation and
Isotope Technology (BRIT) to transfer technologies relevant to medicine and healthcare, but it
has not set up any such institutionalized mechanism, for the technologies in the field of
agriculture, water purification, sludge hygienisation for treatment of municipal sewage, food
irradiation, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should create an
institutional mechanism exclusively for popularization of these technologies on the lines of BRIT.
Besides, for popularization and dissemination of technologies related to agriculture, the
Department should also evolve an effective and potent mechanism of cooperation and
coordination with the Central Agricultural Universities and the State Agricultural Universities, so
as to achieve effective dissemination of information on new seed varieties and other information
relevant to the farmers.

8
Action Taken by Government
The Department had established the Board of Radiation and Isotope Technology (BRIT), a
Constituent Unit, to transfer technologies relevant to medicine and healthcare. BRIT is implementing
technologies for which Research and Development is undertaken by Bhabha Atomic Research
Centre. Based on those technologies, BRIT is providing products and services to customers in India
and abroad. BRIT also encourages private entrepreneurs to set up radiation processing plants with
their investments for which necessary support is provided by BRIT. So far ten radiation processing
plants set up by private entrepreneurs are operational and five more are under construction. Also
supply of Co-60 radiation sources is made to these plants on chargeable basis.
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) alongwith Agricultural Universities are engaged in
developing and dissemination of breeder seeds. So far 41 Trombay crop varieties have been
released. During 2013-14, large scale breeder seed production of Trombay crop varieties will be
undertaken in order to further disseminate the same to farming community. Established mechanism
exists for release of new varieties developed by BARC.
Comments (Para 18.1)
The Department has simply stated that there is an established mechanism for release
of new varieties developed by BARC, but it has not explained as to what it is and why
Department does not wish to set up an organisation like BRIT to transfer technologies
related to agriculture, sludge hygienisation, food irradiation, etc. and therefore the
Committee reiterates its recommendation.
Recommendation (Para 19.1)
The Committee feels that yet another effective way of successfully and adequately utilizing
the socially beneficial technologies could be to integrate them with the related programmes/schemes
being run by different Ministries/ Departments of Government of India. All that the Department
needs to do is to reach out to the concerned Ministries/Departments and to impress upon them to
integrate into their programmes/projects, these proven technologies. For example, providing potable
drinking water in rural and urban areas has turned out to be a formidable challenge for the
Ministries of Rural and Urban Development/Local Administration, etc. Department of Atomic Energy
has proven technology for water purification and water desalination, which costs as less as 6 Paisa
per liter. This technology can easily be replicated at all those places facing safe potable water
problems or where underground water is contaminated with arsenic or fluoride, etc. both in urban
and rural areas of the country by getting it linked with Rural Water Mission and in the urban areas
with the Urban Local Bodies. Similarly, Department of Atomic Energy can help Ministry of Water
Resources draw a map of water hydrology by prospecting and locating availability of underground
water with the help of Isotope Hydrology Technology readily available with them so that water
tapped from the surplus area could be channelised in the arid, parched and those areas that face
drought like situation like the one being faced in Maharashtra now. This way, the Department
would also integrate the National Water Security System with the technologies available with it on
a regular basis. Likewise, the Sludge Hygienisation Research Irradiation (SHRI) technology can be
integrated with the guidelines laid down for Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) by the CPCB so that,
it could be a certified and recommended technology for use by urban and local municipal bodies
for sewage treatment, which is also emerging as a major challenge in the urban areas of the
country. This technology can also play a major role in the JNNURM Programme run by the
Ministry of Urban Development, which has a component of sewage treatment. The technology on
food irradiation could be integrated with the programmes of the Ministry of Food Processing
Industries. By doing all this, the Committee feels the Department would be able to disseminate its

9
socially beneficial technologies in a big way and their benefits would also reach easily to the people
and the society. This will also help the Department earn creditability and good will in the larger
populace and clear the apprehensions/misconceptions in the minds of the people towards atomic
energy. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department must act on the lines being
suggested by the Committee and initiate interaction with the concerned Ministries to convince them
of the relevance and efficacy of its technologies within a given time schedule. It also recommends
the Department to take all possible measures to take the technologies to the society as a technology
lying in the labyrinth of laboratory or an institution is useless and meaningless. Its real success lies
in its wider and wider applications and use.
Action Taken by Government
Ten drinking water technologies covering from desalination to water purification have been
transferred to more than thirty five private companies and some of these products are already in
the market. Discussions are underway with Punjab Government on deployment of drinking water
technology in Punjab. Discussions are also in progress with Ministry of Drinking Water Supply
(MDWS), Ministry of Rural Development-Department of Drinking Water Supply and Department of
Science and Technology (DST) for deploying of drinking water technologies. Recently, Secretary,
Ministry of New and Renewal Energy also visited Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) for
review of drinking water technology. Other recommendations of the Committee on drinking water
technology deployment will be pursued.
Department is already engaged with several States from North to North East with respect
to identifying much needed water resources and recharging of acquifiers. Several Board of
Research in Nuclear Sciences (BRNS) projects have also been sanctioned to different Universities
for this purpose. An Isotope hydrology facility has already been established at Dehradun in
collaboration with an NGO.
NISARGRUNA technology for biodegradable waste digestion and converting it to energy and
manure has been developed. So far more than 150 plants of various capacities are operational with
processing capacity of about 500 tonnes of waste daily. Another 150 such plants are under
construction in the Country. On the initiative of Planning Commission, deployment of
NISARGRUNA alongwith Sewage Sludge Hygenisation Research Irradiator (SHRI) technologies are
under discussion with concerned Ministries for deployment in large scale. A number of officials
from different Municipal Corporations across the Country visited SHRI, which is a demonstration
plant at Vadodara, Gujrat. They were appraised of the benefits of this technology. Discussions are
underway for technical support as per their requirement.
Food irradiation technology is being transferred to private entrepreneurs. So far ten radiation
processing plants set up by private entrepreneurs are operational while another five are under
various stages of construction.
All efforts are being made by the Department to disseminate spin-off technologies beneficial
to the society by technology transfer.
Comments (Para 19.1)
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation (Para 20.5)
The Committee is astonished to note that BHA VINI which is shouldering the responsibility
of building Fast Breeder Reactor has not been able to utilize even a single penny upto January, 2013,

10
out of the Plan Head B.E. allocation of Rs. 536.67 crores in 2012-13. The position prevailing in
the years 2010-11 and 2011-12 was not any better. The actual utilisation of the Budgetary Support
under Plan Head had stood at Rs. 708.24 crores as against the BE allocation of Rs. 1848.00 crores
in the year 2010-11 while in the year 2011-12, the corresponding figure was Rs. 875.00 crores
as against Rs. 1609.00 crores. The Committee also finds that the Plan Head Budgetary Support for
Power Sector over the years has been on the decline, i.e., Rs. 1848.00 crores in 2010-11
Rs. 1609.00 crores in 2011-12, Rs. 998.00 crores in 2012-13 and Rs. 716.14 crores in the current
year. The Committee feels that the above situation does not present a healthy picture about the
nuclear energy scenario in the country and it is high-time the Department of Atomic Energy takes
this declining trend as a wakeup call to take some proactive measures for optimum utilisation of
allocated funds or else a time may come when the funding to this sector would dry out. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should galvanize its resources and intensify
its efforts to ensure that the proposed power projects are completed and commissioned well within
the scheduled deadline, and to do this, the Department must make optimum utilisation of the
Budgetary Support extended to it for the purpose. The Committee recommends that Department
should seriously pay attention to the fact that country cannot endlessly wait for the nuclear energy
to emerge as an alternative option. As such, the Department should now do what is required to
be done in this direction on utmost priority basis.
Action Taken by Government
The Department has taken note of the recommendation. All efforts are being made to ensure
early completion of the on-going projects.
In respect of launch of new projects, the launches are contingent to completion of pre-
project activities which include land acquisition, obtaining environmental clearance from the
Ministry of Environment and Forests and accord of financial sanction. In respect of LWRs to be
set up with foreign technical cooperation, conclusion of techno-economic negotiations and arriving
at agreements are also a major pre-requisite to project approval and start of work. These are
however, long drawn activities involving many issues and take time. These pre-project activities are
taken up in right earnest after ‘in-principle’ approval of the site.
Efforts are being made to complete pre-project activities at the earliest and ensure launching
of the new projects on time and their timely successful completion.
Bharatiya Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Ltd. (BHA VINI) is targeting to complete the construction
of Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor (PFBR) in the year 2013-14 and commence full fledged
commissioning from there onwards. The revised date of criticality for PFBR approved by
Government is September, 2014.
Comments (Para 20.5)
The Committee is not satisfied with reply that the Department has taken note of the
recommendation and all efforts are being made to ensure early completion of ongoing
projects. The Committee is rather constrained to observe that the Department has evaded
its response on the observation of the Committee made with regard to BHA VINI which was
not able to utilise even a single penny upto January, 2013, out of the Plan Head BE
allocation of Rs. 536.67 crores in 2012-13. By highlighting this through its observations, the
Committee underlined the recurring problem of underutilization of budgetary allocation by
the Department in general and in power sector in particular. The Committee hopes that the
Department would make sincere and serious efforts to ensure timely completion of the
ongoing power projects.

11
Recommendation (Para 21)
The Committee feels that the Department should have an environmental advisor on the lines
of financial advisor in the Ministry of Finance, who would be involved in the projects from the
very beginning and make a proactive analysis of likely environmental problems. This arrangement
would help the Department get required environmental clearances from the Ministry of Environment
and Forests in a speedy manner and would also go a long way in alleviating unfound apprehensions
of the people and the environmentalists about the proposed projects. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should seriously think on this suggestion of the Committee and
take appropriate action in the matter.
Action Taken by Government
The recommendation of the Committee to have Environmental Advisor in the Department
has been noted and the matter is being considered at the appropriate level to implement the
recommendation of the Committee.
Comments (Para 21)
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 22.2)
The Committee therefore, recommends that the Department of Atomic Energy must render
all the help required by the Institute. It also recommends that efforts should not only be made to
meet its requirements but efforts should also be made to grant expeditious sanction for the
advanced research facilities for theoretical physics, so that, the Institute could be able to excel
further in pursuit of its objectives.
Action Taken by Government
Considering the importance of the activities carried out by Harish Chandra Research Institute,
the Department will take all necessary action to fully support the requirement of the Institute.
Comments (Para 22.2)
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 23.3)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Atomic Energy should not
ignore or go slow on the indigenous prospecting exploration mining and processing of Uranium
simply because of the fact that imported Uranium is much cheaper or is, presently, being made
available by the international community. Priority must continue to be given to the development of
domestic Uranium and devising of means of cheaper and more efficient extractions of Uranium
from the ores and adequate financial resources must be made available to Atomic Minerals
Directorate and Uranium Corporation of India Ltd., more so, because the gestation period of mining
typically requires 10 years and any incidence of sudden disruption or denial of imported Uranium
can put us in precarious situation.
Action Taken by Government
Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration and Research (AMD) plays a vital role in the
front end fuel cycle of nuclear power programme and carries out survey, prospecting and

12
exploration of atomic minerals required for the nuclear power programme of the country. Survey
and exploration for uranium is carried out through conceptual-based multi-disciplinary approach
including air-borne radiometric and geophysical surveys along with integrated ground radiometric-
geological-geochemical and geophysical surveys to identify potential zones for surface and sub-
surface exploration for augmentation of uranium and other atomic mineral resources.
During Twelfth Plan, exploration for uranium, thorium, zirconium, rare metal and rare earth
elements would be continued with the enhanced physical target and Plan outlay to support
indigenous nuclear power programme. It is envisaged to establish 75,000 tonnes of in-situ uranium
resources (U
3O8), to recover 18 tonnes Nb-Ta and 16 tonnes xenotime mineral concentrate and to
establish additional beach sand heavy mineral resources.
During Twelfth Plan, AMD’s priority is continued to augment the domestic uranium
resources from various potential areas expected to be identified through heliborne, ground
geophysical and geological surveys carried out during Eleventh Plan and from the known uranium
provinces viz.  southern part of Cuddapah basin, Andhra Pradesh; Singhbhum Shear Zone,
Jharkhand; North Delhi Fold Belt, Rajasthan and Mahadek basin, Meghalaya.
Uranium Corporation of India Ltd. (UCIL) continues to pay adequate attention towards
development of new uranium deposits in different parts of the country after undertaking techno-
commercial evaluation of resources explored by AMD. Particular emphasis has been given on
resources already identified by AMD around Tummalapalle. Expansion of Tummalapalle’s existing
operations and setting up new mine and plant at Kanampalle have already been planned during XIIth
plan period. In addition, new projects at Gogi in Karnataka, KP M in Meghalaya, Lambapur in
Andhra Pradesh, Rohil in Rajasthan etc. have been envisaged to be taken up by UCIL towards
enhancing the indigenous uranium production in future. In addition, exploration around Jaduguda
and Narwapahar mines of UCIL has been taken up by AMD. Successful findings may increase the
life of the operations in Singhbhum. Mining layout of Bhatin mine is also being revamped to
enhance the production.
Comments (Para 23.3)
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 24.1)
Although, the Department of Atomic Energy, under its Project Nuclear Agriculture is
working in the area of wheat and paddy growing and has tested a rice involving mutant which was
found to be high yielding and has also tested early mutants of Cv. C306 in wheat, the Committee
desires that research and development activities in this area need to be further intensified so as to
come out with viable solutions at the earliest. The Committee recommends that the Department of
Atomic Energy should explore the possibilities to start working in preservation and prolonging the
shelf life of onion and potato through its irradiation technology, in a mission mode and come out
with viable solutions in a time bound manner.
Action Taken by Government
The Department of Atomic Energy has programmes on use of nuclear techniques for crop
improvement which includes the major cereals, wheat and rice. A rice variety “Hari” was released
in the year 1988, for cultivation in Andhra Pradesh. Currently, the R&D efforts are focused on
improvement of rice for disease resistance, tolerance to salinity and improvement of yield.
Experiments are also being carried out to improve Basmati type rice for yield improvement
through height reduction and reduction in crop duration. Hybrid rice is important approach to

13
increase yield, experiments are being carried out to develop new resources for hybrid
development.
Research and development on wheat includes pyramiding rust resistance genes to prevent
breakdown of rust resistance. Thermotolerance in wheat is being investigated with the intention of
making wheat more tolerant to fluctuation in temperature during wheat season. Wheat quality is an
important aspect of its end-use. Study and incorporation of wheat proteins related to end-use
quality is an important component of current  research. Mutation breeding is being used to improve
variety C-306 known for good chapatti making quality. Promising lines of wheat and rice developed
at BARC are being evaluated for their yield potential in evaluation trials.
As desired by the Committee, these programmes will be pursued with vigour, using radiation
induced mutations, recombination and molecular breeding.
Comments (Para 24.1)
The Committee finds that the recommendation of the Committee has only partially
been responded. The Committee’s recommendation to explore the possibilities to start
working on preservation and prolonging the shelf life of onion and potato through its
irradiation technology in a mission mode has gone unanswered. The Committee reiterates
its recommendation and desires that action taken in this regard may be furnished to the
Committee.
Recommendation (Para 24.2)
The Committee hopes that the Department of Atomic Energy would give due considerations
to the observations and recommendations of the Committee and try to do its best to take such
actions/steps required to given them the practical shape. The Committee is confident that as
outlined in its outcome budget the Department of Atomic Energy would make Twelfth Five Year
Plan more oriented towards programme with objectives rather than spending efforts in building
infrastructure/equipment facilities that may exist elsewhere. The Committee also hopes that the
delivery of output by the Department during the current Five Year Plan would be more than what
is commensurate with the resources utilized.
Action Taken by Government
The Department has noted the observations and recommendations of the Committee. The
Department will make all out efforts to achieve the target set for Twelfth Five Year Plan and also
utilise the funds allotted to the maximum extent by regular monitoring of Plan Expenditure. All
concerned authorities have been appraised of the observations and recommendations of the
Committee for strict implementation.
Comments (Para 24.2)
The Committee notes the reply.

MINUTES

16

17
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 17 th December, 2013 in Room No. ‘67’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
3. Shri M. Rama Jois
4. Shri Alok Tiwari
5. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
6. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
LOK SABHA
7. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
8. Dr. Ajay Kumar
9. Shri O.S. Manian
10. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
11. Shri Basori Singh Masram
12. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
13. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
14. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
15. Shri Pradeep Tamta
16. Shri Joseph Toppo
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Committee Officer
The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and invited
suggestions/amendments to the draft 246
th to 252 nd Reports of the Committee on the Action Taken
by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 239 th to 245 th Reports on
Demands for Grants (2013-14), pertaining to the Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy, Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, Space, Earth Sciences, Scientific and Industrial
Research and Biotechnology respectively.
17

18
*** Relates to other matters.
2. The Committee, after brief discussion, adopted 246 th to 252 nd draft Action Taken Reports
without any amendment.
3. The Committee decided to present/lay on the table of both the Houses of the Parliament its
246th to 252 nd Reports on 18 th December, 2013. The Committee authorised its Chairman and, in his
absence, Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra to present the Report in Rajya Sabha and Shri Pradeep Tamta
and, in his absence, Shri Dayanidhi Maran to lay the copy of the reports on the table of Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
The Committee, then, adjourned at 5.10 
P.M.

19
19
INDEX OF REPORTS PRESENTED BY DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY , ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
Report No. Subject of the Report
12
1. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1993-94.
2. ‘National Environment Tribunal Bill, 1992’.
3 Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1992-93.
4. Annual Report of the Department of Electronics for the year 1992-93.
5. Annual Report of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1992-93.
6. Annual Report of the Department of Science and Technology for the year 1992-93.
7. Annual Report of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1992-93.
8. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1994-95.
9. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1994-95.
10. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1994-95.
11. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1994-95.
12. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
1994-95.
13. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1994-95.
14. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1994-95.
15. Annual Report of the Department of Space for the year 1993-94.
16. Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1993-94.
17. Annual Report of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1993-94.
18. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
1995-96.
19. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1995-96.
20. Annual Report of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1993-94.
21. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1995-96.
22. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1995-96.
23. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1995-96.
24. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1995-96.
25. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1995-96.

20
12
26. Annual Report of the Department of Science and Technology for the year 1993-94.
27. Annual Report of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the year
1993-94.
28. Annual Report of the Department of Electronics for the year 1993-94.
29. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 1995.
30. Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1994-95.
31. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
1996-97.
32. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1996-97.
33. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1996-97.
34. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1996-97.
35. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1996-97.
36. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1996-97.
37. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1996-97.
38. Demonstration of Herbal Fuel by Shri P. Ramar at HP, Dehradun.
39. Action Taken by Ministry of Environment and forests on the recommendations
contained in the 9
th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants of Ministry
of Environment and Forests for the year 1994-95.
40. ‘Mid-term appraisal’ of programmes and functioning of the Department of
Biotechnology with special emphasis on the role of Biotechnology in Agriculture and
allied areas.
41. ‘Mid-term appraisal’ of programmes and functioning of the Department of Science
and Technology.
42. ‘Mid-term appraisal’ of programmes and functioning or the Department of Space.
43. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the Thirty-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(1996-97) of the Department of Biotechnology.
44. Action Taken by the Department of Electronics on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty-second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (1996-97)
of the Department of Electronics.
45. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (1996-97)
of the Department of Ocean Development.
46. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
1997-98.
47. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1997-98.

21
12
48. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1997-98.
49. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1997-98.
50. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1997-98.
51. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1997-98.
52. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1997-98.
53. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1998-99.
54. Demands for Grants of the Department of Bio-technology for the year 1998-99.
55. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
1998-99.
56. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1998-99.
57. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1998-99.
58. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1998-99.
59. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1998-99.
60. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the Fifty-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(1998-99) of the Department of Biotechnology.
61. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty-sixth Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants (1998-99) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
62. Action Taken by the Department of Electronics on the recommendations contained
in the Fifty-eighth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
the Department of Electronics.
63. Aspects related to Food Preservation and Safety Measures.
64. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
1999-2000.
65. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year
1999-2000.
66. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1999-2000.
67. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1999-2000.
68. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1999-2000.
69. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1999-2000.
70. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year
1999-2000.

22
12
71. Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Bill, 1999.
72. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2000-01.
73. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2000-01.
74. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2000-01.
75. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Information Technology for the year 2000-01.
76. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2000-01.
77. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2000-01.
78. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2000-01.
79. ‘The Information Technology Bill, 1999’.
80. Preservation of Gir Forests and Protection of Wild Life.
81. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-second Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Science
and Technology.
82. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-third Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research.
83. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-fourth Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of
Biotechnology.
84. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-seventh Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Space.
85. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-sixth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Ocean
Development.
86. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2001-2002.
87. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2001-02.
88. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2001-02.
89. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2001-02.
90. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2001-02.
91. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2001-02.
92. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Ninety-first Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Space.

23
12
93. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-seventh Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of
Biotechnology.
94. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-sixth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research.
95. ‘The Biological Diversity Bill, 2000’.
96. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-ninth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Science and
Technology.
97. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-eighth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Ocean
Development.
98. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Ninetieth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Environment
and Forests.
99. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2002-03.
100. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2002-03.
101. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2002-03.
102. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2002-03.
103. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2002-03.
104. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Envir onment and Forests for the year 2002-03.
105. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 2000.
106. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-second Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the Department of Science and Technology.
107. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-first Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2002-03) of the Department of Ocean Development.
108. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the
Hundredth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the
Department of Space.
109. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the Ninety-ninth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2002-03) of the Department of Biotechnology.

24
12
110. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-third Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
111. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
112. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2003-04.
113. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2003-04.
114. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2003-04.
115. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2003-04.
116. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2003-04.
117. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2003-04.
118. Conservation and Environmental-Management Plan for Dal-Nagin Lake.
119. Action taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-fifteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Ocean Development.
120. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-thirteenth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology on Demands
for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
121. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in One Hundred-twelfth Report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on Demands for Grants
(2003-04) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
122. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-sixteenth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Biotechnology.
123. Action taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the
One Hundred-fourteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology. Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Space.
124. Action taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-seventeenth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department
of Science and Technology.

25
12
125. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2004-05.
126. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2004-05.
127. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2004-05.
128. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2004-05.
129. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2004-05.
130. Demands for Grants of the Department of Atomic Energy for the year 2004-05.
131. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Envir onment and Forests for the year 2004-05.
132. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-eighteenth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the conservation and Environmental Management Plan for Dal-Nagin
Lake, Srinagar.
133. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Twenty-fifth report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department
of Science and Technology.
134. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the
One Hundred Twenty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Space.
135. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Twenty-seventh Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Biotechnology.
136. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Twenty-sixth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department
of Scientific and Industrial Research.
137. Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Thirtieth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
138. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Twenty-eighth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Ocean
Development.

26
12
139. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Thirty-first Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests.
140. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Science and Technology.
141. Demands for Grants (2005-06) if the Department of Biotechnology.
142. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
143. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Ocean Development.
144. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Space.
145. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
146. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
147. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Forty-third Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Ocean Development.
148. Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Forty-fifth Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Atomic Energy.
149. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-fortieth Report of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Science and Technology.
150. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in
the One Hundred Forty-forth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of Department of Space.
151. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty-second Report of the
Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research.
152. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the One-Hundred Forty-first Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Biotechnology.
153. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in  the One Hundred Forty-sixth Report of the Committee on the Demands
for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
154. The Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2005.
155. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Science and Technology.
156. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.

27
12
157. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Biotechnology.
158. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Ocean Development.
159. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
160. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
161. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Space.
162. Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research Programme including Herbal Medicines.
163. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Sixtieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
164. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Ocean Development (renamed as Ministry
of Earth Sciences).
165. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Sixty-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Space.
166. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
167. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Biotechnology.
168. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of Science and Technology.
169. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
170. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Science and Technology.
171. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
172. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Biotechnology.

28
12
173. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
174. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
175. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Space.
176. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
177. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Sixty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research Programme including Herbal
Medicines.
178. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Science and
Technology.
179. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Biotechnology.
180. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
181. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
182. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Space.
183. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-2008) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
184. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
For Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
185. Demands For Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Science and Technology
(Ministry of Science and Technology).
186. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (Ministry of Science and Technology).
187. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.

29
12
188. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
189. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Space.
190. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of
Science and Technology).
191. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
192. Functioning of Central Pollution Control Board.
193. Global Warming and its Impact on India.
194. The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008.
195. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Science and Technology.
196. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Ninetieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of’ the Department of Biotechnology.
197. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
198. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Ninety-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
199. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Space.
200. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
201. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
202. Coastal Management Programmes.
203. The National Green Tribunal Bill, 2009.
204. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.

30
12
205. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of
Science and Technology).
206. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Space.
207. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
208. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (Ministry of Science and Technology).
209. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department Science and Technology
(Ministry of Science and Technology).
210. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
211. “The Protection and Utilisation of Public Funded Intellectual Property Bill. 2008”.
212. “The Civil Liability For Nuclear Damage Bill, 2010”.
213. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
214. Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Biotechnology.
215. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Sixth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Space.
216. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
217. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
218. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Ninth report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Science and Technology.
219. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Tenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry or Environment and Forests.

31
12
220. The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Bill, 2010.
221. The Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011.
222. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
223. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Science and Technology
(Ministry of Science and Technology).
224. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
225. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Space.
226. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
227. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (Ministry of Science and Technology).
228. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of
Science and Technology).
229. Report on “The Regional Centre for Biotechnology Bill, 2011”.
230. S teps Taken by various Sectors of the Indian Economy to Control Pollution.
231. The Indian Forest (Amendment) Bill, 2012.
232. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
233. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Science and Technology.
234. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
235. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Space.
236. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
237. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.

32
12
238. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Biotechnology.
239. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
240. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Science and Technology.
241. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
242. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Space.
243. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
244. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
245. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Biotechnology.
246. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Thirty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
247. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fortieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Science and Technology.
248. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
249. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Space.
250. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
251. Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
252. Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Biotechnology.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.