 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS  
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY 
 (DEMAND NOs.  4&5) 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23RD APRIL, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23RD APRIL,2010) 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2010/VAISAKHA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
Web site: http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-Mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
         PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE       (i) – (ii)   
2.     PREFACE                                                                                                                      (iii) 
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                              1-18                                 
4. SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS  
5. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE         
    
 
 
 
 

 
                                                
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2010) 
---------- 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy  –– Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
 ** 2. 
Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
3. Shri Anil H. Lad 
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
5. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi  
6. Shri Saman Pathak 
7. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
8. Dr. Ejaz Ali 
9. Shri Jabir Husain 
10. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
 LOK SABHA 
11. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg 
12. Shri Udayanraje Bhonsale 
13. Shri Ninong Ering  
14. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
15. Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
16. Shrimati Kaisar Jahan 
17. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
18. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
19. Shri C. R. Patil 
20. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle 
21. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
22. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
23. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
 # #24. Vacant 
25. Dr. Rajan Sushant 
26. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
27. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
28. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava 
29. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
 30. Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
          #31. Shri K.C. Singh Baba 
           SECRETARIAT 
 Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary 
 Shri  Alok Chatterjee, Director 
 Shri  V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri  Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
 
 Nominated w.e.f. 14th October, 2009 
**  Nominated w.e.f. 31st December, 2009 
     #  Nominated w.e.f.  11th January, 2010 
  # #  Shri Yashwant Sinha ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from the           
Committee w.e.f. 1st February, 2010 
 
 
 

 
Preface 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science & Technology, Environment & Fore sts, having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Repor t on its behalf, present this  Two Hundred seventh Report 
of the Committee. This Report deals with th e detailed Demands for Grants (2010-2011) 
of the Department of Atomic Energy (Demand Nos. 4&5). 
 
2.   In the meeting of the Committee held on 23
rd March, 2010 the Secretary and other 
Officers of the Department of Atomic Energy gave an overvie w of the various activities 
of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the 
performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants. 
 
3.   The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to 
the clarifications sought by the Members and placing before it  the required material to 
enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Atomic 
Energy. 
 
4.    The Committee considered and adopte d the Report at its meeting held on the 16 th 
April, 2010. 
 
  
NEW DELHI;
         DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY  
April 16, 2010                    Chairman ,   
                                Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
 on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests. 
REPORT 
         The acquisition of knowledge of th e controlled release of atomic energy and its use 
has been recognized as path-breaking event in the human history. India has a long history 
of development of atomic energy for peaceful purposes and has developed its own 
nuclear power programme, which has b een recognized around the world. For the 
development and industrialization of the count ry, atomic energy has become not merely 
an aid but an absolute necessity, keeping in vi ew the fast depleting reserves of coal and 
oil in the country. On the more, atomic energy is a clear and green  energy which is the 
need of the day in view of global warming and climate change.  The Department of 
Atomic Energy has therefore been engaged in the development of nuclear power 
technology, besides promoting other applications of radiation technologies in the field of 
agriculture, medicine, industry and basic research. The Atomic Energy Commission 
(AEC), which is the apex body for formulatio n of policies and dire ction of the Atomic 
Energy programmes in the country, implemen ts its policies and programmes through the 
Department of Atomic Energy (DAE).  
2.  The Programmes of DAE have b een divided into four sectors viz.  Research and 
Development, Industrial, Minerals and Power Sector. Some of the significant 
programmes covering all the four above sectors can be briefly summarized as-  increasing 
the share of nuclear power through de ployment of indigenous and other proven 
technologies developing fast breeder reactors and thorium reac tors with associated fuel 
cycle facilities; building and operation of  research reactors for production of 
radioisotopes and carrying out radiation technology applications  in the field of medicine, 
agriculture and industry;  developing advanced technologies  such as accelerators, lasers, 

 
supercomputers, advanced materials and inst rumentation and encouraging transfer of 
technology to industry; support to basic resear ch in nuclear energy and related frontier 
areas of science; interaction with unive rsities and academic institutions; support to 
research and development projects havi ng a bearing on DAE’s programmes, and 
International cooperation in related advan ced areas of research, and contribution to 
national security. 
3.   The programmes   of the DAE are   mu ltidisciplinary   in  nature and for their 
execution, the Department has evolved a broa d based organization comprising research 
centres, industrial units, public sector undertakings and fully aided autonomous 
institutions, along with servic e organizations. The details of these organisations are as 
follows: 
Five Research Centres: Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) – Mumbai,  which 
pursues comprehensive research and devel opment (R&D) programmes in the fields of 
nuclear sciences, engineeri ng & technology, basic sciences  and allied fields for 
harnessing nuclear energy and also its utility for the benefit of the society.  
Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic  Research (IGCAR) – Kalpakkam is the second 
largest R&D centre of the Department engaged in basic research in nuclear sciences and 
allied areas, technology development in th e field of nanomaterials and nanotechnology 
and has designed the 500 MWe Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor (PFBR). 
Raja Ramanna Centre for Advanced Technology (RRCAT) – Indore  is engaged in 
development of particle accelerators and lase rs along with their applications, besides 
carrying out substantial activities in cryogenics and materials research. 
Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre (VECC) – Kolkata is operating the nation’s largest 
and the first indigenously built  Cyclotron and has been produced for the first time in 
India, the energetic Neon 20 and Argon 40 beams required for conducting research in 
Nuclear Physics.and         
Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration and  Research (AMD)– Hyderabad  
Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration & Research carries out  survey, prospecting 
and exploration of atomic minerals require d for the nuclear power programme of the 
country.   
Three Industrial Organisations :  Heavy Water Board (HWB) – Mumbai, Nuclear Fuel 
Complex (NFC) – Hyderabad  and Board of Radiation  and  Isotope Technology (BRIT) 
– Mumbai. 
Three Service Organisations :  Directorate of Purchase  & Stores (DPS) – Mumbai, 
Directorate of Construction, Services and  Estate Management  (DCSEM) – Mumbai, and 
General Services Organisation (GSO) – Kalpakkam.  
Five Public Sector Undertakings :   Nuclear Power Corporation of  India Limited 
(NPCIL) – Mumbai, Bharatiya Nabhikiya  Vidyut Nigam Limited, (BHAVINI)  
Kalpakkam, Tamil Nadu, Uranium Corporation of India Limited (UCIL) – Jaduguda, 
Indian Rare Earths Limited (IREL) – Mumbai and Electronics Corpor ation of India Ltd. 
(ECIL) – Hyderabad. 
Nine  Aided Institutions  : Tata Institute of Fundament al Research (TIFR) – Mumbai, 
Tata Memorial Centre (TMC) – Mumbai, Saha  Institute of Nuclear Physics (SINP) – 
Kolkata , Institute of Physics (IOP) – Bhubaneswar, National Institute of Science 
Education and Research (NISER) – Bhubane swar, Harish-Chandra Research Institute 
(HRI) – Allahabad, Institute of Mathematical Sciences (IMSc) – Chennai,  Institute for  
Plasma Research (IPR) – Ahmedabad, and Atomic  Energy  E ducation  Society   (AEES) 
– Mumbai.  

 
4. MONITORING MECHANISMS FOR ONGOING PROJECTS 
4.1 As regards the structure of monitoring a nd reviewing mechanisms of projects in 
the Department of Atomic Energy, the Committee was informed of the process of 
monitoring starts with the Pr oject Coordinator and his gro up of assistant reviewing and 
monitoring the progress of ongoing projects on da y to day basis.  Thereafter, the Unit 
Head reviews and monitors the projects on  month-to-month basis and tries to remove 
constraints/lacuna if any and monitors the financial and p hysical progress of projects. 
Finally, at the Department level, Secretar y, DAE takes monitoring and review meeting 
periodically to review the physical and fina ncial progress of the pr ojects and tries to 
remove any procedural bottleneck amongst th e Units/Divisions for smooth progress of 
projects so that there is no time/cost overrun of any projects. After the above review 
process, the Department assesses the requirement of fund in each project and formulates 
the proposal for budgetary support in the form of Revised Estimates for the current year 
and Budget Estimates for the next financial year. 
4.2 The Department also informed that in or der to ensure the Plan targets made, the 
Department has taken concrete steps.  The mechanism of form ulation of projects is now 
based on the concept of Major Programmes. Further, Steering Committee, Internal 
Working Groups and Specialist Groups have been constituted to review the project report 
prior to their sanction and also to review th e progress of each project.  Thereafter their 
recommendations provide the re alistic input to the budget pl anning process. In the R&D 
Sector, the overall programme of the Department has been divided into twenty themes 
and a Specialists Groups have been formed for each one of them for overseeing the 
activities during XI Plan.  Thus monitoring of projects under R&D Sector would be done 
at three levels.  The first level monitoring is at Section or Group level in the Unit, the 
second level monitoring is by the higher leve l of management in the Unit and the third 
level is the monitoring by Specialist Group at DAE level.  
 4.3 The Committee while examining  the details of reasons provided by DAE for 
non fulfillment  of targets in  X Plan under R&D sector observ es that   as against    
the revised outlay of Rs. 3501.35 crore,  utilization of only Rs. 3199.45 crore could be 
done which works out to 91.37 per cent of th e revised outlay and there is a short fall 
of about 8.63 per cent in terms of  utilization.  Similarly under Industries Sector, 
against the Budgetary support of Rs. 1539 crores, the utilization is Rs. 1241.23 
crores which means there is a short fall of Rs. 297.77 crores in terms of utilisation.  
Under power sector against the budget ary support of Rs. 13441.41 crores the 
utilization is only Rs. 10016.83 crores which is about 74.52 per cent of total of the 
budgetary provision.  The Committee therefore, finds that despite the elaborate and 
comprehensive monitoring mechanism adop ted by the DAE underutilization of 
funds under different sectors presents alto gether a different picture because in 
certain cases the underutilization of budgetary support  runs to almost 25.5 per cent 
which is not a healthy indication. 
4.4 The Committee, therefore, recomme nds that the Department needs to 
further strengthen the mechanism of monitoring ongoing schemes for their effective 
implementation and eliminating any scope of  surrender of funds at a later date due 
to under utilization. 
5. ELEVENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN OUTLAYS AND PROPOSALS 
5.1 The Committee has been informed that  the total budgetary outlay for the 
Department of Atomic Energy (Demand No s. 4 and 5) is Rs. 7688.79 crores under 
plan allocation  and Rs. 6834.17 crores under non plan amounting to a total 
budgetary allocation of Rs. 14522.96 crores for the 11
th Five Year Plan (2007-2012). 

 
 
 5.2 As informed by the Department, the major thrust of the Indian Nuclear 
programme during the 11
th Five Year Plan 2007-12 will be in terms of the major 
programme under various sectors i.e. R&D sector, Industries sector, minerals sector  
and power sector. 
 5.3 R&D SECTOR 
Under R&D sector emphasis has been on the following programmes: 
(i) Augmentation of R&D for 700 MWe PHWR and life extension 
programme for existing PHWRs in cluding improvement in capacity 
utilization, safety, control instrumentation, corrosion, materials etc. 
(ii) Strengthening R&D on back end fu el cycle including long term 
radioactive storage strategies 
(iii) Development of indigenous technologi es related to fuel development for 
light water reactors. 
(iv) R&D for further development of metallic fuel for fast breeder reactors and 
associated fuel cycle 
(v) India’s participation in ITER a nd development of fusion related 
technologies 
(vi) Development of core technologies for ADS 
(vii) Development of Advanced Reacto r / New Energy Systems for co-
generation of electricity, hydrogen and desalinated water 
(viii) Thorium fuel cycle development 
(ix) Participation in International Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, 
Geneva, International Linear Collider  (ILC), Facility for Antiproton and 
Ion Research (FAIR),  X-ray Free Electron Laser (XFEL) and related 
technologies for strengthening indigenous mega science programme. 
(x) Upgrading science education and re search in Universities through 
education in Nuclear Sciences 
(xi) Greater outreach of societal applic ations in the area of radiation 
technologies applications, nuclear  agriculture, food processing by 
irradiation, health care, water, industrial lasers etc 
(xii) Development of energy conversion t echnologies to ha rness alternate 
sources and carriers of energy and its efficient utilization planned 
(xiii) Enhanced R&D efforts on development of nanotechnology under “Micro-
Nano Initiative” of DAE at various units of Department 
(xiv) DAE core research programme on biological effects of radiation and other 
genotoxic stresses on microbes, animal and plant systems, human health 
and cancer would be expanded. 
(xv) New Campus for fusion Reactor related activity. 
(xvi) Setting up of Board for Research in fusion Science & Technology. 
5.4  INDUSTRIES SECTOR 
  Under Industries sector emphasis has been on the following programmes: 
 To vigorously pursue efforts aimed at recovering uranium from secondary 
sources (e.g. phosphoric acid from uranium
  bearing phosphatic rocks). 
 To upgrade existing facilities and to set up new ones for fabrication of fuel 
and structural materials so as to meet increased demand of the expanding 
nuclear power programme. A new plant for production of zirconium oxide 
and sponge at Pazhayakayal, Tamil Nadu.  

 
 To set up spent fuel recycle plant fo r the spent fuel discharged from 
nuclear power plants; integrated reprocessing and waste immobilization 
plant to recover fissile and fertile mate rials; and thorium fuel reprocessing 
plant.  
 To set up fast reactor fuel cycle faci lity, and demonstra tion facility for 
fabricating sodium bonded metallic fuel to  be used in the fast reactors in 
future.  
 To enhance production capacity at RM P, Mysore, Additional Campus for 
RMP. 
 To continue measures for reducing specific energy consumption at heavy 
water plants. 
 ECIL will upgrade existi ng facilities and set up new facilities to cater to 
nuclear, defence and other sectors on its own resources.  
 BRIT will complete the ongoing project to set up a medical cyclotron at 
Kolkata.  
 Deployment of desalination and water purification plants and to provide 
safe drinking water in areas affect ed with water quality problems in 
collaboration with CSIR. 
 55 MINERALS SECTOR 
 Under Mineral sector emphasis ha s been on the following programmes: 
 To strengthen exploration and prosp ecting efforts to locate high grade, 
large tonnage and low cost uranium deposits and to augment uranium 
resources considerably to displace dependency on relatively high cost and 
low grade deposits. As a part of this  effort, outsourcing of exploration 
would be further expanded to complement efforts being made 
departmentally and advanced tec hnologies would be developed and 
deployed to locate concealed deposits having no surface manifestation.  
 To open new mines and set up new mills and to enhance existing facilities 
so as to meet the requirements of op erating reactors and to enable NPCIL 
to set up new reactors.  
5.6  POWER SECTOR 
  Under Power sector emphasis has been on the following programmes: 
  There were 22 schemes to be carried out during XI Plan by NPCIL. The schemes 
are: 
 
NPCIL Projects 
1 Operating Stations 
2 Development Works (R&D) 
3 HQ Capital Works (OB, IIS, OE) 
4 TAPP 3 & 4 (2x540 MW) 
5 KAIGA 3 & 4 (2x220 MW) 
6 RAPP 5 & 6 (2x220 MW) 
7 NAPS 1 & 2 EMCCR 
8 Kudankulam-1&2 (2x1000 MW) 
9 RAPP 7&8 (7NP-3&4) (2x700 MW) 

 
10 KAPS-1 EMCCR 
11 JVP (Diversification) 
12 KAPP 3&4 (7NP-1&2) (2x700 MW) 
13 7NP-5&6 (2x700 MW) 
14 7NP-7&8 (Pre Project) (2x700 MW) 
15 Kudankulam-3&4 (LWR-3&4) (2x1000 MW) 
16 Jaitapur –1&2 (LWR-5&6) (2x1000 MW) 
17 Kudankulam – 5&6 (2x1000 MW) 
18 Jaitapur – 3&4 (2x1000 MW) 
19 LWR-11 & 12 (2x1000 MW) 
20 Equity for BHAVINI 
21 Site Selection for Future Projects 
22 Land Acquisition for New Projects 
 5.7  In view of the developments, in th e Mid-Term Appraisal (MTA) of XI Plan, 
Kudankulam 5&6 and Jaitapur 3&4 have b een postponed to the XII Plan and an 
additional new scheme, i.e., Light Water Reactor (LWR) 13&14 ha s been introduced. 
Thus there are 21 schemes being carried out by NPCIL in the XI Plan. 
5.8 The Committee observes that the ov erall thrust of the Indian Nuclear 
Programme during the 11 th Five Year Plan (2007-12)  is to sustain and strengthen 
the already established Nuclear based programmes which the Department has 
designed during past several years for socio economic development of the country.  
The Committee recommends that in addition  to continuing and strengthening its 
already developed Nuclear Programmes and technologies, the Department  should 
also quest  for mastering economical a nd more advanced reactor technologies, so 
that more viable reactor technology could be developed in future.  The Committee 
hopes that the Department would be able to achieve the goals set for itself during 
the 11
th Five Year Plan period, despite the fact that the trend of utilisation in the 
year 2007-08 is not upto the mark.  The Committee finds that under Nuclear Power 
Schemes, the Deptt. has been able to utilize only Rs. 1188.86 crores as against the 
plan allocation of Rs. 2449.15 crores.  The Committee, however, notes that the trend 
of expenditure has improved during the last two years. 
6. BUDGETARY  OUTLAYS 
6.1 The budgetary outlays of the Department (Plan and Non-plan) fall under the 
following Demand Heads: 
 Demand No. 4 - Atomic Energy  
 
It covers all expenditures (plan a nd non plan) of three Programmes of DAE 
viz. Research and Development, Industrial and Minerals Sector.  
 Demand No. 5 - Nuclear Power Schemes 
 
It covers all expenditure pertaining to the Power Sector.  
6.2 The Department has provided the followi ng details regarding the                               
projected demand made and the funds allocated to the Department (Plan and Non-Plan) 
for the year 2010-2011 for Demands Nos. 4 and 5: 

 
 
Demand No. 4+5 
A.  BS 
Proposed 
 
Approved  
 
Shortfall  
  
1.   Plan  7688.79 5000.00 -2688.79
2.   Non-Plan 6834.17 6615.23 -218.94
Total 14522.96 11615.23 -2907.73
B. IEBR 3253.05 3226.00 -27.05
Total Grant No. 4+ 5 17776.01 14841.23 -2934.78
6.3 The Department also informed the Committee of the following shortfalls in 
approved allocations (Plan and Non-Plan) as compared to the proposed allocations for the 
year 2010-2011: 
 (i) PLAN ALLOCATION 
  The shortfall in allocation under the Plan schemes is Rs. 2688.79 crores which 
includes Demands of the Department viz.    Demand No.4 – Atomic Energy (Rs.2613.89 
crores) and Demand No.5 – Nuclear Power Schemes (Rs.74.90 crores).  
 (ii)  SHORTFALL IN PLAN AL LOCATION IN MINERAL SECTOR 
 The Committee was informed of the following demand projected by the 
Department to the Planning Commission for its various programmes and the allocation 
that has been agreed to by the Planning Commission under the Minerals Sector: 
       (Rs. in crores)
Units Proposed allocation Approved 
allocation 
AMD 72.00 55.00
IREL 87.05 60.00
BS 0.00 0.00
IEBR 87.05 60.00
UCIL 621.58 467.00
BS 377.58 223.00
IEBR 244.00 244.00
 DAE Project:                               
(NPCIL) Acquisition of 
Uranium  Assets from Abroad 
2000.00 1.00
 
TOTAL 2780.63 583.00
BS 2449.58 279.00
IEBR 331.05 304.00

 
 
BS=Budgetary support, IEBR = Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources. 
 6.4  The major portion of s hortfall under Demand No. 4 pe rtains to the Minerals 
Sector where an amount of Rs.2000.00 crores  proposed for ‘Acquisition of Uranium 
Assets from Abroad’ for which only a toke n provision of Rs. 1.00 crore is provided for 
the time being.  When Committee felt surprise d to learn that against a heavy amount of 
Rs. 2000.00 crores proposed for acquisition of uranium assets from abroad only a meager 
amount of Rs. 1.00 crore has been provide d temporarily, it asked for  detailed 
background note on the issue from the Departme nt.  The Department later intimated that 
with the opening of the civil nuclear co-operation with USA concerted efforts are being 
made to obtain stake in uranium mines aboard particularly in South Africa and Namibia, 
as the production of natural Uranium in the country is very low.  The Department further 
intimated that a provisions of Rs. 5000.00 cr ores have been proposed under mineral 
sector for acquisition of Uranium from abroad  during the mid term appraisal.  However 
an outlay of Rs. 2000.00 crores have been pr oposed in the Annua l Plan 2010-11 against 
which a token provision of Rs. 1.00 crore ha ve been incorporated in the budget.  
Department has also stated that issue of a dditional funds in this respect will be taken up 
with the Ministry of Finance as and when required.    
6.5 The Committee notes that a major curtailment in funds has been made under 
the Plan allocation for the Minerals Sect or where against an initial amount of Rs. 
2000.00 crores proposed for 'Acquisition of Uranium Assets from Abroad' a meager 
amount of Rs. 1.00 crore has been approve d for the time being as a provisional 
amount.  The Committee is not at all satisfied with the explanation given   by the 
department as mentioned above and feels that this token provisions of Rs. 1.00 crore 
will not at all fulfill the purpose for which the same is being given.  The Committee 
is of the opinion that if the Ministry of  the Finance makes any token provisions of 
such low amount  for any programme fo r which the initial demand is high, no 
scheme under the Department could realize its dreams and the entire token 
provisions may go waste.  The Committee wh ile expressing its serious concern over 
such drastic curtailment of funds recommends that whenever any token provision is 
made in future for any scheme, the allocati on made initially should be reasonably 
proportional to the original amount demanded and should not be granted in a 
causal manner as has been done in the pres ent case as such action may hinder the 
progress of strategic scheme of the Department in future.    
7.  RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT  
7.1 While responding to a query of the Committee for a brief on the research & 
development being handled by DAE, the Secretary replied that R&D is divided into two 
sectors, one is nuclear pow er generation, which provides research support to Nuclear 
Power Corporation, nuclear fuel complex, mineral and also for fast reactor technology. 
7.2 The other research sectors under R&D is in  the area of biological research which 
includes influence of radiation on living being, plants and animals. 
7.3 So far as, R&D in power generation is concerned, Secretary emphasized that at 
present extensive research is going on to extend the lifespan of nuclear reactor for 
electricity generation from initial 40 years to about 60 years, which could further be 
extended for another 20 years, i.e., upto 80 y ears.  In order to extend the life of the 
nuclear reactor, a lot of R&D is necessary like more advance pressure tube, more advance 
degradation mechanism by which minerals coul d be used for effici ent breeding of power 
and also to design nuclear reactor in such a fashion that more effective fuel technology 
could be developed to generate power faster. 

 
 
7.4 Yet another important compone nt of R&D includes capacity 
addition/enhancement of reactors.  Starti ng with 200 megawatts to 540 megawatts now 
the Deptt. has been able to upgrade the r eactors to 700 megawatts.  The Committee has 
been further informed that the Department of  Atomic Energy is vigorously pursuing the 
roadmap of well laid down nuclear power pr ogramme in stages.  After successfully 
putting the first stage in commercial domain  and launching the second stage programme 
by ongoing construction of 500 Mwe prototype fast breeder reac tor, the Department is 
actively engaged in devel oping technologies for th e third stage programme.  
Technologies to be developed for future applications include  building accelerator driven 
sub-critical reactor system, high temperature reactor systems and fusion technologies, etc.   
7.5 So far as the area of res earch concentrating on the biological side of science is 
concerned, the main research, which is goi ng on under DAE is the influence of nuclear 
radiations on local inhabitants.  Apart fr om this, under the second category of research 
being handled by DAE, a lot of contribution is being made in the field of agriculture and 
apart from this in the field of medical sc ience, radio isotopes are being supplied to 
various medical institutions all over the c ountry by DAE for the purpose of therapeutic 
treatment, particularly, in case of cancer treatment.  He also intimated the Committee that 
the Deptt. is playing a pivotal role in tele-therapy type of operation, particularly, with the 
aid of Bhabhatron machine.  Apart from this, cancer screening programme, particularly, 
in rural areas with progress in  cancer registry is also getting a boost, particularly under 
the aegis of Tata Memorial Centre which is one of the best cancer hospitals in Asia.  
Besides this, the DAE is playing a major role  in popularizing tele-medicine, particularly 
in rural areas for the treatment of cancer etc., through Tata Memorial Centre.   
8.  Shortfall in Plan Allo cation in R&D Sector 
8.1 
The Committee was also informed of the detailed break up of the demand 
projected by the Department to the Planning Commission for its various programmes and 
the allocation agreed to by the Planning Commission under the R&D Sector, which is as 
follows: 
(Rs. in crore)
Units Proposed 
allocation 
Approved 
allocation
AERB 5.00 5.00
AMD 83.00 80.86
BARC 700.00 610.00
RRCAT 125.00 115.90
DAE Projects 20.20 20.00
DCSEM 88.60 50.00
AEES 15.20 10.00
Assistance to Universities 187.00 154.00
HRI 17.85 10.00
IGCAR 150.00 140.00
IMS 33.72 5.00
IOP 16.35 12.10

 
 
IPR 356.00 340.00
NISER 70.00 55.00
SINP 93.59 82.00
TIFR 281.21 230.00
TMC 90.20 82.00
VECC 93.09 83.00
TOTAL 2426.01 2084.86
8.2 The Committee notes with serious concern  that a drastic reduction of about  
Rs. 340.00 crores have been made in the proposed allocation as regards the 
Research and Development sector. The Committee is of the opinion that reduction 
in the allocation towards Research and Development will slow down the initiatives 
that are proposed to be undertaken by the department and also the overall progress 
achieved by the country in this field. The Committee, therefo re, recommends that 
such reductions should be avoided at all cost by the Planning Commission.  
8.3 The Committee is of the opinion that  the well thought out programmes and 
proposed demands of a crucial Department  such as the Department of Atomic 
Energy should not face drastic cuts in funds allocation. The Committee is also of the 
opinion that reduction of funds for leading Institutions delays the endeavour of 
these institutions in achieving their main objective of harnessing nuclear energy for 
the benefit of the society. The Commi ttee recommends that to enable the 
Department to achieve its targets in the field of Atomic Energy, appropriate 
budgetary allocations should be made keepin g in view the fact that Atomic Energy 
is a highly capital intensive sector and th at the Department has been able to fully 
utilize the allocated provisions during th e last two years. The Committee also 
recommends that in future the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance 
would be extremely judicious while finalizing allocation for the Department.  
9. Nuclear Irradiation in Agri culture and Food Processing 
  The Committee has been informed that the Deptt. of Atomic Energy has 
developed several applications of radiati on and isotope technologies for improving the 
quality of life and is making concerted efforts on this front.   
9.1 The use of Nuclear irradiation helps in  reducing the inciden ce of diseases in 
seeds. Food-borne diseases can also be reduced by food irradiation techniques.  It can 
also inhibit post-harvest sprouting in pot atoes and onions – disinfect fruits and 
vegetables, delay in ripening of fruits, can eliminate out rightly the food-borne pathogens 
which can be kept for a long time without refrigeration before substantial consumption.  
In addition, the irradiation technology can be used for eliminating pests nuisance, etc. 
9.2 The Committee was informed by the Department that it is taking initiatives in the 
field of Nuclear irradiation in agriculture and food proces sing, to increase agricultural 
yield and for protection of the crops from di seases and pests. The department giving the 
specific details alongwith the successes achieved in this regard stated that eleven 
irradiated varieties of crops, called the ‘Trombay crop’ varie ties have been developed in 
oilseeds and pulses in the last three y ears by Nuclear Agricultu re and Biotechnology 
Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai and released for cultivation in 
Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Chattisgarh, West Bengal, 
Orissa, Gujarat and Karnataka. The crops include oilseeds such as Groundnut, Soybean, 
Mustard, Sunflower and pulses such as Green Gram, Pigeonpea & Cowpea. 
 

 
9.3   The department also informed that as regards Food Proce ssing the radiation 
Processing Plant, Vashi provides gamma ra diation processing services for spices, 
ayurvedic raw material and pet feed etc. to  more than 130 customers from all over the 
country.  During the current fi nancial year, about 1600 Metric Tonnes(MT) of spices and 
other products were processed till November 2009.  During the financial year, the plant is 
expected to process around 2400 MT spices a nd allied product yielding revenue of about 
Rs.1.50 crore. The Board of Radiation & Isotope Technology(BRIT) signed a tripartite 
agreement with the Maharashtra State Ag ricultural Marketing Board (MSAMB) and 
BARC for service operation of  KRUSHAK Irradiation Facility, Lasalgaon, Nashik from 
this year by MSAMB, for 3 years. Using this facility, about 130 tonnes mangoes were 
processed and exported to Unite d States by various exporters.   The facility is under 
upgradation for multi-tasking i.e. to convert  it into a multi-product processing unit 
covering wide range of food products requiring low dose to medium dose exposure.  
9.4 The department also informed that the in terest of entrepreneurs in using radiation 
technology for hygienising a nd preserving food and allied products is increasing.  
Construction of a radiation processing plan t at Bhiwadi, Rajasthan, was completed and 
trial run was started with support from BRIT.  It is the ei ghth such plant in private sector 
in the country. Radiation technology has also helped India in increasing its exports of 
food items including the most developed markets in the world. 
9.5 The Committee is of the opinion that  the economy of the country being 
primarily based on agriculture with a substantial workforce of the country engaged 
in farming, the economic development of the country largely depends on 
agricultural development. The Committee is al so aware that most of the farmers in 
the country do not have any access to the latest techniques to increase agricultural 
produce and also techniques to prevent the lo ss in produce due to diseases and pests 
and also due to lack of proper storage facilities. Therefore, increase in agricultural 
produce and processing of agricultural prod ucts in the country through scientific 
support, assumes prime importance and the Department of Atomic Energy through 
its reputed  institutions has a pivotal role to play in this regard. 
9.6  The Committee is of the opinion that in troduction of new varieties of disease 
and pest resistant crops in various parts of  the country will help in increasing crop 
yields and give a boost to agriculture and al so help in tiding over shortage of food. 
The Committee is also of the opinion that irradiated food products which have a 
higher shelf life will increase the export of  farm products and thereby help in 
increasing the agricultural incomes. While the Committee appreciates the initiatives 
taken by the Department in this regard, it feels that much more needs to be done 
further.  The Committee, therefore, rec ommends that the department should 
intensify its research in the field of agric ulture and   populariz e its technologies 
among farmers across the country, so that  the benefit of research could percolates 
down to the poor and marginal farmers as well.  
10. Assistance to Universities and other Institutions 
10.1 The Committee is informed that the al location under Assistance  to Universities, 
etc., (Grants to other Institu tions) has been increased from Rs.145.15 crores R.E. in the 
year 2009-2010, to Rs.154.00 crores in B.E. 2010-2011. The department also explained 
that the budget provision under this head, is not only restricted to support the Universities 
alone but also to support other Research Institutions, Societies and Non-Government 
Institutions in the area of education, re search and cancer research. The increased 
allocation of Rs.154.00 crores under BE 2010 -2011, is to support the research projects 
being carried out by research ers through Grant-in-Aid give n by Board of Research in 

 
Nuclear Sciences (BRNS), s upport for promoting studies/research in Mathematics 
through National Board of Higher Mathematic s (NBHM), assistance given to Radiation 
Medicine Centres/Cancer Hospitals in the form of grants for procuring indigenous 
equipment and to develop cancer care facility  at Shillong and Ranchi.  As per the 
information furnished, the Deptt. has given gran t-in-aid to 79 Universities in the states of 
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Jharkhand, Chattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu& Kashmir, Karnataka, Kera la, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Delhi, Orissa, Pondich erry, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and West-Bengal 
for upgrading the libraries in the Universities.  
10.2 When the Committee enquired about the pa rameters of selection of Universities 
for extending grants-in-aid for upgrading their libraries, it was informed that Board of 
Research in Nuclear Sciences (BRNS) invites applications from different educational and 
research institutions and based on evaluation of the project proposals, funding is done.  
The Department further informed that efforts are made to identify small universities for 
funding who are not able to get funds from other major sources.   
10.3    The Committee appreciates the initiative of the department in providing 
funds and support to Universities, Research Institutions, Societies and Non-
Government Institutions in the area of e ducation and cancer research and feels that 
such investments would help in creating interest of the younger generation towards 
nuclear science at the University level and would go a long way in helping the future 
growth of the country in the field of Atomic Energy. 
 The Committee, however, feels 
that there is a lot of scope for further expa nsion of this scheme to more universities 
in the remaining states of the country which would require additional investments 
and therefore recommends that the Department should furt her increase its 
allocation under this head. The Committ ee also recommends that it should 
encourage those Universities to send their projects from where projects have not 
been received so far.  By doing this, the Department would be able to cover all the 
States of the country.   
11.   INDUSTRIAL SECTOR 
11.1 The Industrial Sector is providing full suppor t to the front-end as well as back end 
of the nuclear power programme of the c ountry. The Nuclear Fuel Cycle programme 
covers industrial activities whic h are ancillary to the nuclear  power sector and comprises 
design, construction and operation of industrial plants for ore refining, fuel fabrication, 
heavy water production and others. The programme relating to the Industrial Applications 
of Nuclear Energy in the non-electricity fields  addresses applications of radioisotope, 
laser and accelerator technologi es in medicine, food preservation, agriculture, industry 
and other such areas. 
11.2 The Committee was informed of the following demand projected by the 
Department to the Planning Commission for its various programmes and the allocation 
that has been agreed to by the Planning Commission under the Sector: 
 
  (Rs. in crores) 
Units Proposed allocation Approved 
allocation  
BARC 600.00 520.00
BRIT 19.50 18.00
DAE Projects 3.10 3.10
ECIL-R&D 20.00 20.00

 
PREE & Other Projects 2.04 2.04
Total-DAE Projects 25.14 25.14
ECIL 31.00 31.00
BS 0.00 0.00
IEBR 31.00 31.00
HWB 80.00 70.00
IGCAR 90.00 83.00
NFC 75.66 72.00
GRAND TOTAL 921.30 819.14
BS 890.30 788.14
IEBR 31.00 31.00
      
BS=Budgetary support,  IEBR = Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources. 
11.3 The Committee is of the opinion that the activities carried out under this 
sector would help the country in achievin g self-reliance and less dependence on the 
external sources for pursuing its nuclear programme. The Committee also 
appreciates the endeavours made by the Department for applications of Nuclear 
Energy in the non-electricity fields namely addressing applications of radioisotopes, 
laser and accelerator technologies in medicine, food preservation, agriculture, 
industry and other such areas which  cater to the societal needs of the country. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the allocation of funds to this sector should 
commensurate with the objectives set for the sector. 
11.4 The Committee asked the Secretary, Depa rtment of Atomic Energy whether there 
is involvement of any public sector enterpri ses in the field of atomic energy?  The 
Secretary replied that the Department has adopted a strategy according to which 
manufacturing of equipments/m aterial is by and large in the private sector but the 
operation is with the public sector.  Even pub lic sector companies like BHEL and others 
are involved in the process.  He further added that our public and private sector 
companies have developed expertise and capabilities to be able to supply components and 
equipments for the nuclear industry worldw ide and today India has the potential of 
becoming a hub for equipments manufacturing.  One of the main advantages of opening 
up of civil nuclear trade would be  that India will be able to  compete with other countries 
in export of nuclear related components and equipments.  He further added that at present 
about 70 to 80 per cent of the components are coming from the private industries and that 
the Department is making concerted efforts to increase this percentage further.   
11.5 The Committee is happy to note that I ndia has become capable to participate 
and compete in international civil nuclear commerce.  The Committee, however, 
recommends that the Department should ma ke consistent efforts to involve and 
nurture more and more Indian companies both  from private and public sector so as 
to further strengthen our competence in the field.  Such an attempt would also help 
the nation financially and would open up greater job opportunities in the country.   
12. MINERALS SECTOR  
12.1 The Committee observes that during the Eleventh Five Plan, so far, AMD has 
been able to establish 34,080tonnes of uranium resource as against the target of 
75,000tonnes, whereas India’s total uranium re source stands up to 1,41,937 tonnes.  The 
Committee enquired from the Department as to why it has not been able to expedite and 

 
enhance indigenous exploration and exploitati on of Uranium ore which is critical not 
only for running the existing nuclear power pl ants at its optimum capacity but also to 
expand nuclear power programme in future.  The Deptt. informed the Committee that 
Atomic Mineral Directorate (AMD) has enhanc ed the survey & exploration activity for 
augmentation of uranium and other atomic mi nerals required for the nuclear programme. 
AMD has also imported the heliborne geophysical survey system (TDEM) which is being 
utilized for survey this will help in locating high grade la rge tonnage concealed uranium 
deposits.  In addition, heliborne survey is being outsourced to Multi National Companies 
for speedy completion of work.  AMD is also outsourcing the drilling activity in thrust 
area for augmentation of uranium resource. 
12.2   The Committee notes that the Atomic  Minerals Directorate (AMD) has been 
able to establish only 34,080 tonnes of uranium resource as against the target of                   
75,000 tonnes for the Eleventh Five Year Plan period.  The Committee expresses its 
concern over the fact that ev en after three years of the Eleventh Five Year Plan 
have lapsed, the Department has not been ab le to harness even half of the uranium 
resources targeted during the Eleventh Fi ve Year Plan.  The Committee expresses 
its apprehension over the successful achievement of the set target.  The Committee 
therefore, recommends that the obstacles co ming in the way of achievements of the 
target set for the 11
th Plan period need to be overcome  in right earnest so that our 
dependence on imported fuel could be minimized.    
12.3  The Committee has been given to understand that fuel shortage is coming in 
the way of generation of nuclear energy.  Percentage of capacity utilisation of 
installed reactors has consistently gone down from 90 per cent in 2002-03 to 50 per 
cent in 2008-09.  The Committee, therefore, st rongly recommends that to tide over 
this situation, the Deptt. must do its utmo st to procure uranium from indigenous, as 
well as, foreign sources. 
12.4  The Committee takes note of the fact  that despite sufficient allocation made 
during the Tenth Five Year Plan for expa nding uranium mining activities under minerals 
sector, the Department could although have achieved reasonable success in areas where 
mining activities are already going on but it fa iled to achieve any major success at green 
field sites.  The Committee has been given to understand that the main reason behind not 
achieving the desired success has been oppos ition to setting up uranium mines/milling 
activities from the local public.  The Committ ee was also informed that uranium ore 
milling project at Turamdin was affected due  to land dispute of tailing pond and water 
pipeline, while uranium ore mining and milling project at Lambapur and one at Kylleng 
Pyndengshohiong, Mawthaban are waiting mining lease from the State Governments of 
Andhra Pradesh and Meghalaya respectively.   
12.5  While the Committee appreciates the fa ct that the Department is engaged in 
sorting out the problems, however, it reco mmend to get these matters resolved at 
the earliest because uranium resource is vi tal for the expansion of nuclear power 
programme. 
13 HEALTH HAZARD OF URANIUM MINES 
13.1 The Committee also raised th e issue of the health hazard posed due to the existing 
mining and milling plants of Uranium ore, wh ich has become a cause of major concern 
for the local population and enquired about the steps that have  been taken by the 
department in this regard. The Committee also pointed out a specific instance of Jajugada 
in the Singhbhum district wher e there have been instances of health problems for the 
local community ranging from miscarriage to children born with physical and mental 
deformities. The department clarified that as the operations of Uranium Corporation of 

 
India Limited(UCIL) are carried out under strict surveillance of Atomic Energy 
Regulatory Board, State Pollution Control Board and Director-g eneral of Mines 
Safety(DGMS), there is no adverse effect due to the mining of uranium ore and the same 
has been confirmed by the various studies carried out by the experts. Further, local Health 
Physics Units of the Bhabha Atomic Resear ch Centre present in the locality are 
monitoring the activity on day to  day basis to ensure the sa fety aspect. The department 
also pointed out that on the basis of medical reports it has been confirmed that most of 
the diseases in the areas n ear the mines are due to malnutrition, malaria and unhygienic 
living conditions rather than the side-effect of radiation. 
13.2 The Committee while acknowledging the need of the department to increase 
its Uranium sources through development of  new mines, would like to stress upon 
the importance of avoiding the resulting health hazards and maintaining the ecology 
and environment of the areas near the mines.  The Committee is also aware that in 
some regions of the country Uranium pros pecting has led to public unrest due to 
resulting health hazards and displacement of people. The Committ ee feels that the 
department should take preventive steps to ensure that there is  no adverse effect 
due to the mining operations. Before mining operation starts the department should 
make consistent efforts for winning over th e confidence of public by making aware 
of the factual information to all stakeholde rs of the project through extensive public 
awareness programmes.  The department sh ould also ensure proper compensation 
for the displaced people to avoid public di scontentment at a later stage and also 
undertake welfare measure programmes in th e entire area by opening schools, 
hospitals, etc. 
14. POWER SECTOR 
14.1 The Power Sector of the Deptt. is respons ible for generation of electricity from 
nuclear plants on commercial basis.  It c overs design, construc tion and operation of 
pressurized heavy water reactors, fast breeder reactors and thorium reactors, with 
associated safety aspects, on commercial  scale as well as waste management and 
environment monitoring. 
14.2 The Committee was informed of the following demand projected by the 
Department to the Planning Commission for its various programmes and the allocation 
that has been agreed to by the Planning Commission under the Power Sector: 
 
 
  (Rs. in Crores) 
Units  Proposed allocation Approved 
allocation 
NPCIL: 2925.00 2925.00
Russian Credit       (BS) 34.00 34.00
                                   IEBR 2891.00 2891.00
BARC (BS) 0.10 0.10
DAE Projects: 403.80 403.90
 KKNP (Fuel cash) 0.00 0.00
Custom Duty 69.00 69.00
Repayment 330.00 330.00

 
KKNP (credit) 0.00 0.00
 DAE Project 4.80 4.90
IGCAR(BS) 10.00 10.00
BHAVINI  (BS) 1475.00 1400.00
TOTAL 4813.90 4739.00
BS 1922.00 1848.00
IEBR 2891.00 2891.00
        BS = Budgetary support, IEBR = Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources.  
14.3 The Committee was informed that at present there are eighteen reactors in 
operation with a capacity of 4340 MW.  Out of these, four reactors-TAPS 1&2 and RAPS 
2&5 with a capacity of 740 MW are fuelled by imported fuel and are operating at full 
power.  Two reactors NAPS-2 and KAPS-1 w ith a capacity of 440 MW are shutdown for 
Renovation and Modernization, while RA PS-1(100 MW) is shutdown for techno-
economic studies on refurbishment. The remaining eleven reactors, fuelled by indigenous 
fuel, are operating at lower capacity due to mismatch in demand and supply of 
indigenous fuel.   
14.4 The Committee was informed that the pe rcentage contribution of Nuclear Energy 
to the total energy production in the country is 3 per cent and by 2020 it is going to be 
slightly higher i.e., 25,000 MW which would workout to 6 or 7 per cent.  However, as per 
future projections the department would be in a position to reach something like 60,000 
MW by 2032, which would come to 20 per cent.   
14.5  The Committee enquired from the Department whether public-private partnership 
is permissible in the setting up nuclear power  plants in the country. The department 
informed that as per the pr esent legal framework private industries are not allowed to 
hold major share in the nuclear power sector and foreign direct investment is totally 
banned. There are two government companies viz. Nuclear Power Corporation of India 
Limited and BHAVINI which are allowed to set up nuclear power sta tions in partnership 
with other public sector companies like NTPC, NALCO and IOL.  .  
14.6 The Committee is of the opinion that Nuclear Energy with a huge potential is 
expected to play vital role in power generati on in the country in future because it is 
a very clean source of energy, devoid of any environmental pollution and therefore 
recommends that conscious efforts shou ld be made to produce the maximum 
amount of energy from Nuclear sources.  
14.7 The Committee feels that besides the pres ent level of contribution of nuclear 
energy being dismal, the future projections, i.e., 6-7 per cent by 2020 and 10 per cent 
by 2032 are also not very encouraging.  Th e Committee is conscious that the Deptt. 
is also concerned about it.  However, it recommends that the Deptt. must devise 
some way out to enhance the power generation capacity. 
14.8 The Committee is of the view that th e Department of Atomic Energy through 
its various research and development activities  is striving very hard against all odds 
to uplift the standard of living in the count ry.  The Committee is happy to note that 
starting from a very modest  beginning the Deptt. has brought the country on the 
verge of becoming an export  oriented country.  Keeping in view the excellent work 
that the Department has done, the kind of competence it has exhibited and the kind 

 
of core and critical programmes it has envisaged for the future, the Committee 
strongly recommends that the Department  of Atomic Energy should be properly 
and adequately funded and any kind of reduction in outlay at R.E. stage should be 
strictly avoided. 
MINUTES 
________________________________________________________________________ 
XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING  
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, 23 rd March, 2010 in Room No. 
'139', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT  
1.  Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 
3. Shri Jabir Husain 
4. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
LOK SABHA  
5.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
6.  Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
7.  Shri Jayaram Pangi 
8. Shri C.R. Patil 
9. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
10. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
11. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
12. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
13. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
SECRETARIAT  
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary 
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director 
Shri V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
Representatives of the Departmen
 t of Atomic Energy  
1. Dr. Srikumar Banerjee, Secretary  
2. Dr. R.B. Grover, Director, Strategic Planning Group 
3. Shri A.P. Joshi, Additional Secretary 
4. Dr. P. Mukherjee, Joint Secretary 
5. Smt. Revathy Iyer, Joint Secretary 
6. Shri V.R. Sadasivam, Joint Secretary (F) 
7. Shri S. Mendiratta, Joint Secretary 
8. Shri M. Pran Konchady, Chief Controller of Accounts 
9. Shri Arun Srivastava, Member , Strategic Planning Group  
10. Shri R.N. Jayaraj, Chief Executive, Nuclear Fuel Complex 
11. Dr. A.K. Koli, Chief Executive, Board of Radiation & Isotope Technology 
12. Dr. A.K. Badwe, director, Tata Memorial Centre 
13. Shri A. Ramaiah, Internal finance Adviser, BARC 
14. Dr. S.K. Jain, CMD, NPCIL 
15. Shri S. Thakur, Executive Director (CP), NPCIL 

 
16. Shri Ramendra Gupta, CMD, UCIL 
17. Shri Chetal, Scientific Officer, IGCAR 
18. Shri J.K. Ghai, Director (Finance) 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed  the Secretary, Department of Atomic 
Energy and his team of officials to the Me eting of the Committee and requested him to 
make a presentation on Demands for Grants (2 010-11) of the Depart ment.   Thereafter, 
the Secretary made a visual presentation rega rding the major activities formulated for the 
year 2010-11 and achievements of the Department during th e year 2009-10.  He also 
mentioned about the budgetary allocations unde r different heads as also the functioning 
of the Department.  Thereafter, Members sough t clarifications on the points that emerged 
out of the presentation. The Secretary replied to them. 
 The officials then withdrew.  
3. The Committee, therea fter, adjourned at 1.00 p.m. and re-assembled at 02.30 p.m. 
to hear the views of the Secretary, Department of ***  
Representatives of ***
 
*** *** *** 
4. *** *** *** 
 The officials then withdrew.  
 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on 
Monday, the 29
th March, 2010. 
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING  
The Committee met at 03.00 p.m. on Friday, 16th April, 2010 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT  
1.  Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 
4. Shri Saman Pathak 
5. Shri Jabir Husain 
6. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
LOK SABHA  
7. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg 
8. Shri Ninong Ering  
9.   Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
10.  Shri C.R. Patil 
11.  Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
12.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
13.  Shri Pradeep Tamta 
14.  Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
SECRETARIAT  
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary 
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director 
Shri V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
2. At the outset, the Chairman informed the Committee that though seven reports 
(204
th to 210 th Reports) on Demands for Grants (2010-2011) pertaining to the 

 
Ministries/Departments under the purview of the Committee have been circulated, the 
Committee would however consider  the draft ***, ***, ***, 207 th, *** and *** Reports 
on Demands for Grants (2010-2011) pertaining to the ***; ***; ***; Atomic Energy; *** 
and ***  respectively and draft *** Report pe rtaining to the *** would be considered 
later on as he could not go through that Repor t due to his some other engagements. The 
Committee then took-up for cons ideration its draft ***, ***, ***, 207
th, *** and *** 
Reports. The Committee discussed the Repor ts one by one and adopted all the six 
Reports (204th to 209th) without any amendment. 
3. The Committee, thereafter decided to present its *** to *** Reports on 22 nd April 
and 207th to 209th Reports on 23 rd April, 2010 to both the Houses of the Parliament. The 
Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri Jabir Husain to present the 
*** to *** reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Fr ancisco Sardinha and in his absence Dr. 
Mirza Mehboob Beg to lay the copies of th e reports on the tabl e of Lok Sabha on 22 nd 
April, 2010. The Committee also authorized its  Chairman and in his absence Shri Rama 
Chandra Khuntia to present the 207 th to *** reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Pradeep 
Tamta and in his absence Dr. Charan Das Mahant  to lay the copies of the reports on the 
table of Lok Sabha on 23rd April, 2010.  
3. Thereafter, the Committee decided to unde rtake study visit to Bangalore, Chennai 
and Tirupati in the second week of June, 2010 to acqua int itself   with    the   functioning    
of    certain institutes/bodies/centers, etc.,   falling    within   the administrative control of 
the Ministries/Departments under the purview of the Committee. The Committee directed 
the Secretariat to take necessary action accordingly. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 p.m.  
 *** Relates to other matters. 