 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND  
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY FIRST REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained 
in the Three Hundred Forty First Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment,  Forests  and Climate 
Change on the Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Department of Atomic Energy 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
 
REPORT NO. 
351 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
 
 
 
 

                                                                                        Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND  
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY FIRST REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Three Hundred Forty First Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment,  Forests  and Climate Change on 
the Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Department of Atomic Energy 
 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
  PAGES 
   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………… (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………… (ii) 
 3. ACRONYMS ……………………………………………………………… (iii) 
  4. REPORT …………………………………………………………………... 1-15 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been  
                       accepted by the Government………………………………... 
 
2-10 
 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee     
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………….. 
 
 
11-13 
 
 Chapter III.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted  by the     
Committee…………………………………………………… 
 
 
14 
 
 Chapter IV.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
                      Replies of the Government are still awaited………………… 
 
 
14 
5. MINUTES …………………………………………………………………. 15-16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____  
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh – Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2.    Shri Anil Baluni 
3.    Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
4.    Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5.   Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
6.    Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
7.    Shri Parimal Nathwani 
8.    Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
9.    Shri Nabam Rebia   
10. # Vacant 
 
   LOK SABHA 
 
11.    Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
12.    Shri Pradan Baruah 
13.    Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
14.    Shri Jashvantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
15.    Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16.    Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
17.    Shri S. Jagathrakshakan 
18.    Shri Mohammed Azam Khan 
19.    Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
20.    Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
21.    Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
22.    Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
23. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
24. Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
25. Shri Francisco Sardinha  
26. Shri Anurag Sharma 
27. Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
28. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
29. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
30. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
31. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
 
         SECRETARIAT 
 
         Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
         Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
         Shri Rakesh Anand, Additional Director 
         Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director 
         Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
         Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
         Shri Ankit Chansoria, Assistant Committee Officer 
____________________________________________________________________                      
#Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha ceased to be the member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation 
from the Committee w.e.f. 11th October, 2021    
(i) 

 
             INTRODUCTION 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Three 
Hundred Fifty First  Report on Action Taken by the G overnment on the  
recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Forty First Report  of the 
Committee on  Demands for Grants (2021 -2022) of the Department of Atomic Energy, 
which was presented/laid in both the Houses of Parliament on 8th March,2021.  
 
2.   There were 10 recommendations/observations in the Three Hundred Forty First 
Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of 
the Committee were received from the Department on 8th June, 2021.   
3.   In the meeting held on 30th November, 2021, the Committee considered the draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JAIRAM RAMESH 
 NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
30th  November, 2021       Department-Related Parliamentary  
Agrahayana 09 , 1943(Saka)                                      Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
  Environment, Forests and Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

ACRONYMS 
 
ACTREC Advanced Centre For Treatment Research And Education in 
Cancer 
AERB Atomic Energy Regulatory Board 
AFR Away From Reactor 
AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
ATN Action Taken Note 
ATR Action Taken Report 
BARC Bhabha Atomic Research Centre 
BHAVINI Bharatiya Nabhikiya Vidut Nigam Limited 
BRIT Board of Radiation & Isotope Technology 
DAE Department of Atomic Energy 
HDI Human Development Index 
IGCAR Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research 
IREL Indian Rare Earths  Limited 
KKNPP Kudankulam Nuclear Power Plant 
NCCP National Cancer Control Programme 
NPCIL Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited 
PFBR Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor 
RE Revised Estimate 
SSH Sewage Sludge Hygienisation 
TMC Tata Memorial Centre 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
                 REPORT 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 341 st Report of the Committee 
on „Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the Department of Atomic Energy ‟. The Report was 
presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 8th March, 2021. 
2. Action Taken Note s (ATN) have been received from Department of Atomic Energy in 
respect of the recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Forty First Report. 
This has been categorized as follows:- 
Chapter I:  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: Para:- 2.6, 2.8, 5.2, 6.4 and 7.1 (of the Three Hundred Forty 
First Report) 
Total recommendations – 05 accepted. 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Department has accepted its 
recommendations/observations as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report.  
Chapter II:    Recommendations/Observations whic h the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
  Para Nos.  2.2, 3.2, 6.2 and 6.3 (ibid)  
Total recommendations – 04. Not to be pursued further. 
                        The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the    
Department and, therefore, does not want to pursue the recommendations 
further. 
Chapter III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:                   
 Para No. 4.2 (ibid)                      
Total recommendations– 01. Not convincing replies. 
The Committee expresses its concern over the non -implementation of its 
recommendations contained in Chapter -III and desires that the Department 
should furnished convincing action taken steps in respect of those 
recommendations. 
Chapter IV:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: Nil. 
. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish pointed and detailed  
Action Taken Notes in respect of the further Recommendations/Observations 
made by the Committee n Chapter I and III of the Report.  The Department 
should also furnish the updated information regarding the paragraph mentioned 
in Chapter IV of the Report. 
3. The details of the ATR have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters.  
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 20 20-21 AND ALLOCATION 
FOR 2021-22 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.1 The Committee while taking note of the activities/road map prepared by the Department 
for the year 2021 -22 hopes that the Department will prioritise its activities in light of the actual 
allocation in BE 2021 -22.  The pr ogrammes/projects of the Department, being very pivotal and 
integral to the country’s progress in the field of atomic energy, need to be adequately funded.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the bare minimum funds as suggested by the 
Department should be made available to the Department at RE stage so as to enable it to carry 
out its planned programmes/projects uninterrupted.  The Department of Atomic Energy should 
also impress upon the Ministry of Finance and sensitise about its bare minimum requir ement of 
additional funds in order to sustain its key programmes/projects.   (Para 2.6 of the 341st Report)               
Action Taken  
1.2 Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited ( NPCIL) thanks the Hon‟ble Committee for 
its recommen dation and will pursue with the Department of Atomic Energy for allocation of 
additional funds in RE 2021-22 to meet its bare minimum requirements. 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.3 The Committee appreciates that the Department has already worked out a detail ed 
strategy of the activities to be carried out for the completion of the task.  The Committee, 
therefore, hopes that the Department would ensure that proposed activities will be completed in 
a time bound manner as envisaged by the Department.  The Committ ee also expects that the 
construction work related to , at least four to five reactors would start during the year 2021 -22.         
(Para 2.8 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.4 NPCIL notes the recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee and will make efforts to 
meet the expectations. 
EXPANSION OF CANCER TREATMENT FACILITIES  
Recommendation/Observation  
1.5 The Committee notes the suggestion made by the Department and is of the considered 
opinion that the existing facilities available in Chhattisgarh, West Bengal and Odisha may be 
upgraded in terms of required  infrastructure/equipments and human resources to enable them to 
function as a 'Hub' for the region. This can be recommended to the State Governments , with 
TMC providing the technical support. As regards to the Greenfield projects in northern 
Karnataka and southern Rajasthan, the Committee is of the view  that the Department through 
Tata Memorial Centre (TMC) should approach the concerned State Governments, sensitise them 
about the efficacy of having a hub, given the incidence of the cancer in these regions, and 
persuade the State Governments to implement their proposal. Further, the Department must 
impress upon the Ministry of Finance to allocate more funds to TMC to recruit additional 
administrative and technical human resources for the smooth i mplementation of proposed 
greenfield projects.                                                                                                   (Para 5.2 ibid)      
Action Taken  
1.6 Director, TMC vide mail dated 01.03.2021 has submitted a detailed note for creation of 
cancer hospital in Goa, Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Bengal on Hub & Spoke model.   

3 
 
The matter has been discussed in detail with Dr. Anurag Shrivastava, Medical Director 
BALCO Cancer Hospital , Raipur (Chhatisgarh) who has shown interest for establishment of 
hospital on Hub and Spoke model. As regard the West Bengal , the issue has been discussed with 
Dr. Alok Roy, Chairman Medical Group of Hospital in Siliguri (West Bengal) who is also very 
keen to receive the technical support from TMC. 
Proposal from Tata Memorial Centre, grant -in-aid institution under the Department of 
Atomic Energy for setting up cancer centres in India on hub and spoke model 
Cancer problem in India 
1.7 The growing burden of cancer in India is a major healthcare issue. As per the 
International Agency for Research on Cancer GLOBOCAN project, it is expected that the burden 
of cancer in India will increase from an estimated incidence of 1.1 million cases in 2018 to about 
1.9 million in 2040. What is more alarming is that cancer deaths are expected to rise from 0.78 
million in 2018 to 1.3 million in 2040. The mortality: incidence ratio of 0.68 in India is far 
higher than that in very high human development index (HDI) countries (0. 38) and high HDI 
countries (0.57). While some of this disparity is because of over -diagnosis in more developed 
countries, it is also due to the unequal distribution of and lack of access to health care resources 
across India. Even among those who are able to access health care, survival is compromised by 
advanced stage at diagnosis and inability to afford optimum treatment. In addition to increasing 
awareness about cancer, augmenting infrastructure for cancer care and improving access to 
health care, one of  the key solutions is to increase the emphasis on research that can identify 
affordable, cost-effective interventions for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of common 
cancers in India. Currently, there are very few government funded cancer centres pro viding high 
quality cancer care, education and research. 
National Cancer Control Programme 
1.8 Although the National Cancer Control Program me (NCCP) has been in place since 1975, 
it has not been impactful primarily because of the lack of political support in past years. We 
propose that the NCCP be revisited under the aegis of the National Cancer Grid, a flagship 
programme of the Government of I ndia. Primarily, the focus needs to continue on prevention of 
common cancers like those of the oral cavity, cervix, lung. Early detection by increasing 
awareness amongst the lay public as well as the primary care physician (including alternative 
medicine practitioners and traditional healers) needs to be at a priority. However, there is also the 
need for augmenting treatment facilities in various parts of the country. Currently, over     two-
thirds of cancer care is provided by private sector. Increasing co sts and out of pocket expenses , 
therefore, results in close to 6% of India‟s population going below the poverty line every year. 
There is an urgent need to augment the cancer care facilities in the country. In addition, attention 
is also required in the areas of palliative care, survivorship and patient advocacy. Data collection 
and aggregation, evaluating patterns of care, and health technology assessment are also required 
to channelize scarce healthcare resources appropriately. 
A dual approach is required  for planning a systematic National Cancer Plan . First, 
existing centres should be strengthened to provide uniform standards of cancer care across the 
country. Secondly, additional Government run cancer centres need to be set up to fill the gaps in 
access across several geographies. The first approach has been successfully done by the National 
Cancer Grid, a large network of cancer centres, research institutions, patient groups and 
professional societies, with the mandate of establishing uniform standards o f patient care for 
prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer, creating adequate trained human resources, and 
facilitating collaborative basic, translational and clinical research in cancer. However, there is 
still a need to create additional government-run cancer centres which can provide affordable high 
quality cancer care to all sections of society. 
 
 

4 
 
Tata Memorial Centre (TMC) 
1.9 The Tata Memorial Centre, a grant -in-aid organization under the Department of Atomic 
Energy, is the oldest and largest cancer centre in the country. Registering close to 80,000 new 
patients and over 500,000 follow ups annually, it provides high quality cancer care to patients 
from across the country regardless of socio -economic status; more than 60% of patients are 
treated almost free of cost. TMC also is the centre for cancer education in the country and trains 
over 100 students every year in various aspects of cancer including surgical, medical and 
radiation oncology. Research from TMC has addre ssed several important questions and changed 
cancer practice globally. ACTREC is the research wing of TMC and houses several cancer 
researchers working towards unravelling the biology, causes and management of cancer. In 
addition, TMC has now expanded to s ix other hospitals located in Varanasi (two), Guwahati, 
Sangrur, Vishakapatnam and Mullanpur. It is expected that TMC will treat over 150,000 new 
patients with cancer annually by the year 2022. 
The National Cancer Grid 
1.10 The National Cancer Grid, an ini tiative of the Department of Atomic Energy, 
Government of India, was created in 2012 with the broad vision of creating uniform standards of 
cancer care across India. Seven years later, it has grown to a large network of 238 cancer centres, 
research institutes, patient advocacy groups, charitable organizations and professional societies. 
Between the member organizations of the NCG, the network treats over 700,000 new patients 
with cancer annually, which is over 60% of all of India‟s cancer burden. Incorporat ing all 
stakeholders of cancer care in India, it is a strong, unified and powerful voice in the fight against 
cancer. 
NCG activities include the following: 
1. Uniform standards of care – NCG Consensus Guidelines 
2. External Quality Assurance Schemes (EQAS) 
3. Second opinion service for patients – “Navya” 
4. NCG Virtual Tumor Boards 
5. Price Discovery Cell / Group negotiation for equipment, drugs and consumables 
6. Continuing Medical Education – NCG National Cancer Library and Discovery tool 
“Akshara” 
7. Unique Educational Initiatives – “Traveling Schools of Pathology and Oncology 
Nursing” 
8. Training in Cancer Research Methods – International Collaboration on Research methods 
Development in Oncology – CreDO workshop 
9. NCG funded multicentric collaborative research 
Hub and spoke model of cancer care 
1.11 A distributed model of cancer care is required to offer patients high quality cancer care at 
their doorsteps. Common and less complex cancer care should be provided close to patients‟ 
homes (spokes) to create minimum disruption in  their lives and that of their families. Treatment 
of uncommon cancers and those with complex treatment protocols require management in expert 
centres of excellence (hubs). However, to avoid over -burdening the hubs, the spokes need to be 
reasonably capable  of handling less complex and common cancer types in the region. This 
strategy would be extremely helpful to minimize costs as well as inconvenience to patients and 
their families. We suggest a comprehensive cancer plan which will address the increasing burden 
of cancer in India by the creation of approximately 30 hubs and 120 spokes in various parts of 
the country. 
Suggested approach 
1.12 Tata Memorial Centre, a grant-in-aid tertiary cancer hospital under Department of 
Atomic Energy, Government of India has been offering state of the art cancer services for last 80 
years. We strive for excellence in cancer care, education, research, public health since our 

5 
 
inception. We hav e now set up hospitals in Sangrur, Chandigarh, Varanasi, Vishakhapatnam, 
Guwahati and Muzaffarpur. While the hospitals in Sangrur, Guwahati, Varanasi are fully 
functional, the facilities in Chandigarh and Vishakhapatnam will be fully commissioned by the 
end of this year. We also offered technical assistance to the Uttar Pradesh ( UP) Government in 
setting up State Cancer Institute at Lucknow.  
It is agreed upon that the availability of affordable cancer care is not uniformly available 
in all geographical areas of our vast country. It is ideal to establish TMC‟s hub and spoke model 
in such a way that no patient has to travel more than three hours to access basic cancer care. The 
model has been endorsed by the Parliamentary Committee on Science and Technology i n its 
report on improving cancer care and control in India. The National Cancer Grid is another 
initiative to standardize cancer care all across the nation.  
A typical hub is a tertiary care facility that has 250 beds and takes care of all specialties 
catering to a population of 4  crore. The approximate cost of setting up such a facility is Rs 700 
crore and it takes around 3 -5 years to commission the facility fully after approvals, sanction of 
funds, and statutory permissions are in place.  A typical spoke is a 100 bedded facility that takes 
care of nearly two thirds of the cancer care spectrum. The approximate cost of setting up a spoke 
is approximately Rs 385 crore and it can be commissioned in 2 -4 years after approvals, sanction 
of funds, and statutory pe rmissions are in place.The budgetary estimates are based on the 
assumption that the land required will be provided free of cost by the respective State 
Governments. Table 1 gives an overview of the sub-heads of this expenditure.  
Table 1 – Capital Expenditure -  250 beds (hub) and 100 beds (spoke) 
 
SR. 
No. 
OBJECT  HEAD 250 BEDDED 100 BEDED 
1. Major Works 300 150 
2. Machinery & Equipments 250 150 
3. Housing 60 40 
4. Salaries 37 12 
5. Professional Services/Consultancy 15 10 
6. Contingency 10 5 
7. Outreach  Prog. 5 5 
8. Supplies & Materials 4 2 
9. Other Captial 4 2 
10. Office Expenses 4 2 
11. Domestic Travel 4 3 
12. Motor Vehicle 2 1 
13. TOTAL 695 382 
The “hub” hosts state of art facility for Surgery, Chemotherapy, Radiotherapy, Nuclear 
Medicine, Laboratory Services, Transfusion Medicine, Preventiv e Oncology and Palliative Care.  

6 
 
The “spoke” hosts all such facilities at lower scale based on the cancer estimates in the drainage 
population and caters to           5 crore population. A detailed description of the distribution of the 
facilities is mentioned in Table 2.   
Table 2 – Scope of Work for 250 Vs 100 bedded hospital  
 
 Departments  Hub (250 beds) Spoke (100 beds) 
1 Surgical Oncology    
 Breast/ Gynecology / Urology / Plastic 
Surgery/ Gastrointestinal / Head Neck  
Yes  Yes  
 Thoracic/Orthopedic / Pediatric 
/Neurosurgery 
Yes  No  
 Major OT 6 4 
 RT OT 1 1 
 Minor OT 2 1 
 Endoscopy suite  2                                                                                                                                                                                     1 
2 Anesthesiology and CCU Yes  Yes  
 ICU 20 10 
 Recovery 20 10 
3 Medical Oncology    
 Hemato-lymphoid Yes  Yes 
 Solid Tumors  Yes  Yes  
 BMT  Yes  No  
 Pediatric  Yes  No  
4 Radiation Oncology  4 tele and 1 brachy 
CT Simulator 
2 Tele and 1 brachy 
CT Simulator 
5 General Medicine  Yes  Yes  
6 Preventive Oncology  Yes  Yes  
7 Nuclear Medicine    
 Diagnostic  Yes Yes  
 Therapy  Yes  No  
8 Palliative Medicine  Yes  Yes  

7 
 
9 Pathology    
 General  Yes  Yes  
 Advanced  Yes  No  
10 Radiology    
 General  2 CT / 1 MR/1 
PETCT/ 
4USG/2DR 
1 CT / 1 MR/2USG/1 
DR 
 Interventional Radiology  Yes  No  
11 Microbiology  Yes  Yes  
 General  Yes  Yes 
 Advanced  Yes  No  
12 Hemato-pathology  Yes  Yes  
 General  Yes  Yes  
 Advanced  Yes  No  
13 Biochemistry  Yes  Yes  
14 Blood Bank  Yes  Yes  
15 CSSD  Yes  Yes  
 
The human resources required to establish a hub and a spoke are detailed in Table 3 
Table 3 –Human Resource requirement*  
Categories  250 Bedded Hub 100 Bedded Spoke 
Medical 150 75 
Scientific 65 30 
Technical 200 90 
Nursing 250 100 
Administration 170 60 
Auxiliary 70 35 
Total 905 390 
 
* assuming substantial component of administrative and auxiliary, labour staff on contract 
appointments (above requirements are for permanent positions) 

8 
 
Based on the recent requests for establishment of cancer hospitals  in Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, 
Odisha, West Bengal and Goa, we would suggest the following approach. 
1. West Bengal - We suggest that TMC provide technical assistance to an existing facility in 
Siliguri in setting up a new spoke or upgrading the existing cancer  care facility.  This 
facility will serve the population of West Bengal, Sikkim, Assam, Bihar, Nepal and 
Bhutan. We are aware that Medica Cancer Hospital is an existing cancer centre at 
Rangapani (outskirts of Siliguri), and this might be an option to coll aborate with. This 
centre can be supported by our centres in Muzaffarpur and Guwahati that are 
approximately 9 hours by road from Siliguri. If we adopt this approach, we may incur an 
annual expenditure of Rs 15 crore. 
2. Chhattisgarh – On the request of forme r Chief Minister of Chhattisgarh, our team has 
visited Raipur and submitted a report on various options that State Government  can 
explore. Amongst all the available options, it appears best that we offer technical 
assistance to the BALCO hospital, a charit able cancer centre, by supporting the existing 
facility, which can be a hub. If we adopt this approach, we may incur an annual 
expenditure of Rs 30 crores. 
3. Goa: As per our assessment, the region around Karwar is deficient in good cancer 
hospitals in the vi cinity. Karwar would be a good site for a spoke as it can service 
patients from Goa as well as North Karnataka. Given the close proximity of Kaiga, this 
can be an appropriate site for a hub to be built by DAE in partnership with the State 
Government. 
4. Odisha: We are aware of an ongoing effort to establish a large cancer centre at 
Bhubhaneswar by the Odisha State Government; in addition, there is a regional cancer 
centre at Cuttack, and an AIIMS in Bhubhaneswar. It would be best that we offer 
technical assist ance to the State Government in their existing proposal of creating a 
cancer centre, which would be a hub. An annual expenditure of Rs 30 crore would be 
required to support infrastructure/ equipment upgrade and operation expenses. 
5. Rajasthan: Southern Rajas than has a scarcity of cancer centres and hence, Udaipur or 
Kota would be good choices to create hubs of cancer care. This would be a greenfield 
project with the creation of a hub. 
As mentioned above, there are two different models being proposed. In the f irst scenario, 
(West Bengal, Chattisgarh, Odisha), TMC will offer technical assistance (civil work planning, 
architectural planning, guidance on equipment purchase, human resource recruitment and 
commissioning) to an existing or upcoming facility for upgradation to a Hub or a spoke. It would 
be preferable to have the location of this facility in an existing government hospital or a 
charitable hospital. In this case, most of the capital cost will be borne by the relevant stakeholder, 
while there may be some supplementary funding for operational expenditure and upgradation of 
infrastructure / equipment from the DAE. In the second scenario (Karwar, Kota/Udaipur and any 
of the above -mentioned sites where collaboration with the suggested centres does not 
materialize), TMC would plan to establish and run the facility itself as a greenfield project. All 
facilities will be functionally and academically autonomous, run directly by TMC.  
Implementation Committee:  
1.13 The above mentioned proposal, combined with existi ng commitments that TMC has, is a 
major task which will require a central core staff at the Tata Memorial Centre to be able to 
handle the additional demands on time and expertise. This would be served by a core group led 
by a Director General (Medical) who  would be overall in -charge of the proposal. He/she would 
be supported by an experienced group of professionals with varying qualifications and expertise 
– medical, administrative, paramedical, scientific, technical, finance, human resource and 
engineering. These individuals would be recruited through a special drive permitting lateral entry 
from experienced, dedicated individuals who are capable of taking on major challenges. Each of 
the centres‟ respective heads would report to the Central Core Committee so that uniformity of 
policy is maintained as well as being able to monitor the activities and progress at each 

9 
 
individual centre. This would be crucial to ensure high quality of establishing as well as running 
these centres. The Implementation Committee would have full powers to do price discovery, 
tendering in bulk and group -negotiate for all aspects of developing these hubs, including civil 
work, equipment, drugs and consumables. 
MANAGEMENT OF DISUSED SEALED RADIOACTIVE SOURCE  
Recommendation/Observation  
1.14 The Committee also appreciates the bullet -proof jackets developed by the Department. It 
weighs less than the imported ones i.e. 6.8 kgs as compared to 11 kgs. This would result in better 
maneuverability /agility of the Forces and is almost 50% cheaper compared to imported jackets.  
The jackets can be exported too and can be a good source of revenue generation.  (Para 6.4 ibid)          
Action Taken  
1.15 The Department gladly thanks the Committee for appreciating the development of bullet 
proof jackets. Technologies developed at BARC are transferred to Government enterprises / 
private entrepreneurs for commercialisation. Developed technologies are released for transfers 
are displayed through website: http://www.barc.gov.in/technologies/technology.html. 
Currently BARC is pursuing only technology development, its popularisation for technology 
transfers and incubation of technology on case to case basis. Commercialisation of technology is 
taken forward by licensees after transfer of technology. The licensees of “Bhabha Kavach (the 
light-weight bullet -proof jacket)”technology can export the product subject to Government of 
India‟s export regulations and policy on national security. 
Technology of Bhabha Kavach (the light-weight bullet-proof jacket) is transferred to 4 
companies mentioned below. 
1. M/s Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited 
PO – Kanchanbagh, Hyderabad  Telangana– 500058, 
2. M/s MKU Limited, 13, Gandhi Gram, G. T. Road, Kanpur (UP)-208 007 
3. M/s Bhukhanvala Industries Pvt Ltd.B-28, Bhukhanvala Chambers, Veera Industrial Estate, 
Off - Link Road, Andheri (West), Mumbai-400053. 
4. M/s Central Electronics Limited, Sahibabad Industrial Area Site 4, Sahibabad, Ghaziabad, 
Uttar Pradesh - 201005 
The Department will continue the transfer the technology to suitable enterprises following the 
prevailing technology transfer procedure. 
 
CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS  
Recommendation/Observation  
1.16 Even with the most aggressive plans for renewable energy, India will still need a 
significantly accelerated and augmented nuclear power generating programme.  The Committee 
underscores the fact that unlike coal, nuclear power does not lead to emission of g reenhouse 
gases.  By 2040 at least 10% of the country’s electricity supply must come from nuclear stations.  
It may seem to be an unrealistic target but all efforts must be made to ensure that it is achieved.  
                                                                                                                                   (Para 7.1 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.17   NPCIL notes the recommendation of the Hon ‟ble Committee and will make all efforts 
in this direction.  
 

10 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
REPLIES 
BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020 -21 AND ALLOCATION 
FOR 2021-22 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.1 The Committee is satisfied to note tha t the Department has, in totality, spent an amount 
of Rs. 14107.88 crore against the RE 2020 -21 allocation of Rs. 14274.96 crore till January, 
2021 which is almost to the tune of 99% utilisation of the allocated funds.  The Committee, 
however, would like to highlight the sub -optimal utilisation of budgetary allocation under heads 
(i) Radiation and Isotopes Projects; (ii) Nuclear Power Projects; and (iii) Bharatiya Nabhikiya 
Vidyut Nigam Limited where the Department could utilise only 17.82%, 44.38% and 21.3 3% 
respectively.                      (Para 2.2 of the 341st Report) 
Action Taken  
2.2 The main contractor i.e. M/s. INVAP company is in Argentina. They had to vacate the 
project site in March 2020. Due to COVID -19, the progress of commissioning of equipments 
could not be completed as Argentina Government and Indian Government both imposed travel 
restrictions and working restrictions lead to incompletion of all installation & commissioning 
activities & restricted milestone amount could not be released. The funds were surrendered at FR 
stage. The approved FR 2020-21 is Rs.12.61 crore. 
Expenditure upto March 2021 is shown below in the statement: 
(Rs. in crore) 
 BE 
2020-21 
RE 
2020-21 
Actual Expenditure 
(Upto March-2021) 
Actual Exp. 
% w.r.t. RE 
2020-21 
BE 2021-22 
Capital 119.12 50.00 12.10 24.20% 38.06 
 
With reference to RE 2020 -21 of Capital project i.e. Rs.50 crore, funds of                  
Rs.37.39 crore were surrendered at FR stage, and the final funds approved for FR 2020 -21 is 
Rs.12.61 crore only. 
 The allocation and expenditure in respect of “Nuclear Power Projects” – DAE projects 
being executed by Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) is as follows: 
(Rs. in crore) 
 BE 
2020-
21 
RE 
2020-
21 
Actual 
Expenditure 
(Upto March-
2021) 
Actual Exp. 
% w.r.t. RE 
2020-21 
Budget 2021-22 
Nuclear 
Power 
Projects- 
DAE 
100.12 100.12 54.66 54.59% 278.95 

11 
 
The expenditure of Rs.46.17 crore (Rs.45.46 crore + Rs.0.71 crore) in respect of RAPS -1 
has already been incurred by NPCIL and the provision made is only for reimbursement of the 
amount to NPCIL by Department of Atomic Energy (DAE).  
 In respect of the Rs. 9.39 crore allocation made for Away from Reactor (AFR) at 
Kudankulam Nuclear Power Plant (KKNPP), the expenditure could not be incurred upto January 
2021.  Major expenditure on AFR is planned in 2021-22 and an allocation of Rs.153.93 crore has 
been made under this Head in BE 2021-22.  
 BHAVINI was incorporated under the companies Act, 1956 as a Special Purpose Vehicle 
for construction, commissioning and operating Fast Breeder Reactors. Prototype Fast Breeder 
Reactor (PFBR) has been constructed by BHAVINI an d it is under integrated commissioning. 
Since there is a delay in commissioning of project, due to first of a kind reactor, a proposal has 
been submitted to Government of India for revising time and cost of the project. 
 Drawal of money is linked with cost  and time revision approval of PFBR pending with 
Government of India. The break-up for the amount approved for BHAVINI for the year 2020 -21 
is given below : 
(Rs. in crore) 
Particulars  Major 
head 
BE 
2020-
21 
RE 
2020-
21 
Actual 
Expenditure 
(Upto March -
2021) 
Actual Exp. 
% w.r.t. RE 
2020-21 
Budget 
2021-22 
Loans 6801 70.00 70.00 0 0% 70.00 
Investment 4801 80.00 80.00 40.00 50% 0 
Total  150.00 150.00 40.00 26.67% 70.00 
 
As the cost revision proposal has not been approved, drawal of Rs.70.00 crore towards 
PFBR could not be carried out. 
As the Final Grant was revised from Rs.80.00 crore to Rs.40 crore, the entire amount of 
Rs.40.00 crore was drawn by BHAVINI towards Pre Project Activities of FBR -1 & 2 in 2020 -
21. 
Necessary follow up action has been taken at our end to expedite approval of PFBR cost 
and time revision so that proper utilisation of Budget will be made. 
 
COMMISSIONING OF PROTOTYPE FAST BREEDER REACTOR (PFBR) 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.3 The Committee is acutely conscious of the extra ordinary difficulties involved with the 
use of liquid sodium as coolant. It is also conscious of the fact that the PFBR is a pioneering 
venture in the world and that it is an essential intermediate step for the ut ilisation of the 
country’s vast thorium reserves for power generation. The Committee commends the DAE for all 
that has been achieved as the PFBR is concerned and expresses the hope that it will be 
commissioned according to the schedule indicated by the Secretary, DAE.          (Para 3.2 ibid)                                                               
Action Taken  
2.4 Sustained efforts are being put by the combined IGCAR -BHAVINI team for the 
criticality of PFBR by October 2022 with day -to-day interactions and joint working between the 
two organisations to resolve all technical issues. Review of the technical progress an d project 

12 
 
status is being made on weekly basis by internal APEX Committees and every month by a 
Committee for Independent Review of PFBR reporting directly to Secretary DAE. 
Recently, certain difficulties have been observed during hand ling trials of three dummy 
subassemblies from the core using in -vessel fuel handling machine. Detailed investigations are 
underway and rectification scheme is being worked out. 
The effect of this on the revised schedule will emerge after the investigations, which is expected 
to be completed within the next two months. 
MANAGEMENT OF DISUSED SEALED RADIOACTIVE SOURCE 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.5 The Committee underlines the safety issues related with the disused radioactive sources 
and their management and it is, therefore, important that all these sources must be brought 
under physical custody of the Department of Atomic Energy to ensure proper a nd scientific 
management. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Atomic Energy 
should undertake an exercise and prepare a lis t of organisations/universities  which are 
struggling to manage these sources first, and then start the process of taking possession of the 
same.                                                                                                              (Para 6.2 ibid) 
Action Taken  
2.6 Atomic Energy Regulatory Board ( AERB), has informed all user s (Radiotherapy and 
Nuclear Medicine Department) who are  in possession of   disused radioactive source of foreign 
origin  (imported) regarding the decision of Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)  to extend one 
time opportunity to get the imported sources disposed off at national waste management facility 
(in India) through Board of Radiation & Isotope Technology (BRIT) on chargeable basis for a 
limited period of  3 years  (up to December 2023) and charges will increase by 10% every year 
and in no case , the sources will be accepted thereafter.   This one time opportunity is only for 
those sources which were imported till December 2019. 
As far as Indian origin sourced are concerned, it may be not ed that in India only BRIT/DAE can 
supply Indian origin radioactive sources. BRIT always accepts disused sources supplied by 
BRIT/DAE as per the terms and conditions of the disposal procedure. 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.7 The Committee reiterates the fact that the country has abundant availability of Thorium. 
The Committee urged the Department to find avenues for its consumption in the country as a 
substitute to the costly imported raw materials through enhanced research and development.  
                                                                                                                       (Para 6.3 ibid)    
Action Taken  
2.8 The matter pertains to find avenues for consumption of thorium in the country as a 
substitute through enhanced research & development. IREL (India) Limited as a part of  its 
mandate, extracts the thorium values from monazite and stores it in engineered trenches for 
future use in the 3rd stage of atomic power programme of the country. 
 
  

13 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE 
SEWAGE SLUDGE HYGIENISATION  
Recommendation/Observation  
3.1 The Committee appreciates the Department for developing an indigenous technology for 
hygienisation of municipal sewage sludge. The Committee, however, finds it surprising that 
though this technology is scientifically sound, it has not been promoted to the desired level and 
only a handful of Municipalities have shown interest in the technology. The Committee is of the 
opinion that this technology can be used on a larger scale by the other Municipalities in the 
country to tackle the problem of sewage sludge.  The Committee is of the considered view that 
the success in Ahmedabad may be replicated across all the major Municipalities in the country, 
in a phased manner, and the Municipalities finding it difficult to deal with its sewage sludge 
should come forward and make best use of this technology. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department should write to all State/UT Governments, apprise them the 
benefits and efficacy of this technology and ask them to impress upon all the Municipalities 
facing the problem of sewage sludge to use this technology to solve the problem faced by them.                                                                              
         (Para 4.2 of the 341st Report) 
Action Taken  
3.2 DAE has provided indirect financial support for establishing Sewage Sludge 
Hygienisation (SSH) plants in form of providing part of Co -60 source required for the plant free 
of cost. Financial assistance to the extent of 50 -60% by the Central Government soli cited to 
encourage Municipal Corporations to come forward to assimilate and adopt this technology. 
It is expected that the proposed financial assistance from Central Government will 
provide an impetus to adoption of this technology by other Municipal Corporations and will also 
help in publicity and dissemination of technology to other urban development agencies. 
Four Municipal Corporation mentioned below were apprised about the technology: 
1. Bhubaneshwar Municipal Corporation,  
2. Banaras Municipal Corporation,  
3. Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) and  
4. Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC)  
 MCGM and SMC have shown interest in this technology. First meeting was held with MCGM 
officials in March 2021. 
Further Comments 
3.3  The Committee notes the action bei ng taken by the Department on the 
recommendation of the Committee.  The Committee is, however, of the view that the 
Department needs to scale up its action and should invariably write to all the State 
Governments highlighting the efficacy of this indigenou s technology  in solving the 
problem of sewage sludge.  
 
 
 
  

14 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
NIL 
  

15 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
 
MINUTES 
_________________________ 

16 
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 30 th November, 2021 in Room No. 63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
              MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.   Shri Jairam Ramesh -- Chairman 
              RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3.  Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
4.  Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
5.  Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
6.  Shri Nabam Rebia 
             LOK SABHA 
7.  Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
8.  Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
9.  Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
10.  Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
11.  Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
12.  Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
13.  Shri Anurag Sharma 
14.  Shri Ram Shiromani 
             SECRETARIAT 
             Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
             Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
             Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
             Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
             Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee.  
The Committee decided to take up the consideration and adoption of the draft 348 th, 349 th, 
350th, 351st, 352nd, 353rd, 354th, 355th, 356th and 357th  reports of the Committee on the Action 
Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 316 th Report 
on 'Air Pollution in Delhi and National Capital Region'; the 324th  Report on „Status of Forests 
in India; the 325 th  Report on „An Expanded Role for the Department of Atomic Energy 
(DAE) in Cancer Treatment in India through An Enlarged Network of the Tata Memorial 
Centre (TMC)‟; and 351 st to 357 th Reports on the Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the 
Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy; Biotechnology; Scientific and Industrial Research; 
Science & Technology; Space; Environment, Forest and Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, 
respectively. The Committee, then, considered the draft 348 th to 357th reports and adopted the 
same. 
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament on the 1 st December, 2021.  The Committee also authorised the Chairman to 
decide the names of the Members for presentation/laying of the reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament.  
4. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 10.25 a.m. 
 
 