TWO HUNDRED FORTY NINTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th December, 2013)
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Forty Second Report of the
Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Space
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
249
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS


33
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED FORTY NINTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Forty Second Report of the
Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Space
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  the18th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  the18th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1—13
5. M INUTES OF THE M EETING .................................................................................................. 15—18
6. I NDEX OF R EPORTS .............................................................................................................. 19—32

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
3. Shri M. Rama Jois
4. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
5. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi
8. Shrimati Maya Singh
9. Shri Alok Tiwari
10. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
12. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
13. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
14. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase
15. Dr. Ajay Kumar
16. Shri O.S. Manian
17. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
18. Shri Basori Singh Masram
19. Shri Vincent H. Pala
20. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
21. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
22. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
23. Shri M.B. Rajesh
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
25. Shri Yashvir Singh
26. Shrimati Supriya Sule
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
30. Shri Ramakant Yadav
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Forty-ninth Report on the Action Taken by the
Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Forty-second Report
of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Space.
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Space on
the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Forty-second Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Space which was presented to the Rajya
Sabha on 8
th May, 2013.
3. There were thirty recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Forty-second Report of
the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from
the Department on 30
th July, 2013.
4. In the meeting held on 17 th December, 2013, the Committee considered the draft Action
Taken Report and adopted the same.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman
December , 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests

(iv)
ACRONYMS
AAI : Airports Authority of India
CQAAT : Comprehensive Quality Audit and Assurance Teams
DoS : Department of Space
GAGAN : GPS-aided Geo-Augmented Navigation
GSLV : Geo Stationary Satellite Launch Vehicle
GTO : Geosynchronous Transfer Orbit
HA T : High Altitude Test
IIRS : Indian Institute of Remote Sensing
ISRO : Indian Space Research Organisation
ISRS : Indian Society of Remote Sensing
LEO : Low Earth Orbit
PSLV : Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle
R&D : Research and Development
RISAT : Radar Im aging Satellite
RRSSC(W) : Regional Remote Sensing Service Centre (West)
SAC : Space Applications Centre
SAR : Synthetic Aperture Radar
SRE-II : Space Recovery Experiment
VRC : Village Resource Centre

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Space on
the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Forty second Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Space, which was presented to both the
Houses of Parliament on 8
th May, 2013. There were thirty recommendations/observation in the
Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee were
received from the Department on 30
th July, 2013. The Department has intimated that it has accepted
all the recommendations of the Committee. The Committee, on examination of Action Taken Notes,
however, was not satisfied with action taken by the Department in respect of six recommendations
and would like the Department to take further action in respect of those six recommendations as
indicated in the Report.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee
on the action taken by the Department of Space are set out in the following paragraphs:–
Recommendation (Para 5.4)
The Committee is happy to note that during the Twelfth Five Year Plan period 2012-17, the
main driving force of the Indian Space programme will be to carry forward and further strengthen
space based services aimed at socio-economic development of the country. The Committee hopes
that as a part of the ongoing space programmes and efforts to develop advanced launch vehicles,
the Department would also strive for mastering critical technologies so as to reduce the chances
of failures of important missions.
Action Taken by Government
Noted. Department has taken up activities for development of critical technologies required
for the advanced missions such as Re-usable Launch Vehicles, Manned Spaceflight, advanced
communication satellite, high-resolution remote sensing satellites and planetary exploration. The
Department is also continuously developing technologies for making the launch vehicles i.e. PSLV
and GSLV more reliable and robust.
In order to strengthen the Quality and Reliability aspects of space systems, the Department
has initiated Zero Defect Delivery Programme to propagate awareness and importance of quality
and reliability among technical workforce. A Workshop on “Lessons learnt from ISRO Space
Systems” was organised to improve the knowledge base of new teams to meet the challenges of
future missions. Comprehensive Quality Audit and Assurance Teams (CQAA T) have also been
instituted at various ISRO/DOS centres to review the existing quality standards and to introduce
new practices with a view to improve the quality and reliability of Space systems.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the action taken by the Department.
Recommendation (Para 5.5)
The Committee notes with happiness that satellite launching target set for the Twelfth Five
Year Plan is 58, just double the Eleventh Five Year Plan of 29. Increased number of satellites would
further strengthen our capabilities in using space technology for benefit of our people and country.

2
Action Taken by Government
The Department expresses its gratitude for the support and encouragement provided by the
Committee. The Department will strive towards achieving the targets set for the Twelfth Five Year
Plan.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation (Para 6.2)
The Committee is happy to note that Planning Commission has accepted in toto the outlays
projected by the Department pertaining to Launch Vehicle Missions, Satellite Navigation System and
Information Technology Related Applications and hopes that the Department would make optimum
utilisation of approved outlays for these projects. The Committee, however, notes with concern
overall reduction of R875.00 crores in the Plan outlay projected by the Department. Considering
India’s rise as the sixth most powerful nation in the world in the field of space technology and
the immense potential of space technology for societal benefits, the Committee is of the opinion
that adequate funds should be allocated to the Department so that India’s leading position in this
area is further strengthened and improved and India’s capabilities in space technology are fully
utilised for benefit of its people. The Committee recommends that the Planning Commission should
not further reduce Plan allocation of the Department on any pretext so that its important
programmes do not suffer for want of funds.
Action Taken by Government
Noted. The views of the committee shall be put forward during the Budget meetings with
Planning Commission.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 7.2)
The Committee takes note of the achievements of the Department in 2012-13. The
Department has not only successfully launched its state-of-the-art technology satellites such as
Indian Radar Imaging Satellite (RISAT-1), Indian Communication Satellite (GSA T-10), etc. but has
also launched satellites for foreign customers viz., France (Sport-6), Japan (PROITERS), Canada
(SAPHIRE) and the United Kingdom (STRaND). The Department has also entered into successful
international collaborations such as Saral and Megha-Tropiques with France which is already an
established power in space technology. These achievements show that the credibility and reliability
of Indian Space programme is now firmly and well established internationally. The Committee
congratulates the Department for taking Indian Space programme to such glorious heights.
Recommendation (Para 7.3)
The Committee hopes that the Department would not only continue to maintain the same
level of performance but endeavour to perform better and better in the remaining years of Twelfth
Five Year Plan so that our space programme in its all dimensions achieves a position that is second
to none in the world.

3
Action Taken by Government
Noted. The Department will strive for higher level of performance during the remaining
years of Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation (Para 8.5)
The Committee takes strong exception to such a casual approach adopted by the
Department in earmarking of funds which results in precious and scarce resource remaining
unutilised. Budgetary resources are very scarce and it is the duty of the Department to make
optimum utilisation of funds allocated, both qualitatively and quantitatively. Underutilisation of
allocated funds for consecutively three years does paint a dismal picture of the capability of the
Department to properly plan, monitor and execute its spending.
Action Taken by Government
The views of the Committee is Noted. It is submitted that the budget utilization of the
Department is largely linked to the progress milestones such as technical design finalization,
prototype development, testing, commissioning of complex equipments, test facilities and the other
activities of similar nature. Due to sophisticated nature, high precision and stringent reliability
requirements, during the course of the year, the milestone payments provided in the budget undergo
revision based on technical performance of test results leading to underutilization of budget.
However, the Department shall make concerted efforts for optimum utilisation of funds in future.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation (Para 8.7)
The Committee finds that the BE 2012-13 allocation made to the Department was reduced
at the RE Stage due to poor spendability of the Department, besides for meeting the ceilings
communicated by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee expresses its concern over the poor
financial performance of the Department reflected by non utilisation of R1835.04 crores during the
year 2012-13, out of which the major share belonged to Plan allocations to the tune of
R1815.01 crores. The Committee feels that this is not a healthy trend especially if seen in the
context of the claim of the Department of having a very sound and robust monitoring mechanism.
The Committee is not at all amused by the figure of 91% utilisation of R.E. allocation in
2012-13 as given by the Department. The Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Department
should make sincere and serious efforts to fully utilise allocated resources in the year 2013-14.
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. During the financial year 2012-13, the
Department has utilised the RE allocations to the extent of 99.51% at the end of 31.3.2013. For
the current financial year 2013-14, the Department has mounted rigorous expenditure reviews on
quarterly basis. As a result of this, the expenditure of the Department during the first quarter i.e.
April 2013 to June 2013 is 21.6% against the targeted expenditure of 20% as indicated in Monthly
Expenditure Plan of Detailed Demands for Grants 2013-14.

4
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply of the Department.
Recommendation (Para 8.8)
The Committee is constrained to observe that the Department appears to have a strong,
monitoring mechanism only on paper as it has failed to produce satisfactory and desired target of
ensuring full utilisation of allocated resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department should further strengthen its monitoring mechanism and make it more robust to ensure
full and effective utilisation of allocated funds.
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. The Department shall put all efforts to
further strengthen the monitoring mechanism to ensure full and effective utilization of allocated
funds.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply of the Department.
Recommendation (Para 9.3)
The Committee finds that the Department has been allocated an amount of R39750 crores
for the Twelfth Five Year Plan. On uniformly spreading out the total allocated fund to five years,
the amount comes to R7950 crores per year. The Committee feels that the projected demand of
the Department of R7500 crores for B.E. 2013-14, was R450 crores less than its proportional
annual share per year for Twelfth Plan. However, the actual B.E. allocation for
2013-14 was only R6792.00 crores, R1158 crores less than the due amount and R708 crores less
than the amount projected by the Department and if this trend of allocation continues, the
Department would ultimately get reduced allocation at the end of the Plan Period. The Committee
strongly recommends that the Department should be provided its full approved allocation in terms
of the total outlay for Twelfth Plan without any cuts.
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. The Department shall make efforts to
optimally utilize the Twelfth Plan outlay in the remaining part of the Plan period when the
expenditure on the newly approved projects is expected to pick up.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply of the Department.
Recommendation (Para 11.2.6)
The Committee understands that the advancement of Indian Space Mission depends mainly
on the up-gradation of Space transportation vehicles for launching Satellites having a payload
capacity of 4-5 tonnes for application in Manned Space Mission/Mars Orbiter Mission and
Chandrayaan-2. Keeping this in view, the Committee feels that all out efforts should be made by
the Department to upgrade the performance of the GSLV technology and make it perfectly reliable
and foolproof.

5
Action Taken by Government
The views of the Committee are noted. India’s Geo-synchronous Launch Vehicle (GSLV) is
designed to launch 2 tonne class of Communication Satellites into Geostationary Transfer Orbit
(GTO). The developmental flight of the GSLV with the indigenous Cryogenic Stage (GSLV-D5) is
planned during August, 2013. Another developmental flight of GSLV (GSLV-D6) is planned during
2014-15. CHANDRAYAAN-2 Mission is planned in the operational flight of GSLV after these two
developmental flights of GSLV .
The next generation heavy lift launch vehicle, GSLV-Mk III; will cater to launching of
Communication Satellites weighing 4-5 tonnes into GTO. This launch vehicle, currently under
development, is expected to have its first experimental flight with passive cryogenic stage in 2014
followed by the first developmental flight in 2016-17. The Manned Space Mission is planned with
the GSLV-Mk III after completion of developmental flights and incorporating the design
modifications required for human space flight for improved reliability.
The launch of the Mars Orbiter Mission will be with the PSLV in XL configuration and is
scheduled for October-November, 2013. The Department will continue to put all efforts to ensure
timely and successful completion of these projects.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation (Para 11.2.7)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that Department should endeavour to achieve the
above goal as early as possible. The Committee would also like the DoS to ensure successful
testing of vacuum ignition of cryogenic engine on ground as well as in vacuum condition with
indigenous cryo stage, which was earlier scheduled for March, 2013, at the earliest and positively
by the end of the current Fiscal. The Committee further recommends that the enhanced allocation
of R139.53 crores for the project in 2013-14 must be fully utilized by the Department.
Action Taken by Government
The views of the Committee are noted. Two successful tests of the indigenous cryogenic
engine in the High Altitude Test (HAT) Facility have been conducted in March and May, 2013. The
indigenous cryogenic stage for the next flight of GSLV has been integrated with the GSLV flight
vehicle.
The allocation of R139.53 crores is the enhanced funding sought for the development of
the next generation heavy lift launch vehicle, GSLV  Mk III. The Government approval for Revised
Cost Estimation for GSLV  Mk III development is under process. The Department will ensure full
utilisation of these funds in a planned and phased manner.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation (Para 11.3.5)
The Committee expresses its concern over the tardy progress of SRE-II project. Even
after utilising 95 per cent, ( R39.83 crores) of the total approved outlay ( R42 crores) of the SRE-
II till March 31, 2012, the SRE-II programme has not yet taken off. The Committee, however,

6
hopes that the two problems plaguing the programme, namely delayed identification of suitable co-
passenger for optimal usage of PSLV payload capability and the indigenous Carbon-Carbon flight
model Nose cap for SRE-II would be addressed at the earliest and the scheduled launching of SRE-
II in 2014 will be adhered to.
Action Taken by Government
The views of the Committee are noted. With the utilization of 95% of the project cost, most
of the procurement activities for critical components, materials, subsystems have been completed
for the SRE-II mission. Balance funds available in the project are primarily towards meeting the
pre-launch and post-launch expenses.
Currently, realization of payloads and various subsystems of SRE-II are in progress. The
realisation of the indigenous Carbon-Carbon flight model Nose cap for the SRE-II is under progress
and is expected to be realised by end 2013. The identification of a suitable co-passenger for the
SRE-II and the connected Mission Studies for the launch proposed in 2014 is in progress.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation (Para 11.4.4)
The Committee is happy to know that the Department has the requisite potential and
required capabilities to conduct the manned mission and has made significant progress in some
critical technologies like crew module development, environmental control and life support system,
space suit, etc. which have been taken up as pre-project activities. The Committee knows that this
is a very sensitive and delicate mission and hence the Department needs to tread very cautiously
and carefully in this mission. The Committee further recommends that as considerable progress has
been made towards this mission, the Department should expeditiously obtain Government approval
for the phase-I project of design development and new module testing, etc.
Action Taken by Government
The views and recommendations of the Committee are noted. Department will put all efforts
to complete Pre-project activities and proceed towards Phase-I activities of the Project at the
earliest.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the progress made
at the time of consideration of the Demands for Grants 2014-15 by the Committee.
Recommendation (Para 12.1.4)
While the Committee is happy to note the successful launch of India’s first indigenous
Radar satellite, RISAT-1 in April, 2012, it finds that there is hardly any progress as far as
development of RISAT-1A is concerned. Given that Radar satellite technology is tremendously
beneficial not only for flood mapping, agriculture but also, for glacial studies, the Committee
recommends that Department take up in right earnest expeditious building of RISAT-IA well before
its targeted launch in 2017-18. The Committee also recommends that adequate funds be made
available for this Mission so that funds crunch does not adversely impact the expeditious
completion of the Mission.

7
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee are Noted. Radar imaging satellite (RISA T-1) was
launched in April, 2012 for enhancing the scope of remote sensing applications and services. The
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) onboard RISA T has ability to acquire data at C-band in different
mode of polarization, incidence angle and resolution. SAR system provides unique capabilities as an
imaging tool and acts as a complementary to the information provided by the visible or infrared
waves.
RISA T-1 data products are being provided to various user communities for taking up
various application projects as well as using as supplementary and complimentary data sets.
With the experience gained in RISAT-1, RISAT-1A can be realized at a relatively shorter
time. The configuration of RISAT-1A has been finalized. The project report is being processed for
obtaining necessary approval.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 12.3.4)
The Committee feels that the Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System (IRNSS) has very
useful application and therefore, all out efforts must be made to see that it becomes operational
at the earliest and in any case within the stipulated time so that the nation is able to reap its
benefits. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should pursue this
programme with all seriousness and sincerity so that there is no time and cost overrun and its
benefits start accruing to the nation as soon as possible.
Action Taken by Government
Noted. Department of Space is pursuing IRNSS programme with vigour and well set out
goals and schedule. First IRNSS satellite, IRNSS-1A has been launched successfully from
Sriharikota and in-orbit tests on the satellite are being carried out. Ground systems required for
control, ranging and integrity monitoring and timing functions have been set up. Actions have been
taken to produce user receivers through industry. Actions are being taken to build and launch the
remaining satellites in the constellation in accordance with the approved schedule and cost to
maximize the in-orbit life of the constellation.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the efforts and progress made with regard to the
IRNSS programme and would like the Department to keep making earnest efforts at the
earliest for operationalisation of full Indian Regional navigation Satellite System
constellation.
Recommendation (Para 12.4.2)
The Committee feels that with the operationalisation of GAGAN, Indian space programme
would reach a phase when India can become a major hub of air navigation through operation of
air services from India. This achievement is more significant at a time when superior space based
navigation is in greater demand. India can reap its advantage being placed at the axis of routes
connecting Europe with Southeast Asia. Further, by having an indigenous Satellite, based on

8
Regional GPS Augmentation System India can gain both in terms of market and strategic
importance. The Committee, therefore, recommends that GAGAN should be made operational as
soon as possible so that its benefits could become available to the country and its people at the
earliest.
Action Taken by Government
Noted. Actions are being taken to operationalise the GAGAN system at the earliest in
collaboration with Airports Authority of India (AAI). Two GAGAN payloads are already operational
on-board GSAT-8 and GSAT-10 satellites. Ground stations have been established and made
operational. The certification process for using GAGAN for civil aviation use is in progress.
Matters pertaining to installation of user receivers on-board aircrafts are being taken up with AAI.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 12.5.3)
The Committee expresses its serious displeasure over the fact that the Department
earmarked an amount of Rs. 50.00 crores in the year 2012-13 for constructing a campus, design
of which is yet to be finalised. This resulted in avoidable non utilisation of the allocated outlay
which could have been gainfully utilised in some other schemes/projects. Secondly, non-completion
of the campus hampers the functioning of the Regional Remote Sensing Centre, Jodhpur. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that such incidents of underutilisation purely on administrative
grounds should be strictly avoided and the construction of the proposed campus must be expedited.
Action Taken by Government
Noted. With a limited land availability of about 8.5 acres, the Jodhpur Campus of RRSC
(West) is required to be planned optimally. This new Campus has to encompass various facilities
like Main RRSC Laboratories, Staff Housing, Guesthouse and related services comprehensively. The
main Laboratory building also has to contain major computer facilities, data storage areas,
instrumentation facilities along with related training facilities. In order to fully conceptualize these
requirements and optimally plan the campus objectively, in full harmony with the local architecture,
it took a slightly more time period for planning. Now, the planning of the Campus is frozen. Action
for tendering and for putting the work on ground expeditiously is already initiated.
All the technical activities of the centre are continuing in the existing campus without
disruption.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply but feels that the Department ought to have planned
the aspects stated in the reply before earmarking funds for construction.
Recommendation (Para 12.5.5)
The Committee congratulates the Department on completion of 25 years of its Remote
Sensing Programme. It is a matter of pride that this programme has become a role model among
comity of nations pursuing space programme particularly in operational utilisation of remote sensing
data for various applications of greater importance to the nation. The Committee is confident that
the Department would continue to excel in the field of Remote Sensing applications.

9
Action Taken by Government
The Indian Remote Sensing Programme has attained an important milestone of completing
25 years of operational Earth Observation Services on March 17, 2013. It was on this red-letter
day, in 1988, the first Indian Remote Sensing Satellite ‘IRS-1A’ was successfully launched.
To mark the milestone of 25 years of operational remote sensing services a memorable
event, a two day Symposium was organized by the Indian Society of Remote Sensing (ISRS), in
association various professional societies at JN Tata Auditorium, National Science Seminar
Complex, IISc., Bengaluru. The Symposium had a series of Technical Sessions on March 16 and
March 17, 2013, in addition to the Commemorative Session on March 17, 2013.
Considering the changing technological and applications dimensions in the country and
elsewhere, ISRO continues to focus on executing the user funded projects meeting the objectives/
goals of the user Departments/Agencies both at the national and regional/local scale; as well as
proactive applications projects of relevance at the national and regional/local scale. In addition,
thrust is being given in the area of R&D projects, application development, etc.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and welcomes focus of Indian Space Research
Organisation on executing the user funded projects.
Recommendation (Para 12.6.4)
The Committee understands that ASTROSAT is a complex scientific satellite in nature but
notes that the even after almost ten years, this project is yet to be given a concrete shape. The
Committee is of the opinion that Department should set its targets realistically and only after due
consideration of complexities involved for repeated failure to meet targets lowers its credibility in
the eyes of public. The Committee recommends that the Department must make a sincere
endeavour to launch the satellite as per the revised time schedule i.e. 2014-15.
Action Taken by Government
ASTROSAT is a multi-wavelength observatory satellite, first of its kind, with unique
scientific payloads. All the mainframe elements for ASTROSAT satellite have been realised and
are currently under integration and testing. The scientific instruments of ASTROSAT are in the
final phases of testing and are expected to be available for integration by the end of this
financial year. The Department is making the required efforts to launch the satellite in the
2014-15 timeframe.
Comments
While taking note of the reply, the Committee hopes that the Department would be
able to launch the ASTROSAT in the 2014-15 timeframe.
Recommendation (Para 12.7.7)
The Committee, in view of the subsequent developments that have taken place with regard
to the inter-planetary mission of CHANDRAYAAN-2, is of the opinion that ISRO should go ahead
with the Mission with full confidence in its capabilities to achieve the mission successfully. The
process of indigenisation may take some time but it will make Indian Lunar programme, i.e.,
CHANDRAYAAN-2 self-sufficient. India’s successful attempt to indigenously build cryo-technology

10
was an outcome of technology denial regime which proved a blessing in disguise. The Committee
is confident that this particular incident would give fillip to the efforts and resolve of the
Department to work harder in order to overcome the challenge with added vigour and energy.
Action Taken by Government
The views of the Committee are Noted. The Department will continue to put efforts for
accomplishing this challenging task.
Recommendation (Para 12.7.8)
The Committee, further, suggests that the Department should galvanise all the resources at
its disposal and intensify its efforts to ensure that the lunar orbiter, rover and Lander are developed
at the earliest. The Committee would also like to caution the Department to take all necessary
measure to make the Chandrayaan-2 Mission a grand success learning lessons from
CHANDRAYAAN-1. The Committee further recommends that Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance should extend all necessary financial/ budgetary support for the Mission.
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee are Noted. The Department is in the process of
developing the necessary technologies for the CHANDRAYAAN-2 mission. In this regard, a study
team was formed and a configuration of the indigenous development of Lunar Lander has been
worked out. Further configuration and design details are being worked out by the project team. The
details of the additional financial support required for completing this mission have been worked
out and will be put up for Government approval.
Comments (Para Nos. 12.7.7 and 12.7.8)
The Committee takes note of the reply and hopes that the Department will make the
country proud by successfully launching CHANDRAYAAN-2 Mission in the near future.
Recommendation (Para 12.8.4)
The Committee notes that Mars Orbiter Mission has several scientific advantages. Mars has
good potential for space industrialisation and the Department should pursue this Mission with all
earnestness and sincerity to make it successful so that India is able to achieve all the desired
objectives from the Mission.
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee are Noted. The Department is working full steam
to realise this mission this year. The Spacecraft and the payloads are integrated and are in the final
phases of testing.
Recommendation (Para 12.8.5)
The Committee takes note of the fact that the main objective of the Mars Orbiter Mission
is to demonstrate India’s technological capacity to reach Martian orbit which would pave the way
for future scientific exploratory Missions. The Committee understands that sending satellite to
Mars, involving a journey of millions and millions of miles and a journey time of about 320 days,
is not an easy task. The Committee has further been informed that for such a long space journey,
higher propulsion efficiency of the rocket is extremely essential and it is to be ensured that

11
spacecraft survives the movement for such long days and remains on the right path towards Mars.
This essentially involves monitoring of the spacecraft by sending commands from the space station
that should not be delinked at any stage during the journey as delinking may lead to the mission
failure. Moreover, for success of the mission, the Department have to ensure that all the
components of the spacecraft continue to work efficiently throughout the life of the mission.
Keeping all this in view, the Committee would expect DoS to be extremely careful in planning and
execution of the Mission so that the huge sum of money involved in the project does not get
wasted.
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee are Noted. The Department has been extremely
diligent in its efforts for this mission. Several internal committees headed by senior scientists of
the Department are reviewing the progress of the mission periodically to resolve all technical
aspects related to the Mission to ensure success of the mission.
Recommendation (Para 12.8.6)
The Committee would further like the Department to ensure that the Mars Orbiter Mission
progresses as per schedule, departing on time from the orbit of earth in November, 2013. The
Committee is also hopeful that the Mars Orbiter would enter in the orbit of Mars by September,
2014, as per schedule taking advantage of earth’s proximity to Mars at that point of time.
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. All efforts are being made to launch the
mission during the launch opportunity available this year.
Comments (Para Nos. 12.8.4, 12.8.5 & 12.8.6)
The Committee congratulates the Department for successful launch of Mars Orbiter
Mission on 5
th November, 2013 and wishes the Department all success in its maiden attempt
to enter the orbit of Mars.
Recommendation (Para No. 13.3)
The Committee is of the view that sharing the burden of producing launch vehicles and
satellites by private sector would help ISRO shed some of its financial burden, which will help
release funds for other research-oriented activities of the Department.
Action Taken by Government
The views and recommendations of the Committee are noted. Outsourcing the production
of launch vehicles and satellites to industry is the current policy of the Department and large
emphasis is given to this. However, lowering of financial burden is not foreseen due to outsourcing,
but the resulting release of experienced skilled technical manpower can be utilised for other
research-oriented activities.
Recommendation (Para 13.4)
Additionally, large scale involvement of private sector would boost Indian space programme
and help generate employment as well. The Committee feels that this is a step taken in the right
direction and DoS should continue to make concerted efforts in this direction. The Committee,

12
accordingly, recommends that the Department should make concerted efforts to encourage greater
participation of private sector in its activities.
Action Taken by Government
The views and recommendations of the Committee are noted. Department will put all efforts
to encourage competent industries in the private sector to participate in the activities of the Indian
Space Programme.
Comments (Para Nos. 13.3 and 13.4)
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 14.2)
The Committee commends the Department for making very good use of its spin off
technologies for socially useful purposes such as tele-medicine, tele-education networks, Village
Resource Centres, Forestry mapping, assisting disaster management efforts, locating natural
resources as also keeping a check on insurgent activities in the country, etc.
Recommendation (Para 14.3)
The Committee, however, feels that a lot more needs to be done by DoS to fully realise
the vision of Dr. Sarabhai “to play a meaningful role nationally and in Comity of nations, we must
be second to none in the application of advanced technologies to the real problems of man and
society”. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the DoS should make concerted efforts to
try to live up-to the expectations of the society, the people and provide them with greater facilities
and benefits.
Action Taken by Government
The encouraging views and the recommendations of the Committee are Noted. In order to
fully realize the vision of Dr Sarabhai and provide the people with greater facilities and benefits,
the Department has undertaken the following activities in recent times:
● Significant transponder space is already allotted in INSAT/GSA T satellites for socially
beneficial programmes like Tele-medicine, Tele-education and Village Resource Centres
(VRC) etc. Also steps have been initiated towards strengthening the existing ground
systems and establishment of new systems.
● The feasibility of incorporating advancements emerged in the area of communication
technology into future VRCs is being studied. Based on the outcome of the study,
utilization plan and interest of associating agencies, further expansion of VRC network
would be considered.
● All the major floods in the country were monitored and the information were furnished
in near-real time to the concerned Relief Commissioners, Central Water Commission
and Indian Meteorological Department besides Ministry of Home Affairs. During the
flood season of 2013 (June-July, 2013) major floods have been observed in
Uttarakhand , Assam, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal and Delhi and 34 flood maps
have been disseminated to the concerned State and Central agencies.
● Near real time active forest fire alerts were generated twice a day during the fire
season (February to June). The information was disseminated to ~400 nodal officers

13
of all state forest departments across the country through DSC-INFFRAS website and
web-posting on BHUV AN.
● Supporting the major disaster of cloud burst/flash floods of Uttarakhand on 16 th June,
2013 was one of the major activities carried out this year. In addition to all the
available Indian satellite data, the foreign data sets obtained through International
Charter was also processed and provided. Information such as flood extent, damaged
roads, damaged settlements, etc were derived and provided to the concerned State and
● Central Government Ministries/Departments. In addition, 12 numbers of INSAT (MSS
Type-D) based satellite phones were deployed and five fixed terminals of DMS-VPN
network were established in the far flung areas in Uttarakhand for emergency
communication.
The Department would continue to strive hard in executing various socially useful
programmes in future.
Comments (Para Nos. 14.2 and 14.3)
The Committee appreciates socially useful programmes and activities being
undertaken by the Department.
Recommendation (Para 15.1)
Keeping in view the outstanding work that the Department of Space has undertaken, the
kind of professionalism and competence it has exhibited and the kind of core and critical
programmes it has envisaged for future, the Committee is confident that the Department would
continue to bring glory to the country by its achievements.
Recommendation (Para 15.2)
The Committee is of the view that, in an age when cost benefit analysis has become an
integral part of public spending, the Department of Space must set an example for others to
emulate by providing high returns in the form of concrete benefits to the country and its people
on every rupee invested in its programme. The Committee is confident that the Department has the
capabilities to do so and it will not betray the trust reposed by the Committee in its capabilities.
Action Taken by Government
The encouraging views and the recommendations of the Committee are Noted. The
Department shall strive to live up to the expectations of the Committee.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

MINUTES

16

17
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 17 th December, 2013 in Committee Room
No. ‘67’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
3. Shri M. Rama Jois
4. Shri Alok Tiwari
5. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
6. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
LOK SABHA
7. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
8. Dr. Ajay Kumar
9. Shri O.S. Manian
10. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
11. Shri Basori Singh Masram
12. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
13. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
14. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
15. Shri Pradeep Tamta
16. Shri Joseph Toppo
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Committee Officer
The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and invited
suggestions/amendments to the draft 246
th to 252 nd Reports of the Committee on the Action Taken
by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 239 th to 245 th Reports on
Demands for Grants (2013-14), pertaining to the Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy, Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, Space, Earth Sciences, Scientific and Industrial
Research and Biotechnology respectively.
17

18
*** Relate to other matters.
2. The Committee, after brief discussion, adopted 246 th to 252 nd draft Action Taken Reports
without any amendment.
3. The Committee decided to present/lay on the table of both the Houses of the Parliament its
246th to 252 nd Reports on 18 th December, 2013. The Committee authorised its Chairman and, in his
absence, Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra to present the Report in Rajya Sabha and Shri Pradeep Tamta
and, in his absence, Shri Dayanidhi Maran to lay the copy of the reports on the table of Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
The Committee, then, adjourned at 5.10 
P.M.

19
19
INDEX OF REPORTS PRESENTED BY DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARTLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY , ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
Report No. Subject of the Report
12
1. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1993-94.
2. ‘National Environment Tribunal Bill, 1992’.
3. Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1992-93.
4. Annual Report of the Department of Electronics for the year 1992-93.
5. Annual Report of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1992-93.
6. Annual Report of the Department of Science and Technology for the year 1992-93.
7. Annual Report of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1992-93.
8. Demands for Grants the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1994-95.
9. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1994-95.
10. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1994-95.
11. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1994-95.
12. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 1994-95.
13. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1994-95.
14. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1994-95.
15. Annual Report of the Department of Space for the year 1993-94.
16. Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1993-94.
17. Annual Report of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1993-94.
18. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 1995-96.
19. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1995-96.
20. Annual Report of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1993-94.
21. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1995-96.
22. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1995-96.
23. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1995-96.
24. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1995-96.
25. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1995-96.

20
12
26. Annual Report of the Department of Science and Technology for the year 1993-94.
27. Annual Report of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1993-94.
28. Annual Report of the Department of Electronics for the year 1993-94.
29. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 1995.
30. Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1994-95.
31. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
1996-97.
32. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1996-97.
33. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1996-97.
34. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1996-97.
35. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1996-97.
36. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1996-97.
37. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1996-97.
38. Demonstration of Herbal Fuel by Shri P. Ramar at UP, Dehradun.
39. Action Taken by Ministry of Environment and forests on the recommendations
contained in the 9
th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants of Ministry
of Environment and Forests for the year 1994-95.
40. ‘Mid-term appraisal’ of programmes and functioning of the Department of
Biotechnology with special emphasis on the role of Biotechnology in Agriculture and
allied areas.
41. ‘Mid-term appraisal’ of programmes and functioning of the Department of Science
and Technology.
42. ‘Mid-term appraisal’ of programmes and functioning of the Department of Space.
43. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the Thirty-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(1996-97) of the Department of Biotechnology.
44. Action Taken by the Department of Electronics on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty-second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (1996-97)
of the Department of Electronics.
45. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (1996-97)
of the Department of Ocean Development.
46. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology of the year
1997-98.
47. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1997-98.

21
12
48. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1997-98.
49. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1997-98.
50. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1997-98.
51. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1997-98.
52. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1997-98.
53. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1998-99.
54. Demands for Grants of the Department of Bio-technology for the year 1998-99.
55. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
1998-99.
56. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1998-99.
57. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1998-99.
58. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1998-99.
59. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1998-99.
60. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the Fifty-fourth report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(1998-99) of the Department of Biotechnology.
61. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty-sixth report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants (1998-99) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
62. Action Taken by the Department of Electronics on the recommendations contained
in the Fifty-eighth report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
the Department of Electronics.
63. Aspects related to Food Preservation and Safety Measures.
64. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
1999-2000.
65. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year
1999-2000.
66. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1999-2000.
67. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1999-2000.
68. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1999-2000.
69. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1999-2000.
70. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year
1999-2000.

22
12
71. Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Bill, 1999.
72. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2000-01.
73. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2000-01.
74. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2000-01.
75. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Information Technology for the year 2000-01.
76. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2000-01.
77. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2000-01.
78. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2000-01.
79. ‘The Information Technology Bill, 1999’.
80. Preservation of Gir Forests and Protection of Wild Life.
81. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-second report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Science
and Technology.
82. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-third report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research.
83. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-fourth report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of
Biotechnology.
84. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-seventh report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Space.
85. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-sixth report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Ocean
Development.
86. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2001-02.
87. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2001-02.
88. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2001-02.
89. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2001-02.
90. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2001-02.
91. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2001-02.
92. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Ninety-first report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Space.

23
12
93. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-seventh report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of
Biotechnology.
94. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-sixth report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research.
95. ‘The Biological Diversity Bill, 2000’.
96. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-ninth report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Science and
Technology.
97. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-eighth report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Ocean
Development.
98. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Ninetieth report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Environment
and Forests.
99. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2002-03.
100. Dem ands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2002-03.
101. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2002-03.
102. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2002-03.
103. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2002-03.
104. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2002-03.
105. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 2000.
106. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One hundred-second report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the Department of Science and Technology.
107. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One hundred-first report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2002-03) of the Department of Ocean Development.
108. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the
Hundredth report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the
Department of Space.
109. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the Ninety-ninth report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2002-03) of the Department of Biotechnology.

24
12
110. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One hundred-third report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
111. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in the One hundred-fourth report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
112. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2003-04.
113. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2003-04.
114. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2003-04.
115. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2003-04.
116. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2003-04.
117. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2003-04.
118. Conservation and Environmental-Management Plan for Dal-Nagin Lake.
119. Action taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One hundred-fifteenth report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Ocean Development.
120. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One hundred-thirteenth report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee Science and Technology on Demands for
Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
121. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in One hundred-twelfth report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on Demands for Grants
(2003-04) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
122. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the One hundred-sixteenth report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Biotechnology.
123. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the
One hundred-fourteenth report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology. Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Space.
124. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One hundred-seventeenth report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department
of Science and Technology.

25
12
125. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2004-05.
126. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2004-05.
127. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2004-05.
128. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2004-05.
129. Dem ands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2004-05.
130. Demands for Grants of the Department of Atomic Energy for the year 2004-05.
131. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2004-05.
132. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-eighteenth report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the conservation and Environmental Management Plan for Dal-Nagin
Lake, Srinagar.
133. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Twenty-fifth report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department
of Science and Technology.
134. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the
One Hundred Twenty-ninth report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Space.
135. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Twenty-seventh report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Biotechnology.
136. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One hundred twenty-sixth report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department
of Scientific and Industrial Research.
137. Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations
contained in the One hundred thirtieth report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
138. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One hundred twenty-eighth report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Ocean
Development.

26
12
139. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in the One hundred thirty-first report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests.
140. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Science and Technology.
141. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Biotechnology.
142. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
143. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Ocean Development.
144. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Space.
145. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
146. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
147. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One hundred forty-third report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Ocean Development.
148. Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations
contained in the One hundred forty-fifth report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Atomic Energy.
149. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One hundred-fortieth report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Science and Technology.
150. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in
the One hundred forty-forth report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of Department of Space.
151. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One hundred forty-second report of the
Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research.
152. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the One hundred forty-first report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Biotechnology.
153. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in  the One hundred forty-sixth report of the Committee on the Demands
for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
154. The Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2005.
155. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Science and Technology.
156. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.

27
12
157. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Biotechnology.
158. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Ocean Development.
159. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
160. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
161. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Space.
162. Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research Progra mme including Herbal Medicines.
163. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Sixtieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
164. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Ocean Development (renamed as Ministry
of Earth Sciences).
165. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Sixty-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Space.
166. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
167. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Biotechnology.
168. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Science and Technology.
169. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
170. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Science and Technology.
171. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
172. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Biotechnology.

28
12
173. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
174. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
175. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Space.
176. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
177. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Sixty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research Programme including Herbal
Medicines.
178. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Science and
Technology.
179. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Biotechnology.
180. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
181. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
182. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Space.
183. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
184. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology. Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
185. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Science and T echnology
(Ministry of Science and Technology).
186. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (Ministry of Science and Technology).
187. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.

29
12
188. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
189. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Space.
190. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of
Science and Technology).
191. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
192. Functioning of Central Pollution Control Board.
193. Global Warming and its Impact on India.
194. The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008.
195. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology. Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Science and Technology.
196. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Ninetieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology. Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Biotechnology.
197. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
198. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Ninety-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
199. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Space.
200. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
201. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
202. Coastal Management Programmes.
203. The National Green Tribunal Bill, 2009.
204. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.

30
12
205. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of
Science and Technology).
206. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Space.
207. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
208. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (Ministry of Science and Technology).
209. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department Science and Technology
(Ministry of Science and Technology).
210. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
211. “The Protection and Utilisation of Public Funded Intellectual Property Bill, 2008”.
212. “The Civil Liability For Nuclear Damage Bill, 2010”.
213. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
214. Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Biotechnology.
215. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Sixth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Space.
216. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
217. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Eighth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
218. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Science and Technology.
219. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Tenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.

31
12
220. The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Bill, 2010.
221. The Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011.
222. Demands For Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
223. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Science and T echnology
(Ministry of Science and Technology).
224. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
225. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Space.
226. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
227. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (Ministry of Science and Technology).
228. Demands For Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of
Science and Technology).
229. Report on “The Regional Centre for Biotechnology Bill, 2011”.
230. S teps Taken by various Sectors of the Indian Economy to Control Pollution.
231. The I ndian Forest (Amendment) Bill, 2012.
232. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
233. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Science and Technology.
234. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
235. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Space.
236. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
237. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.

32
12
238. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Biotechnology.
239. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
240. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Science and Technology.
241. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
242. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Space.
243. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
244. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
245. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Biotechnology.
246. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Thirty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
247. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fortieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Science and Technology.
248. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
249. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Space.
250. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
251. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
252. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Biotechnology.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.