PA R L IAM E N T  O F IND IA
R A JY A  SA B H A 202
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
M A R C H , 2009/PH A L G U N A , 1930 (SA K A )M A R C H , 2009/PH A L G U N A , 1930 (SA K A )
D E PA R T M E N T -R E L A T E D P A R L IA M E N T A R Y  S T A N D IN G
C O M M IT T E E O N S C IE N C E A N D T E C H N O L O G Y , 
E N V IR O N M E N T  A N D F O R E S T S
TWO HUNDRED AND SECOND REPOR T
ON
COASTAL MANAGEMENT PR OGRAMMES
TH  
(PRESENTED T O HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJY A  SABHA  ON THE 20 MARCH, 2009)
TH  
(FOR W ARDED T O HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA  ON THE 20 MARCH, 2009)
TH  
(PRESENTED T O HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJY A  SABHA  ON THE 20 MARCH, 2009)
TH  
(FOR W ARDED T O HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA  ON THE 20 MARCH, 2009)
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON THE ------------------------, 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON THE ---------------------, 2009)
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON THE ------------------------, 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON THE ---------------------, 2009)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED AND SECOND REPORT
ON
COASTAL MANAGEMENT PROGRAMMES
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON THE 20 TH MARCH, 2009)
(FORW ARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON THE 20 TH MARCH, 2009)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE ---------------------,2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE ---------------------, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2009/PHALGUNA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)-(iv)
3. Introductory .......................................................................................................................... (v)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—6
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 7—25
6. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................ 27—41

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2008-09)
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Dr. Ejaz Ali
7. Shri Jabir Husain
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
**10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
12. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
13. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
14. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
15. Shri Akbar Ahmad Dumpy
16. Shri Francis Fanthome
*17. V acant
18. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
19. Shri Brahmananda Panda
#20. V acant
21. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
22. Shri Pratik P. Patil
23. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
24. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
25. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
26. Dr. Rampal Singh
27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
28. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
29. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
30. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
31. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
** Nominated w.e.f. 24th October, 2008.
* Shri Babubhai K. Katara ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his expulsion from the
membership of the Lok Sabha w.e.f. 21st October, 2008.
# Shrimati Neeta Pateriya ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon her resignation from the Lok
Sabha w.e.f. 19th December, 2008.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Gandhi, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred and Second Report on the Coastal Management
Programmes.
2. Coastal environment plays a vital role in nation’s economy by virtue of the resources,
productive habitats and rich biodiversity. Nearly twenty five per cent of the total population of the
country live within a distance of 50 Kms from sea. The fishermen communities in these areas
mainly depend on the coastal resources and the sea for their survival. Several activities such as
unregulated tourism, polluting industries, aquaculture, rapid urbanization, etc. pose threat to the
ecosystem and to lives and livelihoods of the coastal communities. In the past, to protect and
regulate the coastal environment the Government has implemented several legislations including
Coastal Regulation Zone Notification, 1991. The CRZ Notification has been amended from time to
time based on the recommendations of various committees, judicial pronouncements,
representatives from State Governments, general public etc. On 22nd July, 2008, the Government
decided to bring into force a new framework, for managing and regulating activities connected to
coastal resources and coastal environment, based on the recommendations of the Expert Committee
headed by Prof. M.S. Swaminathan. Accordingly, it issued a draft Coastal Management Zone
Notification, 2008 (Annexure-I) inviting objections or suggestions on the proposals contained in the
said Notification. The CMZ Notification has created unrest among the people living in the coastal
areas.
3. Considering the importance of the subject, the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests in its meeting held on
12th September, 2008, decided to take up for examination the aspects relating to Coastal Management
Programmes and report thereon. In order to have wider consultations on the subject the Committee
invited suggestions/views/comments of individuals/institutions/organizations interested in the subject
matter by issuing a Press release in various leading newspapers in the country. The Committee
received 69 memoranda in this regard. A list containing names of individuals/experts/NGOs/
Organisations, etc. who submitted written memoranda, is given at Annexure - II. The Committee also
invited suggestions/views of coastal State Governments and Union Territories. The Committee heard
the views of the Secretaries of Ministries of Environment and Forests and Earth Sciences, Prof. M.S.
Swaminathan, the Chairman of the Expert Committee constituted to Review the Coastal Regulation
Zone Notification, 1991 and Regional Director, Centre for Environment Education, Ahmedabad. In
addition, the Committee also heard the views of Additional Surveyor-General of Survey of India,
Dehradun and Group Director, Space Applications Centre, Ahmedabad. A list showing the details of
the representatives of various Ministries/Departments, experts who appeared before the Committee for
oral evidence is given in Annexure-III and a list of the State/UT Governments who have sent their
comments on the subject matter is given at Annexure-IV . In addition, the Committee undertook a
study visit to Thiruvananthapuram, Kanyakumari, Chennai, Port Blair and Hyderabad to have in-depth
knowledge and to interact with the people affected in the Coastal States and UTs in connection with
the Coastal Management Programmes.
4. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Ministries, experts, NGOs and the
representatives of various organisations of fishermen, who appeared before the Committee to
present their valuable suggestions.

5. In its meeting held on 6th March, 2009 the Committee considered and adopted the draft
report.
DR. V . MAITREYAN
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
March 6, 2009 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.
(iv)

INTRODUCTORY
Ocean and its coast is one among a number of unique aesthetic and majestic gifts ordained
by nature to mankind. Through its sheer charming, soothing, cool and serene ambience that it
creates all around, it has aroused and invoked piety, reverence, awe and admiration in the hearts
of human beings. Spiritual and religious significance apart, ocean has also been considered as the
repository and treasure trove of precious wealth. As the legend goes fourteen gems emerged out
of the churning of the ocean – Samudra Manthan. The coastal region thus provides a peculiar
blend of precious natural resources and unique panoramic landscape and that’s why living on the
coast dates as back as the origin of civilizations. It is also accepted that life began in the ocean.
2. But as society and civilization took the leap to the path of development – predominantly
economic, the devotional aura and spiritual essence gradually started losing its sheen and gave way
to the greed for natural resources. The finer balance between conservation and coastal resource
utilization got disturbed with the coastal areas becoming the focal point of development. But this
development went by and large unplanned and unregulated. This has put the natural ecosystem,
fragile coastal environment and the coastal zone under tremendous stress. Coastal zone is the
transitional area falling between land and sea which is influenced by both terrestrial and marine
environments.
3. Our country is endowed with a long coastline stretching up to 7500 kms. – covering the
mainland which accounts for 5,400 kms. and Andaman, Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands which
together account for 2,032 kms. It varies from open sea to semi-closed (creek, lagoons) coastal
waters and shows significant diversity in environmental and demographic features.
4. Uses of the coastline can broadly be classified under the following four categories:—
(i) Natural Resource Utilization – This includes fisheries, forests, oil and natural gas,
mining, etc.;
(ii) Infrastructure – It involves transportation, ports, harbours, shoreline protection
works and defence;
(iii) Tourism and recreation; and
(iv) Conservation and protection of biodiversity.
(v)

1
REPORT
Although there have been a number of Legislations/Acts/Rules governing coastal activities
viz. Indian Fisheries Act, 1897; Indian Ports Act, 1902, Merchant Shipping Act, 1974; Water
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; Indian Coast Guard Act, 1974; Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986, etc., a tentative non-statutory step arising out of concern over unplanned
development in coastal areas was taken in 1981 when coastal States, UTs were asked by the
Central Government to take adequate measures to protect their coastline. Guidelines were also sent
to them but all these efforts failed to make desired impact in the absence of legislative support
behind them. To deal with coastal activities; protect and preserve coastal environment and to
conserve coastal resources in a decisive and holistic manner, the first major legislative action was
taken in 1991 in the form of Coastal Regulation Zone Notification under the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986. Regulating all developmental activities in the CRZ area and according due
recognition to the basic rights and livelihood of the local communities constituted the leitmotif of
the notification. The salient features of the CRZ Notification are enumerated below:—
(i) Preservation of coastal ecology; conservation of coastal environment; regulated
development of the coast; control of pollution along the coast; and recognition and
protection of the traditional rights of the coastal communities on the sea and the coast
are some of the prominent principles and tenets on which the edifice of CRZ
notification has been erected as it had been conceived in the backdrop of the fact that
unregulated and reckless construction and other activities along the coasts has resulted
in over exploitation of marine and coastal resources and discernible degradation of
coastal habitats and environments. CRZ Notification proved to be a beacon light which
created awareness towards the significance of coastal environment and ecology not
only among the people but also among the policy and decision makers. This
Notification has been instrumental in prohibiting polluting and hazardous industries
coming up along the coast; containing disposal of sewage/effluent into the sea and
protection of life and property to a considerable extent despite numerous cases of its
violations.
(ii) It is for the first time through this Notification that an attempt was made to define
the sensitive coastal zone area which required to be protected. Coastal stretches of
seas, bays, estuaries, creeks, rivers and backwaters influenced by tidal action towards
landward side upto 500 metres from the High Tide Line (HTL) constitute the Coastal
Regulation Zone. The Notification further provided that the land area between the Low
Tide Line (LTL) and High Tide Line including 500 metres along the tidal influenced
water bodies subject to a minimum of 100 metres on the width of water body,
whichever be less is Coastal Regulation Zone area.
(iii) Coastal Zone was categorized into four types based on ecological sensitivity;
geomorphological feature and demographic distribution. CRZ- I includes the
ecologically sensitive area; CRZ-II urban or developed area; CRZ-III rural or
undeveloped area; and CRZ-IV — Andaman, Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands.
(iv) This Notification provided the details of activities prohibited and permitted along the
coastal zone. Setting up of new industries; expansion of existing industries;
manufacture, handling or storage of hazardous substances, fish processing units,
mechanized drawal of water; disposal of sewage water and effluents, mining etc. fall

2
under prohibited activities while activities requiring sea front/foreshore facilities like
construction activities for defence purposes; construction for ports and harbours;
construction of hotels and resorts was also permitted in certain specified areas.
(v) National Coastal Zone Management Authority both at the central as well as coastal
State/UT levels created under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 was assigned
the task of enforcement and monitoring of the CRZ Notification. State and UT level
authorities are supposed to prepare Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plans,
awareness generation etc. as well.
2. Efficacy of CRZ notification has been assessed differently by different stakeholders. While
NGOs – proactive in protecting coastal environment and local communities feel that it is an
effective tool and stringent enforcement mechanism should be put in place to implement the
notification, the pro-development ideologists — which include industries, tourism sector and Central
as well State Government to a certain level take it to be a taboo. To sum up the issue it may be
said that the working of the notification has been a mix of success and failure. The onus of failure
lies on those who are the saviours. It is more the absence of firm resolve and strong will-power
to enforce the regulation that has failed the notification rather than the notification itself — as is
the case with most of the environmental legislation. CRZ rules are being observed more in the
breach rather in adherence and this had the tacit support of the administration — Central or State
or both. A number of violations of CRZ area have taken place. Destruction of sensitive ecology
such as mangroves, coral reefs, breeding sites of endangered species, illegal constructions in ‘No
Development Zone’ without adhering to the norms are some of the major violations of the
notification. State Governments have their own alibi in not having sufficient infrastructure to take
strict action against violations.
3. Non-demarcation of High Tide Line even after many years of CRZ Notification coming
into effect is yet another instance of laxity or lack of commitment on the part of Government
to implement it. Similar is the case with preparation of Coastal Zone Management Plans as
envisaged in the CRZ Notification. No State Government has so far submitted the revised Coastal
Zone Management Plan for the entire State as per the procedure laid down in the CRZ
notification.
4. In view of the near non-effective functioning of the notification, several expert
committees looking into specific issues relating to it; ever increasing anthropogenic pressure on
fragile ecosystems, rising demand for development particularly with reference to housing,
tourism, hotel industry; sand mining and industrial projects, rapid rise in coastal pollution etc. led
the Government to set up a Committee headed by Prof. M.S. Swaminathan to carry out a
comprehensive review of the CRZ Notification and suggest suitable amendments to make the
coastal regulatory framework consistent with well established scientific principles of Coastal
Zone Management.
5. The Swaminathan Committee held detailed discussions and wide ranging consultations
with the primary stakeholders and tried to strike a fine balance between conservation and
commercial interest to achieve the goal of sustainable development. The Committee also examined
various international practices prevailing in developing and developed countries. The Committee
felt that a balance must be maintained between development and conservation, i.e., while it is
essential to promote socio-economic development, it is equally essential to maintain the unique
scientific and cultural values of the coastal sites. The Committee formulated 12 guiding principles
and suggested that these should be central to future decisions on Coastal Zone Management
initiatives.

3
CMZ NOTIFICATION — 2008
6. Prof. Swaminathan Committee submitted its report in February, 2005 and the Central
Government accepted the recommendations of the Committee in principle for implementation in
April, 2005. Accordingly, the Central Government proposed a new legislative framework namely
Coastal Management Zone (CMZ) Notification, 2008 framework to bring into force superseding the
Coastal Management Zone Notification - 1991. The draft Notification was issued on 1st May, 2008
and it was again published on 21st July, 2008.
7. The following are the broad features of the draft Coastal Management Zone (CMZ)
Notification, 2008:—
(i) The Notification aims at protection and sustainable development of the coastal
stretches and marine environment through sustainable Coastal Zone Management
practices based on sound scientific principles taking into account the vulnerability of
the coast to natural hazards, sustainable livelihood security for local communities, and
conservation of ecologically and culturally significant coastal resources.
(ii) The CMZ area is classified as CMZ-I which is ecologically sensitive area, CMZ-II
areas of particular concern, CMZ-III open areas including the coastal waters upto
territorial limits and CMZ-IV islands of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep;
offshore islands and islands in coastal backwaters.
(iii) For the purpose of management, the CMZ-I area is proposed to be mapped, notified
by the Central Government and managed through Integrated Coastal Zone Management
Plans. The CMZ-II area which includes coastal municipalities/corporations, coastal
panchayats with population density or more than 400 persons per sq. km, ports and
harbours, tourism areas, airports etc., would be managed through Integrated Coastal
Zone Management Plans. In the CMZ-III areas, the activities would be regulated on
the seaward side of the setback line, while, developments on the landward side of the
setback line can be undertaken as per local town and country planning regulations. In
the areas classified as CMZ-IV , the management would be through Integrated Coastal
Zone Management Plans.
(iv) The existing dwelling units and other infrastructures existing on the seaward side of
the setback line will not be disturbed. Further, no activities relating to fishing by
traditional community shall be disturbed.
(v) For the purpose of regulating the activities in the CMZ area a setback line on the
landward side is proposed to be demarcated based on vulnerability of the coast to
natural and manmade hazards. The mapping of the setback line in the CMZ-I, II and
III will be demarcated taking into account the parameters such as elevation,
geomorphology, sea level trends and horizontal shoreline displacement.
(vi) For the implementation and enforcement of the notification, there shall be the National
and State/Union territory Coastal Zone Management Authorities. A National Board for
Sustainable Coastal Zone Management shall be set up to provide policy advice to the
Central Government on the matters related to Coastal Zone Management.
(vii) A National Institute for Sustainable Coastal Zone Management (NISCZM) shall be set
up for assisting the Central Government and the State Governments to prepare the
Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plans.
8. Further, the Ministry for the purpose of implementing the recommendations of the Prof. M.
S. Swaminathan Committee has initiated a project with the assistance of the World Bank for

4
demarcation of the setback line, capacity building and institutional development, preparation of
Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plans for identified stretches in the States of Orissa, West
Bengal and Gujarat.
9. This Notification raised a lot of heat and dust/unrest among the coastal communities and
they became very restive and agitated, since they felt that it is an attempt on the part of the
Government to deprive them of their life and livelihood by displacing them from coastal areas,
which has traditionally sustained their life and livelihood. It was in this background that the
Committee decided to take up this subject for consideration and examination. Besides inviting
memoranda/views/comments from the individuals/organizations and all those concerned with the
subject matter, The Committee also undertook a study visit to the coastal areas and heard the views
of organizations/Unions/individuals at Thiruvananthapuram, Kanyakumari, Chennai and Hyderabad.
Some of the main concerns which came to the notice of the Committee on CMZ Notification are
as follows:—
(i) Almost everywhere, it was asserted before the Committee that CRZ is still a
preferred piece of legislation to CMZ Notification, 2008 because the former has
succeeded in containing pollution and encroachment along the coastal areas to
a large extent, whereas, it was felt that CMZ Notification is a replacement/
substitution of CRZ Notification in its amended form with greater possibilities
of misuse. One of the greatest apprehensions about the CMZ Notification was
that it proposes legalization and encouragement to industrial corporate activities
along the coasts in the garb of management methodologies. It was widely
apprehended that this Notification will significantly curtail the accessibility of
the local community to the shore and sea resources and serve the economic
interests of the corporate sector/large investors like tourism industry, refinery,
mining etc.
(ii) Local coastal communities almost unanimously voiced that protection of coastal
ecology and recognition of basic rights and livelihood of the local communities
over the sea and the coast should be at the heart of any coastal zone planning.
The fishermen were of the view that coastal management plan should be framed
by taking them into confidence and that mere mention in the Notification —
“There would be no restriction of fishing or fishery related activities of local
communities” is not enough to instill confidence among them. They need to be
involved, included and integrated in the future opportunities related to the
Coastal Zone. The Committee also feels that in a democratic country like ours
the preferred approach should be bottom up – public participation in planning
and development rather than top down – decisions made by Government and not
involving people in inclusive growth opportunities and practices in matters which
have far reaching consequences on a vast population solely dependent on their
tradition vocations and way of life. It is primarily keeping in view this concern
that peoples’ participation in policy formulation becomes all the more important
and inevitable.
(iii) One common complaint that came to the notice of the Committee during its
interaction with the various stakeholders was that draft CMZ Notification was
not made available to them in their local languages and hence they could not
understand the full import and implications of the CMZ Notification. When the
Committee enquired about the actual position in this regard from the Ministry
of Environment and Forests, it was informed that the translated version of the
Notification in local languages had not been widely circulated amongst the local

5
communities and instead they were put on the internet. It was also informed
that Centre for Environment Education (CEE) has been assigned the task to
organise public consultations to elicit the viewpoint of the local communities.
(iv) The Committee finds that for a community of nearly 250 million people living
within a distance of 50 kms. from the coast, CEE could manage to organise 35
public consultations in nine coastal States and was able to interact with 3714
individuals belonging to various stakeholder groups representing – (a) local
communities (individuals from coastal communities, Panchayat Members and
Fisher/farmer associations) (b) NGOs and Trade Unions (c) public authorities
(Municipal Corporation, District State Offices) (d) academic and research
organizations local experts/media and corporate bodies (tourism industries etc.).
Even the CEE in its report on the public consultation on Coastal Management
Zone, 2008 has conceded that time constraints to communicate and organise
workshops, rains and travel costs for the participants were the limitations to
cover more coastal areas in each State.
(v) The Committee was further informed that the draft CMZ Notification 2008, by
including “Notified Industrial Estates”, “Special Economic Zones”, Green Field
Airports” “Power Plants” etc. in CMZ-II, i.e., “Areas of Particular Concern”
(APC), is legally permitting take-over of the coast by vested interests and
external stakeholders. It was submitted that this notification is far from being
a robust legal document aimed at ensuring the safety of coastal and marine
resource protection and the livelihood interest and security of coastal
communities, it is rather a discriminatory document that allows a number of
new stakeholders to enter the coast, while ignoring the claims of those who
have been traditionally linked to the sea and have been the “owners” and
“protectors” of the coast.
(vi) The roles of the local authorities and State Government is ambiguous in the
proposed CMZ Notification, 2008 management structure and methodology. The
basic right and opportunity for the local communities or their representatives
(panchayat members) to participate and plan the activities in their local
environment and settlement areas are highly curtailed in the proposed
Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan (ICZMP) process. Roles of public
authorities (including various Government Departments like Fisheries,
Environment, Municipal Corporation, Block Development Office etc.) have not
been defined well, along with the methodology for enforcement, especially in
resolving multi-stakeholder conflicts.
(vii) It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that the terminologies
defined and the concepts like ‘setback line’ ‘ecologically sensitive area’
‘Integrated Coastal Zone Management’ (ICZM), mentioned in the CMZ
Notification, 2008 are vague and are open to subjective interpretations. Hence
clarity is required on these aspects.
(viii) The Committee is of the view that a common management plan for the entire
coastal area of the country is not a workable proposition. It feels that it should
rather be specifically designed for different States keeping in mind the diverse
coastal environments and specific cultures of coastal communities. The
Committee is of the view that concerned State Governments should have
enough participation in formulating the Integrated Coastal Zone Management
Plan (ICZMP), the development plan prepared for implementation of the

6
integrated coastal zone management for their States. This view was shared by
Prof. Swaminathan as well.
(ix) The CMZ Notification proposes the constitution of a National Board for
Sustainable Coastal Zone Management to provide policy advice to the Central
Government on matters relating to coastal zone management. The Committee
is of the view that although such a Board with experts is a good step, a perusal
of the Appendix-IV of the said notification shows that out of thirty two
members constituting the Board, only six will be experts. Others will be
representatives of certain organizations who would not have much involvement
in matters related to the Coastal Zone. The NGOs have been ignored and not
given any representation on the Board. The Committee feels that’
representation of social scientists representatives of NGOs involved in activities
related to coastal zone management, fishermen or their representatives need to
be represented in the proposed Board.
10. Around 20 per cent of the population in the country dwells in coastal areas and they
depend mainly on fisheries to eke out their livelihood. It is estimated that the fishermen
population living along the coastal areas of the country is around 67,30,300 as per livestock
census of 1992. The Committee is of the opinion that development should be people and not
solely economics oriented. As such the concerns of the poor and marginalized sections of the
coastal communities, the Committee feels, must be reflected and addressed in State Policy.
No attempt should be such as to divorce the people from their cultural life-style and
traditional livelihood or interfere with practices that have sustained communities over three
millenniums and more. The Committee is of the opinion that in a country like ours, where
a large number of populace depend on natural resources for their survival, social
dimensions of livelihood security and biodiversity conservation should be pivotal to all
decision making pertaining to development or economic considerations of revenue
generation. But the Committee is constrained to observe that these dimensions have not
been adequately incorporated in implementation of environmental laws and regulations by
the State as a result of which interventions by vigilant public interest groups supported by
the positive attitude of the judiciary have played a key role in protecting and conserving
environmental resources. India’s natural resources — land, water, forest and air are getting
depleted and polluted at an alarming pace and the communities who live on them for their
livelihood are being constantly marginalized and displaced.
11. The Committee is of the opinion that Government should not make haste in
implementing the CMZ notification without addressing the conflict of interests between the
stakeholders—mainly the fisher folk/coastal communities and all out efforts must be made
first to assuage their feelings and meet their concerns which the Committee feels, is not
unfound, through education, social mobilization and their active participation and
involvement in decision making. Panchayats can play a crucial role in generating awareness
among them. For this, Government should get the CMZ notification translated into local
languages and circulated widely in every village/hamlet so that the local communities are
made aware of the actual implications of the notification and are not swayed by hearsay or
guided by misgivings about it. Government may also seriously think of bringing out a
legislation to ensure protection of rights of coastal communities to coastal resources on the
lines of the one meant for forest dwellers.
12. The Committee, in view of the above, recommends that the implementation of CMZ
notification be kept pending/in abeyance till mechanisms/instruments-executive and
legislative are put in place for inclusion and integration of coastal communities through
participative, decision making and control instruments.

7
ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-I
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 21st July, 2008
S.O. 1761 (E).— Whereas the Central Government in the Ministry of Environment and
Forests had vide its Notification No. S.O. 1070(E) dated the 1st May, 2008 notified a draft Coastal
Management Zone (hereinafter referred to as the said Notification) inviting objections or suggestions
on the proposals contained in the said Notification in writing within a period of sixty days from
the date of issue of the said Notification, i.e., till the 30th June, 2008;
And whereas the Central Government has now received many representations and requests
from the State Governments including the stakeholders for extending the time limit for seeking
objections or suggestions;
And whereas the Central Government while considering the concerns expressed/by the State
Governments and stakeholders, have decided in the public interest to go for re-publishing the said
Notification and giving opportunity to the public affected thereby in making objections and
suggestions on the proposals contained therein within a period of sixty days from the date of re-
publication of this Notification;
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) and clause (v) of
sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986) read with
sub-rule (3) of rule 5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, the Central Government
proposes to issue a Notification to be known as the Coastal Management Zone (CMZ) Notification,
2008, for the information of the public likely to be affected thereby and notice is hereby given that
the said draft Notification will be taken into consideration by the Central Government on and after
the expiry of sixty days from the date of publication of said Notification in the Official Gazette.
Any person interested in making any objections or suggestions on the proposals contained
in the draft Notification may do so in writing within the period so specified through post to the
Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Paryavaran Bhawan, CGO Complex, Lodi Road,
New Delhi-110003, or electronically at e-mail address: secy@menf.nic.in
Draft Notification
Whereas the Central Government in the Ministry of Environment and Forests issued the
Coastal Regulation Zone Notification vide No. S.O.114(E) dated the 19 February 1991, under which
coastal stretches were declared Coastal Regulation Zones (CRZ) and restrictions were imposed on
the setting up and expansion of industries, operations and processes in the said Zones for its
protection;
And whereas the said Notification has been amended from time to time based on
recommendations of various committees, judicial pronouncements, representations from State
Governments, Central Ministries, and the general public, etc., consistent with the basic objective
of the said Notification;
9

10
And whereas perceiving the continuing difficulties posed by the Notification in its effective
implementation for the sustainable development of coastal regions as well as conservation of coastal
resources, the Ministry of Environment and Forests constituted an Expert Committee vide Order
No.15(8)/2004-IA-III, dated the 19 July, 2004 under the Chairmanship of Prof. M.S. Swaminathan,
with experts in the areas of environmental law, marine biodiversity, marine geology, environmental
economics, socio-economics, remote sensing, coastal engineering, urban planning, and marine
fisheries to carry out a comprehensive review of the said Notification including all its amendments
in the light of findings and recommendations of previous Committees, judicial pronouncements,
representations of various stakeholders, and suggest suitable amendments, if necessary, to make the
coastal regulatory framework consistent with well established scientific principles of Coastal Zone
Management.
And whereas the above Expert Committee had submitted its report to the Ministry of
Environment and Forests in February, 2005 containing specific recommendations to build on the
strengths of  existing regulations and institutional structures and fill gaps for conservation and
improving the management of the coastal resources by enhancing the living and non-living
resources of the coastal zone; by ensuring protection to coastal populations and structures from
risk of inundation from extreme weather and geological events; and by ensuring that the livelihood
security of coastal populations is strengthened;
And whereas the Central Government in the Ministry of Environment and Forests after
carefully considering the above report and all the recommendations made therein have decided to
accept them in principle for implementation;
And whereas in accordance with the above decision, the Central Government proposes to
bring into force a new framework for managing and regulating activities in the coastal and marine
areas for conserving and protecting the coastal resources and coastal environment; and for ensuring
protection of coastal population and structures from risk of inundation due to natural hazards; and
for ensuring that the livelihoods of coastal populations are strengthened; by superseding the said
Coastal Regulation Zone, Notification, 1991;
And whereas, in addition to the above the Central Government has decided to consider the
proposal for developing green field airports and to undertake expansion and modernisation of
existing airports in the coastal areas, without compromising environmental considerations;
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) and clause (v) of
sub section 2 of section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986) read with sub-
rule (3) of rule 5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 and in supersession of the
Notification published vide S.O. 114(E) dated the 19th February, 1991, except as respects things
done or omitted to be done before such supersession, the Central Government proposes to issue
a Notification to be known as the Coastal Management Zone (CMZ) Notification, 2008, namely:—
1. (i) This notification may be called the Coastal Management Zone Notification, 2008.
(ii) It shall come into force on the date of its final publication in the Official Gazette.
2. Objective—
The Objective of this Notification is protection and sustainable development of the coastal stretches
and marine environment through sustainable coastal zone management practices based on sound
scientific principles taking into account the vulnerability of the coast to natural hazards, sustainable
livelihood security for local communities, and conservation of ecologically and culturally significant
coastal resources.
3. Definitions— In this Notification, unless the context otherwise requires,—

11
(a) “Coastal Zone”  means the area from the territorial waters limit (12 nautical miles measured
from the appropriate baseline) including its sea bed, the adjacent land area along the coast, and
inland water bodies influenced by tidal action including its bed, upto the landward boundary of the
local self Government or local authority abutting the sea coast, provided that in case of ecologically
and culturally sensitive areas, the entire biological or physical boundary of the area may be
included, as specified under the provisions of Environment Protection Act, 1986;
(b) “Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM)”  means a process by which decisions
are made for protection of coastal population and infrastructure, protection and conservation of
coastal and marine areas and resources and sustainable development;
(c) “Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan (ICZMP)”  is the landuse plan or
development plan prepared for implementation of the Integrated Coastal Zone Management;
(d) “Local Self Government or Local Authority” means a village Panchayat, or a Urban local
body, or’ any other body or authority, by whatever name called, for the time being invested by
law, for rendering essential services or, with control and management of civic services, within a
specified local area abutting the sea coast or inland tidal water having tidal action.
(e) “Setback Line”  means a line demarcated along the coast, based on its vulnerability to
sea-level rise, flooding and shore line changes as per Guidelines given in this Notification in
Appendix-I.
(f) “Ecologically, Sensitive Areas” are those areas of the coastal zone that play an important
role in maintaining the functional integrity of the coast, including acting as natural barriers to
coastal hazards and, or harbouring a diverse biodiversity that provide valuable resources to local
communities.
4. Categorization of the Coastal Zone—  For the purposes of management and regulation,
the coastal zone shall be divided into four categories, namely:—
(i) Coastal Management Zone — I (CMZ–I) shall consist of areas designated as
Ecologically Sensitive Areas (ESA), an indicative list is given in Appendix–II.
(ii) Coastal Management Zone — II (CMZ–II) shall consist of areas, other than CMZ-I
and coastal waters, identified as “Areas of Particular Concern (APC)” such as
economically important areas, high population density areas, and culturally and, or
strategically important areas. The administrative boundaries of these “Areas of
Particular Concern” would be boundaries of CMZ-II. A generic list of such areas is
given in Appendix–III.
(iii) Coastal Management Zone — III (CMZ–III) shall consist of all other open areas
including coastal waters and tidal influenced inland water bodies, that is, all areas
excluding those classified as CMZ–I, II and IV.
(iv) (a) Coastal Management Zone–IV (CMZ–IV) shall consist of island territories of
Andaman and Nicobar, Lakshadweep, and other offshore islands.
(b) In respect of the islands in coastal backwaters areas which are not included
in CMZ–I or CMZ–II, such areas may be included in CMZ–IV at the option of
the Local Authority; otherwise they would be included in CMZ–I. Once
exercised, the option of the Local Authority would not be subject to change.
5. (i) National Board for Sustainable Coastal Zone Management—
This Board consisting’ of not more than thirty two Members shall have the mandate to provide
policy advice to the Central Government on matters relating to coastal zone management, but

12
shall not undertake regulatory functions. The composition of the Board shall be as given in
Appendix–IV . The term of the non-official members of the Board shall be three years only.
(ii) National and State or UT Coastal Zone Management Authorities
The National and State or Union territory Coastal Zone Management Authorities set up under the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, shall be the Coastal Zone Management Authorities.
6. Management Methodology—  The management methodology and approach for the Coastal
Management Zone shall be as follows:
(i) Notification of the Setback Line: The Setback Line, for the entire coast, excluding
CMZ–I and CMZ–IV areas, will be notified in one or more stretches at a time in a
map on cadastral scale by the Central Government. For this purpose, the Central
Government shall issue detailed technical guidelines, based on the approach set forth
in Appendix–I. The Notification shall be based on the delineation to be carried out by
the competent and established scientific institutions specializing in earth surveys and
mapping, among a set of such institutions to be notified by the Central Government.
Till the Setback Line in respect of area under each local authority as per these
technical guidelines is notified by the Central Government the provisions of the Coastal
Regulation Zone Notification, 1991 shall prevail.
(ii) Coastal Management Zone–I:  The ecologically sensitive areas as per generic list
given in Appendix–II shall be identified within the coastal zone by the Central
Government jointly with the concerned State Government or Union Territory
Administration, with the technical assistance provided by the National Institute for
Sustainable Coastal Zone Management or one or more competent and established
scientific research institutions specializing in coastal resources management, and
notified by the Central Government. All activities in CMZ–I areas shall be regulated by
the State or Union Territory Coastal Zone Management Authority concerned on the
basis of an Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan (ICZMP) to be prepared by the
concerned State or Union Territory Administration with the help of National Institute
of Sustainable Coastal Zone Management or one or more competent and established
scientific research institutions specializing in coastal resources management, and
notified by the Central Government and notified under Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986. The Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plans prepared for CMZ–I areas
would be endorsed by the Central, Government. The ICZMPs prepared shall ensure
proper protection and conservation of all ecological entities within the notified
ecologically sensitive areas keeping in view the safety and livelihood needs of the local
communities and essential development. There shall be no restriction in the fishing and
fisheries related activities of local communities living in the area. The implementation
of the ICZMPs by the State Government or Union Territory Administration shall be
monitored by the concerned State or Union Territory Coastal Zone Management
Authority and by the National Coastal Zone Management Authority.
Provided that the projects pertaining to the development of green field airports
and expansion and modernisation of existing airports shall be undertaken on case to
case basis based on detailed scientific study incorporating adequate environmental
safeguard measures required for neutralising damage to the coastal environment.
(iii) Coastal Management Zone–II:  In the administrative boundaries of areas of the
Coastal Municipalities or Corporation and coastal Panchayat with population density of more
than 400 persons per sq. km activities shall be regulated based on an Integrated Coastal
Zone Management Plan approved by the Central Government. The activities proposed on the

13
seaward side of the setback line in the above administrative boundaries shall be regulated
to ensure that no further development takes place other than foreshore requiring facilities
and basic infrastructure.
The development on the landward side of the setback line shall be as per the local town
and country planning rules as existed on the day of this notification. The Integrated Coastal
Zone Management Plan prepared for the above areas shall take into account the guidelines
laid down in Appendix–V .
With regard to economically and culturally important areas as identified by the concerned
State or Union territory Governments, the activities shall be regulated as per Integrated
Coastal Zone Management Plan prepared. The Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan will
be implemented by the concerned State or Union territory Governments after the plans are
approved by the Central Government.
With regard to strategically important areas, the Ministry of Defence would prepare an
Integrated— Coastal Zone Management Plan and submit to the Ministry of Environment and
Forests. Such plans would be accorded clearance by a Special Committee constituted by
the Central Government.
(iv) Coastal Management Zone–III:  The activities that may be permitted or prohibited on
the seaward side of the setback line and agencies responsible are given in Appendix–VI. The
existing dwelling units and other infrastructure existing on the seaward side of the setback
line shall not be disturbed/relocated. No activities relating to fishing by traditional
communities shall be disturbed.
(v) Coastal Management Zone–IV:  All activities shall conform to the approved Integrated
Coastal Zone Management Plans, which shall be determined in each case by the concerned
State or Union Territory Coastal Zone Management Authority. While, preparing the
Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plans it shall be ensured that no developments are
permitted in the corals, mangroves, breeding and spawning of endangered species other than
those minimum essential activities required for local communities.
7. Operation of the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification 1991—
The Coastal Regulation Zone Notification, 1991 shall cease to operate within:
(a) CMZ–I area, from the date of Notification of the concerned Integrated Coastal
Zone Management Plan.
(b) CMZ–II area, from the date of Notification of the Setback Line and approval of
Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan.
(c) CMZ–III area, from the date of Notification of the Setback Line.
(d) CMZ–IV area, from the date of Notification of the concer ned ICZMP
Appendix-I
SETBACK LINE
The Setback Lines in the coastal management zones categorised as CMZ–I, II and III will
be based on vulnerability of the coast to natural and manmade hazards. This procedure is followed
in many countries where the coast has been mapped far vulnerability to coastal hazards.
Far the purpose of mapping the vulnerability of the coast four parameters are taken into
account: elevation, geomorphology, sea level trends, and horizontal shoreline displacement (erosion

14
of accretion). A brief on each of the parameters which are to be considered for drawing up the
Setback Line are given below:
(i) Elevation: The elevation data shall be obtained from the available coastal toposheets
and satellite data surveys with contour intervals of 0.5 and 1 meter.
(ii) Geomorphology: The land forms will be identified on the maps based on the available
toposheet and remote sensing data. Bathymetry to be derived from naval Hydrographic
Charts on location specific surveys.
(iii) Sea level trends:  The sea level trend data shall be based on the reports of the United
Nations Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
(iv) Horizontal shoreline displacement:  The erosion or accretion data of horizontal
shoreline displacement shall be obtained from long term information derived from
Survey of India Topographic maps (1967) and the latest satellite data. Horizontal
shoreline displacement shall be estimated (median estimate) over the next 100 years.
Further detailed Technical Guidelines for delineation of the Setback Line may be
provided by the Central Government in the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
The setback line shall be demarcated based on the above parameters using the
guidelines as approved by the Ministry for CMZ-II and III areas on cadastral scale by
NISCM or any other agency authorised by the Ministry within a period of two years from
the date of issue of this notification.
Appendix-II
CMZ–I: INDICATIVE LIST OF  ECOLOGICALLY SENSITIVE AREAS
(ESA)
(i) Mangroves
(ii) Coral reefs
(iii) Sand Beaches and Sand Dunes
(iv) Mudflats
(v) Marine wildlife protected areas under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972
(vi) Coastal freshwater bodies such as creeks, lakes, etc.
(vii) Salt Marshes
(viii) Turtle nesting grounds
(ix) Horse shoe crabs habitats
(x) Sea grass beds
(xi) Sea weed beds
(xii) Nesting grounds of birds

15
Appendix–III
CMZ–II: THE INDICATIVE LIST OF AREAS OF PARTICULAR CONCERN
(a) Coastal Municipalities/Corporations (the entire notified area)
(b) Coastal Panchayats with population density more than 400 persons per sq. km (the entire
notified area) as per the latest Census of India.
(c) Ports and Harbours
(d) Notified Tourism Area
(e) Mining sites
(f) Notified Industrial Estates
(g) Foreshore facilities for Special Economic Zones
(h) Heritage areas
(i) Notified Archaeological sites under the Protected Monuments Act.
(j) Defence areas/installations
(k) Power Plants
(l) Green field airports and expansion and modernization of existing airports
Appendix-IV
COMPOSITION OF NATIONAL BOARD FOR SUSTAINABLE COASTAL ZONE
MANAGEMENT
1. Union Minister for Environment and Forests – Chair
2. Union Minister in-charge of Ministry of Earth Sciences – Co-Chair
3. Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests – Member Secretary
4. Experts (by name) in:
Coastal ecosystems – 1
Marine biology – 1
Maritime law – 1
Meteorology – 1
Disaster Management – 1
Environmental Economics – 1
5. Representative of the National Commission for Women – 1
6. Representative of the Ministry of Defence – 1
7. Representative from Indian Space Research Organization – 1

16
8. Representative of the Ministry of Urban Development – 1
9. Representative of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj – 1
10. Representatives of community based organizations of
the mainland coastal population – 3
11. Representatives from fishers (1 male and 1 woman) – 2
12. Representatives from aquaculture, tourism, industries, mining,
ports, sectors – 4
13. Representatives of coastal Rural District Panchayats – 3
14. Representatives of coastal Urban Local Authorities – 3
15. Representatives of Andaman and Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands – 3
Appendix-V
GUIDELINES FOR PREPARATION OF INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT
PLAN FOR CMZ II AREAS
(i) The entire notified Corporation, Municipality, Panchayat, revenue area, shall be the outer
boundary of the APC.
(ii) I CZMPs shall be prepared for these areas indicating all present and future developments,
conservation and preservation schemes.
(iii) The ICZMP shall address vulnerability to human life and property based on setback lines
prepared by Ministry of Environment and Forests.
(iv) No constructions shall be permitted on the seaward side of any existing (as on 2008)
approved building or a tarred or surfaced road in the area.
(v) All the existing roads including the internal roads shall be strengthened, as these roads shall
serve for the purpose of livelihood, communication, relief and evacuation measures
particularly for fisher communities.
(vi) Adequate cyclone shelters shall be constructed taking into account the population of the
area.
(vii) The new schools, market areas and other public facilities where large number of public
congregate shall be located beyond the vulnerable area.
(viii) Along the seaward side sufficient bio shield with local vegetation, trees including mangroves
shall be planted
(ix) The beaches shall be left free of any development.
(x) Appropriate coastal protection structures be constructed where ever required on a scientific
basis
(xi) New houses and settlements shall be planned on landward of the setback line.
(xii) Sand dunes, being natural speed breakers in the event of hazards, shall be maintained or
regenerated by planting shrubs or through appropriate measures.

17
(xiii) All the areas notified by the Ministry of Environment and Forests as CMZ–I shall be clearly
demarcated in the plan for their conservation.
(xiv) The ICZMPs shall be approved by the proposed NISCM of the Ministry or any other
authorized authorities as approved by the Ministry.
(xv) There shall be no regulation with regard to fishing and fishery related activities.
(xvi) The enforcement and monitoring will be the responsibility of the concerned State or Union
territory Coastal Zone Management Authorities.
Appendix-VI
CMZ III: PERMISSIBLE DEVELOPMENTAL ACTIVITIES ON THE SEAW ARD SIDE OF THE
SETBACK LINE
(i) Activities, which are permitted by the local or concerned authorities without CMZ
clearance
(a) Boating, shipping and navigation.
(b) Fisheries including traditional fish processing, ice plants and ice crushing facilities.
(c) Mariculture including hatcheries and traditional aquaculture.
(d) Agriculture and horticulture.
(e) Public toilets and rain or cyclone shelters.
(f) Repair of existing buildings or infrastructure including reconstruction activities.
(ii) Activities to be permitted with the approval of State or Union territory Coastal Zone
Management Authority
(a) Construction of boat jetties and fishing harbours to be approved with Environmental
Impact Assessment.
(b) Saltpans-making salt by solar evaporation of seawater.
(c) Temporary construction for tourism facilities.
(d) Water sports and recreation facilities.
(e) Discharge facilities of treated effluents compiling with the norms.
(f) Forest related activities.
(g) Boat building including repair and re-fuelling facilities.
(iii) Activities that can be permitted with Environmental Impact Assessment and
Environmental Management Plan to be approved by Ministry of Environment and
Forests.
(i) Integrated port, harbour, jetties and moored facilities.
(ii) Dredging and disposal of dredged materials.
(iii) Reclamation within port limits and for coastal protection.

18
(iv) Coastal Protection measures including mangroves and other bioshields.
(v) Bridges and sea links and approaches and reclamation therefor.
(vi) Bunding for the purpose of preventing coastal erosion, salinity ingress, maintenance of
waterways.
(vii) Hydrocarbon exploration and extraction.
(viii) Mining of placer minerals and offshore mining.
(ix) Constructions of communication, power supply, lighthouses and water supply.
(x) Pipelines for transfer of petroleum or chemicals, storage facilities for storage of
petroleum or chemical products and regasification facilities.
(xi) Defence related projects.
(xii) Shipbuilding yards.
(xiii) Ship-breaking in existing locations.
(xiv) Non conventional energy including windmills.
(xv) Any other activity which requires foreshore facilities.
(xvi) Green field airports and expansion and modernization of existing airports.
(iv) All other activities not listed above are prohibited.”.
[F. No. 11-83/2005-IA-III]
Dr. NALINI BHAT, Scientist ‘G’

19
ANNEXURE-II
List of individuals/institutions/organizations who sent suggestions/views on Coastal
Management Programmes
S1. Names and Addresses of Individuals/Experts/Organisations
No.
12
1. Olencio Fernandes, Convenor
Nuvem Civic And Consumer Forum, H.No. 99/0, Belloy, Nuvem, Salcete, Goa.
2. Jairam I. Dialani
Shipyards Association of Goa, Vasco-da-Gama, Goa.
3. Chairman
Vadrai Macchimar Sarvoday Sahakari Society Ltd.
4. President
Digambarpur Angikar, Digambarpur, Via Kashinagar, Block
Patharpratima, Dist. South 24 Pgs., Sundarban, West Bengal.
5. Savapati
Contai-I Panchayat Samity, P.O. Contai, Dist. Purba Medinipur.
6. Hemalata
General Secretary
All India Fishers and Fisheries Workers’ Federation (AIFFWF), BT
Ranadive Bhawan, 13-A Rouse Avenue, New Delhi.
7. President
Marianadu Fishermen Development Welfare Co-Operative Society Ltd.
Marianadu, Puthukurichy. P.O., Thiruvananthapuram-695303.
8. Antony T.
Arthial Puraidom Marianad Puthikurichy P.O. Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala-695303
9. Capt. J. Rama Rao VSM, FIE, Indian Navy (Retd.)
540, Road No. 12, Banjara Hills Hyderabad-500034.
10. Member Secretary
Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority, Thalamuthu Natarajan
Building, No. 1, Gandhi Irwin Road, Egmore, Chennai-600008.
11. E.A.S. Sarma
Forum for Better Visakha (FBV) (A coalition of NGOs and concerned citizens)
Gokhale road Maharanipeta, Visakhapatnam-530002.
12. Matanhy Saldanha,
Ex-MLA
Villa Saldanha, Cansaulim, Goa.
19

20
12
13. C.V. Ravindranath
Kannur-670001, Kerala
14. H.L.K. Joshi
SAIL/CMO /WSR, Ispat Bhavan, K.H. Road, Chennai.
15. P.B. Sahasranaman
Chittoor Road, Kochi
16. Priya Sharma
Samrat-120, Someshwara Enclave, U.M. Road, Surat
17. G .S. Gill
City and Industrial Development Corporation of Maharashtra Ltd. (CIDCO)
18. Addl. Secretyary
Moira Civic and Consumer Forum, Bambordem, Moira, Goa
19. Abhinav Nautiyal
236 C Pocket C, Siddharth Extension, New Delhi-110014
20. Anil Gachke
Maharashtra Chamber of Commerce, Industry and Agriculture, Dubhash
Marg, Fort, Mumbai-400001
21. Dr. Joseph. P. Kavalam
42/2491 Kavalam Puthenpura, Power House Road, Ernakulam, Cochin
Kerala
22. Prof. K.K. Ghosh
Gujarat Ecology Society, Synergy House, Subhanpura, Vadodara, Gujarat
23. Jayaram Pattnaik
HSE and Disaster Management Developer, HSE Officer, Punj Leoyd Ltd.
24. John A Amalan, LGC,
Directorate of Transport, A&N Administration, Port Blair Andaman-744101
25. Gilbert Rodrigo
Tamil Nadu Pondy Fisher People Federation
26. Anton Gomez, President
National Union of Fishermen 7, Teppakulam Street Tuticorin-628002,
Tamil Nadu
27. Jesu Rethinam, Convenor
11/A, Sri Ramakrishna Parahamsar Street Vellippalayam, Nagapattinam-611001
28. P. Tanya
All India Kisan-Mazdoor Sabha (AIKMS) State Executive Committee-Andhra Pradesh
29. M. Ananda Rao
All India Trade Union Congress, 33-1-4, South Jail Road, Allipuram Junction,
Visakhapatnam-4

21
12
30. D. Busi Raju
Maala Mahaanadu, C/o M. Hanumanth Rao, 8-2-272/31, Road No.2,
Banjara Hills, Hyderabad-530034
31. SK Alisha
Ankita Welfare Association, D.No. 53-20-26, Chaitanaya Nagar,
Maddilapalem, Visakhapatnam
32. K.V . Ramana Rao
Jaibeem Cultural and Welfare Association, Mig-4, Green park, NH-5
Road, near Port Stadium, Visakhapatnam-530013. A.P. India
33. Bade Kodanda Rao
8-178, Swarnabhatarhi Nagar, Gitam Collage Post, Visakhaptnam
34. Shrimati Janaki R. Kondapi, IAS
E.F.S &T Department, Secretariat, Hyderabad-500022
35. John P. Rayan
Jananayaka Ammaippu Sara thozhilalargal Thozhir Sangam
36. D. Narasimha Rao
37. C. Srinivasan, Secretary
Tamizhaga Meenava Makkal Poratta Kuzhu, 5/326 Vanigar Street, Near Indian Bank,
Kovalam 603112, Kanchipuram District
38. Prof. Fatima Babu,
Tuticorin
39. Pauldurai Perumal, President
Beach Mineral Producers Association, Mahadevankulam (Post)
Tirunelveli Dist., Pin-627657, Tamil Nadu
40. Solanki Uday Popatlal
Room No.5-A, Siddharth Nagar Baroi Mundra-Kachh Gujrat-370421
41. B.J. Sumra
Plot No. 728/B-8, Deepak Chok, Near bordi Gate, Dr. Ambedkar Road,
Bavnagar (Gujrat) 364005
42. Devendra Singh, Chowdhary
5-Subhash Colony, Agra-10 U.P.
43. Joint Secretary
Assagao Civic and Consumer Forum, House No. 568, Alto badem,
Assagao ( Via Anjuna P.O.), Bardez, Goa-403509
44. Chandrakant V . Keni, Chairman
Mahikavati Mahim Fishermen’s Sarvodaya Co-Op. Sty. Ltd., Mahim
Kajve Road, Mumbai.
45. Amit Kumar Das, General Secretary
P.K. College Students Union, Purba Medinipur-721401.

22
12
46. Santanu Chacraverti, Secretary
Soiciety for Direct Initiative for Social and Health Action (DISHA),
20/4, Sil Lane, Kolkata-700015
47. Chairman
Kharekuran Macchimar Sarvodaya Sahakari Sanstha Maryadit, At. and Post. Kharekuran
Tal. Pal ghar, Dist. Thane, (W.R.)
48. Mrs. Wilma D’Costa, Joint Secretary
Davorlim Civic and Consumer Forum, 14B, The Homestead, Near
Federation Colony, Ravanfond, Davorlim, Goa 403707
49. Maria Vales, Convenor
Raia Civic and Consumer Forum, SF3, Snowline Apts. 1, Quevona, Raia, Salcete,
Goa 403720
50. Valentine Coelho, Convenor
Socorro Civic and Consumer forum, H. No. 1095/1, Zosvaddo-Socorro,
P.O. Porvorim, 403501
51. Chairman
Uttan Machichimar and Vahatuk Sahakari Society Ltd., At and Post Uttan
Pali, Tal. and Dist. Thane Pin 401106
52. Chairman
Edwan Machhimar Vividh Karyakari Sahakari Society Ltd., At and Post
Edwan, Tal. Pal ghar, Dist. Thane
53. Debasis Shyamal,
Baguranjalpai ViII. Baguranjalpai, P.O.-Deshdattabar, P.S.–Contai, Distt.-Midnapur (E)
54. Joseph. P.
Ajila Cottage Marianad Puthikurichy P.O., Thiruvananthapuram
Kerala, Pin 695303
55. Rambhau Patil, President
Maharashtra Machhimar Kruti Samitee, Machhimar Kruti Bhavan, Opp. Bhadvar Park
Caff-pared Colaba Mumbai-400005
56. Ashok Vasudev Naik, Chairman
Thane Jila Machhimar Madhayavarti Sahkari Sangh Maryadit, 9, New Scale Shade
Building, Mahatama Jyotiba Phule Market, Mumbai 400001
57. Chairman
Machhimar Sarvodaya Sahakari Society Ltd., Colaba, Capt. Prakash Pethe Marg, Caff-
parade, Colaba, Mumbai-400005
58. Chairman
Arnala Machhimar Vividha Karyakari Sahakari Sanstha Maryadit
Arnala, Dist Thana, St. Virar, W. Rly, Pin-401302
59. Birendra Bath Shyamal, President
Baguran Jalpai No.1 Matsya Khoti, P.O. Deshdattvar, West Medinipur,
West Bengal, Pin 721450

23
12
60. Alvaro Bragnaza, Convenor
Majorda Utorda Calata Residents and Consumer Forum, H. No. 335,
Costa Vaddo, Majorda, Salcete-Goa
61. Ramona Almeida, Convenor
Velim Civic and consumer Forum, H. No. 582, Gorkomorod, P.O.
Velim, Salcette, Goa 403723
62. Chairman
Dhakti Dahanu Machhimar Vividh, Karyakari Sahkari Society Ltd., Distt. Thane
63. Chairman
Kelve Machhimar Vividh karyakari Sahakari Society Maryadit, Post
kelve, Tal Pal ghar, Dist Thane-401401
64. Ardeshana Vijay R.
Gitanjali, At. Upleta Distt. Rajkot Pin 360490 (Gujrat State)
65. Dr. D. Sudarsanam
Deptt. of Advance Zoology and Bio Technology, Medical Laboratory
Technology and Bio-Medical Instrumentation Science, Loyola College, Chennai-600034
66. Lincoln S. Bastin, Founder
All India Fishermen Advocates Association No. 10, M.A. Street
Triplicane Chennai-600005
67. J. Kosumani, President
Tamil Nadu Fisher People Development Association, 37,
Durgaiyamman Koli Street Nochikkuppam, Mylapore, Chennai-600004, Tamil Nadu
68. V . Dinakaran, General Secretary
Akhila Kerala Dheevara Sabha, Punnapra P.O., Alappuzha-4, Kerala
69. Aarthi Sridhar
Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment 659, 5th ‘A’
Main Road, Hebbat Bangalore 56-0024

ANNEXURE-III
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE V ARIOUS MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENT AND
EXPERTS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE FOR ORAL EVIDENCE
Sl. No. Date of Meeting W itness
Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. 11.11.2008 1. Shri Vijai Sharma, Secretary
2. Shri J. M. Mauskar, Additional Secretary
3. Shri M.B. Lal Additional Director General (FC)
4. Shri Ansar Ahmad, Inspector General Forests (FC)
5. Dr. Nalini Bhat, Advisor
6. Dr. A. Senthil Vel, Additional Director
2. 26.11.2008 1. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan, M.P. and Chairman of the
Expert Committee constituted to Review the Coastal
Regulation Zone, Notification, 1991.
Ministry of Earth Sciences
3. 30.12.2008 1. Dr. Shailesh Nayak, Secretary
2. Shrimati Villasini Ramachandran, AS & FA
3. Shri D.P. Singh, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. K. Somasundar, Scientist ‘E’
5. Shri P. Madeswaran, Scientist ‘E’
6. Dr. S.K. Das, Scientist ‘E’
Centre for Environment Education (CEE), Ahmedabad
4. 13.01.2009 1. Dr. Shailaja Ravindranath, Regional Director
Survey of India, Dehradun
5. 10.02.2009 1. Maj. General R. S. Tanwar, Additional Surveyor General
2. Shri S. V . Singh, Deputy Director
3. Shri D.K. Kar, Suptdg. Surveyor
Space Applications Centre, Ahmedabad
6. 10.02.2009 1. Dr. A jai, Group Director
2. Shri Shantanu Bhatawdeker, Officer on Special Duty
3. Dr. Rajawat, A.S., Scientist
24

ANNEXURE-IV
LIST OF STATE/UNION TERRITORY GOVERNMENTS WHO SENT THEIR
COMMENTS/VIEWS ON THE COASTAL MANAGEMENT PROGRAMMES
Sl. No. Name of States/Union Territories
1. Kerala
2. Gujarat
3. Tamil Nadu
4. Maharashtra
5. Orissa
6. Andhra Pradesh
7. Andaman and Nicobar Islands
8. Daman and Diu, and Dadra and Nagar Haveli
9. Puducherry
25

MINUTES

28

29
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 12th September, 2008 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Shri Jabir Husain
7. Shri D. Raja
8. Dr. Ejaz Ali
LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
10. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
11. Shri Francis Fanthome
12. Shri Brahmananda Panda
13. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
14. Shri Pratik P. Patil
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
16. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
17. Shri Sitaram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Committee discussed its future programme and decided to take up for
consideration the following subjects in order of priority (i) Coastal Management Programmes; ***;
and ***. The Committee directed the Secretariat to obtain necessary documents on the Coastal
Management Programmes viz. Swaminathan Committee Report on Review of Coastal Regulation
29
*** Relates to other matters.

30
Zone Notification, 1991, recent Notification on the subject, background note for the consideration
of the Committee. ***
3. * * *
4. The Committee then adjourned at 11.45 
A.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

31
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 11th November, 2008 in Committee
Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Pankaj Choudhary
8. Shri Akbar Ahmad Dumpy
9. Shri Francis Fanthome
10. Shri Brahmananda Panda
11. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
12. Shri Pratik P. Patil
13. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
14. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
16. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
17. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Gandhi, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
1. Shri Vijai Sharma, Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests
2. Shri J.M. Mauskar, Additional Secretary
3. Shri M.B. Lal, Addl. Director General (FC)
4. Shri Ansar Ahmad, Inspector General Forests (FC)
31

32
5. Dr. Nalini Bhat, Advisor
6. Dr. A. Senthil Vel, Additional Director
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members and the Secretary and officials of the
Ministry of Environment and Forests to the meeting of the Committee. He requested the Secretary,
Ministry of Environment and Forests to highlight the initiatives taken by the Ministry for protecting
and conserving the coastal environment. He also desired to know the measures required to be
adopted to identify the vulnerable coastal regions and ensuring strengthening of the livelihood
security of coastal populations. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, then made a
visual presentation on the subject. Members thereafter, sought clarifications on the points arising
out of the presentation to which the witnesses replied.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee further discussed its proposed study visit to Eastern Coastal States and UT
of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, as decided by the Committee in its previous meeting, to have in-
depth knowledge and to interact with the people affected in the Coastal States and UTs in
connection with the Coastal Management Programmes and to different institutes/bodies/centres,
etc., within the administrative control of the Ministries/Department falling under the purview of the
Committee to acquaint itself with their working and problems being faced by them. The Committee
decided to undertake study visit to Thiruvananthapuram, Kanyakumari, Chennai, Port Blair and
Hyderabad from 28th November to 5th December, 2008. The Committee directed the Secretariat
to take necessary action in this regard.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.50 
P.M. to meet again at 2.00 P.M. on
26th November, 2008.

33
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 26th November, 2008 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Shri Akbar Ahmad Dumpy
8. Shri Francis Fanthome
9. Shri Brahmananda Panda
10. Shri Pratik P. Patil
11. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
12. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
13. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
14. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
15. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
16. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Gandhi, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESS
Prof. M.S. Swaminathan, M.P.
2. * * *
3. The Chairman then welcomed the Members and Prof. M.S. Swaminathan, Member of
Parliament to the meeting of the Committee. The Chairman apprised Members that Prof.
33
*** Relates to other matters.

34
Swaminathan had been the Chairman of the Expert Committee constituted to Review the Coastal
Regulation Zone, Notification, 1991. Thereafter, he requested Prof. Swaminathan to highlight the
challenges and dangers that Coastal Zone/Coastal area is facing and the initiatives that could be
taken for the purpose of protecting and conserving the coastal environment. He also desired to
know the measures required to be adopted to identify the vulnerable coastal regions and ensuring
strengthening of the livelihood security of coastal populations. Prof. Swaminathan made a
presentation on the subject. Members thereafter, sought clarifications on the points arising out of
the presentation to which he replied.
The witness then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.15 
P.M.

35
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 30th December, 2008 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Brahmananda Panda
9. Shri Pratik P. Patil
10. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
12. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
13. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri A.K. Gandhi, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
WITNESSES
Representatives from the Ministry of Earth Sciences
1. Dr. Shailesh Nayak, Secretary
2. Shrimati Villasini Ramachandran, A.S. & F.A
3. Shri D.P. Singh, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. K. Somasundar, Scientist ‘E’
5. Shri P. Madeswaran, Scientist ‘E’
6. Dr. S.K. Das, Scientist ‘G’
Representative from India Meteorological Department (IMD)
Shri Ajit Singh Tyagi, DG
35

36
Representative from Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM)
Dr. B.R. Subramanian, Project Director
Representatives from National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT)
1. Dr. S. Kathiroli, Director
2. Shri Rajat Roy Chaudhary, Scienctist ‘F’
Representative from National Institute of Oceanography (NIO)
Dr. S. Shetye, Director
Representative from Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS)
Dr. Srinivasa Kumar, Scientist ‘E’
Representative from Centre for Marine Living Resources and Ecology (CMLRE)
Dr. V .N. Sanjeevan, Director
Representative from Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)
Shri P.M. Ansari, Additional Director
Representative from Ministry of Environment and Forests
Dr. A. Senthilvel, Director
Representative from Central Water Commission (CWC)
Dr. R. Simre, Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the Secretary and officials of the
Ministry of Earth Sciences to the meeting of the Committee. He requested the Secretary, Ministry
of Earth Sciences to highlight the challenges and dangers that Coastal Zone/Coastal area is facing
and the initiatives that could be taken for the purpose of protecting and conserving the coastal
environment. He also desired to know the measures required to be adopted to identify the
vulnerable coastal regions and ensuring strengthening of the livelihood security of coastal
populations. The Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences, then made a visual presentation on the
subject. Members thereafter, sought clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation to
which the witnesses replied.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee decided to hear the views of representatives of Centre for Environmental
Education (CEE), Ahmedabad on the subject of Coastal Management Programmes at its next
meeting. The Committee directed the Secretariat to take necessary action in this regard.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 
P.M. to meet again at 11.30 A.M. on 13th January, 2009.

37
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 13th January, 2009 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty — In the Chair*
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Shri Jabir Husain
7. Shri D. Raja
8. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
10. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
11. Shri Francis Fanthome
12. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
13. Shri Brahmananda Panda
14. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
15. Shri Pratik P. Patil
16. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
17. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
18. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
19. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Gandhi, Joint Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
(i) Dr. Shailaja Ravindranath, Regional Director, Centre for Environment Education (CEE),
Ahmedabad.
(ii) Dr. A. Senthilvel, Additional Director, Ministry of Environment and Forests.
37
* In the absence of Chairman, Dr. Sujan Chakraborty Chaired the meeting.

38
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and Dr. Shailaja Ravindranath, Regional
Director, Centre for Enviromrient Education (CEE), Ahmedabad and Dr. A. Senthilvel, Additional
Director, Ministry of Environment and Forests to the meeting of the Committee. He requested
Dr. Shailaja to highlight the modalities/procedures adopted to invite comments from NGOs and
interacting with local communities; efforts made by CEE to reach wider sections of NGOs and
local communities; main concerns voiced by them; how real those concerns are and in what
manner those concerns could be addressed, etc. He also desired to know the measures required
to be adopted to identify the vulnerable coastal regions and ensuring strengthening of the livelihood
security of coastal populations. Dr. Shailaja, then made a presentation on the subject. Members
thereafter, sought clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation to which the witnesses
replied.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. * * *
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 
P.M. to meet again at 2.00 P.M. on 20th January, 2009.
*** Relates to other matters.

39
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 10th February, 2009 in Room No. ‘62’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty — In the Chair*
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Kamal Akhtar
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri Jabir Husain
6. Shri D. Raja
7. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Francis Fanthome
9. Shri Brahmananda Panda
10. Shri Pratik P. Patil
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
12. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives from the Survey of India, Dehradun
(i) Maj. General R. S. T anwar, Additional Surveyor General
(ii) Shri S.V. Singh, Deputy Director
(iii) Shri D.K. Kar, Superintending Surveyor
Representatives from the Space Applications Centre, Ahmedabad
(i) Dr. Ajai, Group Director
(ii) Shri Shantanu Bhatawdekar, Officer on Special Duty
(iii) Dr. Rajawat, A.S., Scientist
39
* In the absence of Chairman, Dr. Sujan Chakraborty Chaired the meeting.

40
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and Additional Surveyor General and
officials of Survey of India, Dehradun to the meeting of the Committee. He requested the Additional
Surveyor General to highlight the details of work assigned to them; the time-frame within which
the assignment is to be completed and the modalities/procedures adopted to accomplish those tasks.
He also desired to know the challenges that the organisation faces while carrying out its
responsibilities and the initiatives that could be taken for the purpose of dealing with those
challenges. The Additional Surveyor General, then made a presentation on the subject. Members
thereafter, sought clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation to which the witness
replied.
3. The Chairman, thereafter, welcomed the Group Director and officials of Space Applications
Centre, Ahmedabad to the meeting of the Committee. He requested the Group Director to highlight
the details of work assigned to them; the time-frame within which the assignment is to be
completed and the modalities/procedures adopted to accomplish those tasks. He also desired to
know the challenges that the Centre faces while carrying out its responsibilities and the initiatives
that could be taken for the purpose of dealing with those challenges. The Group Director, then
made a visual presentation on the subject. Members thereafter, sought clarifications on the points
arising out of the presentation to which the witness replied.
The officials then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 
P.M.

41
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 6th March, 2009 in Room No. ‘121’, First
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Kamal Akhtar
4. Shri Jabir Husain
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Jashubhai Dhanabhai Barad
7. Shri Akbar Ahmad Dumpy
8. Shri Francis Fanthome
9. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
10. Shri Brahmananda Panda
11. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
12. Shri Pratik P. Patil
13. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
14. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Gandhi, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Committee took up for consideration its draft Two Hundred and second
Report pertaining to “Coastal Management Programmes”. The Committee adopted the report with
certain additions/modifications as suggested by some Members.
3. * * *
4. The Committee then adjourned at 11.45 
A.M.
41
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.