PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
FIFTH REPORT 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
 ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1993-94) 
  
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
FOR THE YEAR 1992-93 
  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 22ND   DECEMBER, 1993 
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 1993
Page 1 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------- 
C O N T E N T S 
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                              
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                    
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                     
4.APPENDIX                                                                                             
            MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------- 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE-ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,  
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi - Chairman  
RAJYA SABBA 
2.         Shri N. Giri Prasad  
3.         Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi  
4.         Prof. M.G.K. Menon  
5.         Shri Suresh Pachouri 
6.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel 
@7.     Vacant 
*8.       Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi 
9.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh 
10.       Shri Ram Gopal Yadav 
LOK SABHA
 
11.       Shri M.G. Reddy 
12.       Shri Oscar Fernandes  
13.       Shri K.G. Shivappa 
 14.      Shri Digvijaya Singh 
15.       Shri Shankarrao D. Kale 
16.       Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel  
17.       Shri Sharad Dighe 
18.       Shri Rama Chandra Rath 
**19.   Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav  
20.       Shri Harchand Singh  
21.       Shri Yashwantrao Patil  
22.       Shri Vijay Naval Patil  
23.       Shri P.C. Chacko  
24.       Kumari Frida Topno 
25.       Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh 
26.       Shrimati Mahendra Kumari  
27.       Shri Chandresh Patel 
28.       Shrimati Vasundhara Raje  
29.       Pt. Vishwanath Sharma  
30.       Shri Balraj Pasi 
31.       Shrimati Bhavana Chikhalia  
32.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh  
33.       Shrimati Saro
j Dubey  
Page 2 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm

34.       Shri Harpal Panwar 
35.       Prof.Radhika Ranjan Pramanik  
36.       Shri Jitendra Nath Das  
37.       Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy 
$38.     Vacant 
39.       Shri Bhim Singh Patel 
40.       Shri E. Ahamed 
____________________________________________________________________________________
@Vacancy caused due to retirement of Dr. R.K. Poddar from the Membership of Rajya Sabha. 
 *Nominated w.e.f. May 13, 1993 vice Dr. Naunihal Singh resigned. 
**Nominated w.e.f. August 26, 1993 vice Shri Bhagey Gobardhan died. 
$Vacancy caused due to death of Shri Nani Bhattacharya. 
  
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director 
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECI-INOLOGY 
Dr. C.R. Bhatia, Secretary 
Dr. (Mrs.) Manju Sharma, Adviser 
Shri S.B. Krishnan, Financial Adviser & Joint Secretary 
Shri Ashok Kapur, Joint Secretary 
Dr. Amita Biswas, Director 
Dr. P.K. Ghosh, Director 
Dr. M. Balasubrahmanian, Director 
Dr. J.R. Arora, Director 
Mrs. Sachi Chowdhuri, Director 
Shri Sandeep Basu, Director 
Shri Bhaskar Khulbe, Deputy Director 
Dr. (Mrs.) Seema Wahab, Principal Scientific Officer 
Dr. S. Sinha, SSO-I 
Dr. Renu Swarup, SSO-I 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------- 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having
been authorised by the Committee to  submit the report on its behalf, present this Fifth Report of the
Committee. This Report deals wi th issued contained in the A nnual Report of the Department o f
Biotechnology for the year 1992-93. 
2. The Committee held in all th ree meetings on the 7t h, 8th July and the 16th December, 1993
(Appendix). In the meeting held on the 7th Jul y, 1993, the representatives of the Department o f
Biotechnology gave an overview of the various activities of the De partment and the Committee sought
clarifications on the various aspect s of the functioning of the Depart ment of Biotechnology. On the 8th
July, 1993 the representatives of th e Department gave  detailed answers to the queries raised by the
Committee and further discussion took place on the activities of the Department. 
3. The Committee wishes to express its tha nks to the officers of the Department o f
Biotechnology for their coo peration and answerin g the queries raised b y Hon'ble Members on various
Page 3 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm

aspects of programmes initiated by the Department. 
4. The Committee considered a nd adopted the draft report at its meeting held on the 16th
December, 1993. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------            R E P O R T 
General Background 
Biotechnology aims at harnessing genetic diversity in the living organisms and uses advances in
cell and tissue culture, fermentation, enzy mology, immunology and recombinant DNA techniques.
Recombinant DNA techniques enable  genes to be transferred betw een organisms to produce desired
proteins of plant and animal origin as also human growth factors and hormones. It is one of the frontie r
areas of science. There have been many advances in this fiel d during the last forty years and the
developments in this fi eld have been particularly specta cular during the past fifteen years.
Biotechnology includes techniques which use living organisms or subs tances and from these organisms,
make or modify products to impr ove plants and animal  systems or develop other commercial and
industrial outputs. Researches conduc ted in the field of biotechnology have become very significant
because through the applications of  biotechnology, new approaches are being explored to solve various
problems faced by society. It has application in agriculture, he alth and industr y. Many chemical
approaches, currently in use may, in course of time, be replaced by biological techniques where wor k
can be accomplished at low temperatures and pressures with lower energy inputs. This branch of science
has the potential of generating jobs, creating value-added produc ts and employing women and weake r
section of the society in  a cleaner environment. Biotechnology can also ensure sustainable development
by regenerating the degraded environment. 
2.         An integrated programme was launc hed for the development of  biotechnology in 1986 when a
separate Department of Biot echnology was set up. Earlier the National Biotechnology Board was
coordinating the activi ties in this field. This was set .up in 1982 under the Ministry of Science and
Technology pursuant to the recommendation of the then Science Advisory Committee to the Cabinet. At
present the Department of Biot echnology offers' support t6 R&D and manufacture, identifies and
establishes centres of excellence for R&D, promotes large scale use of biotechnology, evolves integrated
programme for manpower development,  establishes infrastructural faci lities to support R&D as well as
production, evolves safety guidelines, promotes university-industry interaction, serves as nodal point for 
specific international collaboration, looks af ter the manufacture and application of cell- based vaccines 
and coordinates the activities of the National Institute of Immunology (NII) and the National Facility for
Animal Tissue and Cell Culture (NFATCC), which are two autonomous institutions working in the field
of biotechnology. The De partment also remains in  constant touch with th e International Centre fo r
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB). 
3.         In order to assess whether the Depa rtment of Biotechnology is fulfilling its mandate, the
committee decided to study the working of the Depa rtment on the basis of the Annual Report for the
year 1992-93. 
4.         The Committee was apprised of the various activities of the, Department, its thrust areas, etc. by
the Secretary and other of ficers of the Department . The committee was informed that the Department
has two advisory committees, name ly, the Scientific Advisory Co mmittee-DBT (SAC-DBT) and the 
Standing Advisor y Committee-Overseas (SAC-O) to provide new directions, define policy issues,
NEW DELHI 
December 16, 
1993                                                                                                 
               
        SYED SIBTEY RAZI 
Chairman  
                             Committee on 
Science and Technology, 
                       Environment and 
Forests
Page 4 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm

monitoring of various programmes and identificati on of new areas for R&D. The Department has
established a strong infra structure for biotechnology research and services in various national
laboratories and academic institutions. Manpower training at various  levels and R&D programmes have
been supported from the viewpoint of attaining excellence and for developing products and processes
based on biotechnological applicat ions. It has been possible to develop some biotechnology based
products and transfer them to indus try for commercial usage. A numbe r of products such as vaccines,
diagnostic kits, biomolecul es, biofertilizers, biopesticides, etc. are presently under various stages o f
development and demonstration. The Department has given special emphasis on demonstration
pr0grammes to benefit the farmers and the rural population. Some of these programmes relate to oil
plam, biological pest control, bi ofertilizers, aquacultur e, embryo transfer technology, sericulture and
leather biotechnology. Cattle herd  improvement using embryo tran sfer technology, development and
production of immunodiagnostic  kits and immunologica l approaches to fert ility control are S&T
projects in mission mode which are being efficiently implemented by the Department. 
5.         The 13 Task Forces comprising experts from all over the country have prepared a R&D profile
for the next 5 years and R&D support would be provi ded in areas leading to product development an e
excellence in research. 
Biofertilizers and Biological Insect Control Programme 
6.         The Committee felt that some of the achievements of the Department of Biotechnology have not
reached the common man in our country. In this regard, the committee quoted the example o f
biofertilizers, bioinsecticides and biopesticides. The Commi ttee was of the view th at blue green algae
and rhizobium are not very much in usage, though it has been claimed by the Department that the use o f
biofertilizers would lead to higher yields. The Committee also wanted to know whether there was any
programme with the Department to popularise the use of biofertilizers in the country. In view of the cost
effectiveness of biofertiliz ers and also due to the fact that biof ertilizers do not advers ely affect the soil
like the chemical fertili zers, the Committee wanted to know about  the steps taken by the Department to
promote the use of biofertilizers. 
7.         The representatives of the Department  clarified that the Depart ment of Biotechnology has
launched a Technology Development and Demonstration Programme in  1990. It has a limited objective
of improvement of the quality of biofertilizers by making use of modern, biotechnological methods
bringing out quality contro l aspects and also ensuring a feedback  from the farmers to  the laboratory so
that there could be consta nt improvement in areas lif e enhancing the shelf-life of the biofer tilizers. At 
present the States covered are Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir, Gujarat, Madhya
Pradesh, Kerala and Punjab. In the eastern region in West Bengal in Sundarbans a major programme
was taken up on the use of blue green algae in th e marshy areas. According to the State Agricultural
Department, there was 7 per cent ri se in the yield of rice after its use in limited field trial. The
production of blue green algae was 200 tonnes in the country in  1992 through the 60 sub-centres of the 
Ministry of Agriculture. The estimated demand for th e blue green algae is cons iderable because there is
going to be 40 million hectares under rice cultivation and scientists feel that  out of the 40 million
hectares at least 15 million hect ares should be supplied with blue  green algae as a supplement to
chemical fertilizers. Th e production of rhizobium is 1,000 tonnes from 70 centres of the Ministry o f
Agriculture As regard comparative studies about th e use of chemical fertil izers and supplementing it
with biofertilizers like blue gr een algae, these studies have b een taken up by the Department o f
Biotechnology in its various centres. It has been clearly noticed that  chemical fertilizers in some of the
areas have reduced the soil fertility to a considerable extent. By supplementing Chemical-fertilizers with 
biofertilizers, the yield per hect are has increased and the plants look greener and hormones are also
produced. It also results in a sa ving of 25% of Nitrogen. The repres entatives of the Department also
informed the Committee that the Department is tr ying to mix biofertilizers by combining blue green
algae, rhizobium, with mycorrhiza and this mixture is working well. These e xperiments may eventually
lead to the modifying of the ratio of the use of biofertilizers and chemical fertilizers. 
Page 5 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm

8.         The Committee is of the opinion that  in view of the encouraging results of the use o f
biofertilizers more States should be  covered for production, distribution and the use of biofertilizers. It
is, no doubt, true that the extension aspect of th e biofertilizers developmen t programme rests mainly
with the Ministry of Agriculture but some sort of mechanism should also exist in the Department o f
Biotechnology through which the Department may assess the popularity of biofertilizers among farmers.
The aim of this technology development is to benefit farmers and improve farm-yield. If the Department 
of Biotechnology remains content only with the packag e prepared by it, the results which are-intended 
would not be quite visible. Th ere, it should continue its effo rts in a major way for technology
development as well as demonstration. 
9.         The Committee also expressed it concer n over the quality control aspe ct of the biofertilizers.
During the course of the deliberations of the Committe e, the representatives of the Department cited the
case of Uttar Pradesh where respons e of farmers to Blue Green Algae Culture used in the rice crop was
not very encouraging. When the investigations were made it was found by the team sent by the
Department that the packets which were supplied to the farmers were hardly containing any micro-
organisms in them. The quality of  the material supplied was not good. The Committee is strongly of the
view that such a thing s hould not happen and insists that proper standard shoul d be evolved, and in this
regard, the Department of Biotechnol ogy should coordinate its efforts wi th the Ministry of Agriculture
and the Bureau of Indian Standards. Only those biof ertilizers should be allowed to be marketed which
conform to the standards prescribed by the Bureau of India Standards. 
10.       As regards biological pest control, the Committee was informed that at present there are 24 R&D
projects in the areas. Initially there were only tw o pest control units in Tamil Nadu- one was in 
Coimbatore and the other in Madurai. The reason fo r setting up the units at Coimbatore and Madurai
was that initially the technolog y was developed by the Tamil Nadu Agricultur al University: The
Department is trying to spread th e biological pest control programme to other agricultural universities,
including those in the North-eastern States. 
11.       The Tamil Nadu Agricultural University a nd the Gujarat Agricultural University are imparting
training and the Department of Biotechnology had also organised workshops and melas where thousands
of farmers participated and demons trations were conducted by the scientists belonging to Agriculture
universities. The Integrated Pest Management Programme is handled by the Ministry of Agriculture and
the Department of Biotechnology has already been in touch with the Ministry of Agriculture to workout
the comparative cost of biopest control vis-a-vis chemical insecticides. It will take sometime to workout 
the cost effectivene ss of biopest control vis-a-vis chemical insecticides. At present the biopest control 
programme covers the States of  Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Andhra Prad esh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh,
Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Punjab. In  the next phase States of Raja sthan, Kerala, some parts of Utta r
Pradesh, North-eastern States and Himachal Pradesh would be covered. 
12.       The Committee is of th e view that biopest control programme  is an important component of the
application of biotec hnology in the field of agricu lture. It should, therefor e, be given top priority.
Farmers should be trained with re gard to the use of this new te chnology and more States should be
covered under the biopest control pr ogramme. The existing biopest c ontrol units need to be furthe r
activised and efforts should be ma de to set up more of such un its. The committe e recommends that
adequate amount be spent not only towards the setting up of these units but also towards R&D work and
support training programmes for sc ientists as well as farmers w ho would be using biopesticides o r
bioinsecticides in their farms. There is need to cl early establish the efficacy and cost-effectiveness o f 
biocontrol agents as alternate strategy to chemical pesticides. 
Oil Palm Demonstration Project 
13.       Oil Palm Demonstration Project is a nother important area in which the Department o f
Biotechnology has made significant achievement. The Department initiated this project in the year 1988-
89 in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Maharashtra. In each State about 1000 he ctare demonstration was
Page 6 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm

done. The total area covered by th e Department was 3160 hectare. Looking at the success of the
programme, the programme was eventually taken over by the Ministry of Agriculture. Under the Eighth
Plan period it has been decided to cover an area of 80,000 hectare in the country and this will be done by
the Ministry of Agriculture. Besides Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and Kamataka the other States which
are to be covered under the Project  are Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and Ke rala. The Committee hopes that the
Department of Biotechnology will closely monitor the success of this pr ogramme by coordinating its
efforts with the Ministry of Agri culture and get the programme impl emented successfully in Gujarat,
Tamil Nadu and Kerala as per the schedule so that the target set for the Eighth Plan is achieved. 
Sericulture 
14.       The Committee also evinced interest in  the use of biotechnology in improving silkworm and
thereby enhancing silk production in the country. The Committee was informed about the work done by
various centres and the Department  of Biotechnology in this area. Biotechnology can be applied for the
development of better races  of silkworm for increas ed productivity. It can al so be used for biological
control measures for major diseases/pests of si lkworm. The exploitation of transgenic silkworm
(containing the genes encoding pr oteins of interest) as bacu lo expression vector using Bombyk mori---
derived cell lines and B. mori  NPV for production of important bi ochemicals appears to be a highly
promising area. Biotechnology can also be used for the improvement of host  plants. The studies on
development of transgenesis system in silkworm species through the introduction of foreign genes at the
embryonic stagtes by direct  microinjection techniques have been  initiated. A project on sericulture
development through synthetic hormones has been la unched with an objective to develop and design
simple analogues of prothoracicotrobic hormone (P TTH) and efforts are being made to use these
synthetic peptides to increase quality and quantity of silk yarn per cocoon by resorting to the appropriate
stage of development of in sect. The demonstrat ion of an integrated manage ment at field level by using
biological and chemical methods to control the uz ifly (Exorista sorbillans ) - an endoparasitoid o f 
mulberry silkworm has also been taken up. Similarly, work. has been done in he field of development of
semisynthetic/synthetic diets for rearing of young age and the late age silkworm larvae. From the details
which were made availabl e to the Committee it appears that  much work has been done for the
improvement of sericulture in th e country. The Committee, however, finds that the benefits have not
actually reached the farmer s and still the productivity of silk in the country is low and its quality is not
very superior. The representative of the Departme nt informed the Committe e that a lot of women
farmers are being involved in the demonstration  experiments relating to sericulture improvement. The
responsibility of transferring this  technology to the field lies wi th the Central Silk Board. The
Committee feels that the Departme nt of Biotechnology cannot absolve itself of the responsibility o f
transferring technology from the laboratories to the field merely by saying that the nodal agency in
transferring technology in the field of sericulture is the Ce ntral Silk Board. The Department o f
Biotechnology should carefully monitor that the tec hnological breakthrough achiev ed by it, is actually
transferred to the target group. The Department of Biotechnology cannot rema in content merely by
developing a new technology. The te chnology must reach the concerned sections of the society and fo r
this, the Department of Biotechnol ogy should sort out the matter with  the Central Silk Board and the
concerned departments of the State Governments. 
  
 
Tissue culture techniques, afforestation, floriculture and horticulture: 
15.       The Department of Biotechnology has ach ieved a considerable breakthrough in tissue culture
techniques which can be used extensively, for the pr oduction Of flowers and frui t-trees species. Tissue 
culture techniques can also help a great deal in  the afforestation progr amme. The Committee was
informed that the elite planting materials raised through tissue culture are being used in small numbers
in some pockets for peaches, berries, tamari nd and pineapple among the horticulture plants; and
eucalyptus, sandlewood, teak, bamboos, etc. amon g the forest plants. Tissue culture raised planting
Page 7 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm

materials are expensive at the moment. Experiments are being conducted to demonstrate their efficacy in
field conditions and the results are awaited. Commercia l plant tissue culture acti vities mainly relate to
the production of ornamentals and fl owering plants for which there ex ists a large global export market.
Besides, the local consumption for these items is also increasing. The Committ ee expressed its concern
over the afforestation and wanted the Department of Biotechnology to provide tissue culture of all such
plants as bamboos and seal which will improve the fertility of la nd and at the same time which are very
useful. The Secretary of the Department informed the Committee that his Department is providing tissue
culture materials to the foresters in different St ates. The National Botanica l Research Institute at
Lucknow is trying to develop the me thodology for the multiplica tion of seal. This is also being done at
the North Eastern Hill University at Shillong. They ar e doing this from the Protocol stage. Once these
are ready they will be ta ken up on a large scale. Th e Committee feels that flor iculture and horticulture
are making a great impact in th e World and, therefor e, the Department of Biotechnology should
strengthen its efforts to develop floriculture and hort iculture in India through the application o f
biotechnology. In these areas India ha s certain advantages over other countries. In  some parts of the
country there are a number of medi cinal and aromatic pl ants available. We have also cheap labou r
available in our country. Recentl y, Government have also announced  several incentives for export
promotion. These positive aspects s hould be properly harnessed for deve loping floricultural plants most
of which can be exported. The Depart ment should also try to  bring down the cost of the tissue culture
materials so that India may compete in the international export market. 
16.       The Committee is of the view that the Department of Biotechnology should also try to improve
the genetic potential of the seeds of fruit-trees and flower-saplings. The Department should try to reduce 
the cost of seedlings developed through tissue cultur e. Private entrepreneurs should be encouraged to
take benefit of the tissue cultur e materials developed by the Depa rtment and even these private
entrepreneurs can be taught the tec hniques of tissue culture so that they may develop their own tissue
culture materials at competitive co sts. This can also provide some  earnings to the Department o f
Biotechnology. 
Embryo transfer technology: 
17.       Biotechnology can also play an important role in the stock improvement of the animals. Through
the Embryo Transfer Technology (ETT) 11 calves were born in 1992. The embryos were taken out from
a single donor Cow and were transferre d to different surrogate mothers and calves were born from these
mothers though the biological mother was the same . The Committee was also  informed that this
technology can be further developed to make sexing of the animal possible. The porogramme of embryo
transfer technology was started as a Mission Mode Project in 1987 and was completed in 1992. Unde r
this programme, technology has been  developed and transferred to the National Dairy Development
Board (NDDB) and also to the Mini stry of Agriculture. The NDDB is one of the main implementing
agencies. This new technology should also be util ised to implement the National Bull Development
Programme to produce genetically superior stock of bulls. 
18.       The Committee is of the view that the ETT programme has been a ve ry successful one and feels
that this technique should be ut ilised for the improvement of othe r animals which are used by the
farmers in our country. The progra mme can be extended to cover buffaloes, camels, goats and othe r
such animals. Buffaloes, in fact, constitute a major research effort of the ETT programme undertaken by
the Department. Further, work need be initiated to bring down the cost of this technology. If the cost per
embryo is reduced naturally  then the farmers would be able to take advant age of this new technology
which aims at breed improvement of animals. The Committee would also like the Department to perfect
the technique of sexing so that farm ers can choose the sex of the calves.  If they need better cows who
can yield more milk or if they want sturdy bulls  who can lift gr eater load, the new technology should
offer them that option. 
Medical biotechnology: 
Page 8 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm

19.       The Department of Biotechnology has a ma jor programme in the area of medical biotechnology.
This programme covers developm ent of new drugs, vaccines and immunodiagnostics. The Department
has been able to achieve much in the pharmaceutical sector applying the conventional biotechnology and
through the recombinant techniques. The Committee wa s .informed that the de velopment of new drugs
takes about 8 to 10 years. Simila rly, for vaccine to de velop, it takes 10 to 15 years. In the case o f
immunodiagnostics, however, the period differs and they  can be developed in a period of about 2 to 3
years. In the area of vaccines the Department of Biotechnology has supported research' and development
in the control of communicable di seases which, is of great nationa l concern. Research was conducted in
the development of vaccine for the c ontrol of cholera, rota virus, vira l hepatitis, hepatitis-B, E-coli an d 
diarrhoea. Work relating to the development of a fe rtility control vaccine has reached a fairly advanced
stage which is in the stage of clin ical trials. The male anti-fertility vaccine or anti-follicle stimulating 
hormone (O-FSH) is being developed and has entered pha se II of the clinical trials. The female anti-
fertility vaccine also has entered the stage of phase-II cl inical trials. A large number of women subjects
have been identified and the vacci ne has been given to them. There is a very close monitoring by the
scientists about the side effects of the vaccine. For leprosy control, the anti-leprosy vaccine has reached 
a very advanced stage of trials a nd the effect of these trials is being very closely monitored by the
scientists. In case of animal vaccine there is alrea dy a vaccine developed against growing canine
diseases. It has entered an  advanced stage of trial. The Depart ment of Biotechnology has also set up a
company called Bharat Immunolog!cal s and Biologicals Corporation Lt d. (BIBCOL) at Bulandshahr in
Uttar Pradesh. This company was incorporated  in March, 1989 as a public sector company unde r
Companies Act, 1956. The Company was set up under National lmmunisation Mission for production of
100 million doses of live attenuated oral polio vaccine and ot her Immunobiologicals. It also aims at
training scientific personnel unde r the Technology Consultancy C ooperation of erstwhile USSR unde r
the Integrated Long Term Programme of Cooperation in Science and Technology . This unit will start
production during the later part of 1993 and the Depa rtment expects to suppl y almost 85% of the
demand of the oral polio vaccine to the Nationa l Immunization Programme. Apart from oral polio
vaccine this unit is also going to produce hepatitis-B vaccine. Fo r this the Depart ment has got a 
technology transfer from the United  States of America. The Department is also administering an Indo-
US Vaccine programme which is a joint effort betw een the scientists of India and the United States
which started in the year 1987. In this programme important areas ha ve been identified, particularly
relating to communicable diseases. Indian Vaccines Corporation Ltd. (IVCOL) is another unit which the
Department of Biotechnology has set up. It is trying for French collaboration. The project was originally
set up to produce viral vaccines including inactivat ed polio vaccines. Based on the recommendation o f
the World Health Organisation and al so due to some policy decisions re lating to the ar ea of eradication
of polio, the Department now intends to produce vero cell based oral polio vaccine at this unit instead of
inactivated injectable polio vaccines. 
  
20.       The Committee appreciates the good wo rk done by the Department  in the area of medical
biotechnology and hopes that the anti-fe rtility vaccines developed by the Department would prove to be 
a major breakthrough in the family planning programme. The Department should make concerted efforts
to develop new vaccines to contorl communicable dise ases which are a great sc ourge. TO assist in the
National Immunization Programme th e Departmept should make the BIBCOL more  effective and also
develop vero cell technology at IV COL as early as possible, because  through the vero cell technology
increased production of vaccine can become a possibilit y. In order to provide he alth to our children we
may have to meet the rising demand to polio vaccine. At present the vaccine available in the country is
not enough to reach every child who requires it. The Department should also develop vaccine cocktails
to eradicate other deadly diseases like measles and tetanus, etc. which generally afflict children. Disease
control should be regarded a priority area and the Committee would like the Depa rtment to take active
interest in the. prevention and c ontrol of disease. The Committee appreciates the initiative of the
Department and progress made in the area of immunodia gnostics for common diseases in the countr y,
Page 9 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm

particularly those which afflict the poorer section of society. 
Transfer of technology to industries: 
21.       Through the application of biotechnology, th e Department and various ce ntres have been able to
develop various biotechnology based products which were transferred to i ndustries for commercial
usages. The Committee was informed that the Depar tment of Biotechnology is primarily a facilitator o f
technology selection and biotechnology development. It makes efforts to transf er biotechnology-based 
products which have been developed in the national institutes and universities to  industries. The
Committee also noted that in or der to facilitate industry and R & D interface, the Biotechnology
Consortium India Limited (BCIL) was set up and this indeed is an important step taken by the
Department. The representatives of  the Department gave an elaborate account of the 16 technologies
which were developed by the nati onal laboratories and other centres  and were transferred to the
industries, out of which 3 or 4 products are already in the market . Some of the technologies transferred
relate to filariasis detection kit, pregnancy dete ction test, typhoid fever de tection test, amoebic live r
abscess detection kit, anim al birth control injection, polypeptide, which is shown to be responsible fo r
reducing the sugar level in the di abetic patients, alcohol producing yeast strain, production of bamboo
through tissue culture, bioconversion of benzaldehyde to phenyl acetyl carbinol, aminoacids, hepatitis-B 
detection kit, leprosy im munomodulator, which helps in reducing th e quantum of drugs used in leprosy
patients and the technology developed for the detection of leishman iasis. The Department informed the
Committee that soon in the diagnos tic area commercial kits may be  developed for the detection o f
tuberculosis, leprosy, AIDS, and in the non-communicable area, ki ts for the detection of some
hormones, certain cort icosteroids will come into the market within a period of 3 or 4 years. The
Department has also developed anti- fungal liposomal antibiot ic formulation. In th e area of agriculture
much work has been done by way of ti ssue culture. This is particularly  evident in the area of banana,
cardamom and certain berries. The Department informed the Committee that units will be set up in the
country using totally indigenous technology in these areas. The representative of the Department told the
Committee that by transferring t echnologies to industry the Depar tment generated around Rs.40 to 45
lakhs. The Committee is happy to note the fact that through transfer of technology, the Department has
earned some money. However small,  this earning certainly has a multi plier effect and hopes that the
Department would keep trying to reduce the cost of the technology develope d by it and would involve
more and more private industries by showing results through their researches. The effect of a technology
development cannot be measured only in terms of money, it has to be seen also in terms of the accrual of
social benefits and Committee is satisfied that in this area the Department r of Biotechnology is doing a
good work. 
Programme for popularising bioteehnology: 
  
22.       The Committee wanted to know as to  what steps the Department has taken to popularise
biotechnology. The Committee was in formed that 10 video casse ttes on different aspects o f
biotechnology have been prepared which are being Used for publicity purposes. Some of the topics
covered in these cassettes relate to embryo transf er technology, injectable polio vaccine, biotechnology,
biofertilizers, new possibility of cardamom production, palm oil, et c. The Department of Biotechnology
is also assisting the Ministry of Science a nd Technology by giving inputs relating to biotechnology
which is aiming at popular ising science through visual methods and mass media by utilising agencies
like Doordarshan and All India Radio. The vi deo cassettes prepared by the Department o f
Biotechnology have also been given to the State Governments for publicity. The Committee feels that in
order to popularise biotechnology and its various usages the Department of Biotechnology should
prepare publicity material  and other audio-visual material in the regional languages, apart from
preparing it in English and Hi ndi. This would impart greate r knowledge about the usages o f
biotechnology to the farmers. The Department should also bring out  leaflets and handbills in local
languages and periodically organise melas, etc. in colla boration with the concerned de partments of the
Page 10 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm

State Governments to expose farmers, 
women, rural yputh and other weaker sections of the society to the usages of biotechnology, particularly
its use in relation to agriculture, breed improvement of animals, etc. 
Cost-benefit analysis of Programme: 
23.       The Committee has also observed that at  present for the various programmes initiated by the
Department, there is need for cost- benefit analysis. According to the representatives of the Department
the reason for the non-existence of cost- benefit analysis is that the mo st of the programmes initiated by 
the Department depend on the extension activities which are administered by other Ministries and
Departments. Also many of the programmes are generally only three to four years old. The Committee
feels that despite this handicap, the Department of  Biotechnology should evolve  some sort of cost-
benefit analysis of various  programmes initiated by it and in this  area if need is felt, then prope r
coordination be evolved between the Department of Biotechnol ogy and the concerned administrative
Ministry which administers the extension aspect of the programme. 
Manpower development: 
24.       The Committee also notes that-the Department should give more emphasis on manpowe r
development. In the budgetary allocations for the year 1990-91, the demand for manpower development 
was Rs. 9 crores and utilisaiton was only Rs. 7.44 crores. For the ye ar 1991-92 the demand was again, 
Rs. 9 crores but utilisation was only Rs. 5.54 crores. Similarly, for the year 1992-93 the demand was Rs. 
7.50 crores and utilisation was onl y Rs. 4.22 crores. The Committee notic ed that some of the projects
which the Department  carried were actua lly been channelled through th e Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR) or through other governme ntal institutions and not through the university
systems. The Committee is, however , aware of the fact that the Department of Biotechnology is
sponsoring programmes in various Indian universit ies at the level of M.Sc. in Biotechnology. This
would, no doubt, contribute toward s the manpower development in the country but the Department
should also explore ways and means to utilise full y the potential of the trained manpower created and in
particular facilitate opportunities for their employment. The repres entative of the Ministry admitted that
in regard to the manpower development there had been definitely some delay in going through the
procedures and assured the Commi ttee that all the procedures wi ll be elaborated soon and the
Department would be able to clear a few projects which are alre ady in the pipeline. The Committee was
also informed about the support for R&D programmes offered by th e Department in many of the
premier universities. The Committe e recommends that the Departme nt of Biotechn ology should make
extra efforts to compensate for the delay with re gard to the manpower deve lopment programme. Unless
the Department interacts with more and more universities, it would be difficult to develop an indigenous
base for the growth of biotechnology in our count ry. By offering scholarship, sponsoring research
projects and providing training facilities in the university systems the Department of Biotechnology may
promote indigenous R&D in bi otechnology. Too much dependence of the Biotechnology development
programme on foreign collaboration will not help in the long run. The Committee noted the fact that the
Department of Biotechnolo gy has set up a Scientific Advisory Committee-overseas which consists o f 
eminent scientists and technologists from other count ries. This Committee is responsible for providing
important input to the De partment. Whilst appreciating this, the Committee is of the view that the
Department should enlarge its efforts to enlist the support of non- resident Indians (N RIs) to get the 
funding and sponsorship for various programmes.  The Department shoul d also promote furthe r
interaction between universities and the industry. 
Administrative and financial aspects of the Department: 
25.       The Committee also finds that a larg e number of vacancies exis ing in the Department o f
Biotechnology have not be en filled up. As on 1st January, 1993, as per the Annual Report of the
Department, the staff position was as under:
Page 11 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm

  
Category                                  Sanctioned                               Posted 
                                                            strength                                                strength 
  
Group 'A'                                 56                                            41 
Group 'B'                                 67                                            55 
Group 'C'                                 94                                            74 
Group 'D'                                 50                                            48 
  
Total                                        267                                          218 
  
When the Committee asked the reasons for not fill ing up of the various posts  lying vacant in the
Department and how the Department was functioning wi th the shortage of staff, the Secretary of the
Department informed the Committee in the following words: 
"We have not been able to fill up a number of vacant positions due to certain difficulties. I would
say certainly this has affected ou r productivity. I am sure we woul d have moved fast er if all the
positions were filled up and would have done much better." 
The Committee is strongly of th e opinion that the Department  requires adequate staff fo r
executing its various programmes effectively and for th is, the process should be initiated to fill up the
vacancies which exist in the Depa rtment so that the various programmes undertaken by the Department
of Biotechnology do not suffer. If de lays are being caused due to th e non-finalisation of recruitment
rules or if required financial sanctions/clearances for various posts have not been received, the same may
be sorted out with other Ministries which deal with these aspects. 
26. The Committee also wanted to know about the financial aspect of the Department o f
Biotechnology. For the Eigh th Plan period the Department ha d approached the Planning Commission
with a requirement of Rs. 650 Cr ores but the Planning Commission made an allocation of Rs. 450
crores. What the Department  actually got as an i ndicative plan outlay is Rs . 265 crores. Looking at the
Annual Plan allocations, the Department got Rs. 75 crores in the first year of the Eighth Plan and Rs. 85
crores during the current year. Out of a total of Rs. 265 crores the De partment has so far got a sum o f
Rs. 160 crores. The Committee recomme nds that the allocation of Rs. 450 crores initially made by the
Planning Commission to the Department should be  actually given to it. Th e Committee is of the view
that the Departme nt should also try to earn  some amount by way of tran sferring technology to private
industries. This would make the Department less dependent on Government funding. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------- 
 
APPENDIX 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY    STANDING    COMMITTEE    ON    SCIENCE    & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
XI 
Eleventh Meeting 
Page 12 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm

  
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology
Environment & Forests met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 7th July, 1993 in Committee Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
      
1.Syed Sibtey Razi       -           Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.         Shri N. Giri Prasad 
3.         Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi 
4.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel 
5.         Dr. R.K. Poddar 
6.         Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi 
7.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh 
8,         Shri Ram Gopal Yadav 
9.         Shri Suresh Pachouri 
LOK SABHA
 
10.       Shri Oscar Fernandes 
11.       Shri K.G. Shivappa 
12.       Shri Shankarrao D. Kale 
13.       Shri Harchand Singh 
14.       Shri Vijay Naval Patil 
15.       Kumari Frida Topno 
16.       Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh 
17.       Shrimati Vasundhara Raje 
18.       Shri Balraj Pasi 
19.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh 
20.       Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
21.       Shri E. Ahamed 
  
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director 
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary 
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Under Secretary 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
Dr. C.R. Bhatia, Secretary 
Page 13 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm

Dr. (Mrs.) Manju Sharma, Adviser 
Shri Ashok Kapur, Joint Secretary 
Dr. Amita Biswas, Director 
Dr. P.K. Ghosh, Director 
Dr. George John, Director 
Shri Bhaskar Khulbe, Deputy Secretary 
Dr. M. Balasubrahmanian, Director 
Dr. (Mrs.) Seema Wahab, Principal Scientific Officer 
Dr. S. Sinha SSO-1 
Dr. Renu Swarup, SSO-1 
  
2. The Committee took up for consideration the Annual Report (1992-93) of the Department o f 
Biotechnology. 
  
At the outset, the Secretary of the Department  gave an overview of the activities of the
Department through the audio-visual  medium. Thereafter the Members sought clarifications from the 
Secretary and other representatives of the Department. 
3. The discussion on the Annual Report remained inconclusive. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.             
  
4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 P.M. to m eet again at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 8th July,
1993. 
  
 
XII 
Twelfth Meeting 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, 
Environment & Forests met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursd ay, the 8th July, 1993 in Committee Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
Present 
1.Syed Sibtey Razi       -           Chairman 
Rajya Sabha
 
2. Shri N. Giri Prasad 
3. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi 
4. Shri Suresh Pachouri 
5. Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel 
6. Dr. R.K. Poddar 
Page 14 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm

7. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi 
8. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh 
9. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav 
Lok Sabha 
10. Shri Oscar Fernandes 
11. Shri K.G. Shivappa 
12. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale 
13. Shri Harchand singh 
14. Shri P.C. Chacko  
15. Kumari Frida Topno 
16. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh 17. Shrimati Vasundhara Raje 18. Shri Balraj Pasi 
19. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia 20. Shri Ram Prasad Singh 21. Shri E. Ahamed 
Secretariat 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director  
Shri Nand Lal. Under Secretary 
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Under Secretary 
  
Representatives of the Department of Biotechnology 
Dr. C.R Bhatia, Secretary 
Dr. (Mrs.) Manju Sharma, Adviser 
Shri S.B. Krishnan, Financial Adviser & Joint Secretary  
Shri Ashok Kapur, Joint Secretary  
Dr. Amita Biswas, Director  
Dr. P.K. Ghosh, Director  
Dr. George John, Director 
Dr. M. Balasubrahmanian, Director 
Dr. J.R. Arora, Director 
Mrs. Sachi Chowdhuri, Director 
Shri Sandeep Basu, Director, NII 
Shri Bhaskar Khulbe, Deputy Secretary 
Dr. (Mrs.) Seema Wahab, Principal Scientific Officer  
Dr. S. Sinha, SSO-I 
Dr. Renu Swarup, SSO-I 
2. The Committee took up for further consideration the Annual Report (1992-93) of the Department o
f 
Biotechnology and heard the replies of the representatives of the Department to the clarifications sought
by the Members. The discussion on the Report was concluded.
Page 15 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm

A Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.                              
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.45 P.M. 
XXV 
Twenty-Fifth Meeting              
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, 
Environment & Forests met at 9.30 A.M. on Thur sday, the 16th December, 1993 in Committee Room
'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi          -           Chairman 
Rajya Sabha 
2.         Shri N. Giri Prasad 
3.                  Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel 
4.                  Shri Suresh Pachouri 
5.                  Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh  
6.                  Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi 
Lok Sabha 
7.         Shri Oscar Fernandes 
8.         Shri Shankarrao D. Kale  
9.                  Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav  
10.              Kumari Firda Topno 
11.              Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia  
12.              Shri Jitendra Nath Das  
13.              Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy  
14.              Shri E. Ahamed 
Secretariat 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director 
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary  
Shri N.K. Singh, Assistant Director 
2. The Committee considered and adopted its Fourth  Report on the Annual Report of the Department o f
Electronics for the year 1992-93 with minor changes. 
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel to present the
Report to the Rajya Sabha on the 21st December, 1993. 
4. The Committee further authorised Shri Jitendra Nath Das and in his absence Shri M.V.V.S Murthy to
lay the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 21st December, 1993. 
5. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopt ed its Fifth Report on the Annual Report of the
Department of Biotechnology for the year 1992-93 unanimously. 
6. The Committee again authorised the Chairman and in hi s absence Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel to present
Page 16 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm

the Report to the Rajya Sabha on the 22nd December, 1993. 
7. The Committee also authorised Shri E. Ahmed and in his absenc e Kumari Frida Topno to lay the
Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 22nd December, 1993. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
8. The Committee then adjourned at 10.30 A.M. to meet again at 9.30 A.M. on Tuesday the 21st
December, 1993 for consideration and adoption of Sixth Report on the Annual Report of the Department
of Science and Technology for the year 1992-93. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------- 
  
  
Page 17 of 175th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/5threport.htm