147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
     PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY-SEVENTH  REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT ON THE
 RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED FORTY-THIRD REPORT
 OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
 ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON THE
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-2006)OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 22ND DECEMBER, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 22ND DECEMBER, 2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2005/PAUSA, 1927 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
                                            
1.       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.      INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                          
3.      REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                   
4.      MINUTES OF THE MEETING
5.     COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2005)
----------
1. Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Dr.Prabha Thakur
4. Shri Dilip Singh Judev
5. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav
6. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
7. Smt. Kum Kum Rai
8. Shri Birabhadra Singh
    *9.   Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha
  Ф10.   Vacant
      LOK  SABHA
11. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
12. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad            
13. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
14. Shri Pankaj Choudhary
15. Shri Mohan S. Delkar  
16. Shri Francis Fanthome 

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
17. Shri Anantrao Gudhe
18. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
19. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik           
20. Shri Brahmananda Panda
21. Smt. Neeta Pateriya
22. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil        
23. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
24. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
25. Shri Rakesh Singh
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh                                              
27. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh   
28. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar                     
29. Shri D. Venugopal
30. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
31. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
 
SECRETARIAT
      Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
      Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
      Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment &
 Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred Forty-seventh
 Report on the Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations contained in One Hundred Forty-
third Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Ocean Development.
2.         The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the
 recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
 on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Ocean
 Development which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25
th  April, 2005.
3.         There are thirty-one recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty-third Report of the Committee.  Action Taken
 Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Department on  3rd  August, 2005.
4.         In the meeting held on 20th December, 2005 the Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report and adopted the same.
 
NEW DELHI ; 
December 20, 2005
P.G.NARAYANAN 
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
 
REPORT
            The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the
 recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
 Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of
 Ocean Development, presented to both Houses of Parliament on 25 th April, 2005. There were thirty-one recommendations
 in the Report.  Action Taken Notes on those recommendations were received from the Department of Ocean Development
 on 3rdAugust, 2005. The Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report in its meeting held on 18 th November, 2005
 and decided to seek clarification/additional information on certain points contained in paras 10, 22, 29,30,35, 39, 48, 50, 57,
 62, 65 and 66. The Department’s clarification/additional information on the points was received on 30th November, 2005.
            The Committee’s recommendations, Action Taken thereon by the Department of Ocean Development, points raised

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 by the Committee (wherever necessary), clarifications by the Department and comments of the Committee thereon are set
 out in the succeeding paragraphs: -
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2005-06
Recommendation
The Committee finds that the pace of expenditure by the Department has not been uniform. However, it notes that
 Department has sustained the tempo of its activities and made optimum utilization of the funds allocated to it in third and
 fourth quarter.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that meaningful and relevant programmes and policies should be
 formulated for regular infusion of funds in various projects/schemes in all quarters of the financial year and the total
 utilization of plan outlays.                                                                                                                                                           
 (Para 8)
Action Taken by the Department
            The variation in the expenditure, particularly in the third and fourth quarter of 2004-05, is primarily due to making a
 single payment towards acquisition of new research vessel for which the final approval was obtained in the second quarter
 of 2004-05.  Besides, the four new programmes undertaken during the 10
th Plan were cleared in all aspects only in the year
 2003-04 for which initial payments had to be in lumpsump particularly towards infrastructure.  Secondly, the low
 expenditure in the first quarter has also resulted due to adjustments of previous unspent balance available with the
 participating agencies.    Currently, efforts are also underway to re-formulate some of the programmes and policies towards
 achieving regular infusion of funds in all the quarters of the financial year and total utilization of plan outlays.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 
POST-TSUNAMI ASSESSMENT OF CORAL HEALTH IN ANDAMAN WATERS AND   INDIAN OCEAN
Recommendation
The Committee has been given to understand that massive influx of seawater borne by Tsunami on 26/12/2004
 severely affected several section of coral population in Andaman & Nicobar and in certain strategic areas of Indian Ocean. 
 The Committee has been further given to understand that four research vessels, namely, Sagar Purvi, Sagar Paschimi, Sagar
 Sampada and Sagar Kanya of the Department of Ocean Development were commissioned in these waters to undertake,
 interalia, a detailed assessment of destruction inflicted by Tsunami on the coral health of these regions.
The Committee, however, finds that assessment with regard to the impact of Tsunami on coral reefs in Andaman &
 Nicobar Islands is somewhat contradictory.  As per the Annual Report of the Department for 2004-05, coral reefs have been
 severely affected by Tsunami whereas Secretary of the Departmentin his presentation before theCommittee on the 1
st April,
 2005, maintained that by and large coral reefs were unaffected.  The Committee, therefore, feels that a detailed physical
 verification of coral health is necessary to assess accurately the status of their health in post-Tsunami scenario.  The
 Committee would like to have a factual note in this regard, inter-alia, giving the future contingency plan in case of such
 natural eventuality.
(Para 10)
Action Taken by the Department
            The activities relating to the assessment of the damages caused to the coral reefs in Andaman and Nicobar islands
 including undertaking coral reef habitat restoration projects etc. fall within the purview of the Ministry of Environment and
 Forests (MoEF).  The Department of Ocean Development (DOD), under the Integrated Coastal and Marine Area
 Management Programme, has taken up only mapping of coral reefs using GIS, mainly to demonstrate the use of the GIS

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 technique in coral reef mapping and monitoring in Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands.
Point raised by the Committee
What are the procedure and benefits of Coral reef mapping and monitoring in    A&N Islands and Lakshadweep
 under the Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM)? What are the actual benefits derived therefrom?
Clarification by the Department
The Department of Ocean Development, under the ICMAM Programme, has proposed to demonstrate the use of GIS
 in mapping of coral reefs in Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshdweep.  The procedures for coral reef mapping and
 monitoring include qualitative and quantitative analysis of coral reefs using Line Intersect Methods (LIT) with the help of
 SCUBA diving equipment.  During the survey, accurate position of investigating area is recorded using the sophisticated
 GPS equipment namely Arc Pad.  The data collected is brought into GIS Environment with the help of Software called Arc
 Info and Arc View.  The plotted data with respect to coordinate indicates the status of the corals at the time of
 Investigation.  This technique is useful in monitoring the health of the corals in the subsequent years by the local
 authorities.  The ICMAM Directorate has already developed this technique for Andaman and Nicobar Administration and
 Lakshadweep Administration through training programmes so as to facilitate them for continuously monitoring the health of
 the corals.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee apprehends that certain branching corals like Acropara Cytherea also known as stag horn corals
 which are common in Andaman waters might have been affected severely by the Tsunami onslaughts.
The Committee is, however, of the opinion that unless comprehensive planning is made, neither proper and deep
 assessment of the heart of coral in these areas could be made nor any critical measures could be designed to remedy the
 health of these corals in the affected areas.  The Committee, therefore, understands that in order to have a very successful
 picture of the entire assessment scenario, the following measures need to be considered by the Department before
 undertaking major audit of coral health in these areas:
i)
                    Norms of audit through symbiotic studies of coral health will have to be mapped.
ii)                   New insights into the role of cell suicide and apoptosis in bleaching of corals should also have to be
 developed.
iii)                 A detailed mapping of coral stress tolerance is necessary to be assessed and mapped.
iv)                 The Behavior of coral reef fish is needed to be assessed on a comparative pilot-scale basis in coral areas
 which are severely affected by Tsunami and areas which are less affected or are not affected at all by the
 Tsunami onslaught.
v)                  Since reef bleaching and mortaity are highly co-related, the study of coral bleaching in detail is also
 necessary since this could be linked to global climate change specially elevated sea water temperature and
 high solar irradiance.                                                                                                      (Para 11)
Action Taken by the Department
            The Department of Ocean Development (DOD) under the Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management
 Programme has taken up only mapping of coral reefs using GIS, mainly to demonstrate the use of the GIS technique in
 coral reef mapping and monitoring in Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep islands.  However, the subject of coral reefs
 pertains to Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) and all the recommendations made by the Committee are pertinent

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 to the activities that are being undertaken by MoEF at present.
Recommendation
The Committee feels that successful restoration and management of coral health require a more realistic and
 historically informed understanding of the ecology of near-pristine condition of coral reefs that can only be obtained by a
 combination of retrospective analyses, modeling and intensive studies of eco-systemstructure andfunction of the very few
 isolated reefs that have escaped intensive exploitation by Tsunami onslaughts.  The Committee understands that studies
 based on an index known as DI, i.e., comparative Deterioration Index of community for corals will have to be undertaken
 for deriving a comparative picture of analysis of the health deterioration of different corals groups in these regions.  The DI
 values can show the likelihood of some of the corals getting rehabilitated early and some corals more at a later stage which
 is proportional to the destructive index of each coral communities following the Tsunami onslaughts.  The training should
 be given to surveyors  for fast yielding of elaborate data based upon deterioration index of these coralcommunities so that
 relatively accurate picture could be framed for the subsequent restoration.  Moreover, the DI approach can serve as an
 efficient tool for Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) Selection and Management.  The Marine Protected Areas (MPA) is the
 primary form of protection in the marine coastal zone and could be used as a spearhead for marine conservation including
 the restoration of coral health.  The MPA could be directly linked with DI index and the coefficient of the DI picture can
 give details for restoration of the marine protected areas.  Apart from this, identification of new Heat Shock Protein (HSP)
 of marine invertebrates is expected to enable rapid and accurate quantitative monitoring of short term and long-term
 fluctuations in marine eco-system. The expression of specific stress proteins present in certain coral community can be
 identified as early warning system for future changes in coral communities following Tsunami disturbances and also the
 ability of reef eco-system to withstand global changes could also be
 assessed.                                                                                                                                                    (Para 12)
Action Taken by the Department
            The activities relating to  the need to assess the damages caused to the coral reefs including mapping of coral reefs,
 undertaking coral reef habitat restoration projects etc, are the subject matters pertain to Ministry of Environment and Forests
 (MoEF).  The Department of Ocean Development (DOD) has taken up only mapping of coral reefs using GIS, mainly to
 demonstrate the use of the GIS technique  in coral reef mapping and monitoring in Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep
 islands under the Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management programme.
Recommendation
The Committee also feels the turbidity and terrigenous which have been transported by the Tsunami to different coral
 reefs from other areas should also be measured to understand the coefficient of DI (Deterioration Index).
            Apart from this, the comparative gene flow, migration of sea bio community from other areas and relative return of
 the elementary sea bio community to their original coral habitats following Tsunami can also give some idea about
 comparative health of the coral resources.                                                                                                               (Para 13)
Action Taken by the Department
            The subject of coral reefs pertains to Ministry of Environment and forests (MoEF).  The recommendations made by
 the Committee are being undertaken by MoEF.  The Department of Ocean Development (DOD) under the Integrated
 Coastal and Marine Area Management programme has taken up only mapping of coral reefs using GIS, mainly to
 demonstrate the use of the GIS technique in coral reef mapping and monitoring in Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep
 islands.
Recommendation
The Committee further feels that while assessing coral health, the incidence of coral diseases may also be studied

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 because in most cases etiology of greater number of coral diseases are still unclear and the nature of relationship between
 coral and their associated bacteria are not yet fully established.  Since the reef bleaching and mortality of coral are highly
 co-related, a detailed mapping in this regard is also necessary before designing a proper restoration scheme.  A major
 andtopical question concerns the effect of increasing atmospheric CO2 on coral calcification.  Coral calcification rates have
 been used to derive information on carbonates saturation state in the ocean and to derive specific conclusion on atmospheric
 CO2  levels in the past and in the future.                        
                                                                                                              (Para 14)
Action Taken by the Department
The Department of Ocean Development (DOD) under the Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management
 programme has taken up only mapping of coral reefs using GIS, mainly to demonstrate the use of the GIS technique in coral
 reef mapping and monitoring in Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep islands.  However, all the recommendations made
 by the Committee are pertinent to the activities that are being undertaken by MoEF at present as the subject of coral reefs
 pertains to Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF).
Recommendation
Geographic Information System (GIS), which is a computer based system, could be made useful by the Department
 for generating geographical reference data, management and analysis through digital mapping of coral areas and mapping of
 coral reef condition through tabular database in digital format. Apart from this, the knowledge of geotectonic processes is
 pertinent to the study of coral health and its repercussions on coral communities.  The Committee is of the opinion that any
 blending of geological processes and subsequent changes in bio diversity pattern of coral can suggest avenues for further
 research, such as molecular genetics of biodiversity patterns of coral reefs.  The Committee is of the opinion that the extent
 of coral bleaching could be used as a promising indicator for environmental change and tsunami linked turbidity
 repercussions on coral community.                                                                                                                                        
 (Para 15)
Action Taken by the Department
            The Department of Ocean Development (DOD) has taken up only mapping of coral reefs using GIS, mainly to
 demonstrate the use of the GIS technique in coral reef mapping and monitoring in Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep
 islands under the Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management  programme.  The observations made by the Committee
 on the need to assess the damages caused to the coral reefs in Andaman and Nicobar islands including undertaking coral
 reef habitat restoration projects etc., are the subject pertains to Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF).
Recommendation
The Committee would also suggest the development of coral nursery project by the Department because this will
 provide resource managers information on various coral species and colonies.   Since coral nurseries may become important
 tools in future, coral reef habitat restoration projects, the development of coral nursery composed of important coral schools
 is absolutely necessary.                                                                                                                                               (Para 16)
Action Taken by the Department
            The subject of coral reefs pertains to Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) and the recommendation made by
 the Committee to develop coral nursery is one of the activities being undertaken by MoEF at present.  The DOD will pursue
 the mapping of three islands group namely, Redskin, Outram and Jolly Buoy to demonstrate the use of GIS in mapping of
 corals.
Comments
            The Committee would have appreciated if this issue could have been referred to the Ministry of Environment and
 Forests by the Department under intimation to it, instead of clarifying the position now.  This could have saved the time of

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 the Committee.  The Committee also directs the Department that in future, whenever the Department feels that any
 recommendation included in the report is not originally meant for implementation by the Department on the ground that its
 implication is falling outside the jurisdiction of the Department, it should intimate the Committee sufficiently in advance so
 that the principal details in regard to the action taken, if any, on the issue could be obtained from the appropriate
 Department and could be placed before the Committee for its perusal and subsequent examination.
COASTAL RESEARCH VESSELS
Recommendation
The Committee endorses the uninterrupted operations of the vessels for the Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction
 Systems (COMAPS) and Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM) programmes.  The cruises by the
 vessels should be carried on frequently to monitor pollution with assistance from national laboratories and other
 oceanographic observations for universities.  These cruises will also help the Department to continue the physical
 oceanographic observation and microbiological studies for the Waste Load Allocation Project under ICMAM.  The cruises
 should also observe critical habitats in Lakshdweep Islands specially sea
 turtles.                                                                                  (Para 19)
Action Taken by the Department
            The coastal research vessels, namely, Sagar Paschimi and Sagar Purvi are utilized for carrying out the activities
 under Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction Systems (COMAPS), Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management
 (ICMAM) Programmes and other coastal research activities.  The ship-time of these vessels is already being used for
 monitoring pollution, physical oceanographic observations and microbial studies including waste load allocation
 classification by reputed national laboratories and  Universities.  However, the Department has noted the observations made
 by the Committee and the same shall be kept in mind while planning cruises.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply and hopes that with its research vessels, the Department will try to cover maximum
 number of islands spread over Indian Coastline in the near the future. It also reiterates its recommendation that the cruises
 should also observe critical habitats in lakshadweep islands and other coastal areas of the country.
POLY METALLIC NODULES (PMN) PROGRAMME
Recommendation
The Committee believes that the country is facing an enormous task of carrying development and meeting the
 challenges of modern times for which there is a particular requirement of minerals.  Therefore, efforts of the Department
 should be directed towards tapping of rich and economically viable deposits of Poly Metallic Nodules and utilize them for
 filling gaps in availability of resources.  It willhelp in meeting the requirementof the country for minerals, besides attaining
 self-sufficiency.  Moreover, if deep seabed mining technology is perfected, the country can comprehensively increase its
 capacity in extracting the Poly Metallic Nodules.                                                                 
                                                      (Para 22)
Action Taken by the Department
            Noted.  Efforts of the Department are presently directed towards development of technology to mine the nodules
 from the depth of 6000 metres in phases.
Point raised by the Committee
            The Committee would like to know the details of the efforts made by the Department for tapping mineral resources

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 and filling the resource gap in availability of resources.
Clarification by the Department
            The development of technologies in Mining and Metallurgy under the programme on polymetallic nodules is aimed
 at tapping mineral resource and filling the resource gap in availability of resources.  Following efforts are made by the
 Department in this regard:
i)                    A pilot plant has been set up with a capacity of processing 500 kg nodules per day at Hindustan Zinc Limited to
 extract Copper.  Nickel and Cobalt.  This plant is first of its kind in the world. The operational efficiency of the plant
 is more than the design capacity.  The residue from the plant will be processed further to extract ferro-sillico-
mangness alloy.
ii)                   The deep sea mining system capable of operating upto water depth of 6000 m is required to be developed.  As a
 part of this endeavour, shallow bed mining system capable of operating upto a water depth of 500 m has been
 developed and is being re-demonstrated.
iii)                 A remotely operated submersible capable of operating upto a water depth of 6000 m is under advanced stage of
 development.
Comments
            The Committee notes the steps taken by the Department in tapping mineral resources and filling the resource gap in
 the country.
POLAR SCIENCE (ANTRACTIC RESEARCH) PROGRAMME
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Department should study the icy continent’s atmospherics and ozone
 depletion.  Besides ongoing activities, it should also plan to undertake studies on lake biology, Antarctic microbes, and
 relation of the Antarctic plate with the Indian plate, telemedicine, clean energy technology, micro and molecular biological
 studies on low temperature life forms and the impact of human activity on Antarctica. In addition, the Department should
 also undertake a shallow drilling in Antarctica for retrieval of ice core for paleo-climatological studies.  If required, the
 Department should also take steps to work out collaboration   with other countries in this regard.                                           
 (Para 26)
Action Taken by the Department
Studies on ozone hole, ice core and climate changes
Studies undertaken by the India Meteorological Department (IMD) and National Physical Laboratory (NPL) have
 provided insight to understand the temporal and spatial dynamics of ozone hole phenomenon. Analysis of ice cores obtained
 by Indian Scientists have provided insights into the changes in the earth’s climate during the past two centuries.  A high-
tech Ice-core laboratory has been established at NCAOR, Goa under its long term ice-core-drilling & research programme. 
 Palynostratigraphic studies of lake sediments have thrown light on the nature and dynamics of paleoenviroments.  Satellite
 imageries and GPS based studies are included to expand the scope and dynamics of Antarctic ice sheet and sea-ice. 
 NCAOR, Goa has recently published an Atlas on Antarctic Sea-Ice using satellite data over a period of two years.
Studies on lake biology, Antarctic microbes, micro and molecular biological studies on low temperature life forms
 and the impact of human activity on Antarctica.
            Enumeration of the microbial biodiversity at Antarctica and understanding its molecular basis of cold adaptation

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 have been studied by national institutes.  Out of 125 new microbes found in Antarctica, 20 microbes have been identified by
 scientists at Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), Hyderabad.  Identification of new genes involved in the
 survival of life forms in extreme cold conditions and research on cold adaptation of bacteria has led to technological
 innovation in biodegradation of wastes in extreme cold conditions.  Recently, the Department has organized a National
 seminar in collaboration with Ocean Science and Technology Cell (OSTC), Microbiology, Goa University to work out a
 detailed research programme in Antarctic and Marine Microbiology.  Besides, frontier institutes like Birbal Sahni Institute
 of Paleobotany, Lucknow and IIT, Kanpur has undertaken palynological studies in schirmacher Oasis using lake sediments. 
 It has generated valuable data which will help to understand the changes of vegetation over a period of time.
Relation of the Antarctic plate with the Indian plate.
Premier organizations like Geological Survey of India (GSI), National Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI) have
 undertaken studies on the relation between the Antarctic plate and India plate.  There are strong evidences suggesting that
 the Indian Eastern Ghat Mobile Belt (EGMB) and Enderby Land, East Antarctica shared a common Mesoproterozoic (1100
 Ma) evolutionary history.  The east Gondwana Land, then comprised of India, part of East Antarctica and Australia while
 the west Gondwanaland comprised a small fragment of South India, Africa, South America and central Droning Maud
 Land, east Antarctica (area in which Indian Antarctic Station, Maitri is located).  Indian earth Scientists have been working
 in the area of exposing rocks which have been involved in the Pan-African orogeny.  The Indian base has offered a unique
 opportunity to study the processes that were responsible for amalgamating east and west Gondwana. This, in turn, has also
 helped them to understand the processes involved in the evolution of continents through geological past with co-relatable
 implication on the evolution of Indian subcontinent.  Geochronological studies have helped to trace back the chronology of
 tectonometamorphic events.
Telemedicine
            Due to communication constraints fullfledged telecommunication connectivity is not possible at present.  However,
 medical advice is provided using existing facilities at Maitri, to handle medical emergencies over there.  Efforts are on to
 improve the communication links, including radio link between Maitri and  NCAOR, Goa.
Clean energy technology.
            National Aerospace Laboratory (NAL) has conducted experiments on wind energy and related activities.  A 12v,
 340-watt wind turbine was installed near ‘Nanda Devi’ hut for performance study.  Valuable data was collected on the
 installation and performance of the wind battery charger etc.  A new data retrieval software was designed and installed. 
 NCAOR is developing plan to upgrade facilities at Maitri and also for a new research base, where clean energy technology
 will be a priority, as also mandated under the Environmental Protocol of Antarctic Treaty.
Impact of human activity on Antarctica.
            In line with the commitments of Protocol on Environment Protection, Environmental Impact Assessment  Studies
 (EIA), collection of baseline data on air, water, noise, and waste water has been a regular feature of our activities.  A
 permanent environmental monitoring laboratory has also been set up by NCAOR in Maitri.  Baseline studies on the major
 wild animal population in the area of Indian operation have been carried out by the Wildlife Institute of India and a long
 term monitoring programme is in place.
International cooperation.

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
            Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) has been signed with Argentina, Peru and South Africa.  Efforts are on to
 have a MOU signed with Brazil under IBSA – South South Cooperation.
            XXX    Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) will be hosted by India in 2007.
Comments
            The Committee appreciates the nature of activities being pursued by the Department under the Antarctic Research
 Programme.  It hopes that intensive efforts will be undertaken by the Department for shallow drilling in Antarctica for
 retrieval of ice care for paleo-climatological studies
SUPPLY SIDE OF THE DRUGS FROM SEA
Recommendation
The Committee while appreciating the drugs from the sea programme of the Department had in its 128
th Report,
 presented to Parliament on the 26 th August, 2004, cited the names of certain anti-cancerous drugs, which could be
 extractedfrom the depthof the ocean for the treatment of this incurable disease, particularly from certain microorganism
 found at the depth of the sea.                                                                                                          (Para 29)
Action Taken by the Department
            The Department is exploring all the sources of marine organisms for extraction of bioactive substances including
 curing cancer.  The Department has already identified cancer as one of the thrust areas and initiated studies.  As
 recommended, action has been initiated to involve more number of institutions under the programme so as to concentrate
 more on developing drugs for cancer.
Point raised by the Committee
          Please elaborate the action initiated to involve more number of institutes for development of drugs for cancer and
 which are the Institutes? Whether any achievement has been made so far?
Clarification by the Department
          The Department has taken action to include Dabur Research Foundation (DRF) for developing drugs for cancer from
 the marine organisms.  The preliminary discussion on their technical capabilities and infrastructure facilities was held and
 the final proposal from DRF is expected in December 2005.  The programme for developing anticancer drugs is likely to be
 commenced from 2006-07.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply and wishes that the Department would keep it posted with the progress regarding
 anti-cancer drugs programme. It also opines that the Department should involve more institutions, other than Dabur
 Research Foundation, in this Programme.
Recommendation
Apart from anti-cancerous drugs like diademing-B, Bryostatin-1, Dolastatin 10 etc.  which were earlier cited by the
 Committee, another  very important anti-cancerous drug that could be extracted from sea organism, is Ecteinascidin 743
 (ET-743) which is by far the most advanced compound that could be extracted from Tunicate.  The drug has already
 undergone three clinical trials in advanced countries and has proved to be a carrier of potential anti-tumor activity, which is
 especially effective against solid tumors, such as sarcomas and breast cancer.  TheCommittee, therefore, suggests that

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 extract of the ET-743 may be attempted from tunicate by the Department in collaboration with medical community which
 may open the door for a challenging use of this drug against possible cancer treatment in future.
However, the Committee feels that serious obstacle in the ultimate development of most natural marine products that
 are undergoing clinical trials or that are in pre-clinical evaluation is the problem of supply.  For example, in order to obtain
 approximately 1g of the promising anti-cancer agent ET-743, a close to 1 metric ton (net weight) of the tunicate has to be
 harvested and extracted.  In case of other anti-cancer drugs also, the ratio of biomass to yield of product is even less.(Para
 30)
Action Taken by the Department
            Noted.  As suggested, the medical communities are involved only during the Clinical trails. Further, it is true, a large
 quantity  of organisms are being used to extract and screen for potentially bioactive compounds in drugs development
 research.
Points raised by the Committee
‘No action taken’ has been mentioned about the Committee’s observation contained in second part of Para 30. The
 Department may also like to comment on the extraction of ET-743, as suggested by the Committee in the first part of the
 same para.
Clarification by the Department
As suggested by the Committee, the extracts of marine organisms including tunicates would be attempted for
 developing anti-cancer drugs depending upon the commencement of programme of drug development with DRF.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee feels that huge quantum of ocean biology is involved in extracting a very miniscule quantum of drug
 from the entire group of such organism.  It also feels that such large amount of biomass of either sponges, tunicates or other
 pharmacologically promising marine in-vertebrates can never be harvested from nature without risking extinction of the
 respective species.                                                                                                                                    (Para 31)
Action Taken by the Department
            Noted.  More attention is being paid to save the natural resources during collection of organisms.  In case, the
 presence of potential active component is found in the endangered species, suitable culture technique may be attempted.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
Isolation and cultivation of suspected microbial producers of bioactive natural products either from the surrounding
 sea water or groom the tissue of invertebrates through careful design of special media could provide a much needed answer
 to the pressing supply problem that is currently presented by many pharmacologically interesting compounds and hampers
 their further development as a drug.  If bacteria are indeed the producers of bio-active metabolites of interest,transfer of
 gene clusterresponsible for the biosynthesis of the respective natural products to a vector suitable for large scale
 fermentation could perhaps provide an alternative strategy thereby avoiding the foreseeable difficulties in culturing
 symbiotic bacteria.

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
With the advancement of this knowledge the ultimate goal of supplying sufficient quantities of drugs from sea for
 pharmaceutical development without destroying valuable natural resources may ultimately be reached by the Department if
 a concentrated effort is made in the field.
The Committee, therefore, feels that alternative strategies for an environmentally sound and economically feasible
 supply of marine natural products are needed.  The Committee also feels that the obtained yields of bio-mass, however, are
 still very far from those that will be needed once one of these compounds has finally entered the drug market.  The
 Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that in view of the problems related to the important supply issue, the question arises
 whether sponges, tunicates, bryozoans and other invertebrates are the true producers of the various bioactive compounds or
 whether these naturalproducts are of microbial origin.  The answer to this question, which is one of the key issues in modern
 marine natural products research, will have far-flung consequences and open up entirely new approaches for the production
 of drugs from the sea using biotechnological methods.                                                                                                  (Para
 32)
Action Taken by the Department
As observed by the Committee, special protocol would be designed for pharmacologically interesting compounds for
 confirmation of suspected sources of microbial bioactive compounds either from the surrounding seawater or from the
 tissue of invertebrates.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
            ASSISTANCE FOR RESEARCH PROJECTS
Recommendation
The Committee feels that the Department should focus its efforts in assisting universities to create infrastructure
 facilities and building up a skilled human resource base in Marine Sciences.  Moreover, the Department should also
 participate and showcase its activities in national and international level exposition, exhibition, fairs etc.  from time to time.
 Inter-active computer generated information on Ocean Science & Technology could perhaps help educate the public on the
 ocean and its resources.                                                                                                          (Para 35)
Action Taken by the Department
Marine Research & Capacity Building
            The Department of Ocean Development has facilitated development of basic research facilities and required
 infrastructure in the field of marine science through nine Ocean Science and Technology Cells (OSTCs) in various
 universities/institutes.  Ninty three research projects in various disciplines of marine science and technology have been
 financially supported so far, in which 346 JRFs, 13 SRFs and 16 RAs, have been engaged.  Academic course in the field of
 ‘Ocean Science & Technology’ started by Annamalai University has been very encouraging.  On accont of its wide ranging
 research work in Marine Biology fields, OSTC at Annamalai University has been upgraded to the level of ‘Centre for
 Excellence’ in February, 2005 and additional grants have been provided to further upgrade the laboratory infrastructure etc. 
 in that OSTC.
            The Department has also provided Rs. 205.50 lakh to the nine OSTCs for creation of infrastructure facilities.
i.
                     OSTC, Goa – Rs. 15 lakh (fluroscent Microscope)
ii.                   OSTC, Mangalore – Rs. 70 lakh (XRD facility)

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
iii.                  OSTC IIT, Kharagpur – Rs. 5 lakh (Modification/Extension of infrastructure facilities).
iv.                 OSTC, Bhavnagar – Rs. 20 lakh (Equipments like Analytical Balance and for modification of infrastructure
 facilities)
v.                   OSTC, CUSAT – Rs. 9 lakh (Equipments like Horizontal Water Sampler)
vi.                 OSTC, Annamalai University – Rs. 18.50 lakh (for up gradation of Laboratory facilities)
vii.                OSTC, Andhra University – Rs. 20 lakh (For purchasing equipment like Elisa Reader)
viii.              OSTC, Berhampur University – Rs. 19 lakh (For acquiring infrastructure facilities like furniture etc.)
ix.                 OSTC, Tamil University – Rs 29 lakh (Equipment like Vibro Corer)
National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT), Chennai, National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research
 (NCAOR), Goa and the Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS), Hyderabad, the three
 autonomous institutes of the Department are continuing research in the field of Ocean Science and Technologies in which
 132 researchers are engaged.
            The Department has also provided one hundred and sixty fellowships to various institutes/organizations under
 Marine Manpower Development Programme in different fields of Ocean sciences which are outside OSTC subjects.
Point raised by the Committee
The Department has not made any comments on the Committee’s recommendation that the Department should also
 participate and showcase its activities in national and international level expositions, exhibitions, fairs, etc.
Clarification by the Department
The Department of Ocean Development has participated in the following exhibition and fairs during 2004-05:
National exhibitions
 
1. INFRA-R&D 2004, International Exhibition & Global Summit held at Pragati Maidan, New Delhi from 15-17 April,
 2004.
2. Exhibition INFRA EDUCA 2004 at Pragati Maidan, New Delhi from 25-27
th June, 2004.
3. Enviro 2004 held at Pragati Maidan, New Delhi from 9-12th September, 2004.
4. 8th National Science Expo held at Kolkata from 1-10th Oct. 2004.
5. India International Trade Fair 2004 held at Pragati Maidan, from 14-27th November 2004.
6. Uttranchal International Trade Fair, from 5-12th December 2004 at Dehradun.
7. “Pride of India Science Expo” held during 92nd Indian Science Congress from 3-7th Jan. 2005 at Ahemdabad.
8. “National Science Exhibition” organized by Science Aur Kainal Society of India at Jamia Milia Islamia from 8-11 th Feb.
 05.
9. Vigyan Rail-Exhibition of Science on wheel which was run throughout the year in several parts of the country has been
 monitored closely and officers and staff of the Department was deputed on duty to explain the activities of the Department.
 
International Exhibitions
 
1. 37
th Algeria Int. fair held in Algeria. From 2-10th June, 2004.
2. 51st Damascus International Fairs held at Damascus, Syria from 3-12th Sept. 2004,
 
Exhibition and fairs, 2005-06.
 
1.”IFDE 2005” at Pragati Maidan, New Delhi.
2. “9
th National Expo” held at Kolkata during 2-11 Sept., 2005.
3. “INMEX India 2005” at Mumbai during 5-8 Oct., 2005.
4. “Swasraya Bharat 2005” held at Kochi
5. “Infra R&D 2005” held at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi during 7-9 Nov. 2005.

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
6.”IITF 205” held at Pragati Maidan, 2005 during 14-27 Nov., 2005.
 
Exhibition participated in abroad
 
1. “INMEX-China 2005” held at Guanzhou, China.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
INTEGRATED COASTAL AND MARINE AREA MANAGEMENT (ICMAM)
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that to achieve the stipulated objectives of the programme, the Department should focus
 its activities on  imparting training to coastal states about the use of Geographic Information System (GIS) for management
 of critical habitats.  The Committee also recommends that Department of Ocean Development should take-up specific
 projects in Sunderban Coastal areas specifically pertaining to development of marine sciences.  The task towards
 determination of Waste Assimilation Capacity should also be carried out through development of
 GSI.                                                  (Para 39)
Action Taken by the Department
            ICMAM Project Directorate has been conducting training on GIS for management of critical habitats in the past and
 this effort will be continued during the year 2005-06 also.  Regarding the recommendation of the Committee to take up
 specific projects Sunderban coastal areas, pertinent to development of marine science, it is stated that the DOD under
 ICMAM Programme has already developed a GIS based information system for Sunderban area which provides
 information on biological wealth of the Sunderbans.  Updating of this can be taken up by the State Govt. for development of
 the marine science in the area.  Any technical support required from the State govt. can be provided by DOD. Regarding the
 application of GIS in waste assimilation capacity studies, the tool of GIS is useful in displaying the model outputs
 especially the scenarios showing the resultant concentration in different zones of coastal waters after simulating the
 characteristics of effluent discharged into the sea .  These techniques will be continued to be used in all the waste disposal
 studies.  These will be carried out based on the user demands and requirements.  They include Coastal States and Private
 Industries that in turn discharge waste/effluents into the coastal waters.
Point raised by the Committee
Does the Department of Ocean Development provide any financial assistance to the Coastal States for
 development/updating of GIS based Information System under ICMAM Programme? If so, the details thereof.  Has the
 State Government of West Bengal approached the Department of Ocean Development  for any assistance relating to
 Sunderbans?
Clarification by the Department
The Department of Ocean Development does not provide any financial assistance to the Coastal States towards
 development/updating of GIS based information System under ICMAM Programe.  Further, the State Government of West
 Bengal did not approach the DOD for any assistance relating to Sundarbans.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
OCEAN OBSERVATION & INFORMATION SERVICES (OOIS)
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that in order to improve oceanography services, the Department should strengthen the
 observation platforms.  The moored buoy network should also be augmented to improve generation of data useful for the
 coastal and offshore developmental activities.  The Department should also process the data collected from Array for Real-
time Geotropic Oceanography (ARGO) Floats for obtaining temperature and salinity profiles from the Indian Ocean to study
 the long-term climate and monsoon variability.                                                                                       (Para 44)

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
Action Taken by the Department
The Department has been implementing a comprehensive programme for generation of data through various state-of-
the-art technology ocean platforms for improving the ocean services.  Currently, a 20 moored buoy network is in operation
 which would be augmented to 40 moored data buoy network by the end of 10 th Plan.  Efforts are underway to further
 augment the existing buoy network to improve generation of data useful for the coastal and offshore developmental
 activities.  The data being acquired from Argo floats are made available to different user communities via internet in near
 real-time  (www.incois.gov.in ).  Specific programmes have been undertaken to study long-term climate and interannual
 variability of monsoon, using the data generated from the ARGO Floats.
Comments
While the Committee appreciates the Department’s efforts for undertaking progammes aimed at improving Ocean
 Information Services for different states, it is of the view that the data collected must be timely disseminated so that the
 same can be utilized to predict cyclones and prevent loss of life and property.
Recommendation
The Committee is also of the view that the Department should monitor the performance of the Indian National Center
 for Ocean Information Services(INCOIS) for efficient dissemination of ocean data and data products to user communities
 on a regular basis so that ocean weather forecasting is precise.                                                                           (Para 45)
Action taken by the Department
 The performance of INCOIS has been monitored periodically by the Governing Council under the chairmanship of
 Secretary, DOD, which consists of 15 members including Heads of institutions of 11 national agencies pertaining to Science
 & Technology and 2 experts who would provide advice on generation and dissemination of coastal and ocean data products
 and value added services to a variety of user community.  Besides, the major programmes of INCOIS are also being
 monitored separately by the respective Steering  Committee.  The  Research Advisory Committee (RAC) of the Department
 constituted recently, is also monitoring the various activities of INCOIS.  In addition, the progress of various activities of
 INCOIS is also being reported on quarterly basis to the Planning Commission by quarterly performance review under the
 chairmanship of the Member (S&T).  Significant achievements are also reported on monthly basis to the Cabinet Secretary. 
 Thus the achievements of INCOIS are effectively monitored to make the advisory services of INCOIS as a part of value
 added chain among the potential user communities.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and is of the view that being nodal agency for providing coastal and ocean data and
 value added products, the INCOIS should play a leading role in better coordination with user agencies to achieve optimum
 results.
DESALINATION
Recommendation
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department in the area of desalination of sea water.  It understands that
 some other Departments are also making efforts in this direction.  It is, therefore, desirable that all the efforts are
 coordinated to achieve better and quicker results.  The Committee hopes that with integrated and coordinated efforts of the
 various Departments, the country,particularly the coastalareas, can think of getting safe drinking water at affordable cost in
 the near future.  This would also help in solving one of the greatest burning problems of the country, which is facing a
 peculiar situation ‘water, water everywhere, but not a drop to drink’.                                                                              ( Para
 48)
Action Taken by the Department
The Department would like to express its gratitude to the Committee for appreciation on the efforts being made by
 the Department towards development of technology for desalination of seawater.  Recently, a one lakh litre capacity low

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 temperature desalination plant has already been commissioned at Kavaratti, Lakshadweep.  The Department is also planning
 to augment the  capacity of existing plant and develop similar desalination plants for commissioning in different parts of the
 country.  It may be further noted that efforts are underway in coordination with other departments, such as Steel Authority
 of India, Indian Farmers and Fertilizer Cooperation, Administration of Islands and Coastal States to achieve the objectives.
Points raised by the Committee
The Committee would like to know the outcome of the efforts being undertaken by the Department of Ocean
 Development in coordination with other Departments to achieve the programme objectives? Which are the areas identified
 for commissioning of desalination plants? What is the role of SAIL and IFFCO in the achievement of objectives set in this
 regard?
The Committee would also like to know whether Department has done any study to analyse the cost effectiveness of
 the Desalination process.
Clarification by the Department
i)
                    The 1 lakh litre per day capacity LTTD desalination plant commissioned in Lakshadweep, Kavaratti in May 2005,
 has been functioning well.  This is a land based plant, established in cooperation with the Lakshadweep
 Administration (Ministry of Home Affairs),who have allotted necessary land.
 
ii)                   After successful demonstration of 1 lakh litre per day LTTD desalination plant at Kavaratti, Lakshadweep, the
 Department has taken a project to design, develop, demonstrate and commission a 10 lakh litre per day capacity
 plant on a barge near Chennai, which is expected to be commissioned in March 2006.
 
iii)                 As far as the role of SAIL, IFFCO etc. is concerned, these firms have basically explored the possibility of utilizing
 the LTTD technology of the department, at their power/fertilizer plants to convert waste water into fresh waters.
 
iv)                 As regards the cost effectiveness, it has been estimated that the cost per litre of fresh water production would be
 reduced substantially when higher capacity plants such as 100 lakh litre per day, are established.  The present cost
 of 24 paise per litre (1lakh litre per day plant) is expected to come down to 5-6 paise once higher capacity plants
 (100 lakh litre per day) are established.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like the Department to keep it posted of the progress made in augmenting
 the capacity of its existing plant and developing other plants in different parts of the country. It would appreciate if the
 Department strives for setting up of plants of higher capacity (i.e. 100 lakh litre per day) after the commissioning of 10 lakh
 litre per day capacity plant near Chennai in March, 2006 as it would result in substantial cost reduction from the present 24
 paise per litre to 5-6 paise per litre, which can be hopefully afforded even by the common people in the Country.
GAS HYDRATES AND ITS ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
Recommendations
The Committee is of the opinion that any change in ocean geochemistry/bio-chemistry during the extraction or
 drilling of the gas from the hydrates should be viewed from the point of view of its potential polluting capacity.      ( Para 50
 )
The Committee is of opinion that methane can appear in the marine environment not only due to microbial and
 biochemical decomposition of the organic substance in bottom sediments, but also as a result of the natural bottom seepage
 of combustible gases from shallow oil and gas bearing structures.  The entire process can lead to intensive vertical flows of
 hydrocarbon gases from the bottom to the sea surface accompanied some times by gas hydrates decomposition. ( Para 57 )
The Committee is also of the opinion that an important anthropogenic source of gas hydrocarbons in the water
 environment is the offshore drilling accidents.  The environmental consequences of offshore drilling accidents can be very
 hazardous.  Such accidents may cause long-term release of large amount of natural gas into the water accompanied by self-
inflaming of the gas.                                                                                                                  ( Para 62 )
The Committee, in view of the above, recommends that the Department of Ocean Development while dealing with

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 the gas hydrates extraction issue should also deeply concentrate on eco-toxicological assessment of the impact of natural
 gas and other toxicants on the marine organisms.  It  should  be remembered that methane hydrate could become
 crystallized ice during winter and correspondingly dissociate during increased temperature in summer followed by releasing
 of free methane into the ocean geochemistry with this corresponding environmental consequences as explained
 above.                             ( Para 65 )
In the opinion of the Committee, another critical environmental factor that directly influences the impact of natural
 gas on water organism is the concentration of dissolved oxygen.  It is quite evident that oxygen deficit directly controls the
 rate of fish metabolism and decreases their resistance to many organic and inorganic poisons. This may be directly linked
 with species character.  From the physiological perspective, the level of hemoglobin in fish blood and the rate of blood
 circulation through the gills increase under oxygen deficit
 condition.                                                                                                      ( Para 66 )
Action Taken by the Department
            Noted.
Point raised by the Committee
In Gas Hydrate programme, the Department has mentioned ‘Noted’ in most of the action taken. The Committee
 would like to know the detailed comments of the Department on the Committee’s recommendations.
Clarification by the Department
The issue of Environmental Impact Assessment as pointed out by the Committee has been noted and will follow once
 the Department is ready with the technologies to exploit the gas hydrates.  The present endeavours are aimed at
 understanding the basic processes involved in gas hydrate formation, identification, assessment and exploration and
 developing technologies in this regard.  So far, worldwide, there is no commercial exploitation of gas hydrates and efforts
 are focussed on Gas Hydrate research.  Environmental Impact Assessment is an important aspect and shall be  considered
 while exploiting the gas hydrates.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
 
Recommendation
 
The Committee, therefore, feels that hydrates breakdown for releasing methane into the atmosphere can be linked
 with the glacial sea-level fluctuations and gas hydrate can play a major role in controlling long-term global climate change. 
 Sea floor landslides can cause breakdown of hydrate by reducing the pressure in sediments and these interacting processes
 may cause cascading slides which would result in breakdown of hydrates and subsequent release of methane into the
 atmosphere.
(Para 52)
Action Taken by the Department
Noted. However, it may be mentioned that there is no conclusive scientific evidence linking gas hydrates to sea-level
 fluctuation.  In Indian tropical conditions, breakdown of hydrates due to landslide is not applicable as the gas hydrates are
 found about more than 150 metres from ocean-bed.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
High methane concentration which is one of the component gases released into the atmosphere during hydrate extract
 can affect overall earth’s temperature.   The Committee, therefore, feels that if  concentration of methane in the atmosphere
 keeps on increasing, the noticeable alteration in the climate over the exclusive economic zone of the country could be

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 noticed in the near future.                                                                                                                                       (Para 59)
Action Taken by the Department
 
            In case eventual extraction of hydrate takes place, safe use of hydrates would be taken care of by the appropriate
 agencies in future.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
 
Recommendation
 
The Committee, therefore, feels that Department of Ocean Development should undertake study at pilot scale while
 dealing with problems of extraction of gas from hydrates on the following:
a)
                                          The behaviour and distribution of the products of natural gas flaring in the atmosphere and their impact on
 water environment; and
b)                                          The environmental consequences of the offshore drilling accidents is an important anthropogenic source of
 gas hydrocarbons in the water environment.                                             ( Para 61 )
Action Taken by the Department
Noted.  The present thrust of the programme is to understand formation of gas hydrates, spatial distribution,
 assessment of the gas hydrate, potential in selected areas etc. and to develop technology for its samplings.  The studies
 suggested perhaps would be appropriate upon fulfilment of the present objectives.
 Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The repercussion of gas leakage on ocean fishes are extremely sensitive.  The fish response to a toxic gas leakage is
 extremely high in comparison to its response to other dissolved or suspended toxicants.  The gas could rapidly penetrate
 into the organism of the fish through the gills and disturb the main functional systems. There is external evidence of its
 disturbance which changes the behaviour of this aquatic animal like fish excitement etc.  The Committee has also been
 given to understand that the time interval between the moment the fishes come in contact with such toxic gas and the first
 symptom of poison surfacing on these organisms are extremely short.  The entire toxicological effect could be assessed by
 the nature of the toxicant, its toxicity in water, exposure time and evaluating by environmental degradation.  Gas emboli
 could be the general effect typical to all types of fishes.  These include rupture of tissues, enlarging of swim bladder,
 disturbances of circulatory system and a number of other pathological changes.  The Committee would, therefore, like to
 recommend that deep study of water toxicology of saturated aliphatic hydrocarbons of methane should be undertaken by
 Department of Ocean Development.  The Committee further urges for the development of toxicity data on different gaseous
 poisons which could reveal some general features of interaction between gaseous traces and marine
 organisms.                                                                  ( Para 63 )
Action Taken by the Department
The present thrust of the programme is to understand formation of gas hydrates, Spatial distribution, assessment of
 the gas hydrate potential in selected areas etc. and to develop technology for its samplings. The studies suggested perhaps
 would be appropriate upon fulfillment of the present objectives.
 Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee is, therefore, of the firm opinion that laboratory studies are also necessary to understand the process
 by which the gas hydrate, by releasing poisonous gases like CO2, Methane, Hydrogen sulphide into sea ecology, seriously

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 affects the biometabolism of sea organisms.                                                                                                      ( Para 67 )
Action Taken by the Department
Noted.  The present thrust of the programme is to understand formation of gas hydrates, Spatial distribution,
 assessment of the gas hydrate, potential in selected areas etc. and to develop technology for its samplings.  The studies
 suggested perhaps would be appropriate upon fulfillment of the present objectives.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
NEW PROGRAMMES
Recommendation
The Committee hopes that the Tsunami and Storm Surge Warning System will be in place as per the set programme
 in coordination with all other participating Departments to minimize the colossal loss of life and property due to such
 natural calamities.                                                                                                                                                   (Para 70)
Action Taken by the Department
Noted. Necessary approvals are being obtained.
Comments
While the Committee notes the reply, it would appreciate if it is kept informed of the progress made in this regard during the
 consideration of next year’s Demands for Grants.
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 03.30 p.m. on Tuesday, the 20 th December, 2005 in Room No. 121 (Committee Chairman’s
 Room), First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            PRESENT
 
1.   Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Prof. Saif-ud-din Soz
3. Dr. Prabha Thakur
4. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
5. Shrimati Kum Kum Rai
 
LOK  SABHA
 
6. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
7. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
8. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
9. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
10. Shri Rakesh Singh
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
 
SECRETARIAT
                       
Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
2.   
The Committee took-up consideration of revised draft 147 th, ***,  ***, ***, *** and 152 nd Action Taken Reports of the
 Committee on the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations contained in its One Hundred Forty-third, ***, ***, ***,
 *** and *** reports on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) relating to Departments of Ocean Development; ***; ***; ***; ***; and

147th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/147threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 ***, respectively.  After discussion and suggesting a minor change in 147th report, the Committee adopted all the reports.
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy to present the
 Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Sujan Chakraborty, and in his absence, Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli to lay the Reports
 on the table of the Lok Sabha on Thursday, the 22nd  December, 2005.
 
4.         The Committee, then, decided to hear the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and
 Forests in respect of control and supervision on experiments on Animals for the purpose of Drugs and Pharmaceutical
 Research, in its next meeting to be held on the10th January, 2006. The Committee also decided to hear the Drugs Controller
 General of India and representatives of Indian Council of Medical Research in the matter in its future meetings.
 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 04.35 p.m.
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                                                                              C. B. RAI
December 20, 2005                                                                                                                UNDER SECRETARY
 
 
☼ Pursuant to the adoption of the 5th Report of the Committee on Ethics on 13.12.2005, the Member was suspended from the Rajya Sabha pending the presentation of the final
 Report of the Committee on Ethics.
Ф Shri Jaswant Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  11th August, 2005 consequent upon his resignation from  the Committee.
 
*** Related to other matters.