RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1995-96)

TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT

ANNUAL REPORT (1993-94) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS

(Software Technology Parks; Electronics Hardware Technology Parks (EHTPS);

Electronics for weaker sections including women; Employment potential of

Electronics; and Support of Department of Electronics for Research and Development

particularly with regard to Technology Development Council, National Radar Council
and Industrial Promotion)

(Presented on 1st August, 1995)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 1995/Sravana 1917 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PaGEs

1, COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEB ,,,.७००००००००६००००००००००००००००७०००००००००७०००००००७००००७०३००००००००००००००००००० 6)
(0)
1—15
4. APPENDIX 19—21
5. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE ......... ५ ५-००" ० "०ू_ञञअ्ञअलसल न... 23-31

2. INTRODUCTION

३. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE



COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON _ SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1995-96)

RAJYA SABHA

Syed Sibtey Razi— Chairman
Dr. M. Aram

Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
Shri K. Rahman Khan
Prof. M.G.K. Menon
Shri Suresh Pachouri
Shri N. Giri Prasad

Shri Satchidananda

10. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
11. Dr. Ranbir Singh

12. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav

LOK SABHA

13. Shri 8. Ahamed

14. Shri P.C. Chacko

15. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia

16. Shri Jitendra Nath Das

17. Shri Sharad Dighe

18. Shrimati Saroj Dubey

19. Shri Oscar Fernandes

20. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale

21. Shri P. Kumarasamy

22. Shrimati Mahendra Kumari

23. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee

24, Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy

25. Shri Harpal Panwar

26. Shri Balraj Passi

27. Shri Bheem Singh Patel

28. Shri Chandresh Patel

29. Shri Vijay Naval Patil

30. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
31. Shrimati Vasundhara Raje

32. Shri Rama Chandra Rath

33. Shri M.G. Reddy

34. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma

35. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
36. Shri Harchand Singh

37. Shri Ram Prasad Singh

38. Shri K.G. Shivappa

39. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

40. Kumari Sushila Tiriya

41. Kumari Farida Topno

42. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
3. Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
4.

5

SOP एक ON aes bore

Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests having been authorised by the
Committee to present the report on its behalf, present the Twenty-eighth Report of the
Committee. This Report deals with the issues contained in the Annual Report (1993-94) of
the Department of Electronics with reference to: (i) Software Technology Parks (STP); (ii)
Electronic Hardware Technology Parks (EHTPs); (iii) Electronics for Weaker Sections
including Women; (iv) Employment Potential of Electronics; and (v) Support of the
Department of Electronics for R&D, particularly with regard to the Technology
Development Council (TDC), National Radar Council (NRC) and Industrial Promotion.

2. The Committee held in all three meetings on January 5, 6 and June 19, 1995. In the
meeting held on January 5, 1995 the Secretary, Department of Electronics made a brief
presentation about the activities of his Department, particularly with reference to the
aforementioned five areas and the Members raised certain points thereon. On January 6,
1995 further discussion was held and the Committee heard the replies of the Secretary and
other officials of the Department of Electronics to the points raised by the Members.

3. The Committee thanks the Officials of the Department of Electronics for giving it
necessary information and placing before it relevant papers/background notes which
facilitated detailed examination of the Annual Report (1993-94) of the Department.

4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 19th
June, 1995.

New छा का; SYED SIBTEY RAZI
ae = 5७४ Chairman,
June 19, 1995 Committee on Science and Technology,

Environment and Forests.


REPORT

There has been an unprecedented growth in electronics world wide. This has had an
impact in India also. There seems hardly any field-be it industry, offices, houses or in the
life of an individual where the applications of electronic gadgets are not discernible.
Electronics industry is, as a matter of fact, one of those rare industries whose products have
been able to reach millions of people, so much so that they seem to have become a part of
daily life. Capabilities are constantly increasing and prices falling in contrast to what are
encounters in other areas. In this and the continuing innovation taking place lies the
tremendous potential for growth of this field. The Department of Electronics (DOE) aims at
bringing the benefit of electronics to every walk of life and developing this industry to serve
as a catalyst of national development both directly as well as by promoting, providing
capabilities and increasing efficiency and productivity in various sectors. The Department
aims to make India a major global player in this area. With a view to ascertain as to what
the Department has been doing to carry forward this mandate, the Committee decided to
take up detailed examination of its activities in the following five areas on the basis of its
Annual Report for the year 1993-94:

(i) Software Technology Parks (STPs);

(ii) Electronic Hardware Technology Parks (EHTPs);
(iii) Electronics for Weaker Sections, including Women;
(iv) Employment Potential of Electronics; and

(v) Support for R&D, particularly with regard to the Technology Development Council
(TDC), National Radar Council (NRC) and Industrial Promotion.

To facilitate this discussion, a Background Note was made available by the Department,
giving details of the initiatives taken by it in these specific areas. Besides, the Committee
also had the benefit of the views of the Secretary and other officials of the Department who
appeared before the Committee. The details of the discussions and observations/
recommendations of the Committee are given in the succeeding paragraphs.

SOFTWARE TECHNOLOGY PARKS (STPs)

The Software Technology Parks (STPs) Scheme is a 100% export oriented scheme
designed to give a boost to software industry through software exports. The Software
Technology Parks offer its members (e.g. computer software exporting units), general
infrastructural facilities and utilities like power, ready-to-use built-up space, centralised
computing facilities and data communication facilities depending on the requirement of the
STP units. Units under the STP scheme can be set up in the STP complex; but they can also
operate from their own premises; in both cases, the units will have access to the centralised
infrastructural facilities and services offered by the STPs. STPs administer these units, on
behalf of Government, as a single window mechanism.

Under the Software Technology Park Scheme, which was conceived and initiated in
1989, the member units, who undertake software development for export purposes are
provided, in addition to general infrastructural facilities, services such as import certification,


software valuation, project approvals, etc. The Scheme also aims to: (i) promote the
development and export of software and software services through technology assessments,
market analyses, marketing support, etc.; and (ii) to train professionals and to encourage
design and development in the field of software technology and software engineering.

As per the information given to the Committee, Software Technology Parks of India
(STPI) was established and registered as a society under the Societies Registration Act 1860,
under the Department of Electronics on June 5, 1991 with the purpose of managing the
operations of Software Technology Parks (STPs) that were to be established at Hyderabad,
Noida, Gandhinagar and Thiruvananthapuram. These STPs were established in August,
1991. In September, 1991 the management of the STPs set up at Pune, Bangalore and
Bhubaneshwar during August, October and December, 1990, was brought under STPI. A
total of 327 units have been accorded Government approval to operate under this scheme so
far; out of this, 58 units have been approved to operate inside the complexes and the
remaining 269 to operate from their own premises. Details in respect of the year-wise growth
of software export by each of the Software Technology Parks under the STP scheme are
given in Annexure-I.

The Secretary of the Department informed the Committee that out of business in
electronics all over the world of an order of $ 700-800 billion, nearly 40% is in software, and
India is in an advantageous position in this respect as it have established a niche for quality
software; costs of skilled manpower in India are much lower than elsewhere in the world
82% of American companies think of India as the first source in this area. There are,
however, a few problems. As against exports worth Rs. 1020 crores of software, the
domestic market is just Rs. 620 crores; the industry is also facing a shortage of trained
manpower for high-end software. The latter aspect is engaging the attention of the
Government, and the Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Computer and Allied Sciences is proposed to
be set up on which investment to the tune of Rs. 40 crores will be made during the current
year and Rs. 600 crores in the next 4 to 5 years. A Committee is currently going into the
concept of this proposed Centre which would establish competitive standards and provide a
sound base for building manpower. The Department is also trying to improve standards in
various institutions all over the country through its Accredition of Computer Programme.

The Committee wanted to know: how much money had been spent on the Software
Technology Park. Scheme upto; what the total earnings from the users have been; what is
the relative priority given to this sector in terms of the proportion of the total budget of the
Department allocated to it; and how is it that STPI has been registered as a society under
the Societies Registration Act - which implies that its operations are to be of a non-
commercial nature - and why the Department did not think of setting up STPI for
commercial functioning specially when it is dealing with exports and all its beneficiaries are
engaged in operations of a commercial nature, and this would have provided the added
advantage of loan facility from banks.

The Committee was informed that an investment of Rs. 27.70 crores has gone into the
STPs; out of this Rs. 12 crores have been spent on Earth Stations which provide for high
speed data communication. These Earth Stations exist presently at Bangalore, Hyderabad
and Trivandrum, and Gandhinagar and Bhubaneshwar will have them shortly. The five
Earth Stations are directly linked to INTELSAT, and engineers within the country can,


through this network of computer links, partly tide over the problems arising from
restrictions imposed on grant “of visa” by countries, particularly USA. Touching upon the
aspect related to earnings by the STPs from users, the Secretary pointed out that initially the
priority was to set up the facilities, and not so on much the returns, though adequate charges
are being levied on the user units. About Rs. 14 lakhs is charged for a dedicated line on
high speed data communication facility. Charges are also levied as rent for space, services
like PABX etc. The units, are given concession for the first two years; 50% subsidy in the
first year, and 25% during the next year; and it is only from the third year that they are
made to pay full charges. It has been envisaged that from the fourth year onwards the Parks
will be self- supporting and not depend on further Governmental support; and by and large,
this is being achieved.

It was, however, conceded by the Secretary of the Department that all the Software
Technology Park are not performing equally well. The STP at Bangalore is not doubt a star
performer in that its share of exports has been around Rs. 16 crores, Rs. 22 crores and
Rs. 56 crores during the years 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94, respectively. Similarly,
Hyderabad STP has also done somewhat well with exports being to around Rs. 22 lakhs,
Rs. 4.55 crores and Rs. 9 crores during these years. The Noida STP has also shown
reasonable performance, with exports of Rs. 6 lakhs during 1991-92, Rs. 23 crores during
1992-93 and Rs. 45 crores during 1993-94. The STPs at Gandhinagar, Pune and
Thiruvananthapuram, however, have not fared as well vis-a-vis these Software Technology
Parks. The pace of growth of the STPs depends on many factors. Bangalore is fortunate in
that the Government of India’s defence establishments, a lot of electronic industries and the
Indian Institute of Science are located there. The Thiruvananthapuram Software Technology
Park perhaps could not show the desired results because of lack of high speed data
communication facility, but now that this has become operational there, the Park is expected
to show improved performance. In the Bhubaneshwar STP the problem is lack of trained
man-power. This zpart, some of the State Governments such as West Bengal and Rajasthan
have set up Software Technology Parks of their own at Calcutta and Jaipur respectively. But
the Department hopes that the STPs have tremendous potential and would grow fast.

Explaining the point about the registration of Software Technology Parks of India as a
society and not as a company, the Secretary of the Department stated that this has yielded
very good results, and some of the Software Technology Parks are growing rapidly.
Investments have been made on these Parks but they are not for yielding dividends. There
are certain advantages of having*STPI in the form of a society in that one can have a single
organisation for different Software Technology Parks located at various places; there is a
certain degree of internal balancing and the organisation is becoming commercially viable.
There is no ban on making profits, but whatever is the surplus is plughed back for further
growth. Even 85 a society they can get loans from institutions like the ICICI and TDICI.
CICI had adva:ced a ioan of Rs. 4.7 crores for microwave electronics development and
research in the SAMEER programme of the Department, though not for their Software
Technology ? rks Programme. Therefore, taking into account the nodal and the catalytic
role of the Depertmeni of Electronics, the idea of having Software Technology Parts as a
society, accord'ig to the Secretary, has been quite viable.

Replying to :he question «bout the relative priority accorded to the software sector in
terms of buczciary allocations, the Secretary of the Department informed the Committee
that this is partiy reflected by the proportion of the total allocation for the sector for a
particular year. Last Year, oui of a budgetary outlay of the Department of Rs. 140 crores,
nearly Rs. 10 crores were given for soitware. This amount of Rs. 10 crores might appear to
be small, but having regard to the fact that of the Rs. 140 crores nearly Rs. 60 crores were
for rebuilding the Semiconductor complex, the priority for the software sector is of a fairly
good order.



The Committee is aware that there is great potential for the development and export of
Software, principally arising from the low costs of highly skilled scientists and engineers. This
has been emphasised over the past two decades. The opportunities have increased of late with
the much larger role of software in diverse areas of application. There are a number of
software companies in the country. The Committee notes that the total exports by these
companies functioning outside the STP scheme are much larger than the contribution through
the STPs; the latter consists of just 10% of the total software exports at the moment.
However, the Software Technology Parks Scheme will play a useful role through the
establishment of infrastructural facilities in this vital sector which those concerned with the
development and export of Software can make use of. The Committee is happy to note the
significant increase in software exports over the years.

Related feature which has come to the notice of the Committee is that not many
industrial units are coming forward to take the benefit of facilities provided under the
Software Technology Park Scheme; and in some of the STPs, over the last few years, there
has been a decline in the number of units seeking approval to operate under this Scheme vis-
a-vis that of the previous years. The Committee is of the view that the Department should
seriously look into this aspect to identify the reasons behind this downward trend, especially
when the software exports have a very good market. Software exports from India have not
doubt registered an appreciable increase over the recent years, but its share in the total world
software market still continues to be abysmally low. As pointed out in the World Bank
Report, there is scope to raise it to a level of one billion dollars by 1996 if the facility of high
speed telecommunication network and adequate trained man-power is made available. The
Committee appreciates that the Department is seized of the problem and the work of setting
up high speed data communication facility and Earth stations is getting necessary priority.
The Department, however, needs to involve industry on a much larger scale to boost software
exports, and jointly undertake necessary surveys to identify the specific needs and demands of
users such as insurance companies, airlines and industrial undertakings etc., so that necessary
capabilities are developed.

The Committee feels that while the Software Technology Parks Scheme has made some
headway there appear to be some factors still hindering their growth. A total of 327 units
wave been accorded Government approval to operate under the Scheme so far, but only

§8 units have approvals to operate inside the STP complexes while the remaining operate from
-their own premises. This is understandable in terms of other advantages that the units derive
i operating from their premises. The question that the Department has to go into is whether
“the rest of the facilities of an industrial estate are important in this area or only the facilities
yelating to earth stations and high speed communication links. Besides, the performance of all
+}e Software Technology Parks has not been uniformly good. The Department should identify
those STPs which are not working upto their potential and take concrete action to make them
viable. The setting up of such Parks, on a broad basis at various locations in the country is no
bt to ensure that regional imbalances in the matter of growth are removed, and this is
{audable, but this purpose will not be served if those in relatively backward locations are not
hzIped to become viable.

ELECTRONIC HARDWARE TECHNOLOGY PARK SCHEME (EHTP)
The two principal objectives behind the Electronic Hardware Technology Park (EHTP)


Scheme, which became operational during the year 1993-94, are: (i) to establish global scale
manufacturing facilities incorporating the latest technology; and (ii) to facilitate the
transition of Indian manufacture to a globalised environment. The main features of the
scheme are as follows:—

An EHTP complex may be set up by the Central or State Government,

Public or Private Sector Undertakings or any combination thereof. An EHTP
may be a stand-along unit or one of the units located in an EHTP complex.
2. The existing units in Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) can be converted into
EHTP units.
35 Foreign equity upto 100% is permissible.
4. Free-of-duty imports of capital goods, raw-materials, components and other
imported inputs are permitted.
5. There is no minimum value addition requirement. However, for access to the
Indian domestic market, a minimum value addition of 15% is necessary.
6. There are two slabs of value addition with different scales of domestic market
access. there are:
Value Permissible scale in the Domestic Tariff Area (DTA)
addition
15% to 25% (1) Upto 25% of the production in value terms of finished
equipment.
(2) Upto 30% of the production in value terms of components and
electronic materials.
More than 25% (1) Upto 30% of the production in value terms of finished

equipment.

(2) Upto 40% of the production in value terms of components and
electronic material

7. Domestic market access is computed on the basis of the total production of all items
of an EHTP unit rather than as a percentage of the production of each item.

8.’ Complete tax holiday for 5 years.

The Committee was informed that 120 proposals have upto now been approved under
the scheme for setting up industrial units in addition to 6 proposals for infrastructure
complexes. Out of these 120 approved units, 24 units have become operational. The
investment in these projects is Rs. 163.068 crores and the likely export revenue is
US $ 1166.09 million over a period of 5 years. Seven more units are likely to become
operational by the end of March, 1995 with an investment of Rs. 140.86 crores and the
anticipated export earnings are around US $ 321.26 million in the next 5 years.

The total investment in all the 120 industrial units, proposals for setting up of which
have been approved, will be of an order of Rs. 110.04 crores which includes a foreign direct
investment of US $ 46.44 million for 26 cases. The total export earnings envisaged over the
period of 5 years are US $ 4954.70 million with a net foreign exchange earning of


US $ 1493.24 million. Computer systems would account for 54% of the total exports followed
by components which would be of the order of 25% and consumer electronics of 12%.

The Committee was informed that there exists an Inter-Ministerial Standing Committee
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Electronics) for approving applications under the
EHTP Scheme and a letter of approval is issued by the SIA (Ministry of Industry). In cases
where foreign collaboration is involved, the matter is referred to the Foreign Investment
Promotion Board (FIPB), an empowered Committee. A designated officer, who is appointed
by the Department of Electronics, monitors the operation of the units. Responding to a
query from the Committee about the time taken in approving the applications for setting up
units under the EHTP Scheme and whether there existed any redressal mechanism for those
units whose applications are rejected, the Secretary explained that the whole process takes a
maximum time of two months and hardly 1% applications are rejected. After the advent of
the new economic policy, the system of single window clearance has come into vogue and
Secretaries of all the Ministries/Departments concerned sit together for expeditiously
clearing the investment proposals. If the proposal involves an investment of more than Rs.
200 crores, it goes to the Cabinet Committee.

The Committee wanted to know as to how much Government money had been pumped
into the EHTP Scheme and what was the level of financial return as a result of this
investment. The Committee was told that there has been no investment by Government in
the infrastructural facilities under the EHTP Scheme; the question of getting any commercial
return therefrom did not arise. Nevertheless, some State Governments, nearly six of them,
had shown their willingness to invest in the scheme and set up infrastructural facilities. He
cited the Governments of Haryana, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu in this context, though
it is only the Government of Haryana which has done some work for setting up an
Electronics City. The Secretary also informed the Committee that some of the Hardware
Technology Parks in India have very good potential in the area of services and the
Department has requested the Ministry of Finance to permit these Parks to engage in
Gervices like repair, maintenance, collaboration etc., specially when no major capital
investment was needed in this area. Another advantage of the services being undertaken by
the Parks would be that it would result in creation of skilled job opportunities along with
€>reign exchange earnings.

The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the fact that the EHTP Scheme, which has
Considerable potential for the growth of exports, has made a good beginning within a span of
two years and the response from industry has been quite encouraging. The Committee,
however, is concerned that the pace at which the approved units are becoming operational is
SKIl quite slow in that just about 31 units out of 120 which have been approved, have become

o¢are about to become operational. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Department
would look into this aspect and take necessary remedial action to expedite the process. The
.D :partment, in co-ordination with other agencies involved, should have necessary interaction
with the entrepreneurs and remove any difficulties or obstacles they may be encountering.
+~he Committee appreciates the decision of Government to extend Earth Station facilities to
ysearch and development institutions in the country as that would help further growth of this
tndustry. The proposal mooted by the Department to exploit the potential area of services
(wrough the EHTP Scheme is also a step in the right direction, and the Committee feels that
Ministry of Finance should accord its approval to this proposal given its viability.

The Committee has noted that the units under the EHTP Scheme are somewhat unevenly
clistributed so much so that certain regions remain practically out of EHTP Scheme. The
Committee, therefore, feels that the Department should take necessary initiative in this regard


to ensure balanced growth of different regions. The Committee recognizes that investments are
made by the industrial units (and not by Government) and they would have to go by sound
economic considerations.

ELECTRONICS FOR WEAKER SECTIONS INCLUDING WOMEN

The field of electronics and computers has considerable potential for employment of
women. The availability of trained women in this sector is, however, much less than the actual
requirement. The total employment in the electronics sector is expected to grow from a level
of 11.53 lakhs in 1992-93 to 16.85 lakhs in 1996-97 which would mean an addition of 5.32 lakhs
to the work force. Correspondingly, based on these figures, female employemnts will register
an increase from 2.81 lakhs in 1991-92 to 4.26 lakhs in 1996-97. This means that there will be
an additional demand of 1.45 lakhs trained women by the year 1996-97. There is, however,
expected to be a substantial shortfall in meeting this requirement of trained women workers as
only about 34,000 women will be available, against the requirement of 1.45 lakhs. The need to
train women in electronics and computers, therefore, assumes great importance and the
Department of electronics is working on a few schemes in this regard. It is extending necessary
assistance to the Department of Women and Child Development in training poor and needy
women for employment in electronics and computers under the Norwegian Agency for
International Development (NORAD) Scheme which is being funded by the Government of
Norway. Under this scheme, projects sponsored by public undertakings/Public Corporations/
Women’s Development Centres of Universities/autonomous organisations/voluntary
organisations for setting up “Employment and Income Generating Training-cum-
Employment-cum-Production Units for Women” are being given assistance. During 1993-94,
training programmes in electronics and computers for about 3,000 women were initiated, and
during 1994-95 about 4,000 women would be trained. The training programmes have been
launched by UPTRON, HARTRON, KEONICS, ELCOT, IETE, APEL, UPTEC, some
Non-Government Organisaitons (NGOs) etc. in Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka,
Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Delhi, West Bengal, Gujarat, Punjab, Haryana,
Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Jammu & Kashmir and Orissa. The Department normally makes use
of the State Electronics Development Corporation as the agency for interacting with the
Women and Child Development department. More States will be covered for providing
training to women under the NORAD Scheme depending upon the availability of funds.

The Department proposes to train rural youth under Training of Rural Youth for Self-
Employment (TRYSEM) as village technicians to raise the socio-economic level of the weaker
sections. The Ministry of Rural Development has agreed in principle for imparting training to
tural youth which would cover house wiring and repairs of its defects,repair of household
electrical appliances, and repair of refrigerators and consumer/entertainment electronic
equipment. The Department of Electronics would get in touch with the Secretary, Rural
Development of the State Governments for identifying the appropriate districts and training
organisations to initiate the scheme on a pilot basis.

The Committee was informed about the project ‘Vivek Darpan’ which has been launched
as an experiment for the use of electronic media for improving the quality of life in the rural
areas. It is designed to demonstrate and propagate the use of electronic media as a more ९0४
effective method for dissemination of socio-economic and other relevant information/
knowledge in rural areas as compared to traditional methods/media. The project covers more
than 220 villages of the States of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Punjab, Gujarat, Tripura,
West Bengal and Arunachal Pradesh and focuses on rural development, education, women’s
upliftment and family welfare. The project is proposed to be implemented in 10 villages of
Haryana very shortly.


The Secretary of the Department was asked to clarify as to what is the priority accorded
by his Department to this overall area within the framework of its budgetary allocations, and
whether it did not look like a contradiction that with the use of more electronic devices like
computers and the like, the avenues for employment generation would shrink and the
Department still thought of the electronics sector as being a potential area for generation of
employment opportunities for women. The Secretary informed the Committee that the
Department does not have any budget for employment generation. The Department had, in
fact, mooted a proposal for training 12,000 poor and needy women in electronics, and had
necessary interaction with the Manufacturers’ Associations, Software Association and
Consumers’ Electronics Association for absorbing the trained work-force of women and the
response was very positive. Taking the feed-back from MAIT, NASSCOM and CETMA
into account, the Department had suggested to the Planning Commission that during the
remaining two years of the 8th plan, i.e., 1995-96 and 1996-97, to begin with, the
Department would like to start a scheme for training of 2,500 women each year and had
requested for a sum of Rs. 3 crores in the budget for 1995-96 and Rs. 4 crores in 1996-97.
The scheme, however, did not find favour with the Planning Commission and no funds were
made available for the purpose.

Referring to the aspect of shrinkage in employment opportunities on account of
automation, the Secretary of the Department stated that in electronics, information
technology and computers are tools for productive employment and when the Department is
thinking of employment generation, it means that more jobs will be created through
increased productivity and down stream activities including those relating to the much longer
use of electronic devices. Today, the consumer electronics is registering an appreciable
growth of 30—40%, and obviously, this will call for personnel on sales, marketing, service
apart from direct manufacturing. The Department has looked into another area of
employment generation, and tried to promote a wholly new business area of data entry,
which means that if from the MPs Local Area Development Programme some investment is
made and a computer terminal is set up in every constituency with a few computers, this
data entry can be done for which personnel will be needed. There are about 20 businessmen
in the country engaged at present in the business of data entry.

The Committee specifically drew the attention of the Secretary of the Department to
the crisis being faced by the Electronic Assembly Units under the Women’s Electronics
Industrial Society in Kerala. Most of these small units are manufacturing a whole range of
products such as PCBs, Radios, TV boosters etc. for those engaged in the marketing of
these products or their use as subsystems/ancillaries etc. On their own these units neither
have the financial capacity nor any organised machinery for marketing their products; they
have to depend entirely on the major marketing organizations for survival. The small units
are denied all the facilities and opportunities to which big units are entitled. The Secretary
of the Department was asked as to what the Department can do to alleviate their lot and to
help them tide over the crisis. The Secretary stated that the crisis seems to have arisen in
respect of the 13 women’s co-operatives in Kerala, following the decision of the Finance
Ministry not to extend the benefit of tax exemption in case the specified items are got
manufactured by the manufacturer in a society; and the solution, therefore, lay with the
Finance Ministry to restore the exemption enjoyed by them earlier. Responding to another
point from the Committee about the very little work being done by the Department
concerning exployment generation for physically handicapped people and the use of
electronics in their rehabilitation, the Secretary stated that the Department is only playing its
role in the employment schemes by, providing technical inputs in a small way. The Science


and Technology Project in the Mission Mode in Application of Technology for the Welfare
and Rehabilitation of the Handicapped is being implemented by the Ministry of Welfare; the
Department of Electronics is involved only to the extent of participating in the decision
making. The Department has helped the Computer Society of India to train blind people in
the use of computers and has also funded research in the IIT, Delhi in this area. The
Secretary was candid in admitting that the Department has not been able to do much on the
issues raised by the Committee.

On the basis of the submissions made before it, the Committee has come to the conclusion
that there is considerable scope for generation of employment for women as also for weaker
sections in the electronics industry. It is a sector which can become a potential instrument of
social justice and balanced regional development if proper schemes, which involve weaker and
deprived sections of the society, and women, are launched with sincerity of purpose. With the
rapid growth of electronics industry, the demand for trained man-power is likely to increase
manifold and, as admitted by the Department itself, as against the requirement of 1.45 lakhs
trained women by the year 1996-97, the availability will be of just about 34,000 trained
workers. The Committee feels concerned that the schemes which the Department of
Electronics has in hand at present or in which it is involved with other departments/agencies,
are not of the proportion or magnitude to seriously cope with the situation. The Department
has, in fact, no training schemes of its own, and it is either the Department of Women and
Child Development or the private or non-government agencies who are contributing more to
the training and absorption of women in various industries in the electronics sector. Schemes
like TRYSEM and Vivek Darpan are, no doubt, useful, but they do not appear to strike at
the root of the problem. The Committee equally feels that schemes which are prepared by the
Department for training of women, and for which allocations of just a few crores of rupees
are sought, are not scuttled; the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance should see
to it that the welfare schemes targeted towards employment generation are given necessary
priority and financial support. The Committee expresses its concern over the crisis overtaking
women’s co-operatives in the electronics sector in the State of Kerala where there is a
significant women work-force and recommends to the Government to go into the root cause of
their problem and if necessary, restore the tax exemption if that can alleviate their suffering.
The Committee would like to impress upon the Department to not only to launch more
programmes and schemes for training of man-power in computers and electronics but also to
examine the feasibility of creating a centralised mechanism to ensure absorption in
employment of those so trained. The Committee feels that the Department has an important
catalytic and promotional role to play in this area. Where there are clear economic returns
and profitability, industry will come in on its own. But it is where social, welfare and
infrastructural aspects are concerned that Government has a primary role.

EMPLOYMENT POTENTIAL OF ELECTRONICS

Electronics industry has a very large potential to meet one of the important national
priorities namely, employment generation. It is a sector in which employment of women is
of substantial proportions vis-a-vis other industrial sectors, and it can be an excellent
instrument for planning balanced regional development.

As per the information given to the Committee, despite accounting for less than 1% of
investment in the industrial sectors, electronics directly employs about 2% of the industrial
labour force. In addition, it is expected that for every unit of direct employment there will
be two units created in the secondary and tertiary sectors. As a sector of industry,
employment generation in electronics is much more than in other sectors as per the details
given in Annexure-II. The electronics production target for the terminal year of the 8th Plan


(1996-97) is about Rs. 30,000 crores; the employment projections for this year (1996-97) are
given in Annexure-III. The total electronics man-power is expected to increase to a level of
14.42 lakhs in 1996-97 which would mean an increase of 5.50 lakhs over 1990. The non-
electronics man-power in the electronics industry is expected to increase by 0.42 lakh
numbers during the same period. Software exports have been identified as an area of
principal attention as the performance of this sector critically depends upon the availability
of man-power having skills in the line with the requirements. Software professionals are
currently drawn from various engineering disciplines (49%), Computer Science B.Tech,.
M.Tech. and M.Sc. (25%), Master of Computer Applications MCA, (10%), MBA (8%) and
others (8%). Man-power requirements in the computer/electronics sector at the higher levels
are met from 6 institutions at the national level, 17 institutions at the regional level and
about 250 universities/degree colleges.

The Committee notes that the Department of Electronics is not engaged in any major

programmes/activities leading to employment generation for the electronics sector, and the
industry itself draws people from various streams of trained manpower and then gives them
on-the-job training. The Department’s budgetary allocations also do not reflect any
worthwhile effort being made by it to meet industry’s requirements. Its role is limited to just
co-ordinating with a few other departments like Ministry of Welfare and Department of Rural
Development in training of physically/visually handicapped persons and women. 85 admitted
by the Department itself, its role has so far been peripheral in this regard. Despite automation
following introduction of devices such as computers, the electronics industry, as per the
Department’s own projections, is likely to face shortage of required trained manpower. In
such an emerging scenario, the Committee feels that the Department has to play more positive
promotional role in meeting the national priority of employment generation. For this it has to
get intensively involved by initiating viable schemes/programmes and maintaining necessary
intractions with the industry. It must also play a promotional role in the educational sector
which is responsible for providing the manpower in the first instance. The Committee feels
that one possible reason for the shortage of manpower may be that the people at large are not
aware of the employment opportunities available in the electronics sector. The Department
has, therefore, to mount a concerted effort to create an awareness among people in general
about the employment potential of this sector.
SUPPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS FOR RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT, PARTICULARLY WITH REGARD TO TECHNOLOGY
DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL, NATIONAL RADAR COUNCIL AND INDUSTRIAL
PROMOTION

The Department of Electronics has under it a number of agencies and societies which
are engaged in the R&D activities in the field of electronics as also promotional institutional
mechanisms. The Committee, selected two councils viz, (i) Technology Development
Council and (ii) National Radar Council which have been in existence since the earliest days
of this Department, to examine the support being provided by DoE for carrying R&D
activities through these Councils. The Committee also examined the role of the Department
in the area of industrial promotion through electronics applications.

Technology Development Council (TDC) was set up in 1971-72 with the objective of
promoting the supporting research design, development and engineering in computers and
computer communications, control and instrumentation, consumer electronics,
telecommunications, broadcasting and general areas of electronics and to develop, nuture
and support new initiatives, responding to changing technology development needs of the
electronics sector. At present the Council is making efforts to involve industry, including the
private sector, in the high risk R&D projects promoted by the Department of Electronics.


Government has decided to provide funds for research in the private sector also, with well
defined conditionalities.

TDC also strives to promote joint international cooperative R&D projects and build up
alliances based on mutual strength. In this connection, the Secretary of the Department of
Electronics told the Committee that in December last, an 8 million dollar Binational
Industrial Research and Development Fund in Electronics between India and Israel was
agreed upon with equal contribution of the both the countries. In the case of India $ 2
million will be provided by the Government and $ 2 million by the Industry. By May 1, 1995,
the Fund is likely to be operationalised. In the absence of adequate resources, the
Department is trying to persuade MNCs to contribute to the Fund. The Fund will be used to
concentrate on innovative R&D activities. TDC is also working on the development of
telecommunications technology with the assistance of the Department of
Telecommunications. The initiatives which were taken up in respect of paper and pulp
project under Retrofit Automation Mission are leading to good results. In terms of financial
support, provision of Rs. 1700 crores has been made for the Technology Development
Council during the Eighth Five Year Plan. For the current year a provision of Rs. 3.00
crores has been made for the Council to carry out its activities.

The National Radar Council (NRC) is an apex forum of the Government of India in the
Department of Electronics for coordinating various aspects of work relating to technology
development, manufacture and use of radars under water and allied equipment so as to meet
in these strategic areas the defence and civil requirements in an integrated manner on the
basis of scientific and technological work done in the country. Projects involving equipment
development or products of interest to the Defence Ministry are supported by the Ministry
itself. On the basis of recommendations of Working Groups of the National Radar Council
the Department of Electronics provides financial support for development of techniques and
technologies of a futuristic nature which are of dual-use (both defence and non-defence)
nature, and the manpower training in these specialized areas.

Since its inception in 1974, NRC has supported 136 technology development projects in
different institutions located in 14 States involving an outlay of Rs. 42.98 crores. Out of
these 136 projects, 113 have been completed till March, 1994, 7 have been completed during
March-December, 1994, 8 will be completed prior to March 1995, four in 1995-96, one in
1996-97 and three in 1997-98. As an outcome of the projects supported under NRC, major
research gruoups have been formed and centres of training created in various academic
institutions in the areas of Radar Antennae, Surface Acoustic Wave (SAW) devices,
Microwave Tubes, Phase Shifters, Underwater Electronics, Ocean Acoustics, Navigational
Electronics and Fibre Optics based technology. The R&D groups have been able to develop
strategically important components and systems such as yttrium iron based devices, surface
acoustic wave filters, phase shifters, magnetostatic wave devices and MST and other radars.

Some of the projects have resulted in the development and productionisation of
equipment for specified user needs. The Important ones are Wind finding and weather
analysis radar, very high frequency Omni Range equipment, Distance measuring equipment,
Air Route Surveillance Radar, Precision Approach Radar, X-band Radar Beacons,
Electromagnetic ship log, Ultrasonic Echosounder, MF-Beacons, Emergency Position
Indicating Radio beacons and Search and Rescue Radar Transponder

Some of the man-power development projects in the areas of Microwave technology at
Delhi University, Microwave tubes at Banaras Hindu University, Underwater Electronics at


Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi and Navigational Electronics at Osmania University,
Hyderabad have proved to be immensely useful for providing the specialised man-power to
cater to the needs of various national R&D laboratories and industries, and extend
consultancy services and industry inputs wherever require. Man-power projects on futuristic
areas of Avionics and microwave technology were initiated in this year. As a result of
successful completion of the projects in the equipment development area, some of the
equipments developed have reached commercial scale productioin and value realised till now
comes to Rs. 62 crores.

Many development projects at academic institutions have resulted in the development of
advanced technologies in the areas of radar antennas, surface—acoustic—wave (SAW)
devices, microwave tubes, phase shifters, underwater electronics, ocean acoustics,
underwater imaging, navigational electronics, microwave technology, EMI/EMC,
millimeter wave electronics and fibre optics-based technology.

The annual allocation for NRC’s Technology Development Programme during the
Eighth Plan is about Rs. 1.0 19 1.5 crores. Because of this meagre allocation substantial
pruning of the size of this programme has had to be carried out. However, 1991 Review
Forum for NRC Technology Development Programme and the Planning Commission
Working Group, in the course of formulation of the Eighth Five Year Plan, had
recommended that the annual outlay for NRC Technology Development Programme should
be increased to a level of about Rs. 5 to 6 crores per annum. Despite this recommendation,
there has been no increase in the allocation for this Programme.

The Department of Electronics has launched a plan programme on Industrial
Electronics Promotion Programme (IEPP) covering Appropriate Automation Promotion
Programme (AAPP) for the industrial sector and Microprocessor Application Engineering
Programme (MAEP) for non-industrial applications so as to improve Productivity,
operational efficiency, safety and quality. Industrial Electronics Promotion Programme
(IEPP) continued its development activities through its eleven centres located at various
places in the country. During 1993-94 significant project activities such as retrofit Data
Acquisition System (DAS), Energy Management System of Steel Plant, Solid State
Interlocking system for the Railways etc., were taken up and progressed. In order to
promote appropriate automation in industrial sectors like steel, cement, paper and pulp,
textile, etc., AAPP arranges for the development of electronic equipment, system
engineering, technical evaluation, etc., for the purpose of achieving consistency in quality,
integrating systems for automation, etc.

The Secretary of the Department was asked as to whether the post-GATT regime/
World Trade Organisation was going to have an impact on the electronic sector and whether
the level of our exports would be affected in any way. The Secretary replied that the post-
GATT regime as such did not pose any problems. On the contrary, India has an advantage
of excellent engineering skills and has taken suitable action to check piracy. The extent of
piracy in India is 68% as against 71% in Germany and more than 95% in Indonesia and
some other countries. Even in the United States of America, the degree of piracy is
somewhere around 30—40%. Pursuant to an amendment in the Copyright Act, the
Department has in particular taken action to curb piracy in the matter of software and
Intellectual Property Rights. Besides the Department is also trying to help the Indian
Industries in getting patents from abroad and is interacting with National Research
Development Corporation (NRDC) in furtherance of this objective.

The Committee in particular wanted to know as to whether any major projects under


NRC and TDC had been taken up recently, as most of the projects mentioned by the
Department were started way back in seventies and whether the Department thought that it
would be in a position to cover the R&D areas under TDC with an allocation of just Rs. 17
crores in 5 years. Similarly, the annual allocation for NRC Technology Development
Programme during 8th Plan is around Rs. 1.00 to 1.5 crores and whether the Department
would, with such a meagre allocation, be able to cater to highly knowledge—intensive areas
of radars underwater equipment and strategic electronics. NRC is also meant to coordinate
the requirements of agencies like DRDO, Space, Atomic Energy Civil Aviation and strategic
industries etc. and whether there is any priority accorded in the budget of the Department of
technology development in these areas, especially when the Department is supporting other
areas like Micro-Electronic Council and Materials Council. Whilst the Committee has not
gone into the details of the work of the latter two councils, from the Annual Report it is
clear that the efforts of the Department are woefully subcritical in these also.

The Secretary of the Department drew attention to the recommendations of the
Committee made in its earlier Report to the effect that the Department should have a
central data base about all R&D work being done in the area of electronics, and submitted
that the work had been undertaken by the Technology Information Forecasting and
Assessment Council of the DST in right earnest. The Department, in other words, was
trying to ensure availability of information on R&D on a centralised basis. He was unable to
respond to specific progress made by TIFAC in this regard. He apprised the Committee of
the problems the Department was faced with, and the initiatives it was taking to build up
R&D . He pointed out that pursuant to the 1988 Report on Micro-Electronics, the matter
for reduction of duty on capital goods for Micro-Electronics was taken up with the Ministry
of Finance and some amount of success was achieved, but despite, the duty being brought to
the level of 15%, there has not been any major growth in the area of Micro-Electronics. As
regard the Semi-conductor Complex, the point made was that the construction of the
building was expected to be completed by the first quarter of 1995 and that by the second
quarter it was expected to become operational, but again, the problem in this area was of
countervailing duty and despite the matter being taken up by his Minister with the Ministry
of Finance for getting relief in terms of countervailing duty, not much had been achieved.
The rebuilding of SCL was therefore in a frozen state. In countries, like the United States of
America and Japan, semi-conductors are getting huge investments and NEC and Toshiba are
putting between $1 to 1.5 billion in this sector. The Department of Electronics, however,
does not have resources of that magnitude and what it is trying is to build up on its
competence in design.

Referring to some of the other initiatives being taken by his Department, the Secretary
stated that it had been decided for the first time to fund research in the private sector also,
with the stipulation being that the private sector has also to contribute 50% of the amount
involved and depending upon the extent to which they want to use the technology, their
contribution will be regulated. Government loan, however, will have to be returned when
the technology is commercialised. As a result of the support of this nature by the DoE,
research is getting catalysed even in sectors like steel, Railways, Doordarshan etc. This
apart, the Department is also concentrating on developing joint international co-operatives
and R&D projects and alliances based on mutual strength are being built up. A Bi-national
Industrial Research and Development Fund between India and Israel has been agreed upon
and the overall amount finalised is $ 8 million — $ 4 million each from Israel and India. This
$4 million contribution from India will be shared in the ratio of 50% each by the
Government and the industry. The Department is also examining the feasibility of bringing


in contributions from the multi-nationals. The Department, as a nodal agency responsible for
the Development of Electronics, is having necessary interaction with different Departments.
In the Mission on Future Air Navigation, the anticipated cost of each is Rs. 21 crores. The
Department is working in this in close collaboration with the Civil Aviation Ministry, the
National Airports Authority of India, Air India, Indian Airlines, Defence Research &
Development Organisation and the Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. The Department is working
towards Operational Global Positioning System and the private sector is getting involved
into this area.

The Committee expresses its deep sense of concern that whereas in earlier years the
Department of Electronics had made major efforts through mechanisms like Technology
Development Council, National Radar Council etc., to develop indigenous technologies and
self-reliance, which have contributed to industrial production and providing equipment in
strategic areas like defence, this is no longer the case. The NRC projects resulted in the
development and productionisation of wind-finding and weather analysis radars, very high
frequency omni-range equipment, distance measuring equipment, air-route surveillance radar
and precision approach radar etc. In spite of all this background, the annual allocations for
TDC and NRC now can be regarded only as a pittance, and wholly subcritical, indicative of
the low priority R&D seems to have in the frame work of the Department today. The
Committee feels that the efforts of the Department to provide financial assistance to R&D by
the private sector and also to create centralised database in respect of R&D activities in the
electronics sector as a whole are steps in the right direction, but have yet to take off. The
challenges of the post-GATT era when the advanced technologies will matter the most in a
highly competitive environment, do not seem to have been properly appreciated. The
Department will have to devise new strategies to keep pace with the rapidly developing
technologies and have, therefore, to ensure that research and technology development takes
place in the country if one has to realise the objectives of making India a global player in this
sector. The Department has to identify and fully exploit the areas where potentiality exists.
Whilst some areas like parallel processing and photonics have been provided support, other
areas have been left to languish.

The Committee appreciates that the Department is conscious of the demanding nature of
its tasks. It has been developing collaborations with different departments/agencies. Necessary
alliances in the R&D sector are being built by involving foreign companies; the setting up of a
Bi-national Industrial Research and Development Fund in electronics between India and Israel
is a positive step. The Government’s decision to extend the facility of Satellite Earth Stations
to R&D institutions is laudable. The Committee, however, feels that the recommendations
of 1991 Review Forum for NRC Technology Development Programme and the Planning
Commission Working Group for increase in the 8th Plan allocation for NRC Technology
Development Programme have to be re-considered and it has to be ensured that the viable
proejcts do not suffer on account of financial constraints. The area of patents calls for
strenous efforts on the part of the Department to create a nucleus of specialised man-power
so that our indigenous R&D efforts are duly rewarded. Financial Support for the registration
of patents particularly in other countries will be needed. There is no indication of this.

The Committee feels that electronics is an area with great commercial potential. It is
rapidly moving knowledge-intensive field. Particularly in the post-GATT period, fullest
attention will need to be paid to technology development. Whilst a large part of this will be
undertaken in research laboratories/institutions of atomic energy, defence, space,
telecommunications, public and private sector industry, educational institutions, there is
need for coordination, ensuring that gaps are filled, niche areas are pushed and there is an


integrated national approach. The Committee feels that an approach for the Department,
dealing largely with clearances, fiscal issues, etc. is fraught with risks. The raison de etre for
the existence of the Department is its focus on self reliance, based on catalysing, nurturing
and promoting national efforts.

New De.ut; SYED SIBTEY RAZI
a Chairman,
June 29, 1995 Committee on Science and Technology,

Environment and Forests.


ANNEXURES



ANNEXURE-I
Status of Year-wise Exports Growth under STP Scheme
(Rs. Crores)

1994-95

Location F 1991-92 1992-93 1993-94 (Till Nov.)
Pune 0.23 0.45 1.62 1.58
Bangalore 16.09 22.89 56.59 81.67
Bhubaneswar पे _ 0.27 0.12
Hyderabad 0.20 4.55 9.83 7.81
Noida 0.06 23.56 45.70 45.61
Gandhinagar न 0.94 _ —
Thriuvanathapuram _ 1.18 1.73 0.77
Tora: 16.59 53.58 115.76 137.58

Say 17.00 54.00 116.00 138.00



ANNEXURE-II

Employment/Investment Ratios in Different Industries

(No. of jobs per Rs. 1 crore investment 1989-90)

Industry Group

Employment Ratio

Chemicals and Petrochemicals
Power Generation and Distribution
Non-Ferrous Metal Products
Ferrous Products

Sugar

Rubber Products

Transport Equipment

Pulp and Paper Products
Textiles

Electrical Equipment
Electronics

13
13



ANNEXURE-III
Employment Projects for the Year 1996-97

Table-1. Employment of Electronics Man-power
(In Lakhs)

Sl. 1990 1996-97
No.

Electronics Man-power an Electronics Industry 1.35 1.98

2. Electronics Man-power in Non-Industry sector 5.00 6.50

3. Electronics Man-power in Industries other than Electronics 0.18 0.46

Total of (1) + (2) + (3) 6.53 8.94

4. Electronics Man-power in Service Sector 2.39 5.48

(a) Equipment (1.37) (2.58)

(b) Data Entry Operators (1.02) (2.90)

5. Non-Electronics Man-power (1.56) ~ 1.98

8.92 14.42

Total Man-power 10.48 16.40



MINUTES

० ०0-०2020.0०20-20० : ० ००20-23: ००2०2: “०-7० ०-7-7:7:-7-__



MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON _ SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS

९, ९॥ ॥ ६
TWENTY THIRD MEETING

The Committee met from 10.15 a.m. to 12.18 p.m. and again from 2.15 p.m. to 3.20
p.m. on Thursday, the Sth January, 1995 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT

1. Syed Sibtey Razi—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi

3. Shri K. Rahman Khan

4. Prof. M.G.K. Menon

5. Shri N. Giri Prasad

6. Dr. Ranbir Singh

7. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav

LOK SABHA

8. Shri P.C. Chacko

9. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia

10. Shri Jitendra Nath Das

11, Shri Sharad Dighe

12. Shri Oscar Fernandes

13. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale*

14. Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy

15, Shri Harpal Panwar

16. Shri Vijay Naval Patil

17. Shri Harchand Singh

18. Shri Ram Prasad Singh

19. Shri K.G. Shivappa

20. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

3. Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
4. Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter


REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS

Shri N. Vittal, Secretary

Shri O.N. Vaid, Joint Secretary
Dr. V.P. Kodali, Advisor

Shri N. Gopalaswami, Jt. Secretary
Shri S.W. Oak, JS&FA

Dr. A.K. Chakravorty, Sr. Director
Shri S.S. Oberoi, Sr. Director

Shri G. Soni, Sr. Director

Dr. U.P. Phadke, Sr. Director
Shri R.K. Shrivastava, Sr. Director
Shri S.L. Sarnot, Sr. Director

Shri S.L. Sarnot, Sr. Director

Shri B.A. Chetty, Director

Shri R.K. Arora, Director

Shri S.N. Zindal, Director

Dr. K.S.K. Sai, Director

Shri B.B. Bahl, Dy. Director

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY

Dr. C.R. Bhatia, Secretary

Dr. (Mrs.) Manju Sharma, Advisor

Dr. V.K. Vinayak, Advisor (Medical)

Shri S.B. Krishnan, JS&FA

Dr. P.K. Ghosh, Director

Dr. (Mrs.) Amita Biswas, Director

Dr. S. Natesh, Principal Scientific Officer

Shri S.L. Govindwar, Principal Scientific Officer

Dr. S.R. Rao, SSO-I ©

Dr. Rama Mukherjee, N.I.1.

Dr. Vishwa Karma, N.I.1.

Dr. S.K. Gupta, N.LI.

Dr. Kanuri Roy

Shri K.C. Srivastava, Dy. Secretary

2. In the forenoon session, the Committee took up consideration of the Annual
Report (1993-94) of the Department of Electronics with reference to the Software
Technology Parks (STPs), Electronics Hardware Technology Parks (EHTPs),


Electronics for weaker sections including women, Employment potential of Electronics and
Support of Department of Electronics for Research & Development, particularly with regard
to Technology Development Council, National Radar Council and Industrial Promotion. The
Secretary of the Department gave an overview of the programmes and initiatives being
pursued by the Department in these areas and the Members sought clarifications from him
on various points arising from his presentation.

3. In the afternoon session, the Committee, on the basis of the Annual Report (1993-
94) of the Department of Biotechnology, took up consideration of the following subjects:—

(i) Development of Immunodiagnostic kits;

(ii) Environmental Conservation and Biodiversity;

(iii) Medicinal and Aromatic Plants; and

(iv) Implications of new GATT Regime and Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) with
regard to new developments in Biotechnology.

The Secretary of the Department assisted by other officials of his Department, briefly
explained for the benefit of the Members the activities of the Department in these areas and
the Members sought clarifications from him. \

4. The discussion on the Annual Reports (1993-94) of the Departments of Electronics
and Biotechnology remained inconclusive. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.20 p.m. to meet again at 10.15 a.m. on Friday,
the 6th January, 1995.


XXIV
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING

The Committee met from 10.15 a.m. to 12.55 p.m. and again from 2.15 p.m. to 3.45
p.m. on Friday, the 6th January, 1995 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT

1. Syed Sibtey Razi—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi

4. Prof. M.G.K. Menon

5. Shri N. Giri Prasad

6. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh

7. Dr. Ranbir Singh

8. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav

LOK SABHA

9. Shri P.C. Chacko

10. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia

11, Shri Jitendra Nath Das

12. Shri Sharad Dighe

13. Shri Oscar Fernandes

14. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale

15. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee

16. Shri Vijay Naval Patil

17. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma

18. Shri Harchand Singh

19. Shri Ram Prasad Singh

20. Shri K.G. Shivappa

21. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

22. Kumari Sushila Tiriya

23. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
SECRETARIAT

1, Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
3. Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
4. Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS

Shri N. Vittal, Secretary

Shri O.N. Vaid, Joint Secretary
Dr. V.P. Kodali, Advisor

Shri N. Gopalaswami, Jt. Secretary
Shri S.W. Oak, IS&FA

Dr. A.K. Chakravorty, Sr. Director


Shri S.S. Oberoi, Sr. Director
Shri G. Soni, Sr. Director

Dr. U.P. Phadke, Sr. Director
Shri R.K. Shrivastava, Sr. Director
Shri V.K. Dharmadhakari, Sr. Director
Shri S.L. Sarnot, Sr. Director

Shri B.A. Chetty, Director

Shri R.K. Arora, Director

Shri S.N. Zindal, Director

Dr. K.S.K. Sai, Director

Shri B.B. Bahl, Dy. Director

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY

Dr. C.R. Bhatia, Secretary

Dr. (Mrs.) Manju Sharma, Advisor

Dr. V.K. Vinayak, Advisor (Medical)
Shri S.B. Krishnan, JS&FA

Dr. P.K. Ghosh, Director

Dr. (Mrs.) Amita Biswas, Director

Dr. S. Natesh, Principal Scientific Officer
Shri S.L. Govindwar, Principal Scientific Officer
Dr. S.R. Rao, SSO-I

Dr. Rama Mukherjee, N.I.1.

Dr. Vishwa Karma, N.LI.

Dr. S.K. Gupta, N.LL

Shri. K.C. Srivastava, Dy. Secretary

2. In the forenoon session the Committee took up further consideration of the Annual
Report (1993-94) of the Department of Electronics with reference to its programmes in the
areas of Software Technology Parks (STPs), Electronics Hardware Technology Parks
(EHTPs), Electronics for weaker sections including women, Employment potential of
Electronics and Support for Research & Development, particularly with regard to Technol-
ogy Development Council, National Radar Council and Industrial Promotion and heard the
replies of the Secretary of the Department on various points/queries raised by the
Members.

3. In the afternoon session, the Committee took up further consideration the Annual
Report (1993-94) of the Department of Biotechnology with particular reference to its
programmes in the area of Development of Immunodiagnostic Kits, Environmental
Conservation and Biodiversity of Medicinal & Aromatic Plants and Implications of new
GATT Fegime and Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) with regard to new developments in
Biotechnology and heard the replies of the representatives of the Department of the various
points /queries raised by the Members.

4. The discussion on the Annual Reports (1993-94) of the Departments of Electronics
and Biotechnology was concluded. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 p.m.


XI
TWELFTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 19th June, 1995 in Room No. 63
Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Prof. M.G.K. Menon
3. Shri N. Giri Prasad
4. Dr. Ranbir Singh

LOK SABHA

5. Shri Sharad Dighe

6. Shri Oscar Fernandes

7. Shri P. Kumarasamy

8. Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy

9. Shri Balraj Passi

10. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
11, Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
12. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
13. Shri K.G. Shivappa

14. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

15. Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

2. Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary

3. Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer
4. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer

2. The Committee took yp consideration of its draft Twenty-seventh Report on the
Annual Report (1993-94) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research with
reference to its R&D programmes in the area of chemicals and adopted the same
unanimously.

3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration its draft Twenty-eighth Report
on the Annual Report (1993-94) of the Department of Electronics with reference to
Software Technology Parks; Electronics Hardware Technology Parks (EHTPs); Electronics
for weaker sections including women; Employment potential of Electronics; and Support of
Department of Electronics for Research and Development, particularly with regard to
Technology Development Council, National Radar Council and Industrial Promotion and
adopted the same unanimously.


4. The Committee decided to present these Reports to both the Houses of Parliament
on the 2nd day of the ensuing monsoon session. The Committee authorised its Chairman
and in his absence, Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh to present these Reports to the Rajya Sabha
and Shri Oscar Fernandes and in his absence, Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik to lay the
Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 p.m.